
Science, Order, and Creativity
‘An outstanding probe of the creative process in
science.’
Marilyn Ferguson, author of The Aquarian Conspiracy
‘A rare combination of depth and breadth, this probing
book stirs both the mind and the heart, and attracts and
inspires on many levels: philosophical, scientiﬁc, exist-
ential and spiritual.’
Renée Weber, author of Dialogues with Scientists
and Sages: The Search for Unity


David
Bohm
and
F. David
Peat
Science, Order, and Creativity
London and New York

First published in the USA in 1987
by Bantam Books
First published in Great Britain in 1989 by Routledge
First published in the Routledge Classics 2011
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada
by Routledge
270 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 1987 David Bohm and F. David Peat
Preface and chapter 7 © 2000 F. David Peat
The right of David Bohm and F. David Peat to be identiﬁed as authors of this work
has been asserted by them in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright,
Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted
or reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic,
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter
invented, including photocopying and recording, or in
any information storage or retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the publishers.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
A catalog record for this book has been requested
ISBN 10: 0–415–58485–X (pbk)
ISBN 10: 0–203–84481–5 (ebk)
ISBN 13: 978–0–415–58485–2 (pbk)
ISBN 13: 978–0–203–84481–6 (ebk)
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2010.
To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge’s
collection of thousands of eBooks please go to www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.
ISBN 0-203-84481-5 Master e-book ISBN

CONTENTS
preface
vii
introduction
ix
1
Revolutions, Theories, and Creativity in Science
1
2
Science as Creative
Perception-Communication
53
3
What Is Order?
97
4
The Generative Order and the
Implicate Order
148
5
Generative Order in Science, Society, and
Consciousness
189
6
Creativity in the Whole of Life
229
7
The Order Between and Beyond
275
notes
315
index
319


PREFACE
F. David Peat
Following the completion of this book (ﬁrst published in 1987)
David Bohm and I met at The Baily Farms Institute near
Ossining, New York. Originally a hobby farm, the area consists
of two houses, a small lake and wooded and grassed areas where
Dave and I could sit and talk. Because we were the only guests
over that period we had plenty of time to ourselves. It was
October, warm and sunny at midday, but cool enough for a good
walk in the morning and late afternoon. This was important for
it was while walking and talking that David Bohm often did the
major work of his day.
Having ﬁnished the ﬁrst edition of this book we were left with
a more leisurely period and our walks were ﬁlled with discus-
sions on consciousness, and new ideas about a pre-space struc-
ture and its relationship to general relativity. Bohm also talked
about Hegel and emphasized the way his philosophy concerned
the mechanisms of thought. Bohm’s long-term companion,
Basil Hiley, once remarked that Bohm’s thinking was like a
spiral—for a time he would focus on one area and then appear to

leave it for some quite diﬀerent interest, only to return, months
or even years later, with a much deeper sense of the original
topic. His new focus on Hegel seemed yet another aspect of this
process. And so we talked about the dialectic and binary opposi-
tions in thought, and about the way people tend to adopt ﬁxed
non-negotiable positions.
This was also a time when Bohm took a somewhat pessimistic
position regarding the future of the human race. He wondered if
there was any way out of our present predicaments or if we were
doomed to succumb to the implications of our ﬁxed positions.
During these discussions we did not always agree—indeed, if we
had been in complete accord then there would not have been
much point in writing a book together. I do not share Bohm’s
pessimism for the future of humanity and I had some reserva-
tions about his enthusiasm for the dialogue process that, he
believed, could show us a way out of our general predicament.
At all events, suﬃcient creative tension was generated for us to
want to work together again. But what would we write about?
The number of topics we had covered was too vast. How to pin
them down? How could we group them around a single frame-
work? For several days our discussions revolved around this
point. Then one morning, while walking down the driveway
from the house to the main gate, the plan of the book appeared
to us both in its entirety. By the time we reached the gate we
knew what we would be writing about. We turned back to
retrace our steps and conﬁrm what we had decided. That after-
noon I typed up the notes of our discussion. I have them now
before me—twenty-four single-spaced pages beginning “Why
are we writing this book?” This material provides the inspiration
for a new and ﬁnal chapter.
preface
viii

INTRODUCTION
This book grew out of a series of dialogues that took place
between us over the last ﬁfteen years. It therefore seems appro-
priate, in this Introduction, that the reader should be given some
idea of the genesis of our book and of the kinds of thoughts and
questions that stirred us into writing it. Since this naturally
involves our own personal backgrounds, feelings, and attitudes,
it is most easily presented in the form of a dialogue between us.
Indeed, what follows could well have taken place during one of
our afternoon walks together while the book was being written.
david bohm: I think that it would be a good idea to begin with the
book itself. What ﬁrst led you to suggest that we should write a
book together?
david peat: Well, a question like that takes me right back to my
childhood. You see, as far back as I can remember, I was always
interested in the universe. I can still remember standing under a
street lamp one evening—I must have been eight or nine—and
looking up into the sky and wondering if the light went on

forever and ever, and what it meant for something to go on forever
and ever, and if the universe ever came to an end. You know the
sorts of questions. Well, pretty soon the idea began to excite me
that the human mind was able to ask these sorts of questions and
in some way comprehend the vastness of everything.
These sorts of ideas continued right through school, along
with a feeling of the interconnectedness of everything. It was
almost as if the entire universe were a living entity. But of course,
when I got down to the serious business of studying science at
university, all this changed. I felt that the deepest questions, par-
ticularly about the quantum theory, were never properly
answered. It seemed pretty clear that most scientists were not
really interested in these sorts of questions. They felt that they
were not really related to their day-to-day research. Instead, we
were all encouraged to focus on getting concrete results that
could be used in published papers and to work on problems that
were “scientiﬁcally acceptable.” So fairly early on, I found myself
getting into hot water because I was always more excited by
questions that I didn’t know how to answer than by more routine
research. And of course, that’s not the way to build up an impres-
sive list of scientiﬁc publications.
david bohm: But you were not simply interested in science alone?
david peat: No, I was attracted to music, theater, and the visual arts.
I could see that they were another very important way of
responding to nature and understanding our position in the uni-
verse. I always felt that, in some deeper sense, the really important
ﬁgures in science and the arts were fundamentally doing the
same thing and responding to the same ultimate origin. This
essential relationship between the sciences and the arts is still
very important to me.
But with the exception of a few good friends, it was diﬃcult to
ﬁnd people who shared my enthusiasms. I had begun a kind of
indirect dialogue with you by reading your papers and I sensed a
similar interest. The end result was that in 1971 I took a year’s
science, order, and creativity
x

sabbatical leave to come to Birkbeck College in London so that we
could explore all these things together.
david bohm: Yes, I remember we met once or twice a week and
talked well into the evening.
david peat: Do you remember how I began by asking you scientiﬁc
questions but very soon we moved into the whole area of con-
sciousness, society, religion, and culture? After I returned to
Canada, it was clear that we should go on meeting again on a
fairly regular basis to continue our dialogues.
david bohm: Yes, but it also began to emerge that the dialogue
itself was the key issue. And that this was intimately related to all
the others. The essential question was: How can we engage in
dialogue in a creative way?
david peat: Yes, and I think this was what eventually led me to
suggest that we should write a book together. In a sense, working
on this book has become a continuation of our dialogue. Of
course, many of the ideas we’re going into really began
with you.
david bohm: Yes, but in exploring them through dialogue they
began to develop in new ways and it also became possible to
communicate them more clearly.
david peat: Communication plays a very important role in how
new ideas can develop. In fact, this whole project has been a very
exciting one.
david bohm: I think this has come out of the intense interest we
both have in going into these questions. You see, I, too, felt that
kind of wonderment and awe in my early days, along with an
intense wish to understand everything, not only in detail but also
in its wholeness.
I learned later that many of my fundamental interests were
what other people called philosophical and that scientists tended
to look down on philosophy as not being very serious. This cre-
ated a problem for me, as I was never able to see any inherent
separation between science and philosophy. Indeed in earlier
introduction
xi

times, science was called natural philosophy and this corresponded
perfectly with the way I saw the whole ﬁeld. At university, I had a
few friends who approached the subject in the same way and we
had many discussions in a spirit of friendship and common
inquiry. However, in graduate school at the California Institute of
Technology, which I entered in 1939, I found that there was a
tremendous emphasis on competition and that this interfered with
such free discussions. There was a great deal of pressure to concen-
trate on learning formal techniques for getting results. It seemed
that there was little room for the desire to understand in the
broad sense that I had in mind. Neither was there a free exchange
and the friendship that is essential for such understanding.
Although I was quite capable of mastering these mathematical
techniques, I did not feel that it was worth going on with, not
without a deeper philosophical ground and the spirit of common
inquiry. You see, it is these very things that provide the interest
and motivation for using mathematical techniques to study the
nature of reality.
david peat: But things did improve for you when you went to
Berkeley, didn’t they?
david bohm: Yes, when I went to work with J. Robert
Oppenheimer, I found a more congenial spirit in his group. For
example, I was introduced to the work of Niels Bohr and this
stimulated my interest, especially in the whole question of the
oneness of the observer and the observed. Bohr saw this in the
context of the undivided wholeness of the entire universe. I can
still recall the many discussions I had on matters like this which
had the eﬀect of setting me on the course I’m still following
today. Philosophy played an inseparable part, but it was not just a
matter of philosophizing about material that was already present
in science in a more or less ﬁnished form. I was more interested
in broader questions which have been the very source and origin
not only of my interest, but also of many key ideas which later
took mathematical form.
science, order, and creativity
xii

david peat: Maybe you could give an example of this relationship
of scientiﬁc ideas to the underlying philosophy.
david bohm: When I worked at the Lawrence Laboratory, after tak-
ing my Ph.D., I became very interested in the electron plasma.
This is a dense gas of electrons that exhibits radically diﬀerent
behavior from the other, normal states of matter and it was a key
to much of the work the laboratory was doing at the time. My
insights sprang from the perception that the plasma is a highly
organized system which behaves as a whole. Indeed in some
respects, it’s almost like a living being. I was fascinated with the
question of how such organized collective behavior could go
along with the almost complete freedom of movement of the
individual electrons. I saw in this an analogy to what society
could be, and perhaps as to how living beings are organized.
Later, when I went to Princeton, I extended this view in order to
treat electrons in metals on the same footing.
david peat: But I think that you were also a little disturbed at the
way your results were being used.
david bohm: Well, I had worked out a number of equations and
formulae and some of these played a key part in research into
fusion and into the theory of metals. But a few years later, when I
attended some scientiﬁc conferences, it became clear that these
formulae had been taken up and transformed into more abstract
forms, while the ideas behind them were ignored. People didn’t
even seem to want to talk about the ideas. The general spirit was
that the main aim of physics is to produce formulae that will
correctly predict the results of experiments. In the face of all this,
I began to feel that there was no point in going on with the
plasma research and so I lost interest in it.
However, I did continue to work in physics and developed the
causal interpretation of the quantum theory and the implicate
order. But both of these originated, to a large extent, in philo-
sophical questions.
david peat: As a matter of fact, these early papers of yours were just
introduction
xiii

what ﬁrst excited my interest. I started my ﬁrst research by look-
ing at systems of many electrons, and I was soon interested in the
relationship between individual and collective behavior. Of
course, it was your papers that helped me to obtain some insights
into the relationship between the individual and the whole. I
think they also gave me the conﬁdence to go further and try to
look a little deeper into questions about the foundation of quan-
tum theory. But as I said before, the overwhelming climate was
unsympathetic to such an approach. I could see that most physi-
cists could not see the point you were driving at.
david bohm: They seemed more interested in the formulae than
the ideas behind them.
david peat: But this leads me to what I think is a very important
question. What would you say to the prevailing belief that the
mathematical formalism itself expresses the very essence of our
knowledge of nature?
david bohm: Of course, some scientists, notably the Pythagoreans,
held views like this in ancient times. And others, like Kepler,
believed that mathematics was a basic source of truth. But this
notion that the mathematical formalism expresses the essence of
our knowledge about nature did not really become commonly
accepted until relatively recent times. For example, when I was a
student, most physicists felt that a physical or intuitive concept
was the essential point and that the mathematical formalism had
to be understood in relation to this.
david peat: But how did this emphasis on mathematics come
about?
david bohm: It was really because the quantum theory, and to a
lesser extent relativity, were never understood adequately in terms
of physical concepts that physics gradually slipped into the prac-
tice of talking mostly about the equations. Of course, this was
because equations were the one part of the theory that everyone
felt they could really understand. But this inevitably developed
into the notion that the equations themselves are the essential
science, order, and creativity
xiv

content of physics. To some extent this began as early as the
1920s when the astronomer Sir James Jeans proposed that God
must be a mathematician.1 Heisenberg later gave it an enormous
boost with his idea that science could no longer visualize atomic
reality in terms of physical concepts and that mathematics is
the basic expression of our knowledge of reality.2 Along with
this went a whole change in the notion of what was meant by
an intuitive or imaginative grasp. This had previously been iden-
tiﬁed with the ability to visualize ideas and concepts, but now
Heisenberg was claiming that intuition and imagination provide
not a picture of reality but a mental display of the meaning of
the mathematics.
Now I don’t agree with these developments. In fact, I feel that
the current emphasis on mathematics has gone too far.
david peat: But on the other hand, many of the deepest scientiﬁc
thinkers have used criteria of mathematical beauty in the devel-
opment of their theories. They believed that the deepest scientiﬁc
explanations must also be mathematically beautiful. Without the
requirement of mathematical aesthetics a great many discoveries
would not have been made. Surely in your own work the criteria
of mathematical elegance must have acted as a signpost that you
were on the right track?
david bohm: Certainly mathematics gives rise to creative insights,
and the search for mathematical beauty can be a helpful guide.
Scientists who have worked in this way have often been successful
in deriving new knowledge through an emphasis on the
mathematical formalism. I have already mentioned Kepler and
Heisenberg, and in modern times I could add such names as
Dirac, von Neumann, Jordan, and Wigner. But mathematics was
never the sole criterion in their discoveries. Moreover, this does
not mean that everyone thinks alike in this regard. In fact, I think
that verbal concepts, pictorial aspects, and philosophical thinking
can contribute signiﬁcantly to new ideas. Einstein certainly
appreciated mathematical beauty very keenly but he did not
introduction
xv

actually begin from the mathematics, especially in his most cre-
ative period. Instead, he started with unspeciﬁable feelings and a
succession of images out of which more detailed concepts even-
tually emerged. I would go along with this and add that ideas
arising in this way, or in other ways, may eventually lead to
further mathematical developments and even to the suggestion of
new forms of mathematics.
It seems arbitrary to say that mathematics must play a unique
role in the expression of reality. Mathematics is only one function
of the human mind, and other functions can surely be just as
important—even in physics.
david peat: This dialogue is moving in an interesting direction. We
seem to be saying that physics may have taken a wrong direction
in giving so much emphasis to its formalisms. But I’m sure that
many scientists would point out that mathematics happens to be
the most abstract and logically coherent way of thinking that is
known to us. It seems to be totally open to free creation and not
bounded by the requirements of sense experiences of ordinary
reality. Doesn’t that give it a unique status?
david bohm: Well, in reply, I’d like to bring in the work of Alfred
Korzybski, an American philosopher who was fairly well known
in the early twentieth century.3 He said that mathematics is a
limited linguistic scheme, which makes possible great precision
and coherence—but at the expense of such extreme abstraction
that its applicability has, in certain key ways, to be bounded.
Korzybski said, for example, that whatever we say a thing is, it
isn’t. First of all, whatever we say is words, and what we want to
talk about is generally not words. Second, whatever we mean by
what we say is not what the thing actually is, though it may be
similar. For the thing is always more than what we mean and is
never exhausted by our concepts. And the thing is also diﬀerent
from what we mean, if only because no thought can be abso-
lutely correct when it is extended indeﬁnitely. The fact that a
thing has qualities going beyond whatever we think and say
science, order, and creativity
xvi

about it is behind our notion of objective reality. Clearly, if reality
were ever to cease to show new aspects that are not in our
thought, then we could hardly say that it had an objective exist-
ence independent of us.
All this implies that every kind of thought, mathematics
included, is an abstraction, which does not and cannot cover the
whole of reality. Diﬀerent kinds of thought and diﬀerent kinds of
abstraction may together give a better reﬂection of reality. Each is
limited in its own way, but together they extend our grasp of
reality further than is possible with one way alone.
david peat: What you have said about Korzybski reminds me of
René Magritte’s painting of a pipe which also contains the words
This is not a pipe. However realistic a painting may be, it falls
indeﬁnitely short of being an actual pipe. And ironically, the
word pipe in the title is not an actual pipe either. Perhaps, in the
spirit of Magritte, every theory of the universe should have in it
the fundamental statement “This is not a universe.”
david bohm: Actually, a theory is a kind of map of the universe,
and like any other map, it is a limited abstraction and not entirely
accurate. Mathematics provides one aspect of the overall map,
but other ways of thinking are needed along the lines we have
been discussing.
david peat: Well, it’s certainly true that in the early days of quan-
tum theory, the leading physicists like Bohr, Heisenberg, Pauli,
Schrödinger, and de Broglie were vitally concerned with philo-
sophical questions, especially on the relationship between ideas
and reality.
david bohm: These questions go beyond the limited scope of
physics as it is generally known today. Each of these thinkers
approaches the problem in his own way and there are important
and subtle diﬀerences between them that we tend to overlook
today. But the general practice of physics has indeed become
remote from these deeper considerations. It tends to concentrate
on technical questions, and for this reason, it seems to have lost
introduction xvii

contact with its own roots. For example, in any attempt to unify
quantum mechanics and relativity, especially general relativity,
there are fundamental questions that must be faced. How can
physicists hope to work successfully in this ﬁeld when they
ignore the subtle and unresolved problems that still lie buried in
the early period of quantum mechanics?
david peat: I remember that these sorts of questions kept coming
up in the discussions we had together at Birkbeck College.
We were especially concerned with the narrowness of vision
that is developing, not only in physics, but quite generally in
scientiﬁc research.
david bohm: We used an analogy from human vision. The details
of what we see are picked up in a small central part of the retina
called the fovea. If this is destroyed, then detailed vision is lost,
but general vision, which comes from the periphery of the retina,
remains. But if the periphery is damaged, while the fovea remains
intact, even the details lose all their meaning. By analogy, we
asked if science was in danger of suﬀering a similar “damage” of
its vision. By giving so much emphasis on mathematics, science
seems to be losing sight of the wider context of its vision.
david peat: But originally there was such a general vision of the
universe, humanity, and our place in the whole. Science, art, and
religion were never really separate.
david bohm: But as time went on, this vision changed with special-
ization. It grew progressively narrower and eventually led to our
present approach, which is, in large part, fragmentary. I think this
development partly arose because physics had become the pat-
tern or ideal toward which all the sciences aim. While most
sciences are not as dominated by mathematics, the essential point
is the spirit with which mathematics tends to be done. Its general
aim is to try to analyze everything into independent elements that
can be dealt with separately. This encourages the hope that any
problem can be split oﬀ into a separate fragment. Now it is still
true that science also contains a movement toward synthesis and
science, order, and creativity
xviii

to discovering broader contexts and more general laws. But the
prevailing attitude has been to put the major emphasis on analysis
and on splitting oﬀ the key factors of each situation. Scientists
hope that this will enable them to extend their powers indeﬁn-
itely to predict and control things.
david peat: It’s important to emphasize that not only is this sort of
approach fundamental to physics but it also extends into
chemistry, biology, the neurosciences, and even into economics
and psychology.
david bohm: By concentrating on this sort of analysis and con-
stantly splitting oﬀ problems into specialized areas, we increas-
ingly ignore the wider context that gives things their unity. In
fact, this spirit is now spreading beyond science, not only into
technology, but into our general approach to life as a whole.
Understanding is now valued as the means to predict, control,
and manipulate things. Of course, beginning with Francis Bacon,
this has always been important but never so dominant as today.
david peat: Yes, science has been moving at an ever-increasing rate
since the nineteenth century and it’s bringing with it a host of
technological changes. But it is only relatively recently that so
many people have begun to question if all this progress is really
beneﬁcial. We’re beginning to realize that the cost of progress is
more and more specialization and fragmentation to the point
where the whole activity is losing its meaning. I think that the
time has come for science to pause and take a careful look at
where it is going.
david bohm: I think that even more than this we need to change
what we mean by “science.” The moment has come for a creative
surge along new lines. This is essentially what we are proposing
in Science, Order, and Creativity.
david peat: But most scientists would be shocked by such a sugges-
tion. After all, it must look as if science has never been more
active and successful than it is today. In every ﬁeld there are new
frontiers opening up and new technologies are being exploited.
introduction
xix

Think of all those novel experimental techniques, exciting new
theories, and interesting problems for an indeﬁnite number of
research workers to tackle. Take medicine, for example: So many
diseases have been wiped out and there is the promise of eradicat-
ing even more. And there are the new ﬁelds of biotechnology and
genetic engineering, and let’s not forget the changes that are
being made by computers and mass communication. In every
area of life, science is making a really powerful impact.
david bohm: All this is true, but some very important factors have
been neglected in obtaining such progress. First of all, there has
been an overall fragmentation in our general attitude to reality.
This leads us to focus always on particular problems, even when
they are signiﬁcantly related to a broader context. As a result, we
fail to notice the unforeseen negative consequences, which
cannot always be dealt with in terms of a fragmentary mode of
thought. The result is that these diﬃculties spread into the whole
context and eventually come back to create problems that may be
worse than those we started with. For example, by exploring
natural resources in a fragmentary manner, society has brought
about the destruction of forests and agricultural lands, created
deserts, and even threatens the melting of the ice caps.
david peat: I remember looking into the whole question of the
development of more productive strains of crops. It’s not at all
clear that they have been totally beneﬁcial. To begin with, it leads
to the problem of the great vulnerability of a limited genetic
strain, and there is an increased reliance on fertilizers, pesticides,
herbicides, and ripeners. When you take all this, together with
the more eﬃcient farming techniques that these new crops
require, it produces radical changes in agrarian societies that
have to rely more and more on an industrial basis. In the end,
the whole society changes in an uncontrolled way and its
economy becomes dependent on imports and it is vulnerable to
global instabilities.
david bohm: Of course, many people think that solving these sorts
science, order, and creativity
xx

of problems is only a matter of studying ecology or some other
speciality. Certainly ecology does begin to acknowledge the
complex dependence of each activity on the whole context. But
really the problem is as much one of economics as it is of ecol-
ogy, and this leads on to politics, and to the structure of society
and the nature of human beings in general.
The key issue is this: How is it possible to subject all these
factors to prediction and control in order to manipulate the sys-
tem and bring about good order? Clearly this is an impossible
demand. To begin with, there is the inﬁnite complexity involved,
and the extreme instability of these systems, which requires
almost perfect and, probably unattainable, degrees of control. But
more important, the system itself depends on human beings. And
how can science lead human beings to control themselves? How
do scientists propose to control hatred between nations, reli-
gions, and ideologies when science itself is fundamentally
limited and controlled by these very things? And what about the
growing psychological tension in a society that is so
unresponsive to basic human needs that life seems, for many, to
have lost its meaning? In the face of all this, some people break
down mentally, or become dependent on various drugs, while
others engage in mindless violence.
david peat: It seems impossible to dream that through some sort of
new discovery in chemistry or biology or the behavioral sciences
these problems will ever be brought under control. They are
so far-reaching and pervasive. How does science intend to end
the danger of mutual annihilation that exists in the world? After
all, this has its origin in the fear, mistrust, and hatred between
nations. It seems to me that the more science and technology
develop, the more dangerous the whole situation is becoming.
david bohm: Of course, a century or so ago the beneﬁts from sci-
ence generally outweighed the negative eﬀects, even when the
whole endeavor was carried out without regard for long-range
consequences. But the modern world is ﬁnite and we have almost
introduction
xxi

unlimited powers of destruction. It’s clear that the world has
passed a point of no return. This is one reason why we have to
pause and consider the possibility of a fundamental and extensive
change in what science means to us.
david peat: What we need is not so much new scientiﬁc ideas,
although these are still going to be of great interest. The question
is how can science, when it is based on a fragmentary attitude to
life, ever understand the essence of real problems that depend on
an indeﬁnitely wide context? The answer does not lie in the
accumulation of more and more knowledge. What is needed is
wisdom. It is a lack of wisdom that is causing most of our serious
problems rather than a lack of knowledge.
david bohm: But this also implies goodwill and friendliness. This
seems to be lacking today, among scientists as much as in the
general public.
david peat: Of course, goodwill and friendship are important if
people are going to work together for the common good. But in
the long run, I think that we may have to sacriﬁce some of the
values that we hold so dear today. For example, we have to ques-
tion the indeﬁnite increase of individual comfort and prosperity
and the preeminence of the competitive spirit, which is basically
divisive and fragmentary.
david bohm: Yes, and it’s arbitrary to forever limit science to what
it has become today. After all, this was the result of a historical
process that involved many fortuitous elements. We have to
explore in a creative way what a new notion of science might be,
a notion that is suitable for our present time. This means that all
the subjects that we have been talking about will have to come
into the discussion.
david peat: I think that if we are to understand this call for a new
creative surge in science, then we also have to understand the
historical perspective that you’ve been talking about. We need to
understand how our present fragmentary approach came about.
For example, it would be interesting to think about what would
science, order, and creativity
xxii

have happened if diﬀerent pathways that were available at the
time had been fully explored in the past.
david bohm: But these sorts of discussion cannot be restricted to
science alone. We have to include the whole range of human
activities. Our aim is to throw light on the nature of creativity and
how it can be fostered, not only in science but in society, and in
the life of each individual. This is the ultimate nature of the surge
we are calling for.
introduction xxiii


1
REVOLUTIONS, THEORIES, AND
CREATIVITY IN SCIENCE
Science today is exerting an ever-increasing inﬂuence over the
world’s societies, yet at its very heart, it is beset with serious
diﬃculties. One of the most pervasive of these involves its frag-
mentary approach to nature and reality. In the Introduction it
was suggested that, in an age in which science is taken to be the
key to increasing progress and the betterment of life, this frag-
mentary approach can never resolve the deeper problems which
now face our world. Many of these problems depend on contexts
so broad that they ultimately extend into the whole of nature,
society, and the life of each individual. Clearly such problems
can never be solved within the limited contexts in which they
are normally formulated.
It is only by moving beyond its present fragmentation that
science can hope to make a realistic contribution to these, more
serious problems which face us. But fragmentation should not
be confused with the act of division of an area of knowledge
into particular ﬁelds of specialization or with the abstraction of

speciﬁc problems for study. These divisions may be perfectly
legitimate, and in fact, they are an essential feature of science.
Rather, as the term indicates, to fragment means “to break up or
smash.” Fragmentation therefore arises when an attempt is made
to impose divisions in an arbitrary fashion, without any regard
for a wider context, even to the point of ignoring essential con-
nections to the rest of the world. The image of a watch that has
been smashed by a hammer comes to mind, for what results
is not an appropriate set of divisions but arbitrary fragments
which have little or no signiﬁcance to the working of the
watch. Many of our current attempts to deal with the serious
problems discussed in the Introduction result in solutions and
actions which are as fragmentary and irrelevant as the parts of a
broken watch.
FRAGMENTATION AND CHANGE IN SCIENCE
Science is an attempt to understand the universe and humanity’s
relationship to nature. How then is it possible for fragmentation
to grow out of such an approach? The very notion of scientiﬁc
understanding appears to be totally incompatible with a frag-
mentary attitude to reality. To understand how the fragmentary
approach to the problems and diﬃculties discussed in the Intro-
duction came to pervade the whole of science, it is ﬁrst neces-
sary to understand not only what fragmentation means, but also
how it operates in practice. This involves particularly subtle and
complex issues. To begin with, it is important once again to
distinguish fragmentation from simple specialization and from
the practical division of knowledge into various subdivisions.
Clearly some such form of specialization was the essential step in
the development of civilization.
Indeed, the study of any ﬁeld begins with a natural act of
abstraction, in order to focus on certain features of interest. To
be able to give attention to something, it is ﬁrst necessary to
science, order, and creativity
2

abstract or isolate its main features from all the inﬁnite, ﬂuctuat-
ing complexity of its background.
When such an act of perceptive abstraction is free from an
excessive mechanical rigidity, then it does not lead to fragmenta-
tion, but rather it reﬂects the ever-changing relationship of the
object to its background. In order to recognize a face in a mov-
ing crowd, for example, an act of perceptive abstraction is
required in which important features are isolated and integrated
together. In a similar way, nonrigid focusing of the mind upon a
ﬁeld of interest will allow a corresponding integration of all
relevant features in this ﬁeld.
As a simple illustration, think of an intern who examines a
patient in the emergency ward of a hospital. This doctor must
make a preliminary diagnosis based on characteristic signs and
symptoms that have to be abstracted from the inﬁnite variety of
appearances and behavior of the patient. This diagnosis therefore
relies upon an essential division and classiﬁcation of groups of
symptoms and ﬁndings. But this division must never be ﬁxed
rigidly beforehand. Rather, the doctor must constantly check and
conﬁrm his or her hypotheses, changing them when they are
not conﬁrmed.
The preliminary diagnosis may point to some trauma in a
localized region of the body, the dysfunction of an organ,
a generalized infection, or some overall disorder of the metabol-
ism. The recognition of a speciﬁc disease therefore depends
upon the doctor’s ability to recognize a whole picture of symp-
toms which have been abstracted out of a complex background.
Given this diagnosis, the intern will then call upon the assistance
of a doctor who specializes in one of the subdivisions of
medicine, for example injuries to the brain, disorders of the
gastrointestinal system, fractures of the bones, infectious dis-
eases. When medicine works well, it combines this generalized
knowledge with the more focused and detailed knowledge of
the specialist. The danger, however, is always present that by
revolutions, theories, and creativity in science
3

converging upon a particular symptom, or area of the body, its
connection with the larger whole of the patient’s lifestyle and
the lifestyle of the whole society may be neglected. When this
happens, the deeper nature of the disorder is obscured and spe-
cialization gives way to fragmentation, which will lead to
inappropriate treatment.
In a similar way, science has developed into a number of
general areas, such as physics, chemistry, and biology. In turn,
each of these ﬁelds is further broken down into more speciﬁc
specializations. Physics, for example, includes elementary par-
ticles, nuclear, atomic, molecular, condensed matter, ﬂuids,
astrophysics, and so on. Each particular discipline involves its
own highly speciﬁc areas of knowledge together with character-
istic theoretical and experimental approaches that have been
built up through historical evolution.
In the seventeenth century, for example, the study of gases
embraced both physics and chemistry, and a range of diﬀerent
approaches and experimental techniques were used in the one
laboratory. The Irishman Robert Boyle, for example, was inter-
ested in the behavior of gases, both chemical and physical with-
out distinction. In particular he became fascinated by what he
called the “spring” of a gas, the way its volume changes with
pressure. In order to make careful measurements of this relation-
ship, it was necessary to isolate each particular gas from back-
ground contingencies, such as changes in temperature. But once
Boyle’s law had been established, it became possible to widen
the investigation and to explore the eﬀect of both pressure and
temperature on the same volume of gas. In turn, ever more
reﬁned experiments could detect deviations on the part of indi-
vidual gases, from this ideal behavior. But by now, the study of
gases had divided itself into two main areas, their physical and
their chemical behaviors, which were studied by scientists with
quite diﬀerent backgrounds and trainings.
The example of Boyle’s research illustrates two particular
science, order, and creativity
4

tendencies in specialization: ﬁrst, that a topic of general interest,
in this case the behavior of gases, can become divided into sev-
eral distinct ﬁelds of study; and second, the way in which a
scientiﬁc investigation proceeds by focusing, through carefully
designed experiments, upon some particular property of a
system and then attempting to study it in isolation from the
wider context of its environment. Once this particular property
is fully understood, the context can then be expanded to include
additional eﬀects and properties. Ideally, areas of specialization
are never rigidly ﬁxed but evolve dynamically, in a state of ﬂux,
subdividing into narrow regions of specialization at one time
then becoming more generalized at another. Provided that these
boundaries remain ﬂuid and scientists are aware of the wider
context of each experiment and concept, then the problems of
fragmentation need not arise.
But, in general, science today is becoming more and more
specialized so that an individual scientist may spend a lifetime
working in a particular narrow ﬁeld and never come into contact
with the wider context of his or her subject. Indeed, some scien-
tists believe that this is inevitable. For as knowledge accumulates,
knowing everything in depth and detail becomes impossible, so
that researchers must apparently be content to work in increas-
ingly narrow areas.
Nevertheless, it is still commonly thought to be possible to
ﬁnd examples in which specialization does not lead to fragmen-
tation but rather to an actual extension of the overall context. In
biology at the start of this century, for example, most researchers
had little to do with the emerging ideas in physics. Experts may
have had some superﬁcial knowledge of the new advances in
atomic physics and quantum theory but they had little reason to
connect it to their daily research. However, a few decades later
interest in DNA brought into biology a whole series of new
experimental techniques ﬁrst developed in physics. Today the
methods of experimental physics and the quantum theory form
revolutions, theories, and creativity in science
5

an essential part of what has become known as molecular biol-
ogy. The context of molecular biology has therefore transcended
the boundaries of a number of sciences. However, as a new area
of study, molecular biology has itself become fragmented and
separated from other ﬁelds of biology. Today a molecular
biologist probably has little in common with workers in whole
animal biology, for example. Hence, even when signiﬁcant cross
connections are made between areas of specialization, the end
result may in fact be an even more subtle and far-reaching form
of rigid specialization.
As was suggested earlier, however, there appears to be no
intrinsic reason why the movement between specialization and
generalization, analysis and synthesis should of itself necessarily
lead to fragmentation. Moreover, it is clear that individual scien-
tists themselves would hardly make a conscious decision to carry
out their research in a fragmentary way. How then has the pres-
ent fragmentation of science come about? Clearly it must involve
some particularly subtle factors that have by now become built
into the very way that science is carried out. Our proposal is that
fragmentation does not so much arise from some defect in the
scientiﬁc approach. Rather it has its origins in the general ways
in which human beings perceive and act, not only as individuals
but, more importantly, on an organized social level. As an
example (which will be explored in more detail in the next
chapter), fragmentation arises in scientiﬁc communication and
this becomes embedded in the very way the languages of science
are used. And since the causes of such fragmentation are in
general mainly subliminal, they are extremely diﬃcult to detect
and to correct.
A more general subliminal cause of fragmentation in science
involves what might be called “the tacit infrastructure of scien-
tiﬁc ideas.” Some of our most valuable skills exist in the form of
such a tacit infrastructure of knowledge. A child, for example,
spends long hours with a bicycle before suddenly learning to
science, order, and creativity
6

ride. Yet once this new skill is acquired, it never seems to be
forgotten. It takes a subliminal and mainly unconscious form,
since no one actually “thinks” about how to ride a bike. Likewise
typing, sailing a yacht, walking, swimming, playing tennis, and
for the skilled handyperson, ﬁxing a car, replacing a broken elec-
trical plug, or changing a washer in a faucet all involve this sort
of tacit infrastructure of knowledge and skills. Similarly, a scien-
tist possesses a great deal of such knowledge and skills which are
at his or her “ﬁngertips.” These make day-to-day research pos-
sible, allowing concentration on the main point of issue without
the constant need to think about the details of what is being
done. Most scientists, for example, carry out their research by
using experimental techniques or applying established theories
that were ﬁrst picked up in graduate school. In this way a physi-
cist may spend a decade investigating, for example, the internal
structure of metals without ever needing to question this tacit
knowledge in any basic way.
But science, like everything else, is in a constant process of
evolution and change. In this process, the developments that are
made in one area may sometimes have serious consequences for
the foundations of theories and concepts in other areas. In this
way, the overall context of science is constantly undergoing
changes which, at times, are both deep and subtle. The result of
this complex change is that the underlying tacit infrastructure of
concepts and ideas may gradually become inappropriate or even
irrelevant. But because scientists are accustomed to using their
tacit skills and knowledge in subliminal and unconscious ways,
there is a tendency of the mind to hold on to them and to try to
go on working in old ways within new contexts. The result is a
mixture of confusion and fragmentation.
As an example, consider the development of the theory of
relativity. Before Einstein, the Newtonian concepts of absolute
space and time had pervaded both the theory and the practice
of physics for several centuries. Even a physicist as original as
revolutions, theories, and creativity in science
7

H. Lorentz at the turn of the century continued to use these
concepts in an eﬀort to explain the constancy of the velocity
of light, irrespective of the speed of the measuring apparatus.
Newtonian notions of relative velocity suggested that the meas-
urement of the speed of light should yield an experimental
result that depended upon the speed of the observing apparatus
relative to the light source. For example, if the apparatus moves
rapidly toward the source of light, it would expect to register a
higher speed than if it moved away. However, no such eﬀect was
observed during very careful measurements. Lorentz, in an eﬀort
to retain the Newtonian concepts, proposed an ether theory, in
which the anomalous results on the measurement of light were
explained by actual changes in the measuring apparatus as it
moved through the ether.
Lorentz was therefore able to explain the constancy of the
velocity of light, independent of the relative speed of the obser-
ver, as an artifact produced by the measuring instruments them-
selves, and there was no need to question the fundamental
nature of Newtonian ideas. It took the genius of Einstein to do
this. But such was the strength of the tacit infrastructure of basic
concepts that it required a long time before scientists could
generally appreciate the meaning of Einstein’s proposals. As
with Lorentz, the general tendency was to hold on to basic ways
of thinking in new contexts that called for fundamental changes.
In this way a confusion was introduced into the subliminal
infrastructure that becomes extremely diﬃcult to detect.
To be free of this confusion, scientists must be able to perceive
the underlying infrastructure of skills, concepts, and ideas in a
radically new light. In the ﬁrst instance, such perception reveals
various internal contradictions and other inadequacies, which
should in themselves alert scientists to the fact that something
is going wrong. An accumulation of internal contradictions and
inadequacies should properly lead scientists to question the
whole general structure of the theories and presuppositions that
science, order, and creativity
8

underlie a particular ﬁeld. In some cases, this examination would
involve calling into question even the independence of that area
of specialization from others.
In many cases, however, this sort of response does not actually
take place and scientists attempt to press on by putting “new
wine in old bottles.” But why should this be? The answer to this
question involves a psychological factor, the mind’s strong ten-
dency to cling to what it ﬁnds familiar and to defend itself
against what threatens seriously to disturb its overall balance and
equilibrium. Unless the perceived rewards are very great, the
mind will not willingly explore its unconscious infrastructure of
ideas but will prefer to continue in more familiar ways.
The mind’s tendency to hold on to what is familiar is
enhanced by the fact that the overall tacit infrastructure is
inseparably woven into the whole fabric of science as well as into
its institutions, on which depends the professional security of
each scientist. As a result, there is always a strong pressure
against any individual scientist who threatens to “rock the boat.”
But of course, this resistance is not conﬁned simply to science
but occurs in every walk of life when familiar and comfortable
thoughts and feelings are threatened. People will therefore tend
not to have the necessary energy and courage to call into ques-
tion the whole tacit infrastructure of their ﬁeld. But this becomes
increasingly diﬃcult to do as the whole infrastructure ultimately
extends, in its implications, into the whole of science and even
of society itself.
One particularly signiﬁcant mechanism which the mind
employs to defend itself against the inadequacy of its basic ideas
is to deny that it is relevant to explore these ideas. Indeed the
whole process generally goes further because it is implicitly
denied that anything important is being denied! Scientists, for
example, may avoid confronting deeper ideas by assuming that
each particular diﬃculty or contradiction can be dealt with
through some suitable modiﬁcation of a commonly accepted
revolutions, theories, and creativity in science
9

theory. Each problem therefore produces a burst of activity in
which the scientist seeks a “new idea.” But rather than looking
for something truly fundamental, scientists often attempt an
addition or modiﬁcation that will simply meet the current prob-
lem without seriously disturbing the underlying infrastructure.
Another way of defending the subliminal structure of ideas is
to overemphasize the separation between a particular problem
and other areas. In this way the problem can be studied in a
limited context and without the need to question related con-
cepts. But this only acts to prevent a clear awareness of the
ultimate connections of the problem to its wider context and
implications. The result is to produce artiﬁcial and excessively
sharp divisions between diﬀerent problems and to obscure their
connections to wider ﬁelds. As these divisions rigidify with
time, they cease to constitute valid breaks or abstractions of dis-
tinct ﬁelds of study and result in a pervasive form of fragmenta-
tion. Further work, guided by this fragmentary infrastructure,
will lead to an apparent conﬁrmation of the original assumption
that there can be a sharp separation between the ﬁelds in ques-
tion. Diﬀerent areas of study now appear to exist on their
own, as objective and independent of the actions, will, and
desire of individual scientists, even though their actions origin-
ally brought about this fragmentation in the ﬁrst place. Fragmen-
tation therefore tends to become self-fulﬁlling, so it is particularly
important to become aware of its dangers before being trapped
in its consequences.1
The resistance of the mind in going beyond the boundaries of
particular divisions of subjects, and more generally, its resistance
to change in fundamental notions of all kinds, is particularly
dangerous where the idea of fundamental truth is involved.
Until well into the nineteenth century, most people were willing
to believe that humanity, through its common endeavors, was
actually approaching some kind of absolute truth about nature.
The idea that science could play a signiﬁcant role in discovering
science, order, and creativity
10

this truth lay behind, for example, the Catholic Church’s original
reaction to the teachings of Galileo, for it appeared that scientists
felt themselves to be in a position to challenge the authority
of the Church as the traditional repository of truth. In the
nineteenth century, Darwinian evolution produced yet another
revolution that appeared to many to strike against the authority
of religion.
When science won its battle with the Church for the freedom
to entertain its own hypotheses, it in turn became the principal
repository of the idea that particular forms of knowledge could
either be absolute truths or at least could approach absolute
truths. Such a belief in the ultimate power of scientiﬁc know-
ledge evoked strong feelings of comforting security in many
people, almost comparable with the feelings experienced by
those who have an absolute faith in the truths of religion. Natur-
ally there was an extreme reluctance to question the very founda-
tions upon which the whole basis of this sort of truth rested.
In retrospect, the idea that science can lead to an absolute
truth about nature was not initially implausible. After all, in
the seventeenth century Galileo and Newton had revealed an
impressive internal structure that applied to the whole universe.
To many scientists this must have suggested that they were
approaching some aspects of the absolute truth. However,
science in its ceaseless change soon led to new developments of
this “truth” with Darwinism, Freudian analysis, relativity, and
quantum theory. Today this process of change has every prospect
of continuing. It therefore raises such questions as: How is it
possible to reconcile the hope for an absolute truth from science
with such radical changes in its very foundations? What is the
relationship between scientiﬁc ideas and reality if such funda-
mental changes in scientiﬁc theories are constantly taking place?
For the modern mind, this notion of absolute truth has become
considerably weakened and scientists have become accustomed,
at least tacitly, to accepting the need for unending change in
revolutions, theories, and creativity in science
11

their basic concepts. Nevertheless, at the subliminal level at least,
most scientists still seem to cling to the hope that in some way
the very activity of science will one day bring them to some
notion of absolute truth. This appears to be one of the main
reasons why they have such a strong disposition to defend the
tacit infrastructure of the whole of science with great energy.
Clearly, the whole problem of ending the mind’s defense of
its tacitly held ideas and assumptions against evidence of their
inadequacy cannot be solved within the present climate of scien-
tiﬁc research. For within this context, every step that is taken
will, from the very outset, be deeply conditioned by the auto-
matic defense of the whole infrastructure. What is needed is
some new overall approach, a creative surge of the kind sug-
gested in the Introduction that goes far beyond the tacit and
unconscious ideas that have come to dominate science. Such a
novel approach would, however, involve questions about the
nature of creativity and what, if anything, will help to foster it.
This inquiry begins, in this chapter, by looking at the ways in
which creativity has actually operated to give rise to new ideas in
physics. This exploration also reveals some of the factors that
impede creativity and begins to suggest how the current activ-
ities of science could be changed so as to foster a more creative
approach. Later chapters take a more general approach as creativ-
ity is explored in relation to the whole question of order. Finally,
the last chapter explores the implications for a general creative
surge, not only in relation to science but also to society and
human life as a whole.
NOVELTY AND CONSERVATION IN
SCIENTIFIC THEORIES
The ideas discussed in the previous section have something in
common with those of Thomas Kuhn, the historian and phil-
osopher of science, whose The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions
science, order, and creativity
12

aroused much attention in the 1960s.2 A closer examination,
however, reveals subtle but signiﬁcant diﬀerences between our
ideas and those of Kuhn, particularly in connection with the
nature of change and conservation in science. More speciﬁcally,
we diﬀer from Kuhn especially in the interpretation of the breaks
that occur in the development of science and in our suggestions
of ways in which these can be overcome.
On the basis of a study of the history of how scientiﬁc ideas
develop, Thomas Kuhn argued that the prevailing activity of
science takes place during long periods of what he called “nor-
mal science,” periods in which the fundamental concepts are
not seriously questioned. This “normal science” then gives
way to a “scientiﬁc revolution” in which theories and ideas
change in radical ways as whole new systems of concepts and
approaches are created. Kuhn calls these overall systems of
concepts and approaches paradigms. Paradigms include not only
systems of theories, principles, and doctrines, but also what we
have called the “tacit infrastructure of ideas” which are transmit-
ted to later generations of scientists in a kind of apprenticeship.
Kuhn argued that, following a scientiﬁc revolution, the new
paradigm is “incommensurable” with what came before. This
clearly suggests a break or fragmentation within the evolution of
science. Kuhn’s term “incommensurable” is not too clear. It
seems to imply that a new paradigm does not have enough to do
with the old to permit even a common measure. Incommensur-
ability, in this sense, is quite diﬀerent from notions such as
contradiction or incompatibility, which imply some common
infrastructure with opposition lying only in certain points so
that a measure of divergence or lack of agreement can be made.
Kuhn’s term, however, implies that no such measure is possible.
Perhaps it would have been better to say that two paradigms are
mutually irrelevant. In this sense, those who understand one
paradigm might, by a special eﬀort, understand the other. But
they would feel that this has little to do with what they regard as
revolutions, theories, and creativity in science
13

the basic framework in which truth is to be grasped. They would
have little motive for paying serious attention to the alternative
paradigm. Clearly, if Kuhn is correct, the new paradigm therefore
leads to a very basic and serious form of fragmentation.
It is therefore important to question Kuhn’s whole analysis of
this incommensurability and ask if such a fundamental disloca-
tion of ideas must always accompany a scientiﬁc revolution. It is
also necessary to go into Kuhn’s notion of “normal science.”
In fact, Kuhn did not imply that this was a norm or ideal to
which science should approach following a revolution. Rather
he argued that this was the traditional way in which scientists
have worked in the past. In this book it will be argued that
science need not, in fact, work in this way and that Kuhn’s
“normal science” has no more force than that of custom and
habit. A closer analysis will show that during periods of “normal
science,” quite signiﬁcant changes, in fact, take place and that
true creativity cannot be bound or limited to periods of revolu-
tion alone.
But to return to this notion of a scientiﬁc revolution. The
discussions of this chapter will show that the whole issue is far
more subtle than that of opposing two incommensurable para-
digms. Indeed there is a potential for a continuously creative
approach in science so that any abrupt discontinuity of ideas is
not inevitable.
As a preliminary example, let us look at one of the major
scientiﬁc revolutions to take place before this century, a revolu-
tion in the understanding of the basic nature of motion. Accord-
ing to Aristotle, all bodies have their natural place in the universe.
When a body has discovered its natural place, it will remain at
rest unless acted upon by some external force. Aristotle’s theory
corresponds to what could be called a “common sense” view of
nature. No matter how hard a stone is thrown, experience shows
that it eventually comes to rest on the ground. Similarly a cart
comes to rest when the horse tires. “Common sense” suggests
science, order, and creativity
14

that all things eventually come to rest, and remain that way
unless moved by some external force.
Newton’s system, which replaced Aristotle’s, argued that the
natural state is one of motion, in which rest, or zero velocity,
happens to be a special case. An object therefore moves in a
straight line, or remains at rest, indeﬁnitely unless some force
acts on it. Under the action of a force, the motion changes and its
rate of change is expressed by Newton’s second law of motion.
Newton’s laws of motion appear, at ﬁrst sight, to contradict
“common sense,” for they suggest that if all opposing forces are
somehow removed, then the stone and the cart will continue to
move in a straight line forever.
Clearly, the gap between Aristotelian and Newtonian concepts
is extremely wide. In the Newtonian paradigm, for example,
Aristotle’s notion of a natural place is completely beside the
point, while in Aristotle’s system, there is no room to consider
Newton’s idea of natural motion. The two ideas, therefore,
appear to be unrelated to the point that one is not even relevant
to the other. However, a closer examination of Newton’s “scien-
tiﬁc revolution” shows that, in some areas, a sudden dislocation
of concepts and ideas did not in fact take place. To begin with,
part of the old tacit infrastructure of ideas was carried over
into Newton’s scheme. Furthermore, other signiﬁcant changes
occurred in the longer period of “normal science” which fol-
lowed. In fact, while a considerable confusion of the two sets of
ideas and concepts existed for a long period following Newton,
this did allow for the possibility of a dialogue between the
two paradigms. In this sense the two paradigms were never abso-
lutely incommensurable and indeed some form of creative
dialogue could always have been held between them.
During the Middle Ages, people accepted Aristotle’s ideas as
part of a tacit infrastructure of their worldview. Gradually, fol-
lowing Newton, another worldview arose in which Aristotle’s
earlier ideas began to seem strange and beside the point. By the
revolutions, theories, and creativity in science
15

end of the eighteenth century, therefore, Aristotle’s notions on
motion appeared to be quite incommensurable with Newton’s.
Yet a closer examination shows that, in the Newtonian revolu-
tion, not everything had been swept away. For example, the
notion of what constituted a material body, and what was the
actual structure of space and time, did not change in any radical
way, at least at ﬁrst. The actual Newtonian revolution could
best be described, therefore, as a radical change in certain
ideas, set against a general background of concepts that
remained unchanged.
Indeed the sense of mutual irrelevance of the two paradigms
actually arose later, as the implications of Newton’s ideas were
unfolded across the rest of physics. For as Newton’s ideas spread,
they began to transform general concepts about the nature of
matter that had not been closely examined in the initial “revolu-
tion.” For example, Newton’s laws of motion apply not only to
apples and cannonballs but also to the motion of the moon and
the planets. But clearly, if the same laws govern the heavens as
they do bodies on earth, then there can be no essential diﬀerence
between these two forms of matter. In this way, one of Aristotle’s
basic assumptions about the nature of the universe was denied. A
similar change took place in the notion of cause, for the
approaches of Galileo, Kepler, and Newton showed that the con-
cepts of formal and ﬁnal causes, advocated by Aristotle, were no
longer needed in physics. Therefore, as the new ideas made their
eﬀects felt, they began to transform the whole framework of
traditional modes of thought. As the old framework was grad-
ually dropped and new notions of cause, motion, and matter
evolved, science underwent a major transformation in the way it
looked at the world, a change which was absorbed into the new
tacit infrastructure.
Clearly, while major changes took place during the Newtonian
revolution, the old and new infrastructure of ideas was not,
initially, incommensurable on all points. However, in the period
science, order, and creativity
16

of “normal science” which followed, the older infrastructure
was eroded and transformed by the many implications of the
new ideas. In this way the implications of a “scientiﬁc revolu-
tion” can be far-reaching and will continue to manifest them-
selves during the period of “normal science” that follows.
With Einstein’s theory of relativity and the quantum theory,
traditional concepts of motion, matter, and causality changed yet
again. For example, the Newtonian concept of absolute space
and time, a holdover from earlier Aristotelian notions, was
ﬁnally found to be incompatible with Einstein’s relativistic ideas.
In addition, the classical concept of a particle’s trajectory did not
cohere with the notion of a continuous quantum transition.
In this and in many other ways, relativity and quantum theory
continued the revolution that was started by Newton, and con-
tinued to transform the general tacit infrastructure of ideas
that underlie physics. One particularly signiﬁcant aspect of this
change was to place a much greater reliance on mathematics.
As was pointed out in the Introduction, the idea that mathemat-
ics expresses the essential reality of nature was ﬁrst put explicitly,
in modern times, by scientists, such as Sir James Jeans and
Werner Heisenberg, but within a few decades, these ideas were
being transmitted almost subliminally. As a result, after passing
through graduate school, most physicists have come to regard
this attitude toward mathematics as being perfectly natural.
However, in earlier generations such views would have been
regarded as strange and perhaps even a little crazy—at all events
irrelevant to a proper scientiﬁc view of reality. So yet again,
while the scientiﬁc revolutions of this century are generally
viewed as arising explicitly in the ﬁrst three decades with quan-
tum and relativity theories, in fact radical changes continued to
take place in the postrevolutionary decades that followed. During
this period of so-called “normal science,” the whole attitude
toward the signiﬁcance of mathematics began to change. Where
it had once been regarded as an important tool for unfolding the
revolutions, theories, and creativity in science
17

implications of ideas, concepts, and models, now it was believed
to contain the very essence of the scientiﬁc ideas themselves.
CREATIVITY AND METAPHORS
Scientiﬁc revolutions, therefore, begin with a radical change,
which then unfolds, through a long period of “normal” science,
into a whole new infrastructure of ideas and tacit assumptions.
Of course, such long-term transformations within the largely
unconscious infrastructure of ideas, involve the operation of
creativity on a continuous basis. In contrast to the approach
of Kuhn, therefore, it is argued here that a certain continuity
is always preserved during a scientiﬁc revolution and that sig-
niﬁcant changes to this infrastructure continue to take place
during the subsequent periods of “normal” science. However, a
clear perception of the actual nature of this change does not
always take place at the time itself. Indeed, scientists generally
believe that “everything changes” in a revolution, while during
the longer period that follows, it is assumed that “everything
remains basically the same.”
In science, this failure to fully perceive the subtle but essential
nature of change becomes a major source of rigidity, which in
turn contributes to fragmentation in the way that has been
described earlier. Hence, in order to understand the essential
nature of change in science, it is necessary to see how new ideas
actually arise in spite of this rigidity. In doing this, it will be
possible to obtain some insight into the nature of creativity,
without which science would tend to be caught indeﬁnitely in
the “rigid tracks” that it has made through its own progress in
the past.
To begin such an inquiry into creativity, consider the example
of Newton’s theory of universal gravitation. Newton’s revo-
lutionary step went far beyond the mere reordering of existing
concepts, for it involved a radically new mental perception of
science, order, and creativity
18

nature. The idea that objects may attract each other did not actu-
ally originate with Newton. But his genius lay in realizing the
full, explicit implications of what was already known within
the scientiﬁc community. To understand the signiﬁcance of
Newton’s perception, it is necessary to go back to the Middle
Ages, when science was strongly based on Aristotle’s notion that
earthly and heavenly matter are of two basically diﬀerent natures.
A great deal of experimental evidence began to accumulate after
the Middle Ages which suggested that there is no fundamental
diﬀerence between heavenly and earthly matter. But this know-
ledge tended to be kept in one compartment of scientists’ minds,
fragmented from another compartment which continued to
cling to the notion that heaven and earth are separate. Thus
scientists never raised the question as to why the moon does not
fall, because it seemed evident that, as a result of its celestial
nature, it naturally remains in the sky where it belongs.
It was Newton who ﬁrst perceived the universal implications
of the fall of the apple: As the apple falls toward the earth,
so does the moon, and so does everything fall toward everything
else. To see the universal nature of gravitational attraction,
Newton had to become free of the habitual compartmentaliza-
tion of earthly and celestial matter, a form of fragmentation that
was implicit within the tacit infrastructure of the “normal”
science of his day. To break away from the habitual and com-
monly accepted modes of thought, which had been taken for
granted for generations, required intense courage, energy, and
passion. Newton had these in abundance, and at the height of his
powers, he was always asking fundamental questions. The cru-
cial factor in Newton’s vision, and indeed in the creation of all
new ideas, is this ability to break out of old patterns of thought.
Indeed, once this has been done, new perceptions and novel
ideas appear to arise naturally.
It is, of course, diﬃcult for the nonscientist to obtain a direct
experience of what it is like to create a new theory or scientiﬁc
revolutions, theories, and creativity in science
19

concept. But some insight can be gained by thinking about the
way metaphors are used in poetry.3 Shakespeare’s plays, for
example, are particularly rich in metaphors:
All the world’s a stage
And all the men and women on it merely players.
As You Like It
Life’s but a walking shadow, a poor player,
That struts and frets his hour upon the stage.
Macbeth
The world is a stage; birth and death are entrances and exits;
life is “a tale told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, signifying
nothing.”
This characteristic use of the word is to connect things that are
so very diﬀerent or even incompatible, at ﬁrst sight, appears to
generate a paradox. To express this more explicitly, let A = “the
world” and B = “a stage.” The corresponding metaphor then
takes the form A = B. But common sense dictates that the world
is not a stage and therefore A ≠ B. The metaphor therefore appears
to involve a simultaneous equating and negating of two ideas,
concepts, or objects.
The ﬁrst sense of the inner signiﬁcance of a poetic equating of
very diﬀerent things is a kind of tension or vibration in the
mind, a high state of energy in which a creative perception of
the meaning of the metaphor takes place nonverbally. In some
cases this heightened perception is the whole reason for using
the metaphor in the ﬁrst place. Nevertheless some poets chose to
go further and show that the two diﬀerent things that are for-
mally identiﬁed are indeed similar in some very signiﬁcant but
highly implicit way. In the case of Jacques’ speech from As
You Like It, the meaning of the metaphor between life and a stage
is unfolded by comparing people to actors on a stage, and a
science, order, and creativity
20

person’s whole life to a series of scenes in a play. Indeed many of
Shakespeare’s set speeches and sonnets begin with the height-
ened perception of a metaphor and then, having charged the
listener with a high perceptive energy, proceed to unfold the
inner meaning of the metaphor by exploring the subtle similar-
ities and diﬀerences between A and B.
This notion of a metaphor can serve to illuminate the nature
of scientiﬁc creativity by equating, in a metaphoric sense, a
scientiﬁc discovery with a poetic metaphor. For in perceiving a
new idea in science, the mind is involved in a similar form
of creative perception as when it engages a poetic metaphor.
However, in science it is essential to unfold the meaning of the
metaphor in even greater and more “literal” detail, while in
poetry the metaphor may remain relatively implicit.
These ideas are best explored through an example, Newton’s
initial insight into the nature of universal gravitation. This can be
expressed in metaphoric form as “The moon is an apple,” which
is then extended to “The moon is an earth.” At ﬁrst, this use of
language gives rise to a state of high creative and perceptive
energy, which is not basically diﬀerent from that arising in a
poetic metaphor. At this point, therefore, it is sensed that the
moon, an apple, and the earth are similar in a very important
way, but as with the poetic metaphor, this is not yet expressed
explicitly. However, almost immediately, scientiﬁc thought real-
izes that all these objects are basically similar in the sense that
they attract each other and obey the same laws of motion. At this
stage, while the insight is more explicit, it is still fairly poetic and
qualitative in nature. The next step, however, is to transpose the
unfolded metaphor into a mathematical language which renders
the similarities and diﬀerences more explicit. From there on,
calculations are used to compare theory with experiment, and
explain in detail why all objects fall and yet some, like the moon,
never reach the surface of the earth. It should be emphasized
here that mathematics has now taken its proper place in the
revolutions, theories, and creativity in science
21

theorizing, for without it, the comparison with experiment
could hardly have been made. Moreover, mathematics makes
detailed new predictions possible and even leads to new con-
cepts when these ideas are applied in fresh contexts.
A second example of such metaphoric creation is given by the
well-known story of how Archimedes was asked to determine
the amount of gold in a crown. The philosopher was well aware
that if he knew both the weight of the crown and its total vol-
ume, he could then calculate its density and determine if this
was indeed equal to that of pure gold. If the crown proved to
be too light for its particular volume, then Archimedes could
conclude that its gold had been adulterated with some other
metal. Weighing the crown posed no problem but how was
Archimedes to determine its volume? Greek geometry contained
a series of rules for working out the volume of various objects,
provided that they were of simple, regular shapes. For example,
by measuring the length of its sides and applying such a rule,
Archimedes could easily have calculated the volume of a
cube. But how was he to proceed with such an irregular object
as a crown, something that lay outside the whole system of
Greek geometry?
Legend has it that Archimedes was resting in his bath when
the solution occurred to him. The philosopher observed that the
water level in his bath rose as his body sank, and he suddenly
equated this process of displacement with the degree to which
his body was immersed and then with the volume of another
irregularly shaped object—the crown. A metaphor was therefore
established between the irregular shape of the crown, the vol-
ume of his own body, and the rising water level in the bath. By
immersing the crown in water and observing the rise in water
level, its volume could therefore be inferred. Archimedes’ per-
ception was, to some extent, a visual one, involving the rising of
the bathwater. But the essence of his discovery lay in an internal
perception of new ideas within the mind, which showed
science, order, and creativity
22

Archimedes how the volume of any object is equal to the vol-
ume of water it displaces. The state of high energy and vibrant
tension inherent in this instant of creation is captured in the
story that at the moment Archimedes saw the key point, he
cried out “Eureka.” Archimedes’ perceptive metaphor was later
developed in more detail into a general method for the practical
determination of irregular volumes and led to the new concept
of speciﬁc gravity. Finally, with the creation of Newton’s calcu-
lus, it became possible to place the notion of the volume of an
irregular shape on a ﬁrm mathematical footing.
Metaphoric perception is, indeed, fundamental to all science
and involves bringing together previously incompatible ideas in
radically new ways. In The Act of Creation, Arthur Koestler explores
a similar notion, which he refers to as bisociation.4 Koestler himself
makes use of a metaphor between “the logic of laughter” and
the creative act, which he deﬁnes as “the perceiving of a situ-
ation or idea in two self-consistent but habitually incomparable
frames of reference.” Clearly this is close to what is being
suggested here about the role of metaphor.
It is implicit in what Koestler says that creative insights of this
kind are not restricted to science, or for that matter the arts and
literature, but may arise in any aspect of everyday life. Here the
case of Helen Keller, who was taught by Anne Sullivan, is particu-
larly illuminating. When Sullivan came to teach this child, who
had been blind and deaf from an early age and was therefore
unable to speak, she realized that she would have to give Helen
unrestricted love and total attention. However, on ﬁrst seeing her
“pupil,” she met a “wild animal,” who apparently could not be
approached in any way at all. If Sullivan had seen Helen only
according to “normal,” i.e., habitual, perception, she would have
given up immediately. But the teacher worked with the child as
best she could, with all the energies at her disposal, remaining
sensitively observant, “feeling out” the unknown world of the
child, and eventually learning how to communicate with her.
revolutions, theories, and creativity in science
23

The key step was to teach Helen to form a communicable
concept. This she could never have learned before, because she had
not been able to communicate with other people to any signiﬁ-
cant extent. Sullivan, therefore, caused Helen, as if in a game, to
come into contact with water in a wide variety of diﬀerent
forms and contexts, each time scratching the word water on the
palm of her hand. For a long time, Helen did not grasp what all
this was about. But suddenly, she realized that all these diﬀerent
experiences referred to one substance in many aspects, which
was symbolized by the word water on the palm of her hand. A
little reﬂection shows that this is basically similar to the kind
of metaphoric perception that was discussed above. Thus, the
diﬀerent experiences were implied in some sense as being
equal, by the common experience of the word water being
scratched on her hand. The perception of the signiﬁcance of this
initiated a fantastic revolution in the whole of Helen’s life.
Indeed, the discoveries of Anne Sullivan and Helen Keller
together were extraordinarily creative in helping to transform
not only Helen’s life but the lives of a large number of people in
similar situations.
It is worthwhile bringing out in more detail just what was
involved in this extraordinary act of creative perception. Up to
that moment, Helen Keller had perhaps been able to form con-
cepts of some kind, but she could not symbolize them in a way
that was communicable and subject to linguistic organization.
The constant scratching of the word water on her palm, in connec-
tion with the many apparently radically diﬀerent experiences,
was suddenly perceived as meaning that, in some fundamental
sense, these experiences were essentially the same. To return, for
a moment, to the idea of a metaphor, A could represent her
experience of water standing still in a pail, while B would repre-
sent her experience of water ﬂowing out of a pump. As Helen
herself said, she initially saw no relationship between these
experiences. At this stage, her perception may be put as A ≠B. Yet
science, order, and creativity
24

the same word water was scratched on her hand in both cases. This
puzzled her very much, for it meant that in some way Anne
Sullivan wanted to communicate that an equivalence existed
between two very diﬀerent experiences, in other words, that
A = B. Eventually, Helen suddenly perceived (of course entirely
nonverbally, since she had as yet no linguistic terms to express
her perception) that A and B were basically similar, in being
diﬀerent forms of the same substance, which was represented
symbolically by the word water scratched on her palm. At this
point, there must have been in Helen a state of vibrant tension,
and indeed of intense creative perceptive energy, which was in
essence similar to that arising in a poet who is suddenly aware of
a new metaphor. However, in the case of Helen Keller, the meta-
phor did not stop here, but went on to undergo a further rapid
unfoldment and development. Thus, as she herself said later, she
suddenly realized that everything has a name. This too must have been
a nonverbal ﬂash of insight because she did not yet have a name
for the concept of a name. This perception very probably had its
origin in a yet higher order of metaphor, suggested by the fact
that Anne Sullivan had been playing a similar “game” with her
for many weeks, in which many diﬀerent “words” had been
scratched on her hand, each associated to a number of diﬀerent
but similar experiences. All these experiences were in this way
seen to be fundamentally related, in that they were examples of a
single yet broader concept, i.e., that of naming things. To Helen,
this was an astonishing discovery, for she had in this way per-
ceived the whole general relationship of symbol to concept, start-
ing with water and going on almost immediately to an indeﬁnite
variety of things that could be extended without limit.
From here on, the development was more like that of a scien-
tiﬁc metaphor than a poetic metaphor, for there was an immense
process of unfoldment of the implications of her perceptions in
ever more extended form. Thus, she began immediately to learn
all sorts of names and to combine them into sentences. Soon she
revolutions, theories, and creativity in science
25

was capable of discourse, along with the thought that goes with
it. This power to communicate also opened up her relationship
to society, so that she ceased to be a “wild animal” and became a
cultured human being.
However, there is another side to this story. Anne Sullivan also
worked from a remarkable creative perception. Ordinarily the
whole relation of symbol to concept is taken for granted,
because it is part of the total infrastructure, which is hardly
conscious. Sullivan, however, realized the key importance of
scratching the symbol on the palm of Helen Keller’s hand to the
recurrent feature, while she exposed the girl to many instances
of the experience of water. Some essential quality of “waterness”
remained constant in all this range of experiences. This percep-
tion was so ﬁrm and clear that Sullivan worked a very long time
against discouraging results before the moment of breakthrough
occurred. And when it eventually came, Sullivan was ready to
exploit it to the fullest, and immediately bring about a total
transformation in the mind of Helen Keller.
It is clear that creative perception in the form of a metaphor
can take place not only in poetry and in science but in much
broader areas of life. What is essential here is that the act of
creative perception in the form of a metaphor is basically similar
in all these ﬁelds, in that it involves an extremely perceptive state
of intense passion and high energy that dissolves the excessively
rigidly held assumptions in the tacit infrastructure of commonly
accepted knowledge. The diﬀerences are in the modes and
degrees of unfoldment from the metaphoric to the literal. The
experience of Helen Keller and Anne Sullivan begins to show,
moreover, that much more than metaphor may be involved in
creativity. In their case it was communication, but as we shall see
in the succeeding chapters, creativity goes very far beyond even
this, into very deep questions of order, both in nature and soci-
ety. Ultimately, it involves areas that are too subtle for detailed
analysis of the kind that is being given here.
science, order, and creativity
26

HAMILTON-JACOBI THEORY
Fragmentation in science arises in several ways, in particular
through the mind’s tendency to hang on to what is comfortable
and secure in the subliminal infrastructure of its tacit ideas. In
turn, this leads to a false perception of the radical nature of
change during scientiﬁc revolutions, in which old and new
paradigms are viewed as “incommensurable,” and to an under-
estimation of the degree of change that takes place during
long periods of “normal” science. It is generally believed, for
example, that following a major scientiﬁc revolution, scientists
must consolidate their ﬁndings and unfold the new ideas in ways
that are not necessarily as creative as in the revolution itself.
However, a closer examination of the history of physics shows
that a number of very powerful metaphors were developed dur-
ing this period of “normal” science. Never pursued with suf-
ﬁcient energy and courage to initiate creative new discoveries,
they were stiﬂed by the weight of the whole tacit infrastructure
of familiar and comfortable ideas that prevailed at the time.
During the nineteenth century, for example, there arose an
alternative way of treating the mechanics of moving bodies,
which at the time, received too little attention. Newton had
approached motion in terms of the deﬁnite paths or trajectories
taken by particles. These trajectories were calculated using dif-
ferential equations that were determined by the initial positions
and velocities of the particles, and by external forces that acted at
each point on the path to produce changes in the particle’s speed
or direction. The Hamilton-Jacobi theory, developed in the late
1860s, presented a new way of treating motion as based on waves
rather than on particles. In place of treating the motion of a par-
ticle as following a given path that is aﬀected by external forces,
the Hamilton-Jacobi theory is based upon a wave description in
which all motion is perpendicular to a wave front. A simple
image is given by the movement of a cork or a small piece of
revolutions, theories, and creativity in science
27

wood that is carried by waves on a lake. In this way the motion
is determined by the waves as a whole, rather than by piece-
wise local actions of a force at each point in the trajectory of
the particle.
Clearly, the Hamilton-Jacobi theory is radically diﬀerent from
Newton’s. Yet mathematicians were able to show that the two
theories, in fact, generated the same numerical results. It was clear
that these alternative theories contained essentially “incom-
mensurable” ideas: that matter is in its essence of a particle
nature, or that it is of a wave nature. Scientists, however, tended
to concentrate upon the mathematical aspects of the new theory
and to pay less attention to the curious situation that two appar-
ently unrelated notions of the constitution of matter were able to
cover the same range of experience and with the same results. In
light of the previous section, this situation suggests the possibil-
ity of making a metaphorical leap and saying, “A particle is
a wave.”
Such a metaphor that connects the essence of the two theories
would have, in a certain sense, anticipated the modern quantum-
mechanical notion of wave-particle duality. That is, that the
same entity (e.g., an electron) behaves under one set of circum-
stances as a wave, and in another set of circumstances as a
particle. A more detailed discussion and development of this
metaphor could have led in the mid-nineteenth century to the
general outlines of the modern quantum theory, almost without
any further experimental clues at all.
Indeed, William Hamilton had already unfolded the essential
similarity between particle and wave, which is implicit in this
metaphor, by considering a ray of light. This is basically a form of
waves and yet has a trajectory resembling that of a particle. The
ray, however, still does not quite give a full account of the
motion of the particle. To obtain this, it is necessary to consider a
wave packet, which consists of a group of waves each having
nearly the same wavelength. These waves will combine together
science, order, and creativity
28

within a small region of space to produce an intense disturb-
ance, while outside this region their intensity is negligible. The
wave packet therefore suggests a model of a particle that is based
on the wave concept. This packet can be shown to move with
what is called the group velocity and its motion can be calculated
from the Hamilton-Jacobi equation. When this is done, the
theory yields both Einstein’s relationship, which shows that the
energy of a “particle” (e.g., a light quantum) is proportional to
its frequency, and de Broglie’s relation, that the “particle’s”
momentum is inversely proportional to its wavelength. Both
these equations, which are implicitly contained within the
Hamilton-Jacobi theory, are in fact the key relationships in the
foundations of quantum theory. Furthermore, by means of a
small but natural modiﬁcation to the Hamilton-Jacobi equation,
it is possible to derive Schrödinger’s equation, the basic equation
of the quantum theory.
Scientists in the nineteenth century could, therefore, have
been led to most of the essential features of modern quantum
theory, through the exploration of the metaphor that “a particle
is a wave.” All that would have been needed to complete the
quantum theory would have been to ﬁx certain numerical con-
stants by means of experiment. (Speciﬁcally, the numerical con-
stant that appears in de Broglie’s relationship. This is implicitly
contained within the Hamilton-Jacobi theory and determines
the actual values of a particle’s frequency and wavelength once a
numerical proportionality constant is known. The value of this
constant is calculated from a measurement of Planck’s constant.)
The essential point which can be learned from this example
is that metaphors can sometimes have an extraordinary power,
not only to extend the thought processes of science, but also
to penetrate into as yet unknown domains of reality, which
are in some sense implicit in the metaphor. While all metaphors
may not be as powerful as that between the Newtonian and
the Hamilton-Jacobi theories, it does suggest that scientiﬁc
revolutions, theories, and creativity in science
29

metaphors which link unrelated but fundamental concepts may
be especially signiﬁcant.
In the case of the Hamilton-Jacobi theory, however, scientists
were mesmerized by the whole tacit infrastructure of Newtonian
mechanics, which viewed motion always in terms of trajectories
and particles. By clinging on to this underlying matrix of ideas, it
became impossible to treat the wave theory of matter as a poten-
tial clue to new ﬁelds of reality. Instead the Newtonian theory,
along with all its infrastructure of subliminal ideas about
particles and trajectories, was believed to correspond to reality
in an essential way and the Hamilton-Jacobi theory was treated
as an artifact or simply a mathematical transformation of
Newton’s equations that could be used to facilitate certain
types of calculation. So, to the scientists of the nineteenth
century, the Hamilton-Jacobi equations did not have any
deeper meaning.
Indeed it was a century before scientists were able to seriously
consider this new view of reality—a view which had in fact been
implicitly contained in what was already known. This move
required them to overcome the common presupposition, taken
for granted over centuries, that nature is constituted only of
bodies that are essentially similar to those of ordinary experi-
ence, but simply smaller. One of the major steps in changing this
view was taken by Niels Bohr, who proposed, in the spirit of a
metaphor, that electrons had discrete orbits that changed dis-
continuously. Most physicists, however, took this idea in a literal
fashion, and for a time, scientiﬁc thinking involved an uneasy
marriage of classical and quantum concepts. It was not until the
radically new perceptions of de Broglie (1924), Heisenberg
(1925), and Schrödinger (1926) that physics was able to pro-
duce a reasonably complete and consistent theory of the atom.
However, if the wave nature of matter, implicit within the
Hamilton-Jacobi theory, had been taken as more than a mere
mathematical artifact, progress would have been much more
science, order, and creativity
30

rapid. Indeed, the general attitude of “normal” science among
nineteenth-century physicists prevented a truly creative exten-
sion of classical mechanics and the anticipations of the basic
features of the quantum theory.
The Hamilton-Jacobi theory actually contains a number of
additional interesting and fruitful metaphors which could also
have been explored in the nineteenth century. For example, the
equations themselves can be mathematically transformed in a
special way so that the actual order of motion they describe is
not aﬀected but the wave forms themselves change. In other
words, one wave form can be transformed into another wave
form without aﬀecting the physical outcome of the motion.
What is particularly signiﬁcant about these “canonical trans-
formations,” as they are called, is that in order to leave the actual
motion unaﬀected, time and space must be treated on an equal
footing. In other words, time and space become interchangeable,
with a new time variable being deﬁned not only in terms of the
old time variable but also in terms of the old space variables. The
canonical transformations, which are basic to the Hamilton-
Jacobi equations, therefore suggest a metaphor in which time
and space are, in a certain way, equated. The Hamilton-Jacobi
theory therefore anticipates a key feature of both the special and
general theories of relativity—that the laws of physics are
unchanged (invariant) to transformations in which time and
space are treated on an equal footing.
Yet another metaphor can be extracted from the Hamilton-
Jacobi theory by considering that these equations can be derived
from what is called a variation principle. Newton’s approach to
motion was based on the idea of a diﬀerential equation that
describes the motion as a succession of steps in which each stage
follows continuously from the preceding one in a fashion that is
typical of mechanical systems. The variation principle, by con-
trast, starts not from a diﬀerential equation (in which the motion is
analyzed into inﬁnitesimal steps) but from an integral which
revolutions, theories, and creativity in science
31

depends upon the whole trajectory over a ﬁnite period of time.
This integral is called a Lagrangian, and the variation principle
approaches motion as if a particle were attempting to “minimize
its Lagrangian.” The motion of a particle, in this approach,
depends upon a whole period of time, rather than, as suggested
by Newton, upon a succession of instantaneous mechanical reac-
tions to an external force. The Hamilton-Jacobi theory is, there-
fore, determined by something that approaches teleology; it
appears as if all motion is governed by the need to attain
an “end.”
Put in the form of a metaphor: Mechanism is teleology (of a
particular kind). This reverses, in a creative way, the usual habit
of thinking in which what appears to be teleology is understood
by saying that it can ultimately be explained by, or reduced to,
mechanism (of a particular kind). Indeed, if the full implications
of this metaphor are unfolded, they could perhaps lead to fruit-
ful new insights into the age-old question as to whether or not
there is a teleology in nature and if so, what it means. In a similar
fashion, the metaphor in which time and space are equated
through the canonical transformations of the Hamilton-Jacobi
theory could perhaps lead to deeper insights into the relation-
ship between relativity and quantum theory—an area which at
present contains a number of incommensurable features.
Many other examples of the coexistence of very diﬀerent and
perhaps “incommensurable” concepts can be drawn from the
history of science. However, in the usual way of doing science,
such ideas are not allowed to exist side by side, for one of
them generally acts to overthrow the other, along with the earl-
ier paradigm that it represents. Or alternatively, one idea is
reduced in force and co-opted or absorbed into the other as a
special limiting case or interesting mathematical artifact, so that
its deeper meaning is neglected. This was the case with the
Hamilton-Jacobi theory. But the various examples already dis-
cussed suggest that the actual relationship between concepts may
science, order, and creativity
32

be far subtler and that fruitful insights can ﬂow from equating,
in a metaphorical fashion, what at ﬁrst sight appears to be
“incommensurate.”
Indeed, a gradual and continuous change along these lines has
been taking place over the last decade in elementary particle
physics. The ﬁrst step in this development was the exploration of
a kind of metaphor, in which the well-known electromagnetic
theory was equated with the very diﬀerent and, at ﬁrst sight,
almost incommensurable, weak interaction between elementary
particles. Through the unfolding of the meaning of this meta-
phor, considerable progress was made toward bringing order
into the theory of the elementary particles. The idea was then
extended to introduce the strong interaction in a similar way,
and ﬁnally attempts were made to bring yet another “incom-
mensurable” force, gravitation, into the system. The ultimate
goal of this approach is a grand uniﬁed theory that would allow all
the diﬀerent forms of physics to unfold from a “symmetrical”
ground in which there is no essential diﬀerence between them.
Further extensions of this approach are now being explored in
which the ground is supposed to include newer kinds of force
that have yet to be demonstrated experimentally. In this way it
may be possible to bring about a solution of the long-standing
problems of divergencies and inﬁnities in quantum ﬁeld theory
that have beset theoreticians since the very inception of ﬁeld
theoretic approaches in quantum physics.
SIMILARITIES AND DIFFERENCES: HEISENBERG’S
AND SCHRÖDINGER’S APPROACHES TO THE
QUANTUM THEORY
The unfolding of a metaphor that equates diﬀerent and even
“incommensurable” concepts can, therefore, be a very fruitful
source of insight. But the procedure is by no means straight-
forward. The ﬁrst diﬃculty that is encountered is not only that
revolutions, theories, and creativity in science
33

dissimilar things must be equated but that this must be done in a
way that is sensitive to their basic diﬀerences, implications, and
extensions. Initially, of course, scientists may fail to recognize
the essential similarity between diﬀerent things, for this requires
a creative act of perception. But once this perception has been
achieved, science may then fail to see the essential diﬀerences
that are also inherent within the metaphor. Clearly the problem
with thought is that it often fails to be perceptively sensitive to
similarities and diﬀerences and instead applies mechanical
habits of seeing similarities and diﬀerences.
In the examples given in this chapter it is clear that, in science,
perception of similarities and diﬀerences takes place primarily
through the mind (e.g., Newton’s perception of a certain basic
similarity between the apple, the moon, and the earth), and
much less through the senses. As science developed, this aspect
of perception through the mind grew more and more import-
ant. Indeed, very little of what could be called direct sense per-
ception takes place in physics today. At one time scientiﬁc
instruments, such as the telescope and the microscope, could
have been considered as direct extensions of the senses, but
today, the connection between experimental apparatus and
human experience is becoming increasingly remote. The realm
of physics is now that of perception through the mind, and
theory dominates over experiment in the development of the
scientiﬁc perception of nature.
An example of the important role that theory plays in scien-
tiﬁc perception, and which also shows how perception can fail to
make a proper discrimination, is provided by Heisenberg’s and
Schrödinger’s formulations of quantum theory. Initially these
were two separate, and almost incommensurate, formalisms
that described identical phenomena and could have formed the
basis of a potential metaphor. The Heisenberg theory describes
atoms in terms of mathematical objects called matrices. These
matrices are arrays of numbers that obey well-deﬁned rules of
science, order, and creativity
34

mathematical operation. In Heisenberg’s theory, the numbers in
these arrays correspond to various observable quantities of the
atomic system. While this theory was remarkably successful in
accounting for various experimental results on the spectra of
atoms (the patterns of light emitted when atoms are excited), it
was not able to give a conceptual picture of the atom together
with a satisfactory description of what the theory meant. How-
ever, within a matter of months after Heisenberg’s discovery,
Schrödinger published his “wave function” approach, which not
only gave correct numerical results but also generated an intui-
tive picture of the hydrogen atom, in terms of standing electron
waves around a central, attractive core.
At ﬁrst it appeared that Schrödinger’s theory would quickly
supersede that of Heisenberg and that the latter’s theory had
been a stopgap procedure on the way to formulating a more
complete description of the atom. However, as it turned out,
matters were not so straightforward. To begin with, when
Schrödinger’s equation was extended from the hydrogen atom,
with its single electron, to more complicated atomic systems, it
became apparent that the wave function itself was by no means
as intuitive as had been ﬁrst supposed. Instead of being a wave in
our three-dimensional space, the function existed in an abstract,
multidimensional space, and pictures of electron waves around a
nucleus proved to be something of an abstraction. But more
important, physicists discovered that, under fairly general condi-
tions, the two approaches, Schrödinger’s and Heisenberg’s, were
mathematically equivalent.
This formal mathematical equivalence between the two theor-
ies was a powerful step but it soon led physicists to ignore
the essential diﬀerences between the two formulations and
to consider them as nothing but alternative methods for calculat-
ing results to particular quantum mechanical problems—
Heisenberg’s approach proving advantageous in some instances
and Schrödinger’s in others. However, closer analysis shows that
revolutions, theories, and creativity in science
35

the two theories are not completely equivalent—an observation
which is generally neglected. It turns out that their mathematical
equivalence is true only under certain tacit, rather than explicitly
stated, assumptions. In fact, more detailed examination of the
two approaches shows that they exhibit certain signiﬁcant dif-
ferences. In the Schrödinger approach, for example, the quan-
tum system is described by a wave function, which is the solution
to Schrödinger’s equation. Mathematically this wave function
is a continuous function in space; in other words, the continuity
of space-time is built into the whole Schrödinger theory. By
contrast, Heisenberg’s theory is not committed to such
continuity, for the physical properties of the quantum system
do not come from a continuous wave function but from a matrix
of discrete numbers.
If physicists had chosen to treat the Heisenberg and
Schrödinger theories in a truly metaphoric fashion, then they
may also have been able to unfold the implications of their vari-
ous similarities and diﬀerences. Speciﬁcally, it would have been
possible to explore the idea of space-time both in the context of
discreteness and of continuity. In this way, a theory of space-
time may evolve which is nonlocal and noncontinuous at very
small distances but, in the limit of larger scales, becomes con-
tinuous and local. By taking such a metaphorical relationship
seriously, and remaining sensitive to both similarities and dif-
ferences, it may be possible to gain new insights from these two
approaches to the quantum theory.
Of course, until the various implications of these theories are
formally unfolded, it is not possible to predict if the ﬁnal results
would be important or not. Indeed some physicists would argue
that all this is merely “playing” with the formalisms. But creativ-
ity always has associated with it an element of play, which may
or may not lead to fresh perceptions.
science, order, and creativity
36

THOUGHT AS PLAY
If science always insists that a new order must be immediately
fruitful, or that it has some new predictive power, then creativity
will be blocked. New thoughts generally arise with a play of the
mind, and the failure to appreciate this is actually one of the
major blocks to creativity. Thought is generally considered to be
a sober and weighty business. But here it is being suggested that
creative play is an essential element in forming new hypotheses
and ideas. Indeed, thought which tries to avoid play is in fact
playing false with itself. Play, it appears, is of the very essence
of thought.
This notion of the falseness that can creep into the play of
thought is shown in the etymology of the words illusion, delusion,
and collusion, all of which have as their Latin root ludere, “to play.”
So illusion implies playing false with perception; delusion, play-
ing false with thought; collusion, playing false together in order
to support each other’s illusions and delusions. When thought
plays false, the thinker may occasionally recognize this fact, and
express it in the above words. Unfortunately, however, our
English language does not have a word for thought which plays
true. Perhaps this is a reﬂection of a work ethic which does not
consider the importance of play and suggests that work itself is
noble while play is, at best, recreational and, at worst, frivolous
and nonserious. However, to observe children at play is to realize
the serious intensity of their energy and concentration.
Within the act of creative play, fresh perceptions occur which
enable a person to propose a new idea that can be put forward for
exploration. As the implications of this idea are unfolded, they
are composed or put together with other familiar ideas. Eventually
the person supposes that these ideas are correct; in other words, he
or she makes an assumption or hypothesis and then acts accord-
ing to the notion that this is the way that things actually are. The
movement from propose to compose to suppose enables everyday
revolutions, theories, and creativity in science
37

actions to be carried out with little or no conscious thought. For
example, if you suppose that a road is level, then you are disposed to
walk accordingly. After a number of successful trips, you will be
further disposed to take it for granted that the supposition or
assumption that the road is level is indeed correct, and you will
no longer have to think about this point. However, if some part
of the road later turns out to be uneven so that you trip, you
will be obliged to change your assumption and, through this, a
disposition which is no longer appropriate. Taking certain
assumptions for granted may be a useful way of freeing the mind
to consider other questions, provided it always remains sensitive
to evidence that the assumption may, at times, be wrong.
What happens in this relatively simple case may also occur as
the mind operates with the theories of science. If, for example,
one set of ideas works for a long time, within a particular con-
text, then scientists are disposed to take them for granted and are
able to free their minds to focus on other ideas that may be
relevant. But this is appropriate only as long as the mind remains
sensitive to the possibility that, in new contexts, evidence may
arise that shows that these ideas are wrong or confused. If this
happens, scientists have to be ready to drop the ideas in question
and to go back to the free play of thought, out of which may
emerge new ideas.
The above account shows the appropriate relationship between
thought and experience. Within such a relationship, creative
new perceptions take place when needed as, for example, with the
metaphors discussed in this chapter. Such perceptions emerge
through the creative play of the mind. It is the very nature of
this play that nothing is taken for granted as being absolutely
unalterable, and that its outcome and conclusions cannot be
known beforehand. In other words, the creative person does not
strictly know what he or she is looking for. The whole activity,
therefore, is not regarded as a problem that must be solved but
simply as play itself. Within this play it is not taken for granted
science, order, and creativity
38

that new things must always be diﬀerent or that they can never in
any signiﬁcant way be related to what came before. Indeed, it
could be suggested that the more diﬀerent things are, the greater
may be the importance in seeing how they are similar, and like-
wise, the more similar things are, the greater may be the value in
perceiving their diﬀerence. Science, according to this argument,
is properly a continuous ongoing activity. Through creative play
and fresh perception there is a constant movement of similarities
and diﬀerences, with each new theory diﬀering in some subtle
but signiﬁcant fashion from what came before. To sustain this
creative activity of the mind, it is necessary to remain sensitive to
the ways in which similarities and diﬀerences are developing,
and not to oversimplify the situation by ignoring them or
minimizing their potential importance.
Unfortunately, however, this process, in which experience
and knowledge interweave with creative insight, is not generally
carried out in the way described above. Indeed it might therefore
be called a kind of ideal that is seldom attained or approached. It
is not generally carried out because of the common tendency
toward unconscious defense of ideas which are of fundamental
signiﬁcance and which are assumed to be necessary to the
mind’s habitual state of comfortable equilibrium. As a result,
there is instead a strong disposition to impose familiar ideas, even
when there is evidence that they may be false. This, of course,
creates the illusion that no fundamental change is required,
when in fact the need for such a change may be crucial. If several
people are involved, collusion will follow, as they mutually
support one another in their false responses.
This often takes place in subtle ways that are extremely dif-
ﬁcult to notice. Thus the cases of creative insight discussed
earlier all involved becoming aware of certain assumptions that
everyone else had, hitherto, taken for granted. Newton’s insight
into universal gravitation, for example, involved questioning the
fundamental diﬀerence between earthly and heavenly matter.
revolutions, theories, and creativity in science
39

Indeed since medieval times evidence had been accumulating
which should have suggested that heavenly matter and earthly
matter were indeed basically similar. So to go on treating the
motion of the moon and planets as if it was of a diﬀerent order
from the motion of apples and cannonballs, was, in fact, a false
play of thought within the mind. However, the deception
involved was a particularly subtle one and most scientists were
not consciously aware of its operation. Indeed another form of
false play, which enables people to continue in their habitual
patterns of thought, is to assume that only a person of consider-
able genius is capable of a truly creative act. The cases explored
in this chapter, however, suggest that genius in fact involves suf-
ﬁcient energy and passion to question assumptions that have
been taken for granted over long periods. Of course geniuses
must also have the necessary talent and ability to follow through
and unfold the implications of their perceptions and question-
ings. Most people, however, tacitly suppose that they do not
have the necessary passion and courage to act in a truly creative
way and are doomed to forever “play false” with the more
subtle features of their knowledge. They believe that, not being
geniuses, they are restricted to the tacit infrastructures of sub-
liminally held ideas. But suppose that this assumption is false,
and that everyone is potentially capable of truly creative acts in
various ﬁelds that accord with his or her particular abilities,
skills, and knowledge. Clearly a prerequisite for this creativity is
that we must cease to take for granted that we are incapable
of creativity.
It should now be clear that the mind’s disposition to play false
in fragmentation and the blockage of free creative play are intim-
ately related. For example, to cling rigidly to familiar ideas is in
essence the same as blocking the mind from engaging in creative
free play. In turn, it is this very absence of such creative free
play that prevents the mind from having the vibrant tension and
passionate energy needed to free it from rigidity in the tacit
science, order, and creativity
40

infrastructure of familiar ideas. Indeed, a mind that is forced to
cling to what is familiar and that cannot engage in free play is in
fact playing false. It has already been compelled to take for
granted that it cannot do otherwise. The question of which
comes ﬁrst, the false play or the blocking of free play, like that of
the chicken and the egg, is not relevant. They are just two sides
of one and the same process.
Closer consideration suggests that it is of the very nature of
thought always to engage in some form of play, whether this is
free and creative or not. Indeed, even thought that is excessively
rigid, and therefore uncreative, is in fact still playing, for it is
pretending that certain things are ﬁxed, which in fact are not.
Moreover such rigid thought is also at play when it pretends
that no pretense is taking place, and that it is being absolutely
“serious” and based only on truth and fact. Hence, at the origin
of thought, the activity of play cannot be avoided. The only
question is whether this play is to be free or false.
It is being suggested in this book that the basic problems of
both science and society originate in a general disposition of the
mind to engage in a false kind of play, in order to maintain a
habitual sense of comfort and security. But this also implies that
these problems, at their root, arise through inadequacies in soci-
ety’s current approach to creativity. The great signiﬁcance of
inquiring into the nature of creativity, and what impedes it, is
thus evident.
THE HIGH COST OF PARADIGMS—AN ALTERNATIVE
VIEW OF SCIENCE AS FUNDAMENTALLY CREATIVE
In order to pursue this whole issue of creativity, it is necessary to
return to the question of the nature of paradigms. Paradigms
clearly involve, in a key way, the process of taking ideas and
concepts for granted, without realizing that this is in fact going
on. Since this process takes place as the mind attempts to defend
revolutions, theories, and creativity in science
41

itself against what it believes to be a severe disturbance, a para-
digm tends to interfere with that free play of the mind that
is essential for creativity. Instead it encourages the process of
playing false, especially in deep and subtle areas.
A paradigm, as Kuhn points out, is not simply a particular
scientiﬁc theory but a whole way of working, thinking, com-
municating, and perceiving with the mind. It is based largely on
the skills and ideas that are tacitly transmitted during what could
be called a scientist’s apprenticeship, in graduate school for
example. However, since the publication of Kuhn’s The Structure of
Scientiﬁc Revolutions, many people have equated a paradigm with
a fundamental general theory and a change of paradigm with a
consciously produced change in this theory. In this way some
people go as far as to propose a paradigm change. This, however,
totally misses the main force of Kuhn’s idea, which is that the
tacit infrastructure, mostly unconsciously, pervades the whole
work and thought of a community of scientists. In this book
the original meaning of a paradigm, as proposed by Kuhn, is
therefore used.
Up to now in this chapter, a paradigm has been discussed in a
negative sense, but it must also be realized that a paradigm has
the power to keep a whole community of scientists working on a
more or less common area. In a sense, it could be taken as an
unconscious or tacit form of consent. At ﬁrst sight, the paradigm
would be of obvious use to the scientiﬁc community. However,
it also exacts a price in that the mind is kept within certain ﬁxed
channels that deepen with time until an individual scientist is
no longer aware of his or her limited position. The end result is
that each scientist becomes caught in a process of playing false
as he or she attempts to maintain this ﬁxed position in situations
that call for fundamental change. However, none of this will be
apparent to the scientists who work within the paradigm, for
they have a common feeling that, within this framework, every-
thing will eventually be solved.
science, order, and creativity
42

Nevertheless, as time passes, unsolved problems within a
given paradigm tend to accumulate and to lead to ever-increasing
confusion and conﬂict. Eventually some scientists, who are gen-
erally spoken of as geniuses, propose fundamentally new ideas
and a “scientiﬁc revolution” results. In turn, these new ideas
eventually form the basis of a new paradigm, and sooner or later,
this rigidiﬁes into “normal” science. In this way the cycle of
revolution and “normal” science continues indeﬁnitely.
Throughout the few centuries of its existence, science has
proceeded in this fashion until today it is taken as perfectly
normal for revolution to succeed revolution, interspersed by
periods of relative stability. But is this whole strategy for doing
science inevitable or even desirable? Clearly it results in a
degree of confusion and fragmentation which shows little sign
of diminishing. Is it possible for science to move in a new
direction in which greater freedom for the play of thought is
permitted and in which creativity can operate at all times, not
just during periods of scientiﬁc revolution? But if such free play
and fundamental creativity were the rule, this would imply
that, at any given moment, there would be a number of alterna-
tive points of view and theories available in each particular area
of science.
Traditionally scientists have assumed that when several theor-
ies appear to account for the same phenomenon, then only one
of them can be correct. The others are then discarded or, as with
the Hamilton-Jacobi theory, a theory will be placed in a sub-
servient position as being useful only in the context of certain
calculations. With the Schrödinger and Heisenberg approaches
to quantum theory, however, a mathematical transformation
connects the two theories and they are therefore taken as saying
the same thing. But in other cases, some judgment has to be
made. In this case, aesthetics of the mathematics or the logic of
the arguments may be used or “Occam’s Razor” may be invoked:
the injunction of the fourteenth-century philosopher William
revolutions, theories, and creativity in science
43

of Occam that theories with the smallest number of arbitrary
assumptions are to be preferred.
There is no logical reason, however, why, in the unfolding of
scientiﬁc ideas, several theories may not oﬀer alternative but
equally valid and important accounts of a particular aspect of
nature. Why must some of these theories be rejected almost as a
matter of course? It could be objected that if the number of
alternative theories became too large, then the whole scientiﬁc
enterprise would become excessively diﬀuse and diluted. It is
certainly true that without any established limits, ideas do tend
to diverge from each other. However, there is also a natural ten-
dency within scientiﬁc thinking for ideas to converge as well. Intel-
ligent and creative perception of the diﬀerent theories may, for
example, give rise to new metaphors in which ideas are gathered
together and the similarities and diﬀerences between them are
explored and unfolded.
Clearly this tendency, to convergence within divergence, is
very diﬀerent from the sort of convergence that is brought about
through a paradigm, in which arbitrary pressures and boundaries
are imposed by the, largely unconscious, consensus of the scien-
tiﬁc community. Instead it would be as a result of the intelligent
perception of the whole situation that a degree of convergence
would occur. If science could be practiced in this way, then a
more dynamic approach would be possible in which new ideas
constantly appear and are then gathered together in creative ways
to form limiting cases of yet more general ideas. Within such a
dynamic unity there would be an intense motivation toward
limiting divergence while, at the same time, avoiding conformity.
This attitude is, in certain ways, similar to that of the late
nineteenth-century philosopher William James who advocated a
plurality of approaches that are dynamically related. In place of
the monolithic unity of the paradigm, which is able to change
only by being cracked and shattered in a revolution, would stand
a form of unity in plurality.
science, order, and creativity
44

This proposal, of a creative plurality in scientiﬁc ideas and
theories, does, however, raise a signiﬁcant question: What is the
relationship of science to reality? Is this plurality simply a matter
of developing a number of diﬀerent points of view which
depend on the requirements of society or the particular prefer-
ences of the individual? If this is true, then it would appear that
the idea of objectivity within science, as a means of obtaining
some relative truth about nature, would no longer be valid.
We suggest that there is indeed a meaning to a reality that lies
outside ourselves but that it is necessary that we, too, should be
included in an essential way as participators in this reality. Our
knowledge of the universe is derived from this act of participa-
tion which involves ourselves, our senses, the instruments used
in experiments, and the ways we communicate and choose to
describe nature. This knowledge is therefore both subjective and
objective in nature.
It should be emphasized that this approach to reality is very
diﬀerent from that of the logical positivists, a group of math-
ematicians, physicists, historians, sociologists, and philosophers
who began meeting with the philosopher Moritz Schlick in
Vienna during the 1920s. The positivists argued that scientiﬁc
knowledge is essentially a codiﬁcation of sense data, and they
rejected anything that went beyond the direct deduction from
sense data as being useless metaphysics. Positivism of this type
has had a considerable inﬂuence on the thinking of many scien-
tists. The discussions of this chapter make it very clear, however,
that the major part of scientiﬁc activity is not at all concerned
with direct sensation. Much of what could be called “percep-
tion” takes place within the mind, in terms of theories: inter-
action with the external world is mediated through elaborate
instruments that have been constructed on the basis of these
theories. Moreover, the very questions that science asks arise not
from sense data but out of an already existing body of know-
ledge. So the subjective element in our knowledge of reality
revolutions, theories, and creativity in science
45

comes about not through the senses but through the whole
social and mental way that science is carried out.
The essential activity of science consists of thought, which
arises in creative perception and is expressed through play. This
gives rise to a process in which thought unfolds into provisional
knowledge which then moves outward into action and returns
as fresh perception and knowledge. This process leads to a con-
tinuous adaptation of knowledge which undergoes constant
growth, transformation, and extension. Knowledge is therefore
not something rigid and ﬁxed that accumulates indeﬁnitely in a
steady way but is a continual process of change. Its growth is
closer to that of an organism than a data bank. When serious
contradictions in knowledge are encountered, it is necessary to
return to creative perception and free play, which act to trans-
form existing knowledge. Knowledge, apart from this cycle of
activity, has no meaning.
The fact that this knowledge can bring order to experience
and even correctly predict new kinds of experience shows that it
must in some way be directly related to a reality beyond this
knowledge alone. On the other hand, no form of knowledge can
be absolutely ﬁxed and apply indeﬁnitely. This means that any
search for such absolute, ﬁxed knowledge is illusory, since all
knowledge arises out of the shifting, changing activity of cre-
ative perception, free play, unfoldment into action, and its return
as experience.
But does this mean that truth is a relative aﬀair that depends
only on various accidents? Is it possible for society to construct a
world in any way it pleases? The answer is that we are, indeed,
free to construct knowledge and the world as we desire. How-
ever, the results will not always be appropriate, but in some cases
may be confused and even destructive. We cannot impose any
worldview we like and hope that it will work. The cycle of
perception and action cannot be maintained in a totally arbitrary
fashion unless we collude to suppress the things we do not wish
science, order, and creativity
46

to see while, at the same time, trying to maintain, at all costs, the
things that we desire most in our image of the world. Clearly the
cost of supporting such a false vision of reality must eventually
be paid.
As a simple example, think of the worldview held by Europeans
living in the Middle Ages. This did not include a particularly
strong interest in sanitation; indeed sanitation was not very rele-
vant to their worldview. Nevertheless vast numbers of people
were killed by plague, in spite of what society happened to
believe about the origin and nature of the disease. People did not
notice the connection between their suﬀering and their view, or
lack of it, on sanitation. Indeed they probably took it for granted
that there could be no such relationship. However, as soon as the
true connection was perceived, it became possible to change
things in a positive way so that the new worldview led to
revolutionary improvements in the prevention of disease and
epidemics. The development of this worldview eventually led to
the current notion that all disease is related to external causes,
such as bacteria and viruses. Disease in the twentieth century is,
therefore, considered in terms of causes and cures, a view which
is in accord with the general scientiﬁc infrastructure of analysis
and fragmentation. Only relatively recently have some doctors
begun to question the exclusiveness of this current approach
and ask: Why is it that, exposed to similar causes, some people
catch a disease and others do not? In this way, new perceptions
of the nature of disease and the environment, in terms of life-
style, stress, diet, and neuroimmunology will begin to make
themselves felt and may, someday, transform the current view of
how it is that people get sick.
Clearly the well-being of society is intimately connected with
the particular worldview it happens to hold. It is not simply a
matter of “constructing a reality that gratiﬁes us” but of a whole
cycle of thought, action, and experience that leads in the long
run to the order or disorder of society. As will be seen in more
revolutions, theories, and creativity in science
47

detail in the following chapters, this cycle tends to be blocked,
not only during periods of “normal science,” when people are
insensitive to subtle but important changes, but also during
revolutions, when they overemphasize changes and fail to see
continuity. Unless a proper sensitivity and clarity about similar-
ities and diﬀerences, change and continuity is maintained, rigid-
ity of thought will set in and lead to confusion and inappropriate
action—all signs that thought is caught up in “playing false.”
FREE PLAY AND POPPER’S NOTION OF
FALSIFIABILITY
The proposal of a “unity within diversity,” in which the free
play of scientiﬁc thought permits a number of diﬀerent theories
to coexist in a creative and dynamic fashion certainly goes
against the grain of current ideas on how science should operate.
The infrastructure of science has been considerably inﬂuenced
by the ideas of Sir Karl Popper on how scientiﬁc theories should
be judged. In The Logic of Scientiﬁc Discovery, Popper points out that a
scientiﬁc theory cannot be so much proved as be made credible.5
Repeated experiments, made on the basis of a theory’s predic-
tions, will certainly increase its credibility among the scientiﬁc
community but they can never prove its correctness in any abso-
lute sense. All theories are in some way limited, and while a
series of experiments may conﬁrm the theory in some limited
domain, they cannot rule out the possibilities of exceptions and
novel behavior. The best that science can do, therefore, is to
falsify a theory, by establishing some signiﬁcant point of devi-
ation between experiment and prediction.
Popper’s ideas produced a signiﬁcant change in thinking
about science, for they showed how understanding begins by
provisionally adopting a particular theory, which is conﬁrmed
through observations and later falsiﬁed and replaced by some
newer theory. Clearly, in order to be able to acknowledge
science, order, and creativity
48

contradictions between an acceptable scientiﬁc theory and actual
experience, the theory must ultimately be falsiﬁable. That is to
say, it must be formulated in such a way that its implications are
not subject to too many arbitrary assumptions, so that the theory
can always be “saved” by suitable adjustment of these assump-
tions to ﬁt the facts, no matter what these facts turn out to be.
As Popper’s ideas permeated into the infrastructure of science,
their emphasis was changed somewhat so that today an excessive
emphasis is being placed on falsiﬁability, in the sense that unless
a theory can immediately, or very shortly, be compared with an
experiment in which it could be falsiﬁed, then that theory is not
regarded as properly scientiﬁc. Without the possibility of some
immediate “crucial experiment,” the theory is looked on as
being “just metaphysics” and without any particular importance
for science. The eﬀect of this climate of opinion is to discourage
the mind from free play with ideas.
But a new idea which has broad implications may require a
long period of gestation before falsiﬁable inferences can be
drawn from it. For example, the atomic hypothesis, ﬁrst sug-
gested by Democritus twenty-ﬁve hundred years ago, had no
deﬁnitely falsiﬁable inferences for at least two thousand years.
New theories are like growing plants that need to be nurtured
and cultured for a time before they are exposed to the risks of
the elements.
Rather than putting an exclusive emphasis on falsiﬁability, it
may be more appropriate to suggest that science consists of a
two-way movement of conﬁrmation and falsiﬁcation. Clearly, it
makes little sense to go to all the eﬀort of attempting to falsify a
hypothesis when it has never actually been conﬁrmed, or if it has
little plausibility.
Fundamental ideas need to be sheltered for a while in a spirit
of free creative “play.” This should be acknowledged within the
scientiﬁc community as being a necessary period in which the
new idea can be discussed openly and reﬁned. Indeed it will be
revolutions, theories, and creativity in science
49

argued in the next chapter that this very communication is an
essential phase in the creative action of science. If an individual
scientist cannot talk about a new idea seriously until he or she
has proposed a deﬁnite experiment that could falsify it, then
science will be caught up in a rather “workaday” attitude in
which free play is discouraged unless it can rapidly be put to
the test.
Once, however, a period of nurturing is allowed for a new
theory so that several theories can exist side by side, then the
whole climate of Popper’s argument changes. Theories need no
longer be considered as rivals, and the problem of determining
criteria for choosing between them becomes less urgent. It is
even possible that the same scientist may entertain several alter-
natives in the mind at once and engage in a free creative play to
see if they can be related, perhaps through a creative metaphor.
Moreover, in contrast to Popper, it can be argued that a good
general idea that has been falsiﬁed in some experiment could
properly be “saved” by a change in its secondary hypotheses.
After all, it would be an arbitrary assumption to propose that this
can never happen and that all theories come into the world per-
fectly formed. Of course, if a scientist got into the habit of mak-
ing such adjustments time after time, then this would suggest
that perhaps he or she had been caught up in “playing false.”
When the mind is disturbed at the possibility of having to drop
ideas that are dear to it, then it may well become trapped in
subterfuge. On the other hand, when a person becomes the
victim of such behavior, then no method or philosophical cri-
terion can prevent this from happening. The mind that wishes to
play false will always be able to ﬁnd a way around whatever
criteria science may decide upon.
The key point here is not therefore to search for a method that
is somehow supposed to prevent scientists from being caught up
in playing false. Rather it is to face the fact that this whole prob-
lem arises because the mind does not wish to become unduly
science, order, and creativity
50

disturbed. It cannot, in such circumstances, act creatively but is
impelled to play false in order to defend the ideas to which it has
become so attached. What is needed, therefore, is to press on
with this inquiry into the whole nature of creativity and what
impedes its operation.
SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK
To sum up, the current mode of doing science has evolved in
such a way that certain of its features seriously discourage cre-
ativity. Among these, one of the most important is the develop-
ment of paradigms. Clearly it is desirable at all times, and not
merely during periods of scientiﬁc revolution, that there be the
possibility of free play of the mind on fundamental questions so
that a properly creative response is possible. Paradigms, espe-
cially after they have been established for some time, hold the
consensual mind in a “rut” requiring a revolution to escape
from. Such excessive rigidity amounts to a kind of unconscious
collusion, in which scientists unconsciously “play false together”
in order to “defend” the currently accepted bases of scientiﬁc
research against perceptions of their inadequacy.
In this chapter the main form of creativity considered was that
of the metaphor. What is essential to this form is that in equating
two very diﬀerent kinds of things, the mind enters a very percep-
tive state of great energy and passion, in which some of the
excessively rigid aspects of the tacit infrastructure are bypassed
or dissolved. In science, as in many other ﬁelds, such a percep-
tion of the basic similarity of two very diﬀerent things must
further unfold in detail and lead to a kind of analogy which
becomes ever more literal.
Naturally, not every scientiﬁc metaphor will be fruitful any
more than every attempt at poetic metaphor is worthy of serious
attention. Moreover it is clear that only a person who has
gone into a ﬁeld with great interest and diligence and who has
revolutions, theories, and creativity in science
51

the requisite skills and abilities will be capable of creating a
useful metaphor. Even with such people this does not happen
very frequently.
Given that the focusing of work in any given ﬁeld, through
the action of a paradigm, gives rise to an excessive rigidity of
mind, it was suggested that a better approach is to allow for a
plurality of basic concepts, with a constant movement that is
aimed at establishing unity between them. Free creative play
with ideas would aid in this process and could help scientiﬁc
thinking to move in fresh and original ways. If this were the case,
science would no longer become so rigid that a revolution
would be required to bring about basic changes. Indeed this
whole process would represent a signiﬁcant move toward liber-
ating the surge of creativity that is needed if science is to help in
confronting the deeper problems of humanity. It is therefore
proposed here that such an approach would give rise to a gener-
ally better way of doing science than is possible with the trad-
itional approach.
In this chapter, it was shown, through the example of the
metaphor, that scientiﬁc creativity arises primarily in an act of
perception through the mind. In further chapters creativity will
be explored in a broader context and there will be no need to
focus on the idea of a metaphor and related forms. Thus, in the
next chapter, the link of creativity to the act of communication
will be explored, and in later chapters, this will be extended to
new notions of order.
science, order, and creativity
52

2
SCIENCE AS CREATIVE
PERCEPTION-COMMUNICATION
Is it possible for science to operate in a radically new way, in
which fundamentally diﬀerent ideas are considered together and
new perceptions made between them? In the previous chapter it
was shown that the essence of creativity lies in the ability to
make such fresh perceptions and it was also hinted that com-
munication plays a key role in such perceptions. In the case of
Helen Keller, for example, her moment of insight, and the way
in which it was unfolded, involved communication in a very
important way. In this chapter the whole question of communi-
cation is explored in much greater detail and it is suggested that
communication is an essential for the creative act as is percep-
tion through the mind. Indeed, within this context, perception
and communication are inseparably related, so that creation
arises as much in the ﬂow of ideas between people as in the
understanding of the individual alone.

PERCEPTION THROUGH THE SENSES AND
THROUGH THE MIND
Perception through the senses does not depend upon the imme-
diate physiological details of the eyes or ears alone but on a
much wider context that involves the whole disposition of the
individual. In the case of vision this has been investigated from a
number of diﬀerent perspective. Scientists have shown that see-
ing requires the active movement of both the body and the mind.
Visual perception is therefore an intentional and not a passive act.
A clear example of how vision always operates within a wide
and general context is given by the case of a person who is born
blind and, by means of an operation, is suddenly made able to
see. In such instances clear vision is not an instantaneous pro-
cess, for both the patient and the doctor must ﬁrst become
involved in a great deal of hard work before the meaningless
jumble of visual impressions can be integrated into true “seeing.”
This work involves, for example, exploring the eﬀects of move-
ments of the body on the fresh visual experiences, and learning
to relate the visual impressions of an object to the tactile sense
that had previously been associated with it. In particular, what
the patient has learned in other ways will strongly eﬀect what is
seen. The overall disposition of the mind to apprehend objects
in particular ways plays an important role in helping to select
and give form to what is seen.
These conclusions are conﬁrmed when the nervous system
is analyzed at the neurobiological level. In order to see anything
at all, it is necessary for the eye to engage in rapid movements
which help to extract elements of information from the scene.
The ways in which these elements are then built into a whole,
consciously perceived picture have been shown to depend
strongly on a person’s general knowledge and assumptions
about the nature of reality. Some striking experiments demon-
strate that the ﬂow of information from the higher levels of the
science, order, and creativity
54

brain into its picture-building areas actually exceeds the amount
of information that is arriving from the eyes. In other words,
what we “see” is as much the product of previous knowledge as
it is of incoming visual data.
Sense perception is therefore strongly determined by the
overall disposition of both the mind and the body. But, in turn,
this disposition is related in a signiﬁcant way to the whole gen-
eral culture and social structure. In a similar way, perception
through the mind is also governed by these wider issues. A
group of people walking through the forest, for example, see
and respond to their environment in diﬀerent ways. The lumber-
jack sees the forest as a source of wood, the artist as something
to paint, the hunter as various forms of cover for game, and
the hiker as a natural setting to explore. In each case the wood
and the individual trees are perceived in very diﬀerent ways
which depend on the background and expectations of the
walker. Clearly the manner in which an overall social disposition
inﬂuences how things are seen has considerable importance
for science. For, as was pointed out in the previous chapter, this
mental perception is also linked to the creative act. Clearly the
context of creativity extends into a much wider, social ﬁeld.
It is important, at this stage, to be clear about the exact nature
of perception in science. In the seventeenth and eighteenth cen-
turies the human senses generally provided the major source of
scientiﬁc information. However, by the nineteenth century they
began to play a relatively secondary role. In their place, scientiﬁc
instruments began to supply the primary data of science. During
the seventeenth century, relatively simple instruments, such as
the microscope and the telescope, could still, however, be
regarded as extensions of the eye. But today scientiﬁc instru-
ments have grown to such complexity that observations are
more and more remote from immediate sense perception.
But of even greater signiﬁcance is the role of theories, which
are now science’s major link with reality. Theories determine
science as creative perception-communication
55

not only the design of scientiﬁc instruments but also the kinds of
questions that are posed in the experiments themselves. Clearly,
modern scientiﬁc instruments can no longer be regarded as
simple extensions of the senses. Indeed, even the raw data that
they yield are generally fed directly into computers in the form
of numbers and digitized signals. In perceiving the external
world by means of this computer-processed data, the senses play
a particularly minor role when compared with that of thought.
Perception in modern science, particularly in physics, takes
place essentially through the mind, and it is here that the inward
intention and general disposition most strongly aﬀect what is
“seen.” For example, the simple intention to look, or the decision
to use an object in a certain way, now becomes the intention to
investigate the consequences of a theory or the disposition to use
certain apparatus.
An additional feature of this scientiﬁc perception is its essen-
tially social nature. For without a ﬁrm intention shared among
many scientists, the complex equipment needed to carry out a
modern experiment would never be built and used. The very
nature of modern science and its theories is that it gives rise to the
design of large and expensive pieces of equipment which require
the operation of large institutions. In turn, this predisposes scien-
tists to see nature in a particular way, for it feeds back into their
theories and hence into the design of new experiments.
For example, a vast investment on an international scale is
currently being made in building and operating elementary par-
ticle accelerators. But this, almost subliminally, predisposes
scientists to develop theories in terms of particles and to design
additional experiments that will give answers in terms of par-
ticles again. The whole social structure of physics has the eﬀect of
conﬁrming the particle hypothesis of matter. As a consequence,
other possibilities become more diﬃcult to investigate.
In stressing that perception in modern science occurs essen-
tially through the mind, it must not be forgotten that this was
science, order, and creativity
56

always a vital component in science. The observational data
obtained by Archimedes in his bath, for example, had little value
in themselves. What was signiﬁcant was their meaning as per-
ceived through the mind in an act of creative imagination. The
major change occurring in modern science, however, is that this
mental perception is more pervasive than it was in earlier times
and its social nature is far more dominant.
It should now be clear that all forms of perception—both
through the senses and through the mind—involve a cyclic form
of activity. Incoming information is apprehended by the mind
and, in turn, produces an outgoing activity in which further
scanning and information gathering take place in order to con-
ﬁrm, explore, and reinforce what has been seen. This new activ-
ity gathers additional information, which is again apprehended
by the mind, leading to yet more outgoing activity. But this is
very similar to what happens in science as well. Knowledge of
reality does not therefore lie in the subject, nor in the object, but
in the dynamic ﬂow between them. However, since reality itself
is inexhaustible and never fully covered by knowledge, it could
also be said to lie outside the subject, while at the same time
including this overall cyclic activity.
COMMUNICATION IS ESSENTIAL TO PERCEPTION
IN SCIENCE
Science is essentially a public and social activity. Indeed it is
diﬃcult to imagine scientiﬁc research, in any real sense, that
does not involve communication within the whole scientiﬁc
community. In other words, communication plays an essential
role within the very act of scientiﬁc perception. Scientists are
disposed in their thinking by a general background, or tacit
infrastructure, of ideas, concepts, and knowledge. In addition,
they constantly engage in a form of internal dialogue with the
whole structure of their particular discipline. In this dialogue a
science as creative perception-communication
57

scientist raises questions and meets points of view which are
attributed to other scientists and to his or her own past work.
In addition to the internal dialogue, scientists are actively engaged
in their daily work with a social exchange of ideas and opinions
through discussions, lectures, conferences, and published papers.
Motivations, questions, and attitudes arise out of these dialogues,
so that all scientiﬁc research, in the end, arises out of the whole
subcultural matrix of science.
When insight occurs, it emerges out of this overall structure
of communication and must then be unfolded so that it obtains
its full meaning within it. As a particular insight unfolds, the
scientist discusses the new ideas with colleagues and eventually
publishes them. In this way criticisms are met and new sugges-
tions exchanged within the scientiﬁc community. This leads to
a transformation of the original perception. This process of
general discussion is so pervasive today that it becomes diﬃcult
to say who was originally responsible for creating a particular
new idea. As each scientist attends seminars, writes papers,
and holds discussions with colleagues, new perceptions arise
uninvited out of the totality of the social and cultural milieu.
Indeed it can truly be said that each scientist contributes some-
thing of signiﬁcance to this communal matrix in which every
major scientiﬁc discovery has its ultimate ground.
In view of this continuing social ﬂow of ideas, how is it
possible for fragmentation to arise to the point where communi-
cation becomes seriously blocked? In the previous chapter it
was shown how a person can become limited by an overall
“infrastructure of ideas” which is held to rigidly and almost
unconsciously. But now the danger arises that this structure of
ideas not only applies at the individual level but is held by the
scientiﬁc community as a whole, so that it eventually begins to
limit creative acts of perception. It is therefore necessary to make
a careful examination of the way communication takes place
between scientists. This includes not only individual scientists
science, order, and creativity
58

themselves but the institutions in which research is carried out,
and the general attitudes that are fostered and encouraged within
the scientiﬁc community. Indeed this analysis of communication
must be ultimately extended to the whole structure of human
relationships themselves. For example, fear and mistrust may
be engendered by rigid lines of authority, lack of job security,
and concern over status and competition. All these factors
conspire to starve that sense of mutual conﬁdence, goodwill,
and friendship that is so necessary for the free play and open
exchange of ideas.
If science is to engage in a creative new surge, then all
this must clearly change. Within this book it is suggested that
scientists could engage in a kind of free play of thought that is
not restricted by unconsciously determined social pressures and
the limitations inherent in particular paradigms. Such free play
could be extended into the form of an open dialogue and
exchange of ideas within the scientiﬁc community so that each
scientist becomes more able to realize his or her creative poten-
tial. When the tacit infrastructure of thought is no longer held
rigidly within the community, then it becomes possible to sustain
creativity at a high level throughout the whole of science.
The creative potentialities of free communication are not
peculiar to science alone. They were, for example, of crucial
importance in the education of Helen Keller, and they can be
clearly seen in the operation of the visual arts. Consider a painter
who is engaged in making a portrait. A particularly naive view
of painting would conclude that the artist is attempting to por-
tray the sitter “as he or she actually is.” However, a moment’s
reﬂection shows that other artists will portray the same subject
in totally diﬀerent ways. So where does this “artistic truth” lie?
An equally naive suggestion is that the artist is primarily con-
cerned with the truth of immediate, “naked” visual perceptions.
Yet all sensory data are deeply inﬂuenced by a person’s back-
ground and disposition. In the case of the artist, this includes
science as creative perception-communication
59

everything that has gone before in the history of art, as well as
with the artist’s relationship to the subject.
Psychological experiments have established that visual percep-
tion is clearly conditioned by the circumstances in which that
perception takes place, for example, the “meaning” of the scene
and which questions are put to the viewer at the time. Clearly the
artist is not immune to this process and the “artistic vision”
arises out of an outward communication with a vast matrix of
ideas, social predispositions, and so on. In addition, the artist is
also very much concerned with “inward perception,” a vision
through the mind that is not dissimilar to that experienced by the
scientist. These inward perceptions are aﬀected by everything
that the painter holds important about the history of art. Indeed
the ﬁnal painting must take its place within an artistic matrix that
stretches over space and time. Each painting is an aspect of the
history of art and acts to transform and complement it. Manet’s
“Olympia,” for example, owes much to Goya’s “The Naked
Maja,” among other paintings, and, in turn, inspired Cézanne to
paint “A Modern Olympia.” Throughout the history of art the
individual artist’s engagement with other painters, sculptors,
and poets, and indeed with the whole culture, is intimately tied
to the perception and execution of a work.
As in art, so in science does creativity ﬂow out of a free and
open communication. Indeed it is not possible to consider any
fundamental separation between the mind’s perceptions and
communication; they are an indivisible whole. Although for the
purpose of analysis, it is always possible to divide them into
separate parts, in actuality they are two aspects of the same
process, which could be indicated by the hyphenated term
perception-communication. Clearly it is inadequate to think of the
scientist as related to reality through individual activity alone.
His or her social communication extends throughout the whole
scientiﬁc community and beyond, for technology acts on the
whole society and environment, and in turn, society determines
science, order, and creativity
60

the directions of science through its policies and ﬁnancial sup-
port and in countless other ways. The signiﬁcance of free and
open perception-communication in the creative operation of
science makes it of key importance to discover how communica-
tion can be blocked or broken and how fragmentation of the
scientiﬁc endeavor results.
PARADIGMS AND SPECIALIZATION AS SOURCES
OF BREAKS IN COMMUNICATION
A free-ﬂowing communication is essential to the creative oper-
ation of science. However, serious breaks in communication have
occurred, particularly within this century, which result in the
fragmentary state of science. How do these breaks and barriers
to communication come about? One obvious source is the rapid
and fundamental changes that have taken place in the develop-
ment of science. In the movement from Aristotle to Newton,
and from Newton to Einstein, new sets of ideas and concepts
have appeared which seemed to be irrelevant or incommensur-
able with older ideas. Indeed, some historians of science have
argued that these breaks in communication, and therefore in
perception, must always occur during a scientiﬁc revolution.
We suggest, however, that such a breakdown in communication
is not, in fact, inevitable.
Barriers to communication occur not only during revolutions
but also in the intervening periods of “normal science.” Later
in this chapter it will be shown how the special uses of language
in science, rather than fostering better communication, in fact
act to disrupt the free ﬂow of ideas. A further barrier, and source
of fragmentation, is the development of specialized ﬁelds of
research, for these often include the assumption that ideas and
concepts in one ﬁeld are not really relevant in another.
Of course some degree of specialization is both necessary and
desirable. In their day-to-day work, the neurobiologist and the
science as creative perception-communication
61

theoretical physicist have little to do with each other’s activities.
It is not surprising that research into elementary particles or the
nature of black holes does not draw upon concepts involving
nerve synapses and neurotransmitters. It could hardly be called a
serious barrier to communication. The danger arises when it is
assumed that, at their deepest levels, these subjects have no true
relationship to each other and that the world really does consist
of separate parts which can be indeﬁnitely studied on their
own. This is the very assumption that underlies fragmentation,
and it is worth pointing out, yet again, its basic fallacy. All scien-
tiﬁc concepts are founded within a background of ideas that
extends across the sciences without limit. Long-range connec-
tions between the ideas, approaches, and methods of the various
specializations exist that are of crucial importance and cannot
be dealt with in terms of separate specializations and disjointed
branches within a given ﬁeld. These long-range connections
are often most important when they are subtle and subliminal,
so that their inﬂuence is indirect. Only when scientiﬁc com-
munication takes place in the spirit of creative free play can
scientists become sensitive to the overall contexts and long-range
connections between their disciplines.
A simple example may illustrate this point. Neurobiologists
have little to do with the theories of quantum mechanics.
However, it has been found that, in certain ways, the nervous
system can respond to individual quanta of energy. This opens
the possibility that the current reliance of the neurosciences on
everyday notions of space, time, and causality may prove to be
inadequate, and eventually notions from quantum theory may
have to be brought into this ﬁeld.
It should also be stressed that each discipline provides a con-
text for the others, contributes to the particular ways they use
their scientiﬁc language from day to day, and disposes them to
perceive nature in particular ways. When to all this is added
the constant and often subtle ways in which scientiﬁc notions
science, order, and creativity
62

change, it is clear that a constant and active communication is
called for. Whenever barriers between the disciplines and spe-
cializations become ﬁxed and rigid, then communication breaks
down, ideas and contexts become inﬂexible and limited, and
creativity suﬀers. Indeed the more subtle and unconscious the
connections between the sciences, the more dangerous the eﬀect
of a blockage to their free ﬂow in active communication.
METAPHORS AS WAYS OF HEALING BREAKS
IN COMMUNICATION
Failures in communication within and between the sciences
have been shown to be far more subtle and complex than may
have at ﬁrst sight been suspected.
In particular, across the historical context of science, a serious
gap in communication occurs between ideas and concepts that are
considered to be, using Thomas Kuhn’s terms, incommensurable.
We suggest, however, that none of these breaks are inevitable and,
indeed, that they can be bridged through the creative use of a
form of metaphorical thinking.
At a simple level, take, for example, the conﬂict between the
ideas of matter as fundamentally discrete or continuous. Argu-
ments along these lines go back to the ancient Greeks, and at ﬁrst
sight, the two points of view appear to be incommensurable.
However, on closer investigation it would appear that any theory
of the continuous nature of matter can in fact be based upon
an opposing theory involving discrete matter that is so ﬁne as
to have never manifested its nature up to the present time.
Conversely, any theory of the discontinuous structure of mat-
ter can be explained as arising through the localization and
concentration of a continuous background.
These two approaches have in fact been explored during this
century. Light, for example, which had been thought of as
having a continuous nature, was shown to consist of discrete
science as creative perception-communication
63

quanta whose size was so small as to have hidden their indi-
vidual nature until relatively recently. Likewise Einstein pro-
posed that the particulate nature of matter may be explicable as
concentrations and knots in a fundamental, continuous ﬁeld.
In this example, therefore, what at ﬁrst sight appeared to be
incommensurable views, with little communication between
them, were, on deeper analysis, shown to have a deeper inter-
connection. In the previous chapter other metaphors were shown
to apply between Newtonian and Hamilton-Jacobian theories
of mechanics. A further example is provided by electromagnetic
phenomena, which at one time were viewed through two
quite separate theories, one dealing with magnetic manifest-
ations and the other with electrical. This example also shows
how deeply the theoretical framework aﬀects what is perceived
in science.
Eighteenth-century physicists, for example, treated the vari-
ous manifestations of electromagnetism through two diﬀerent
theories: the theory of magnetism and the theory of electri-
city. Because particular eﬀects were treated by these diﬀerent
approaches, physicists were never in a position to observe vari-
ous manifestations as aspects of the one underlying phenom-
enon. Rather they perceived two quite diﬀerent classes of events,
those arising from magnetic forces and those arising from elec-
trical charges and currents, which were thus fragmented from
each other. In a sense the uniﬁcation of these two fragments
of the one whole was ﬁrst made by J. C. Maxwell with his
theory of the electromagnetic ﬁeld, ﬁrst formulated in the
1860s. However, it remained to Einstein and his special theory of
relativity (1905) to show how a total symmetry can be achieved
through the metaphor: electricity is magnetism and magnetism
is electricity.
It is interesting to note that Einstein’s seminal paper on the
special theory of relativity, On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies,
begins with a consideration of two very diﬀerent explanations
science, order, and creativity
64

for the one phenomenon—the relative motion of a magnet and
an electrical conductor. In one case the magnet is considered
to move past the conductor, a loop of wire connected to an
electrical meter. Through the electrical ﬁeld associated with the
moving magnet, a current is induced in the wire—the net result
is a deﬂection of the meter. In the second explanation, the elec-
trical conductor is moved past the magnet, which is now at rest.
No electrical ﬁeld is produced in this case; rather the magnetic
force on the charged particles (electrons) in the wire causes
a current to ﬂow and a deﬂection of the meter. Two quite
diﬀerent and apparently incompatible explanations are therefore
produced for one and the same phenomenon: the ﬂow of an
electrical current when a magnet and a wire move relative to
each other.
Through his perception that relative motion was the essential
point, Einstein was led to see electrical and magnetic eﬀects not
as absolute and independent but rather as relative to the state of
motion. In addition, they are dependent on each other, for an
electrical ﬁeld in one frame of motion is a magnetic ﬁeld in
another frame. What is involved is a kind of metaphor in which
electricity and magnetism are equated. Einstein’s insight widened
the possible range of communication within physics so that today
electromagnetic phenomena are perceived in a very diﬀerent
light from what had earlier been the case.
Of course Einstein’s perception went beyond this particular
case, for he was led to postulate that time is not an absolute.
To achieve the new unity between electricity and magnetism,
Einstein had to suppose that time, measured in the frame that
moves relative to the laboratory (say, the magnet), is diﬀerent
from time measured in the stationary laboratory frame (say, the
ﬁxed wire). This laid the basis for a conceptual understanding of
what is known as the Lorentz transformation, in which space
and time are, in a certain sense, interchangeable.
What emerged from this insight was a new metaphor: time is
science as creative perception-communication
65

space. Again two apparently incommensurable concepts were dis-
covered to have a deeper unity, and perception-communication
was extended in physics. Indeed Einstein’s was one of the most
revolutionary steps ever taken in the history of science, which
profoundly altered both the mode of communication and the
mode of perception of physics.
LANGUAGE IN SCIENCE
The question of communication leads, in a natural way, to a
discussion of the whole nature of language in science. Language
is normally considered to be a means of communication, but
closer analysis shows that it can also lead to particularly subtle,
yet deeply signiﬁcant, breaks in the ability to communicate
various concepts between individuals.
The world’s languages are almost inﬁnitely rich in their
abilities to deal with subtle distinctions of sense and meaning,
to the extent that many linguists would argue that whatever
can be thought or experienced can be expressed in language.
However, in their professional lives people also tend to use
language in more specialized and restricted ways. Conversations
between lawyers, doctors, or physicists abound in technical
jargon, particular turns of phrase, and special usages of language.
Indeed within each professional group a particular term will
be immediately understood along with all its rich allusions.
Within science, for example, there are even specialized usages
conﬁned to ﬁelds, such as biology, psychology, chemistry, and
physics, in which terms that are basic to one discipline will be
irrelevant, diﬀerent, or even unknown to the other. Such
specialized usages of language can of course lead to diﬃculties
in communicating between the disciplines. As a result of the
rapidity of its changes, the language of science is constantly
changing in subtle but often radical ways. Moreover, as will
be shown in this chapter, major changes are not only conﬁned
science, order, and creativity
66

to “scientiﬁc revolutions” but may accumulate as a result of
the gradual changes that take place during periods of
“normal science.”
Of course, as with all language use, most of the processes
described above take place largely unconsciously and unobserved
and reﬂect the overall infrastructure of ideas embraced sub-
liminally by the scientiﬁc community. In this way when funda-
mental changes in concepts, and in the ways that ideas are actually
used, occur, language becomes used in quite new ways while
everyone continues to believe that “nothing has fundamentally
changed.” The result is a serious form of fragmentation in
which scientists continue to talk together but in ways that are
increasingly at cross-purposes or even incoherent.
This becomes a particular problem in the more mathematical
sciences, in which a lack of coherence can occur between
the mathematical formalisms and the informal way they are
discussed on a day-to-day basis. Indeed a radical change in
the way language is used in physics came about as a result of
the discoveries of quantum theory. Its implications are so
signiﬁcant that they are worth discussing at length in the
next section.
HEISENBERG’S MICROSCOPE EXPERIMENT
In physics before the twentieth century, the meaning of an
equation or a concept generally stood in a direct and easily com-
prehended relationship to something that could be observed
or measured. For example, the motion of a particle could easily
be identiﬁed with the mathematical trajectory given by Newton’s
laws of motion. According to Newton, the path of a particle is
deﬁned once the initial values of its position and its momentum
(the particle’s mass multiplied by its velocity) are given. The
measurement of these two values then enables a physicist to
predict the path of a particle.
science as creative perception-communication
67

In the case of a cannonball, a rocket, or an apple, everything is
fairly straightforward and there is no lack of coherence between
a verbal and a mathematical description. Indeed, the initial
values of position and momentum can be measured to a very
high degree of accuracy, using, for example, radar, without any
appreciable eﬀect on the path of the particle. However, in the
case of subatomic particles, the actual probe used to measure
position and momentum, a photon of light or a beam of elec-
trons, for example, always perturbs the system in a signiﬁcant
way. The act of measurement therefore has an important eﬀect
on what is measured and its full implication in fact led to a
radically new use of language in science and to a split between
the power of the mathematics, and of the informal language of
science, to describe reality.
The reader may already know that the simultaneous meas-
urement of a particle’s position and momentum always involves
an irreducible degree of quantum mechanical uncertainty. To
clarify the implications of this point, Heisenberg devised his
hypothetical microscope experiment. The details which follow
are, to some extent, unavoidably technical, but they illustrate
an important point about the quantum mechanical picture of
nature which has far-reaching eﬀects outside science.
The subatomic particle A which is to be measured is located
within a target. Suppose that its momentum has already been
measured, and to simplify the argument, this is zero: the particle
is at rest. The second step is to measure its position which, the
reader will anticipate, will be found to involve a degree of quan-
tum mechanical uncertainty. This measurement is done with
the help of a ﬁne beam of electrons, E, which hit the particle A.
As one of the electrons in the beam hits A, it is scattered and
brought into focus by the magnetic lens M so that it falls on
the photographic plate at Q and moves on, leaving a track T.
By making measurements on this track, something about the
particle A can be inferred.
science, order, and creativity
68

To understand the implications of quantum mechanical
uncertainty, it is ﬁrst necessary to discuss the measurement of
momentum as if all the particles obeyed Newton’s laws and
there were no quantum eﬀects operating. Even in this “classical”
case, the colliding electron disturbs the target particle A. Of
course by using electrons of very low energy, or by using an
electron microscope of very narrow aperture, this disturbance
can be reduced as much as desired. But in any case, it is always
possible to obtain accurate information about the momentum
of A, even when it is disturbed by the electron beam. For in the classical
case, no fundamental uncertainty is involved. Provided that the
structure of the microscope, with its target, magnetic ﬁeld, and
electron beam, is known, then it is always possible to work out
the exact position and momentum of A by calculating the size of any
disturbance made in the measurement.
Hence, although a measurement may involve some ﬁnite dis-
turbance, by means of a chain of inferences and using Newton’s
equations it is always possible to make exact compensations.
In this way the notions of trajectory, and of precise values
of position and momentum, remain clear, and there is no
incompatibility between the mathematical description of a
science as creative perception-communication
69

particle’s trajectory and the type of informal language used in
the above paragraphs.
But to return to Heisenberg’s argument, which involves the
quantum mechanical nature of the link between the particle A and
the track T on the photographic plate. In this case the electrons in
the beam cannot be considered solely as particles, for they have
a wavelike nature as well. The electron can therefore be thought
of as a wave which becomes diﬀracted by A, after which it is
focused by the magnetic lens M into a point Q on the photo-
graphic emulsion.
In this quantum mechanical case, the appearance of a point Q
on the photographic plate can be used only to infer a probability
distribution of possible points A, from which the electron may have
been diﬀracted. Hence a knowledge of the point Q can be used
to calculate the position of the point A to within a certain min-
imum range of scatter, or uncertainty, Δ X.
A similar argument can be used to infer the momentum
of the particle at A. Knowing the direction of the track T gives
a probability distribution for the momentum of the particle.
Whereas in the “classical” case it was possible to calculate the
exact value of any disturbance made during a measurement, in
the quantum case this disturbance of momentum can only be
known to within a range of scatter, Δ P. Heisenberg was able to
show that the total uncertainty involved in this measurement
(the uncertainty in position Δ X multiplied by the uncertainty in
momentum Δ P) is equal to one of the fundamental constants
of nature:
Δ X . Δ P  h
where h is Planck’s constant.
Heisenberg was therefore led to conclude that the disturbance
made during a quantum mechanical measurement is both unpre-
dictable and uncontrollable, within the limits set by the above
science, order, and creativity
70

uncertainty relation. Indeed this relation is clearly a fundamental
principle, inherent in the very nature of reality itself.
Heisenberg’s uncertainty relation was of revolutionary signiﬁ-
cance in physics. But what was subtler and equally far-reaching
was the way in which the informal language of physics (that is,
the ordinary descriptive language) had to change. In the discus-
sion above, words, such as wave, particle, momentum, position, trajectory,
and uncertainty, were used, all of which have familiar and well-
deﬁned meanings within Newtonian physics. Indeed there is no
break or inconsistency between the informal words trajectory or
path of a particle and the mathematical description given by
Newton’s equations. However, closer analysis shows that these
informal terms no longer cohere, in an unambiguous fashion,
with the actual mathematical formalism of the quantum theory.
The use of the word uncertainty in Heisenberg’s analysis of the
microscope experiment implies some deﬁnite quality whose
actual value is not accurately known. If a person is uncertain
of the exact time of day because of a faulty clock, this is an
expression of ignorance but it does not imply that time itself is
uncertain. In a similar case, the way Heisenberg used the word
implied that the particle A actually did possess a well-deﬁned pos-
ition and momentum, and therefore a well-deﬁned trajectory,
which could not be exactly known, or knowable, to the experi-
menter. However, the implications of the wave-particle duality of
matter, together with the probabilistic relations of quantum the-
ory, are very diﬀerent. They clearly suggest that the concepts of
position, momentum, and trajectory no longer have any clear meaning.
Clearly the informal language used by Heisenberg in his ori-
ginal discussion of his uncertainty relationships and the meaning
of the formalism itself are totally inconsistent. In other words, a
serious gap exists between the way the mathematical formalism
is being used and how it is being interpreted. As indicated earlier
in this chapter, such a break in communication can lead only to
confusion, fragmentation, and the failure of the mind to perceive
science as creative perception-communication
71

clearly the nature of reality. Although a more consistent treat-
ment was suggested by Bohr a few months later, nevertheless
Heisenberg’s initial arguments have been widely accepted by
physicists and have entered into the general way the informal
language is used. The result is that, almost subliminally, a serious
inconsistency has entered into current discussions of the mean-
ing of the quantum theory and pervades much of modern phys-
ics. Niels Bohr was able to make a more consistent discussion of
Heisenberg’s hypothetical experiment by insisting that the pre-
cise path of a quantum particle should not be called “uncertain”
but, rather, ambiguous. That is, something with no clearly deﬁned
signiﬁcance at all. By analogy, consider what is meant by the
term temperature. Temperature, as measured by a thermometer sus-
pended in the air, is in fact a measure of the mean energy of
the air molecules. It is essentially a statistical concept which has
a clear deﬁnition when a very large number of molecules are
involved. But what is the meaning of the temperature of a single
molecule, or for that matter of a single atom? Clearly the concept
is by no means uncertain; rather it is inherently ambiguous.
In giving up the notion of a deﬁnite, but unknown, position
and momentum in favor of inherent ambiguity, Bohr had made
a very signiﬁcant change in the informal way physicists talk
about the world. Clearly this approach was more consistent than
Heisenberg’s, but unfortunately both forms of informal usage
have entered the tacit infrastructure of physics, with the result
that the language used to talk about reality has become even
more confused.
Bohr’s arguments were particularly far-reaching and made a
far more radical break with classical notions than did those of
Heisenberg. In essence Bohr argued that the entire phenomenon in
which the measurement (or any other quantum measurement,
for that matter) takes place cannot be further analyzed into, for
example, the observed particle A, the incident electron, the
microscope, and the plate at which the spot Q appears. Rather
science, order, and creativity
72

the form of the experimental conditions and the content of the
experimental results are a whole which is not further analyzable
in any way at all. In the case of the microscope, this limit to
analysis can be clearly seen, for the meaning of the results depends
upon the way in which the spot Q and the particle A are linked
together. But according to the laws of quantum theory, this
involves a single quantum process which is not only indivisible
but also unpredictable and uncontrollable.
Bohr made a very careful presentation of this whole question.
However, the extreme subtlety of his arguments makes his work
relatively inaccessible. The result has been a further degree of
confusion in the way physicists communicate with each other,
for while most would claim to subscribe to Bohr’s position, they
do not always realize its full implications. For example, many
physicists, if asked whether the electron exists in some funda-
mental sense, would answer in the aﬃrmative. However, Bohr
himself had emphasized that there is no meaning in talking
about the existence of the electron except as an aspect of the
unanalyzable pattern of phenomena in which its observation
takes place. This state of aﬀairs has led to the observation that
physicists come to praise Bohr and decry Einstein (because of
the latter’s refusal to accept the full implications of this feature of
the quantum theory) but that they actually think like Einstein
while tacitly ignoring Bohr’s teaching.
Clearly this state of aﬀairs had led to considerable confusion in
the informal language of physics, which makes the quantum
theory hard to teach and to discuss. In addition, this situation has
been exacerbated by the many other interpretations that have
surfaced in the intervening years. For example, the physicist
and mathematician von Neumann developed an approach which
strongly emphasized the mathematics, logic, and coherence of
the formalism.1 This treatment, which is perhaps closer to the
sympathies of physicists than was Bohr’s, begins with a set of
axioms from which von Neumann attempted to derive the
science as creative perception-communication
73

whole subject systematically. While a careful reading of this
work shows that the informal language is in fact being used in
a new way to discuss the quantum measurement problem, von
Neumann would have argued that he was not proposing any
changes at all but had simply expressed the essence of the theory
within his axioms.
But in discussing a quantum mechanical experiment, von
Neumann proposed a sharp conceptual separation between the
quantum object and the observing apparatus (the former was
described by quantum mechanical laws but the apparatus was
assumed to obey Newtonian laws). For von Neumann, the
apparatus and the quantum system belong to diﬀerent worlds,
in dynamical interaction with each other. This type of informal
discussion is totally incompatible with that of Bohr, who argued
that the experimental situation is an unanalyzable whole. For
Bohr it would have no meaning to suggest that quantum laws
could apply to one part of a system and Newtonian to another.
Following von Neumann, other physicists have added their
interpretations. Wigner suggests that the mind of the human
observer plays an essential role in a quantum measurement.2
Everett argues that the universe, along with its observers, bifurcates
each time a measurement is made.3 The result is a proliferation
of ideas, each of which uses the informal language of science
in subtly, but signiﬁcantly, diﬀerent ways. This has led to a
considerable degree of confusion in physics.
Within this book it is suggested that science will ﬂourish in a
Von Neumann placed a purely conceptual cut between quantum mechanics
and the rest of the world. While the position of the cut was somewhat arbitrary,
von Neumann held that quantum theory alone applies to the left of this cut.
science, order, and creativity
74

more creative way if it allows a diversity of diﬀerent theories to
ﬂourish. When communication between these diﬀerent points
of view is free and open, so that a number of alternatives can be
held together at the same time, then it is possible to make new
creative perceptions within science. What is proposed is not
so much a proliferation of views along with their individual
supporters, but rather a unity in diversity. This is clearly very diﬀer-
ent from what has happened in the case of the quantum theory.
For many physicists would hold that Bohr, Heisenberg, and von
Neumann are all saying the same thing and that there is no
essential diﬀerence in the content of their approaches and inter-
pretations. However, it should now be clear to the reader that
each particular interpretation, in fact, uses the informal language
in a radically, but subtly, diﬀerent way. Yet physicists still tacitly
believe that there is no such dislocation in the language.
This example also illustrates the illusion that during periods
of “normal science,” nothing really changes. For in the decades
that followed the revolution of quantum theory, there have been
profound changes in the way the theory is to be understood
and interpreted. The resulting confusion, in which language is
unconsciously being used in diﬀerent ways, has given rise to a
crisis in communication that makes a clear perception of the
quantum theory very diﬃcult.
THE BOHR-EINSTEIN DIALOGUES AND THE
BREAKDOWN OF COMMUNICATION IN PHYSICS
The major issue of this chapter is the breakdown in communica-
tion within science, especially as it arises in connection with
discontinuities between the formal and the informal languages
used by scientists. A particularly signiﬁcant example of this
failure to communicate arose between Bohr and Einstein, which,
in a symbolic sense, still prevails in physics today.
Bohr ﬁrst met Einstein during a visit to Berlin in 1920, when
science as creative perception-communication
75

the two men discussed the various philosophical issues that lay at
the heart of physics. Following Heisenberg’s discovery of the
uncertainty principle, in 1927, they met at the Fifth Solvay Con-
ference to discuss the meaning of these new discoveries in quan-
tum theory. Throughout the 1930s the two men were involved
in a long series of exchanges on the way quantum theory should
be interpreted. Bohr, for his part, had introduced new notions
into the informal language, so that the meaning of scientiﬁc
concepts, such as momentum and position, was to be taken
as ambiguous. In other words, the meaning of such concepts
no longer corresponds in a well-deﬁned way to reality. Einstein,
however, believed that fundamental concepts should have, in
principle, an unambiguous relationship to reality. This view was
in harmony with the essential role that Einstein had assigned
to the notion of a signal in special relativity. It was a matter of
principle that no signal should be transmitted faster than light.
But this could not be maintained if the notion of a signal became
ambiguous in meaning.
To put this in a diﬀerent way, both Einstein and Bohr empha-
sized particular notions of meaning in the informal language
of physics. But while, for Bohr, the meaning of fundamental
concepts could be ambiguous, in Einstein’s view they had to be
unambiguous. The two men engaged in a long series of discus-
sions about these issues over the following years. However, in
retrospect, it becomes clear that it was never possible to resolve
the issues that stood between them because their diﬀerent uses
of informal language implied conﬂicting notions about the
nature of truth and reality and about what is an acceptable type
of scientiﬁc theory. Bohr began to feel that Einstein had turned
in a reactionary way against his own original, revolutionary
contributions to relativity and quantum theory. Einstein, for
his part, felt that Bohr had become caught in what he called a
“tranquillizer philosophy” which avoided fundamental ques-
tions. Although the two men had begun as good friends, indeed
science, order, and creativity
76

Einstein said that he had initially felt a real love for Bohr, they
eventually drifted apart after many years of fruitless argument
and exchanges of challenge and response.
This breakdown between the two men is clearly shown in a
story told by Hermann Weyl, who was at the Princeton Institute
for Advanced Studies at the same time as Bohr and Einstein. Weyl
felt that it was unfortunate that the two men did not get together,
so he arranged a party for this purpose. But at the event Bohr and
his students congregated at one end of the room and Einstein
and his at the other. Clearly the two men had nothing left to say
to each other.
Weyl’s story shows the enormous power of informal language,
which forms a signiﬁcant part of the tacit infrastructure of science.
It also hints at the actual way science is carried out in practice.
What is particularly important about this example is the earnest
and sustained eﬀorts to maintain contact on what Bohr and Ein-
stein regarded as the key issues in physics. But their diﬀerences did
not arise within the mathematical formalism itself, for Einstein
agreed that the formalism of quantum theory is essentially correct.
Yet as a result of the diﬀerent ways they were using the informal
language, the two men became separated by an abyss.
This separation has had particularly serious consequences in
the development of relativity and quantum theory, for there is
now no common, informal language that covers them both.
As a result, although both theories are regarded as fundamental,
they exist in an uneasy union with no real way of unifying them.
Even within the quantum theory itself there is a serious failure
of communication between the various interpretations. Attempts
to hold dialogues between these points of view are character-
ized by the same sort of rigidity, with respect to fundamental
assumptions, that was present in the exchanges between Bohr
and Einstein. In addition, there is considerable confusion as physi-
cists fail to distinguish between the essential, though extremely
subtle, diﬀerences between the various approaches.
science as creative perception-communication
77

There is so little awareness of the unbridgeable diﬀerences
between physicists today because sustained eﬀorts to engage in
dialogue have not been made with the kind of persistence shown
by Bohr and Einstein. Today the general atmosphere is such that a
physicist can do little more than state, and restate, a particular point
of view. Various approaches are generally taken to be rivals, with
each participant attempting to convince the others of the truth of a
particular position, or at least that it deserves serious attention.
Yet at the same time, there is a general tendency to regard the
whole question of interpretation and the role of informal lan-
guage as not being particularly important, and instead to focus
upon the mathematics about which everyone agrees.
One way of helping to free these serious blocks in communi-
cation would be to carry out discussions in a spirit of free dia-
logue. The nature of such dialogue is discussed in greater detail
in Chapter 6, but it seems appropriate to indicate its key features
here. What is needed is for each person to be able to hold several
points of view, in a sort of active suspension, while treating the
ideas of others with something of the care and attention that
are given to his or her own. Each participant is not called on to
accept or reject particular points of view; rather he or she should
attempt to come to an understanding of what they mean. In this
way it may be possible to hold a number of diﬀerent approaches
together in the mind with almost equal energy and interest.
In this way an internal free dialogue is begun which can lead on
to a more open external dialogue. At this stage the mind is able
to engage in free play, unimpeded by rigid attachments to par-
ticular points of view. It is our suggestion that out of this freely
moving dialogue can emerge something that is creatively new,
for example, the perception of a new link or metaphor between
very diﬀerent points of view.
It is possible that Bohr and Einstein could have tried to carry
out their exchanges in such a spirit. Each could have attempted to
discover fundamental points of similarity and diﬀerence in what
science, order, and creativity
78

they were saying. Perhaps in this way a creative new metaphor
could then have been perceived between their respective points
of view. While Bohr and Einstein are now dead, it is still not too
late to engage in such a dialogue between the various interpret-
ations of the quantum theory and between quantum and relativ-
ity theories. But this will require scientists who are not absolutely
committed to particular worldviews. In addition, they would
have to give serious attention to the way in which informal lan-
guage can interfere with the free play of thought that is needed
in a creative dialogue between diﬀerent points of view.
More generally, the opening up of a free and creative com-
munication in all areas of science would constitute a tremen-
dous extension of the scientiﬁc approach. Its consequences for
humanity would, in the long run, be of incalculable beneﬁt.
THE CAUSAL INTERPRETATION OF THE
QUANTUM THEORY
Among the many interpretations of the mathematical formalism
of quantum theory is the causal interpretation that was developed
by David Bohm over a period of several decades, beginning in the
early 1950s. There are several reasons for including a discussion
of this theory within this chapter. To begin with, it provides a
relatively intelligible and intuitively graspable account of how an
actual quantum process may take place. Moreover it does not
require a conceptual or formal separation between the quantum
system and its surrounding “classical” apparatus. In other words,
there is no fundamental “incommensurability” between classical
and quantum concepts and, therefore, a greater unity between the
formal and informal languages used in its exposition.
In addition, this theory has never before been presented in a
nontechnical way and it may be of interest to the reader to learn
of a quite novel approach to the quantum theory. In developing
the discussion, it is necessary to introduce some new ideas, such
science as creative perception-communication
79

as the notion of active information, which will become important in
explaining the ideas of generative order within Chapter 5.
In addition, the causal interpretation has an interesting socio-
logical signiﬁcance, which arises from the considerable resist-
ance exhibited by physicists to its basic ideas. In the spirit of
free dialogue suggested in the previous chapter, the causal inter-
pretation should take its place beside other interpretations in
an open exchange of ideas. This may ultimately lead to some
creative new perceptions about the nature of physical reality.
However, it appears that the largely unconscious commitment to
the informal language of the current paradigm of the quantum
theory has prevented physicists from responding to this new
proposal in any serious way.
THE CAUSAL INTERPRETATION
Although the interpretation is termed causal, this should not be
taken as implying a form of complete determinism. Indeed it
will be shown that this interpretation opens the door for the
creative operation of underlying, and yet subtler, levels of reality.
The theory begins, in its initial form, by supposing the electron,
or any other elementary particle, to be a certain kind of particle
which follows a causally determined trajectory. (In the later,
second quantized form of the theory, this direct particle picture
is abandoned.) Unlike the familiar particles of Newtonian
physics, the electron is never separated from a certain quantum
ﬁeld which fundamentally aﬀects it, and exhibits certain novel
features. This quantum ﬁeld satisﬁes Schrödinger’s equation, just
as the electromagnetic ﬁeld satisﬁes Maxwell’s equation. It, too,
is therefore causally determined.
Within Newtonian physics, a classical particle moves accord-
ing to Newton’s laws of motion, and the forces that act on
the particle are derived from a classical potential V. The basic
proposal of the causal interpretation is that, in addition to this
science, order, and creativity
80

classical potential, there also acts a new potential, called the
quantum potential Q. Indeed, all the new features of the quan-
tum world are contained within the special features of this
quantum potential. The essential diﬀerence between classical
and quantum behavior, therefore, is the operation of this quan-
tum potential. Indeed, the classical limit of behavior is precisely
that for which the eﬀects of Q become negligible.
For the mathematically minded, the quantum potential is
given by:
Q = −h2
2m
2|ψ|2
|ψ|2
where Ψ is the quantum ﬁeld or “wave function” derived from
Schrödinger’s equation, h is Planck’s constant, and m is the mass
of the electron or other particle. Clearly the quantum potential
is determined by the quantum wave ﬁeld, or wave function.
But what is mathematically signiﬁcant in the above equation is
that this wave function is found in both the numerator and
the denominator. The curious eﬀects that spring from this
relationship will be pointed out in the following paragraphs.
At ﬁrst sight, it may appear that to consider the electron as
some kind of particle, causally eﬀected by a quantum ﬁeld, is
to return to older, classical ideas which have clearly proved
inadequate for understanding the quantum world. However, as
the theory develops, this electron turns out not to be a simple,
structureless particle but a highly complex entity that is eﬀected
by the quantum potential in an extremely subtle way. Indeed the
quantum potential is responsible for some novel and highly strik-
ing features which imply qualitative new properties of matter
that are not contained within the conventional quantum theory.
The fact that Ψ is contained both in the numerator and the
denominator for Q means that Q is unchanged when Ψ is multi-
plied by an arbitrary constant. In other words, the quantum
science as creative perception-communication
81

potential Q is independent of the strength, or intensity, of the
quantum ﬁeld but depends only on its form. This is a particularly
surprising result. In the Newtonian world of pushes and pulls
on, for example, a ﬂoating object, any eﬀect is always more or
less proportional to the strength or size of the wave. But with the
quantum potential, the eﬀect is the same for a very large or a
very small wave and depends only on its overall shape.
By way of an illustration, think of a ship that sails on auto-
matic pilot, guided by radio waves. The overall eﬀect of the radio
waves is independent of their strength and depends only on their
form. The essential point is that the ship moves with its own
energy but that the information within the radio waves is taken up
and used to direct the much greater energy of the ship. In the
causal interpretation, the electron moves under its own energy,
but the information in the form of the quantum wave directs the
energy of the electron. Clearly the term causal is now being used
in a very new way from its more familiar sense.
The result is to introduce several new features into the move-
ment of particles. First, it means that a particle that moves in
empty space, with no classical forces acting on it whatsoever, still
experiences the quantum potential and therefore need not travel
uniformly in a straight line. This is a radical departure from
Newtonian theory. The quantum potential itself is determined
from the quantum wave Ψ, which contains contributions from
all other objects in the particle’s environment. Since Q does not
necessarily fall oﬀ with the intensity of the wave, this means that
even distant features of the environment can eﬀect the movement
in a profound way. As an example, consider the famous double
slit experiment. This is generally taken as the key piece of evi-
dence of the wave-particle duality of quantum particles. When
electrons are sent through the double slit, they exhibit a wavelike
interference pattern on the other side which is quite “incom-
mensurable” with the classical behavior of particles. How does
the explanation work in the causal interpretation?
science, order, and creativity
82

The electron travels toward a screen containing two slits.
Clearly it can go through only one slit or the other. But the
quantum wave can pass through both. On the outgoing side of
The Double Slit Experiment: An electron from the source encounters the double
slits and ends up being registered on the screen behind. After very many of such
individual events a pattern begins to build up on the screen. The conventional
interpretation is that this interference pattern is evidence of the wavelike
nature of the electron. In the causal interpretation, however, the pattern is a
direct result of the complex quantum potential.
science as creative perception-communication
83

the slit system, the quantum waves interfere to produce a highly
complex quantum potential which does not generally fall oﬀ
with the distance from the slits. The potential is illustrated below.
Note the deep valleys and broad plateaus. In those regions where
the quantum potential changes rapidly, there is a strong force on
the particle which is deﬂected, even though there is no classical
force operating. The movement of the electron is therefore
modiﬁed to produce the scattering pattern shown opposite. In this
case, the wavelike properties do not arise in any essential duality
of the quantum particle but from the complex eﬀects of the
quantum potential.
The explanation of the quantum properties of the electron
given above emphasized how the form of the quantum potential
can dominate behavior. In other words, information contained
within quantum potential will determine the outcome of a
quantum process. Indeed it is useful to extend this idea to what
could be called active information. The basic idea of active
information is that a form, having very little energy, enters into
and directs a much greater energy. This notion of an original
energy form acting to “inform,” or put form into, a much larger
energy has signiﬁcant applications in many areas beyond
quantum theory.
Consider a radio wave, whose form carries a signal—the voice
of an announcer, for example. The energy of the sound that is
heard from the radio does not in fact come from this wave but
from the batteries or power plug. This latter energy is essentially
“unformed,” but takes up its form from the information within
the radio wave. This information is potentially active everywhere
but only actually active when its form enters into the electrical
energy of the radio.
The analogy with the causal interpretation is clear. The quan-
tum wave carries “information” and is therefore potentially active
everywhere, but it is actually active only when and where this
energy enters into the energy of the particle. But this implies
science, order, and creativity
84

The quantum potential for the two slit system.
A collection of trajectories for the electron as it passes through the two slit
system.
science as creative perception-communication
85

that an electron, or any other elementary particle, has a com-
plex and subtle inner structure that is at least comparable with
that of a radio. Clearly this notion goes against the whole trad-
ition of modern physics, which assumes that as matter is ana-
lyzed into smaller and smaller parts, its behavior grows more
elementary. By contrast, the causal interpretation suggests that
nature may be far more subtle and strange than was previously
thought.
But this inner complexity of elementary matter is not as
implausible as it may appear at ﬁrst sight. For example, a large
crowd of people can be treated by simple statistical laws,
whereas individually their behavior is immensely subtler and
more complex. Similarly, large masses of matter reduce to sim-
ple Newtonian behavior whereas atoms and molecules have a
more complex inner structure. And what of the subatomic par-
ticles themselves? It is interesting to note that between the short-
est distance now measurable in physics (10−16 cm) and the
shortest distance in which current notions of space-time prob-
ably have meaning (10−33 cm), there is a vast range of scale in
which an immense amount of yet undiscovered structure could
be contained. Indeed this range is roughly equal to that which
exists between our own size and that of the elementary particles.
A further feature of the causal interpretation is its account
of what Bohr called the wholeness of the experimental situation.
In, for example, the double slit experiment, each particle res-
ponds to information that comes from the entire environment.
For while each particle goes through only one of the slits,
its motion is fundamentally aﬀected by information coming
from both slits. More generally, distant events and structures
can strongly aﬀect a particle’s trajectory so that any experiment
must be considered as a whole. This gives a simple and tangible
account of Bohr’s wholeness, for since the eﬀects of structures
may not fall oﬀ with distance, all aspects of the experimental
situation must be taken into account.
science, order, and creativity
86

But if this is the case, then how can the classical world, with
its separate and distinct objects, manifest itself? The answer is
that in those limits in which the quantum potential can be neg-
lected, its information is no longer active and objects behave as
if they were separate and independent. This limit, of negligible
quantum potential, is in fact the “classical limit.”
In general, this classical limit corresponds to large-scale
systems that are not too close to the absolute zero of tempera-
ture—in other words, to normal, everyday objects. But there are
some phenomena involving low temperatures, such as super-
conductivity and superﬂuidity, in which the quantum potential
remains appreciable even at the large-scale level. In these cases,
quantum eﬀects are signiﬁcant, as is indeed the case. But the
present discussion also opens the possibility of other, large-scale
phenomena, as yet undemonstrated, in which quantum eﬀects
could manifest themselves.
A signiﬁcant feature of the causal interpretation is that clas-
sical or Newtonian mechanics becomes a special case of quantum
mechanics—in which the quantum potential can be neglected.
Clearly, the two limits are no longer “incommensurable,” but
rather one ﬂows naturally out of the other. It shows clearly
why Bohr’s notions of wholeness must apply in the quantum
domain, while in the classical limit the world can generally be
analyzed into separate and distinct objects.
In the light of these observations, it would seem reasonable to
assume that the causal interpretation should have attracted ser-
ious interest and attention among the scientiﬁc community. Fol-
lowing critical discussion and, if necessary, modiﬁcation, the
theory would then have assumed its place beside the other inter-
pretations, having its particular adherents and opponents. How-
ever, this has not been the case, for the causal interpretation has
generally been met with only indiﬀerence or hostility. As to why
this may be will be explored in the following section.
The theory itself has been worked out in detail and applied to
science as creative perception-communication
87

a wide range of examples where it provides a simple and intelli-
gible account of what may be taking place in the quantum
domain. Indeed these explanations do not require a break with
older, classical concepts, even when quite new concepts are
introduced. The result is that the formal and informal languages
cohere in a satisfying manner. The formal language, for example,
involves equations that deal with particle trajectories and ﬁeld
equations while the informal language speaks of particle paths
and ﬁelds of information.
A further feature of this interpretation is that it avoids breaks
and discontinuities of interpretation. One of the most serious
of these, in the conventional approaches, involves what is called
the “collapse of the wave function.” The behavior of electrons,
or other elementary particles, is described conventionally in
terms of a wave function (this is formally identical to the quan-
tum wave of the causal interpretation Ψ). According to the
Schrödinger equation, this wave function can change only in a
smooth and continuous way. However, the results of any quan-
tum mechanical measurement make sense only if it is assumed
that the wave function “collapses” in a sudden and discontinu-
ous fashion. Since this collapse is not covered by the Schrödinger
equation, and indeed appears to violate it, an additional assump-
tion or some other interpretation is required to explain this
“collapse of the wave function.” However, in the causal inter-
pretation, the measurement process takes place in a fashion
that is entirely natural to the formalism and no additional
assumptions are needed.
These considerations are particularly signiﬁcant when the
theory is extended to include cosmology. The origin of the
universe in a “big bang” is at one and the same time a cosmo-
logical and a quantum mechanical problem. For if energy and
matter are created out of a singularity, a vanishingly small
region of space-time, then clearly quantum mechanical pro-
cesses must be involved. But how are these processes and
science, order, and creativity
88

their outcomes to be discussed when the only conceptual
framework, in the conventional approach, also involves classical
measuring apparatus?
For example, current theories of the origin of the universe
rely on what is called “the wave function of the universe.” The
behavior of this wave function is particularly important at, or
near, the moment of origin. But how is this wave function to be
properly deﬁned, within the theory, unless classical measuring
apparatus is present? Clearly in a cosmological era, in which not
even atoms or molecules existed, this apparatus is clearly out of
the question. How then is the quantum mechanical origin of the
universe to be discussed in any consistent fashion?
Such a problem does not arise in the causal interpretation,
for an objective universe can be assumed that is not dependent
on measuring apparatus or observers. By contrast, the alternative
interpretations either involve a number of extraneous assump-
tions, or they suppose, along with Bohr, that nothing
whatever can be said of the “quantum world.” Again, there-
fore, the informal language coheres with the mathematics and
enables an intuitive account to be made of the underlying
quantum processes.
A particularly interesting feature of the causal interpretation is
that it is not limited to the formal structure of current quantum
theory. Its mathematical basis is open to an almost unlimited
range of modiﬁcations that go far beyond current quantum the-
ory, while still cohering with the informal language of the causal
interpretation. All these modiﬁcations involve new levels of
reality beyond those in which the laws of the current quantum
theory are valid. For example, the particle paths described
earlier may turn out to be only averages of a more complex set
of trajectories (resembling those of Brownian motion) which
reﬂect new levels of reality.4 These paths (which are discussed in
the next chapter) ﬂuctuate chaotically to bring about, in the long
run, the same sort of statistical distribution that is predicted in
science as creative perception-communication
89

the current quantum mechanics. This shows that the interpret-
ation, while being causal, is not strictly deterministic. Indeed, in
the next chapter it will be shown that the possibility is opened
for creativity to operate within a causal framework.
Extensions of the theory involve the introduction of still other
types of potentials, in addition to the classical and quantum.
There is also the question of an experimental test between
the causal and the conventional approaches. A particular exten-
sion of the causal interpretation shows that there exists a charac-
teristic “relaxation time,” such that if quantum measurements
are carried out in short enough time intervals, the statistical
results will diﬀer in an important way from those of current
quantum theory. It is therefore possible to distinguish experi-
mentally between the predictions of the two theories. However,
at present, these relaxation times are too short for existing
experimental techniques.
OBJECTIONS TO THE CAUSAL INTERPRETATION
Despite the new features of the theory, and the possibilities for
further modiﬁcations, the majority of physicists have not con-
sidered the causal interpretation to be a serious alternative to
other interpretations of the quantum theory. Why should this
be? One of the main reasons is that perhaps it does not cohere
with their general way of using the informal language of phys-
ics, to which they have become habituated over long periods of
application of the usually accepted interpretations. There seems
to be little place in their thinking for the causal interpretation,
which is therefore ruled out as being irrelevant and not worthy
of serious study.
There is also the impression, generally based on a cursory
inspection, that the theory is nothing more than a return to older
classical concepts which physics has already transcended. Indeed,
without a serious study of the approach, physicists will not be
science, order, and creativity
90

properly aware of its genuinely novel conceptual features and
possibilities of as yet unexplored levels of matter.
A particular objection appears to arise from what scientists
call the nonlocal nature of the approach. This can be explained
in the following way. When several particles are treated in the
causal interpretation then, in addition to the conventional clas-
sical potential that acts between them, there is a quantum
potential which now depends on all the particles. Most important,
this potential does not fall oﬀ with the distance between
particles, so that even distant particles can be strongly con-
nected. This feature, in which very distant events can
have a strong inﬂuence, is what is meant by a nonlocal inter-
action and is strongly at variance with the whole spirit of
classical mechanics.
There is great reluctance on the part of physicists to consider
such nonlocality seriously, even though it does lie at the heart
of the formal implications of quantum theory. Because theories
in terms of local interactions have been so successful over the
past few centuries, the concept is now seen as both necessary
and inevitable. But, in fact, there does not appear to be any
intrinsic reason to rule out nonlocal forces. However, a general
attitude has arisen out of the tacit infrastructure of ideas over
the last few centuries which prejudices scientists to any serious
consideration of nonlocality.
If the objections to nonlocality are based on an almost sub-
liminal prejudice, can they be backed up by physical argument?
One suggestion is that nonlocality is inconsistent with the basic
tenets of relativity. Nonlocality implies an instantaneous connec-
tion between distant events, and this appears to violate the basic
principle of relativity that no signal can travel faster than light.
However, a more detailed analysis shows that the quantum
potential is very “fragile” and unstable to alternations. In other
words, if any attempt is made to impose a form on the potential
and thereby use it as a signal, this form will become mixed up
science as creative perception-communication
91

and lose all order and meaning. The quantum potential cannot
therefore be used to carry any signal between distant eﬀects and
therefore its instantaneous connection of distant particles does
not violate the theory of relativity.
Indeed, there is suggestive evidence that rather than violat-
ing physical laws, nonlocality does in fact operate in nature.
An experiment initially suggested by Einstein, Rosen, and
Podolsky depends upon measuring the nonlocal eﬀects of one
distant quantum particle on another. Most recently this
experiment has been carried out in Paris by Alan Aspect and
interpreted with the aid of a theorem of J. S. Bell. It provides
strong evidence for a nonlocal form of interaction. This result
follows in a natural way, within the causal interpretation, as a
result of the nonlocal quantum potential that directly connects
distant particles.
A further objection to the causal interpretation is that it
gives only the same predictions as the conventional interpret-
ation. In other words, there is no crucial test between the causal
and the usually accepted interpretations. But in fact, the causal
interpretation does suggest alternative experimental results,
even though they may require reﬁnements in current experi-
mental technology. But more than this, the insistence of a crucial
test, or the Popperian criterion of falsiﬁability, is overrestrictive.
A fundamentally new approach of this nature requires a long
period of relatively sheltered nurturing before it can properly
meet such tests.
Finally there are the objections that certain features of the
interpretation are aesthetically unsatisfying. For example, the
quantum potential aﬀects the particles but is not aﬀected by
them. Within this group, Einstein could perhaps be included and
many others like him who feel that the notion of nonlocality is
fundamentally unacceptable. On the other hand, if such scien-
tists go as far as to suggest that the very possibility of doing
science demands that locality be retained in all its fundamental
science, order, and creativity
92

concepts, then a serious form of demarcation has been set up
between science and nonscience.
With the possible exceptions of objections arising from aes-
thetic judgments, the rest can be summed up by suggesting
that the overall informal language of physics, within its present
paradigm, is strongly against proposals like that of the causal
interpretation. Within this paradigm, or accepted usage of the
informal language, must be included Popper’s ideas on falsiﬁ-
ability, Heisenberg’s absolute requirement that the essence of
physics lies in the mathematics, and Einstein’s absolute require-
ment of strict locality. All these factors have, largely uncon-
sciously, come to determine which issues and theories are ruled
to be relevant and which irrelevant.
Of particular importance in this subliminal structure is the
belief that if several alternative interpretations of the same factual
and mathematical content exist, then only one of them can
be “right” and the others must be discarded as “wrong.” The
approach of this book, however, is that science should be carried
out in the manner of a creative dialogue in which several points
of view can coexist, for a time, with equal intensity. In the case
of the Bohr-Einstein exchanges, for example, it was suggested
that alternative points of view should have been accommodated
without acceptance or rejection. In this way, new, creative
insights become possible which constantly emerge out of an
open dialogue.
But is such a dialogue possible between the supporters of the
currently accepted interpretation and the causal interpretation?
As a starting point the causal interpretation could be used when-
ever a physicist wishes to understand physically what is taking
place in a given problem, while one of the other interpretations
may be more convenient in carrying out mathematical calcula-
tions. Once such a dialogue is established, it becomes possible to
go much further and examine the key points of similarity and
diﬀerence between the diﬀerent approaches. In this way it may
science as creative perception-communication
93

be possible to make creative “metaphors” between time. This,
however, requires that the various views be actively held in the
mind together, and within the common dialogue of the physics
community. For example, the causal interpretation appears simi-
lar to Bohr’s approach in its emphasis on undivided wholeness,
yet diﬀerent from it, for this wholeness now becomes analyzable
in thought. Likewise the causal interpretation is similar to
Wigner’s in that it gives the “mindlike” quality of active infor-
mation a primary role, yet diﬀerent from it, in that it does not
imply that the human mind can signiﬁcantly aﬀect the electron in
an actual physical measurement.
THE ROLE OF INTERPRETATIONS IN PHYSICS
An interpretation, such as the various interpretations of quan-
tum theory, is in no sense a deduction from experimental facts
or from the mathematics of a theory. Rather it is a proposal of
what the theory might mean in a physical and intuitively com-
prehensive sense. Thus every interpretation brings into the the-
ory something which is not in the observations and equations
themselves. This additional material comes from a very broad
area which extends beyond what is normally taken to be science
and includes philosophy and aesthetic sensibilities.
Bohr’s notions of ambiguity and complementarity were, to a
large extent, suggested to him by his familiarity with Danish
philosophy and the writings of William James with their notion
of the “stream of consciousness.” Likewise Heisenberg’s ideas
on the primacy of mathematics did not so much come from
his experience in physics but had already been inspired by his
familiarity with Plato and, presumably, with the Pythagoreans.
Some, however, prefer to take what they believe is a totally prag-
matic view and argue that quantum theory is no more than
an algorithm for predicting experiments and that to attempt
to interpret such an algorithm is a waste of everyone’s time. Yet
science, order, and creativity
94

these thinkers, too, have been strongly aﬀected by considerations
that lie outside science, such as the opinions of the positivists,
operationalists, and empiricist philosophers who were fashion-
able in the early days of quantum theory.
In essence, all the available interpretations of the quantum
theory, and indeed of any other physical theory, depend funda-
mentally on implicit or explicit philosophical assumptions, as
well as on assumptions that arise in countless other ways from
beyond the ﬁeld of physics.
Many scientists may ﬁnd this analysis to be slightly repugnant.
Indeed there is a particular ideal today which sees the scientist
as “hard-nosed,” concerned only with fact and logic and having
no time for “soft” content from philosophy or from other “non-
scientiﬁc” areas. Ernest Rutherford is often held up as the epit-
ome of such a blunt, hardheaded, practical man who had little
time for speculation. Such physicists love to quote Rutherford’s
reply when asked about the new development in quantum
theory: “There is only one thing to say about physics: the theor-
ists are on their hind legs and it’s up to us to get them down
again.” But novel hypotheses and daring intuitive leaps into the
structure of their nucleus could never have been made by such a
cardboard character. The real Rutherford was highly literate, sen-
sitive, and willing to speculate in a bold way as he constructed
new experiments and hypotheses.
The image of the “hard-nosed” scientist is yet another example
of the subliminal inﬂuence that is exerted upon scientists by the
tacit infrastructure of ideas of the community at large. Possibly
it would be better to regard scientists, in the case of interpret-
ations, as being somewhat like artists who produce quite diﬀer-
ent paintings of the same sitter. Each theory will be capable
of giving a unique insight which is aesthetically satisfying, to
a given person, in some ways and not in others. Some inter-
pretations may show creative originality while others may be
mediocre. Yet none give the ﬁnal “truth” about the subject.
science as creative perception-communication
95

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
The ﬁrst part of this chapter dealt with the important role played
by communication in creative perception, not only in science
but also in art. For a variety of reasons, however, this communi-
cation tends to break down and so stultiﬁes creativity. An
obvious cause of such breaks in communication arises with
the development of new paradigms during a scientiﬁc revolu-
tion. But there is also strong evidence for breaks during periods
of “normal” science, which are particularly serious in being
largely unrecognized.
The discussion was illustrated with examples of how the for-
mal and the informal aspects of language are currently being
used in physics. In particular, the various interpretations of
quantum theory and the breakdown in communication between
Bohr and Einstein were analyzed.
The second part of this chapter was conﬁned to a detailed
discussion of the causal interpretation of the quantum theory,
which allows the formal and the informal languages to cohere in
a more natural way. This interpretation provides a more intuitive
way of talking about events in the microworld. However, partly
because this mode of discussion is at variance with that currently
adopted in physics, the causal interpretation has been considered
irrelevant and largely ignored.
In the next two chapters it will be shown that exploration of
the problem of failure in communication and understanding
within modern physics requires a thorough analysis of what is
meant by order. Indeed it is suggested that the quantum theory
demonstrates the need for radically new notions of order, and
the confusions and failures associated with theory may be due to
an attempt to understand something radically new in terms of an
older order—in other words, to “put new wine in old bottles.”
science, order, and creativity
96

3
WHAT IS ORDER?
The ultimate failure of Bohr and Einstein to continue their dia-
logues together symbolizes the degree of fragmentation that
exists in physics today. Despite their close friendship and the
energy they brought to their encounters, the two men eventually
reached the point where they had nothing more to say to each
other. In the previous chapter it was suggested that this break in
communication was a result of the diﬀerent and incompatible
ways in which the informal language of physics was being used.
Each protagonist was using certain terms in particular ways and
laying stress on diﬀerent aspects of the interpretation. A deeper
analysis of this whole question shows that what was really
at issue was the diﬀerent notions of order involved. Bohr and
Einstein both held to subtly diﬀerent ideas of what the order of
physics, and of nature, should be and this led to an essential
break in their dialogue, a break which is reﬂected in the distance
that lies between relativity and the quantum theory even today.
In particular, Bohr believed that the order of movement of a
particle would admit ambiguity while Einstein felt that such a

possibility was too absurd to contemplate. The source of this
failure in communication between the two giants of modern
physics therefore lay in their incompatible notions of order.
The notion of order extends beyond the conﬁnes of a particu-
lar theory; permeates the whole infrastructure of concepts,
ideas, and values; and enters the very framework in which
human thought is understood and action carried out. To under-
stand the full meaning of creativity, and what impedes it, it is
necessary to go into the whole nature and signiﬁcance of order.
The question of order clearly goes beyond the conﬁnes of
physics, or even science, and into the question of society and
human consciousness. Is it possible to inquire into such a vast
and general ﬁeld? Clearly the subject cannot be encompassed in
a few pages. The approach that is taken in this chapter, therefore,
assumes that the reader has a considerable familiarity with what
is meant by order but that this tends to be on an implicit, rather
than explicit, level. The subject will therefore be approached in a
discursive fashion, as particular aspects, ideas, and intuitions
are unfolded. Rather than attempting to make a deﬁnition or
exhaustive analysis of the nature of order, the intention is to
deepen and extend the reader’s understanding. This chapter,
therefore, focuses on the meaning of order within familiar con-
texts while the next develops new notions of order that are
relevant not only to the ideas of quantum theory but to society,
consciousness, and creativity.
NEW ORDERS IN SOCIETY
General notions of order play an incalculably signiﬁcant role in
the totality of human thought and action. When ideas on order
change in a really fundamental way, they tend to produce a
radical change in the overall order of society. This reaches into
every area of life. In fact, the notion of a change in the order of
society provides a good starting point for the explorations of this
science, order, and creativity
98

chapter, since it gives some idea of how broad and signiﬁcant the
role of order can be. By examining the order of society it
becomes possible to gain a feeling for how subtle and pervasive
is the operation of order within the tacit infrastructure of the
consciousness of humanity.
The change in the order which underlies society is, in certain
ways, not unlike those changes in paradigms that are associated
with a scientiﬁc revolution. For just as radically new theories are
generally taken to be incommensurable with what went before,
so new orders of society may arise that are regarded as incompat-
ible with what they replaced. In such cases the whole society is
faced with a serious crisis that encompasses everything that was
once held dear and is now judged to be irrelevant, improper, or
even immoral. In discussing the change of order it is therefore
important to ask if all changes in society must necessarily be so
destructive and disorienting or if change can happen in more
creative ways.
An example of a radical change in the overall order that per-
vades society can be found in the transition from the Middle
Ages to the present day. The medieval worldview is essentially
that of a timeless order in which each thing has its proper place,
so that even the temporal order of history can be accommodated
within the timeless order. This notion can, of course, be traced
back to the ancient Greeks, for Aristotle wrote of an eternal order
of increasing perfection, going from earthly matter to heavenly
matter. An important aspect of this order is that each object has a
proper place in the order of things, so that motion of bodies
can be understood as a striving to reach this proper place.
Within such an order it became natural to view the universe as a
single organism.
By the time of the Middle Ages this general scheme had
become so comprehensive that it found its eternal basis in the
order of religion and philosophy, from which laws, morals, and
ethics, which regulated the temporal concerns of society, had
what is order?
99

their ground. Society as a whole, and each citizen, was regarded
as an image of the total, overarching eternal order. Within this
framework each individual was able to ﬁnd a place and a mean-
ing for his or her life. To have a single, encompassing meaning
for the universe, society, and the individual was a strong and
positive aspect of this eternal order. However, society was not
without its share of drawbacks, for the freedoms and rights of
individuals were severely restricted and authority was pre-
disposed to become absolute.
After the Middle Ages this order began to give rise to the new
secular order in which everything was regarded as being subject
to the ﬂux of time. (The “new secular order” is incidentally the
motto on the great seal of the United States.) Now nothing had
any special space, and motion was reduced to a mechanical pro-
cess that had no ultimate goal and was therefore going nowhere
in particular. The notion of comparing the universe to an organ-
ism also gave way to comparing it to a mechanism, and the
favorite image of the eighteenth century was that of clockwork.
The secular order was atomistic in nature, and as a result, the
individual came to assume a more prominent role in society.
This new attitude, of course, helped to bring about an increasing
value to human freedom. However, this positive aspect had to be
weighed against the negative features. One of the most import-
ant of these was that the individual, and indeed the whole soci-
ety, along with the moral and ethical principles needed for good
regulation, no longer had any ultimate meaning. For within
the new secular order everything was set in the context of an
immense and purposeless mechanical universe, indiﬀerent to
human values and to human fate, and in which the earth itself
was lost as a mere grain of dust.
All this meant, of course, that a very radical transformation
had taken place in the overall order of human life in particular
and of society in general. One of the most important aspects of
this transformation has been the considerable development of
science, order, and creativity
100

science and technology over the past few centuries. This has
helped to dispel the considerable scientiﬁc ignorance of the old
eternal order and has led to sweeping reforms in medicine and
agriculture. However, all these beneﬁts have not been without
considerable cost.
Indeed, it is now possible to perceive the dialogue held in
the Introduction as concerned with the whole nature of the
secular order.
In physics this change of order was especially signaled by
Descartes, who introduced the concept of coordinates. These can
be thought of as grids by means of which points in space can be
located. As the word “coordinate” indicates, they are the basic
means by which order is to be described in the new secular and
mechanical worldview. Aristotle, for his part, would have under-
stood the formal meaning of Cartesian coordinates, but almost
certainly he would have regarded them as irrelevant to the way
he perceived the world. This would have shown the mutual
irrelevance inherent in diﬀerent notions of order, which can be
thought of as an extension of the mutual irrelevance of basic
ideas in successive paradigms. But the reader should also keep in
mind the possibility of a deeper continuity between notions of
order so that a break in communication between societies does
not result.
In Newton’s mechanics the order of space and time was taken
as absolute and in this sense, therefore, something remained
from the old Aristotelian order. Within the new mechanical
order was embedded something of the eternal order, for, accord-
ing to Newton, space was the “external sensorium of God” and
time ﬂowed equally throughout the universe. However, with
Einstein even this remnant of the old order was called into ques-
tion. In the theory of relativity, the idea of a time that ﬂows
uniformly across the whole universe was called into question,
for it was shown that the notion of the ﬂow of time depends on
the speed of the observer. No longer could a single time order
what is order? 101

span the entire universe; indeed past, present, and future could
not be maintained in the same absolute sense as for Newton.
With quantum theory, even greater changes in order occurred
and the whole basis of the mechanical order, which formed a
signiﬁcant part of the secular order, was called into question. It
was no longer possible, for example, to deﬁne position and
momentum simultaneously, nor could an unambiguous notion
of a particle’s trajectory be maintained. Indeed by the third
decade of this century the Newtonian order had lost its clear
deﬁnition and further new orders were introduced that depended
on the more abstract idea of symmetries, quantum states, and
energy levels.
This whole transformation from the old eternal order has
brought in its wake a movement away from the absolute and
toward the idea that things are inherently relative and dependent
on conditions and contexts. But in fact this was the deeper mean-
ing of giving pride of place to time, rather than eternity, which
originally took place at the end of the Middle Ages. The essential
meaning of time is that everything is mutable and transient.
Indeed the Greek god of time, Chronos, swallowed his children.
Hence the temporal order is essentially one of change and tran-
sience. Admittedly scientists like Newton attempted to formulate
universal laws that were assumed to be eternally valid, and there-
fore were appealing to something that lay beyond time. How-
ever, these laws were eventually found to hold only under certain
limited conditions and could not be, in this sense, eternal. Even
the theory of relativity and the quantum theory, which replaced
the Newtonian worldview, are themselves being called into ques-
tion. The reader will no doubt have heard of “black holes.”
These are singularities in the fabric of space-time within which
all the known laws of physics, including relativity and quantum
theory, must break down and basic structures, such as elem-
entary particles, cease to exist. It has even been suggested that the
universe itself began in such a “big bang” singularity. Clearly
science, order, and creativity
102

science has reached the point at which everything, in principle,
becomes subject to ultimate dissolution within the ﬂux of
time. All traces of the eternal order, with its natural cycles and
harmonies, have now been swept away.
But these far-reaching changes have not been conﬁned to sci-
ence alone but have swept into every area of life. In earlier times,
for example, people regarded the order of society as eternally
determined, perhaps by divine decree. Even though important
changes did occur throughout the Middle Ages, for the most
part they did not seriously aﬀect those who went through the
unchanging and recurring cycles of their lives. However, follow-
ing the change from eternal to secular order, a series of rapid
transformations took place in science and technology, the scale
and scope of commerce and industry, the growth of national-
ism, and the extension of the general goals of European civiliza-
tion. For example, the rise of science was followed by a decrease
in the importance of religion. Within the scientiﬁc order, many
religious beliefs appeared to lose their credibility and the pro-
gress brought by technology substituted new goals, aims, and
values. As the eternal verities and absolute truths became eroded,
the older systems of morals and ethics seemed less signiﬁcant
and, in the end, dissolved into a general form of relativism. This
change of order even reached into the family as the impersonal
ties of commerce, industry, and bureaucracy began to dominate
human relationships.
Clearly the change in social order is far-reaching; indeed the
social tensions associated with it have not yet been resolved. On
the one hand, science and technology have opened up immense
new possibilities for a much better life for much of humanity
than was ever possible before. On the other, the rise of industry
and the growth of technology have given rise to crises in polit-
ics, economics, and ecology, and the conﬂicts between nations
have brought us to the brink of nuclear war. Indeed the ever-
increasing torrent of change threatens to sweep humanity into a
what is order? 103

“black hole” singularity. What is inside that singularity is
unknown. Will it be increasing misery and ultimate extinction
or an unimaginably diﬀerent and better way of life for all?
In the past, changes in the fundamental order of society have
been followed by a period of violence and destruction. This stage
of internal conﬂict and confusion arises when successive notions
of order are believed to be incompatible or irrelevant to each
other. But is it necessary for a change in order to occur in this
way? Is there some intermediate domain in which transition can
occur without this associated violence? Is it possible for a range
of diﬀerent notions of order to be held in active suspension
within “the mind of society” so that a free dialogue is held
between the old and the new orders? In such a case it is possible
that an entirely new kind of movement could begin in which
the whole society would be in a constant state of creative trans-
formation without disruption.
But up to now, those who have called for major changes in
society have given little importance to the question of creativity.
Indeed history shows that there has been little conscious realiz-
ation of what actually takes place during a major change, or
where accumulated changes are leading. In general, society
changes when a mass of people simply react to particular prob-
lems and pressures which have been allowed to accumulate. Even
when a few individuals have attempted to confront the issue of
change in a creative way they have been hampered by the various
issues and problems already brought to light in this book.
People, for example, generally tend to be rigidly attached to the
tacit infrastructure of their cultural milieu so that they resist all
social change in a blind and often destructive way. Others, how-
ever, are rigidly attached to the call for revolutionary change and
pursue their ends in a similarly blind fashion. Clearly what is
called for is a kind of free play within the individual and society
so that the mind does not become rigidly committed to a limited
set of assumptions, or caught up in confusion and false play.
science, order, and creativity
104

Out of this free play could emerge the true creative potential
of a society.
ORDER AND CATEGORIES
To understand how a new order can emerge in a creative way, it
is necessary to go into the whole notion of order. This will be
done by ﬁrst exploring a relatively detailed idea of order and
then generalizing into broader contexts.
Order itself is generally experienced in a number of diﬀerent
situations and contexts. For example, there is the order of num-
ber, of points on a line, of space and time, of the movement of
a particle through space, and of the functioning of a machine.
But order need not be only mechanical or restricted to inanimate
systems. There is also the order of growth of an organism,
of a language, of thought, of music and art, and of society in
general. Indeed it can be truly said that whatever we do presup-
poses some kind of order. Clearly the subject of order is too
broad to be encompassed within an all-inclusive deﬁnition.
This section, therefore, will begin with the question of how
order is thought about, perceived, and brought about in
human activity.
Some reﬂection will show that our ﬁrst notions of order
depend upon our ability to perceive similarities and diﬀerences.
Indeed there is much evidence which shows that our vision, as
well as the other senses, works by selecting similarities and dif-
ferences. While this can be demonstrated in a number of labora-
tory experiments and visual illusions, it can be most easily seen
through the reader’s direct experience. Look around the room
for the moment and note how your overall ﬁeld of vision is
particularly sensitive to change and diﬀerences of sensation. A
sudden small movement is quickly picked up in the corner of
the eye. By contrast, the center of the ﬁeld of vision gives a
much ﬁner discrimination of particular forms that are relatively
what is order? 105

constant. While the background reveals small changes and
movements, it is the center of the ﬁeld which, for example, gives
detailed information about a face.
In the Introduction, it was pointed out that damage to the
central ﬁeld still enables meaning to be extracted from the visual
ﬁeld, even if the ability to integrate forms and discriminate ﬁne
detail is lost. However, when the background itself is damaged,
then information in the central ﬁeld loses its meaning. This
suggests that perception begins through the gathering of
diﬀerences as the primary data of vision, which are then used
to build up similarities. The order of vision proceeds through
the perception of diﬀerences and the creation of similarities of
these diﬀerences.
In thought a similar process takes place, beginning ﬁrst with
the formation of categories. This categorizing involves two
actions: selection and collection. According to the common Latin
root of these two words, select means “to gather apart” and collect
means “to gather together.” Hence categories are formed as cer-
tain things are selected, through the mental perception of their
diﬀerences from some general background. To return to vision,
an animal may be spotted against the background of the forest or
a coin on a patterned carpet may stand out as a result of the glint
of its reﬂection.
The second phase of categorization is that some of the things
that have been selected (by virtue of their diﬀerence from the
background) are collected together by regarding their diﬀerences
as unimportant while, of course, still regarding their common
diﬀerence from the background as important. Thus several birds
of diﬀerent size and posture may be abstracted together from the
general background of a tree without giving particular attention
to the individual diﬀerences between them. These birds, how-
ever, clearly fall into a diﬀerent category from any squirrels
which are found in the same tree. Categorization therefore
involves the combined action of selection and collection.
science, order, and creativity
106

In the process of observing a ﬂock of birds in the tree the
category of birds is formed by putting things together that are
simultaneously distinguished from those that do not belong to
this category—for example, from squirrels. In this way sets of
categories are formed, and these, in turn, inﬂuence the ways in
which things are selected and collected. Selection and collection
therefore become the two, inseparable sides of the one process
of categorization.
This determination of similarities and diﬀerences can go on
indeﬁnitely. For within the similarities of birds will be detected
diﬀerences between small brownish birds and large black ones.
So the category is divided into crows and sparrows, or the new
categories of male and female, or perching and ﬂying birds, or
birds that sing and birds that are silent are selected. As some
diﬀerences assume greater importance and others are ignored, as
some similarities are singled out and others neglected, the set of
categories changes. Indeed the process of categorization is a
dynamical activity that is capable of changing in a host of ways as
new orders of similarity and diﬀerence are selected.
The legends of early humankind, together with contemporary
myths from tribes in Africa and North America, suggest that
categorization is a primitive but important way of ordering the
universe. The gods, for example, are given the task of naming
the various animals and plants so as to establish an order in the
universe. These legends also indicate that the similarities and
diﬀerences selected depend upon a context that involves the
whole activity and order of the tribe. A people categorize diﬀer-
ent animals according to their interaction and importance to the
life of the tribe. Animals may be selected and identiﬁed according
to diet, shape and color, habits, or utility. A group of herders in
Africa, for example, use a series of words which indicate their
sensitivity to variations in the colors of their cattle. In addition,
the names of these cattle colors are used to describe other objects.
The Inuit (Eskimo) by contrast have quite diﬀerent priorities for
what is order? 107

survival and use a number of words to describe the diﬀerent
conditions of ice and snow. Clearly the whole action of cat-
egorization is inseparably linked to perception-communication
which operates within the overall context of a dynamical
social structure.
Most categories are so familiar to us that they are used almost
unconsciously. However, from time to time, as the result of some
important change in the way we see the world, or as our experi-
ence is extended, new categories come into being. Categories are
formed which never existed before and new sets of similarities
and diﬀerences are considered as relevant in entirely new ways.
Clearly this implies that perception must be used in a creative
way within an ever-changing context.
The creation of new categories relies on a perception that
takes place as much in the mind and through the senses. To
understand the creative nature of this process, and indeed to
develop a theme which will be used throughout this book, the
idea of intelligence will be introduced. The word intelligence is often
used in a general and fairly loose way today, but something of its
original force can be found in the Latin root intelligere, which
carries the sense of “to gather in between.” It recalls the col-
loquialism “to read between the lines.” In this sense, intelligence
is the mind’s ability to perceive what lies “in between” and to
create new categories. This notion of intelligence, which acts as the
key creative factor in the formation of new categories, can be
contrasted with the intellect. The past participle of intelligere is in
fact intellect, which could then be thought of as “what has been
gathered.” Intellect, therefore, is relatively ﬁxed, for it is based
primarily on an already existing scheme of categories. While the
intelligence is a dynamic and creative act of perception through
the mind, the intellect is something more limited and static. This
distinction can be highlighted by suggesting that the IQ test
should be more properly said to measure an intellect quotient
than an intelligence quotient.
science, order, and creativity
108

Categories therefore emerge through the free play of the mind
in which new forms are perceived through the creative action of
intelligence and are then gradually ﬁxed into systems of categor-
ies. But this system of categories always remains ﬂuid and open
to further change, provided that the mind itself is open to the
creative action of intelligence.
A particularly illuminating example of this whole process is
given by the experience of Helen Keller and her teacher Anne
Sullivan. When Helen Keller experienced her ﬂash of insight she
saw the essential similarity between all the diﬀerent experiences
of water. Anne Sullivan had played a key part in this by helping
Helen to select these experiences from the general background
and ﬂux of experience, by including them in a kind of game.
Helen’s moment of insight was the perception of her ﬁrst cat-
egory. But this went much further than a simple gathering of
basically similar instances, for it had a name that was com-
municable and which could therefore be used to symbolize the
category in thought and elevate it into a concept. But very
clearly, Helen’s act of perception could not have been based on
previous experience, or facts stored in her intellect. It was a
pure act of intelligence. Later, however, all this became stored in
Helen’s memory; it became a part of her tacit infrastructure and
a contribution to her intellect.
Categorization can become caught up in exactly those sorts of
problems that were discussed in the ﬁrst two chapters. It is pos-
sible for categories to become so ﬁxed a part of the intellect that
the mind ﬁnally becomes engaged in playing false to support
them. Clearly, as contexts change, so do categories. However,
when these categories are implicitly embedded in the whole
structure of language and society, then they become rigid and
persist, in inappropriate ways, within the new context. The
result is a form of fragmentation in which signiﬁcant new con-
nections between categories are ignored, through a false div-
ision; and signiﬁcant diﬀerences are ignored within categories,
what is order? 109

to give a false uniform. Only when the intelligence operates in a
free and creative fashion can the mind be free of its attachment
to rigid structures of category and is then able to engage in the
formation of new orders.
A FORMAL REPRESENTATION OF ORDER
The generation of categories is one aspect of the formation of
order but it does not go far enough. While it allows for an
inﬁnite variety of sets of categories that depend on general con-
texts, it is not yet suﬃciently developed and self-determined.
However, a more deﬁnite scheme can be accomplished by apply-
ing the notions of similarities and diﬀerences to themselves in a
series of levels.
It is therefore proposed that a particular general notion of
order can be understood in terms of similar diﬀerences and
diﬀerent similarities. Consider the example of a line. It can be
thought of as characterized, or indeed constructed, out of a
series of equal segments in contact: a, b, c, d, e, f, etc. The charac-
teristic of the line is that the diﬀerence between a and b is similar,
and indeed equal to, the diﬀerence between b and c, and between
c and d, and so on.
science, order, and creativity
110

The order of the line is deﬁned by a single, similar diﬀerence.
In a similar way, it is possible to analyze a curve, such
as a circle, by approximating it to a polygon of many sides.
The diﬀerence between the segments now includes not only
their lengths, which are all equal, but also their angles, which
are also equal. Again, the diﬀerence between a and b is similar to
the diﬀerence between b and c, c and d, and so on. The circle is
therefore deﬁned by a single, similar diﬀerence.
When the lengths of segments progressively diminish in such
a way that the diﬀerence between successive segments is still
similar, then a spiral results.
what is order? 111

In three dimensions, the line may turn outside the plane of
the spiral and a series of similar diﬀerences will give rise to
a helix.
In this fashion, a whole class of curves can be constructed in
which the diﬀerences between neighboring segments are all
similar. While the examples actually illustrated so far have been
quite simple, by making the constant diﬀerence as complex as
desired, the geometry of the curves can be enriched.
Even the trajectories of Newtonian mechanics are determined
in this way. Newton’s ﬁrst law indicates that the natural motion
is one in which all segments are equal to each other—straight
science, order, and creativity
112

line motion or rest. The second law shows that the rate of change
of this motion is equal to the external force. In the case of a
constant force, such as gravity, this indicates that the diﬀerences
between successive small segments of the velocity are all similar,
and indeed equal.
This concept of order therefore makes it possible to fully
appreciate Newton’s metaphor about the apple and the moon:
the order of similar diﬀerences in the motion of the falling apple
is similar to the order of similar diﬀerences within the orbit
of the moon. Newtonian mechanics, operating with constant
external forces, is therefore encompassed within the deﬁnition
of order through similar diﬀerences. An extension of the scheme
enables more complex cases of motion to be treated as well.
CONSTITUTIVE AND DESCRIPTIVE ORDER
Before going on to discuss more complicated cases of order,
such as chance and chaos, it is important to make a distinction
between what could be called constitutive order and descriptive
order. Consider, for example, the ﬂight of an aircraft in terms of
its coordinates on a map. Clearly this involves a descriptive order
because the coordinates themselves do not have any material
existence of their own with respect to the aircraft. In a similar
way, an architect’s plans for a house are also a form of descrip-
tive order. However, in discussing the construction of a beehive
in terms of individual hexagons, or a wall in terms of bricks, this
clearly involves the very constitution of the object in question.
Such orders will be called constitutive.
But it is equally true that the discussion of the order of a
geometric curve or a trajectory involves both a descriptive and a
constitutive order, in the sense that the latter order constitutes
the very essence of the ﬁgure in question. Thus the spiral can be
described in terms of a series of segments having a similar dif-
ference, but it is equally true that the spiral is actually built out of
what is order? 113

such segments. Indeed the distinction between descriptive order
and constitutive order is never absolute, for every constitutive
order has some descriptive signiﬁcance and every descriptive
order has a constitutive basis. For example, repeating hexagons
are a convenient way of describing a beehive as well as for con-
structing one. Likewise the architect’s plans have a constitutive
basis in paper and ink. Of course this basis has very little rele-
vance to the order of the house. However, once it is converted to
marks on lengths of wood, plumb lines, and scaﬀolding, it
begins to lie midway between a constitutive and a descriptive
order. An additional example is given by the painter who uses a
coordinate grid to enlarge a painting or to transfer a cartoon
onto a wall. Using a series of rows and columns of pinpricks,
the coordinate system becomes intimately connected to the
constitutive order of the ﬁnal work.
These discussions lead naturally to a particularly important
question: Is order simply within the mind? Or does it have an
objective reality of its own? In examining the symmetry of a
snowﬂake, starﬁsh, sunﬂower, and snail’s shell, it seems clear
that a particular, simple form of order is of the very essence of
the object’s form. But what of subtler forms of order, such as
vortices and emerging structures? (These are described in the
next chapter.) What meaning can be ascribed to statements like
“the elementary particles are ordered according to an SU(5)
symmetry” or “the order of the universe arose through the
‘breaking’ of a certain symmetry”? What is the underlying
meaning of Lévi-Strauss’s claim that primitive societies are
ordered on the basis of internal structures that are “not without
similarity to Boolean algebra,” or the current notion of biology
that the life of the organism is based on the order of information
within its DNA, or psychologist Carl Jung’s assertion that the
order of the psyche, and indeed that of the universe as a
whole, has its ground in certain archetypes? To what extent
are these orders and symmetries simply functions of the
science, order, and creativity
114

human mind and to what extent do they have an objective,
independent existence?
It may be helpful to recall Korzybski and emphasize that what-
ever we say that order is, it isn’t. It is more than we say, as well as
being capable of being unfolded in inﬁnitely many ways that are
diﬀerent. To attempt to attribute order solely to the object or to
the subject is too limited. It is both and neither, and yet some-
thing beyond all this: a dynamic process that involves subject,
object, and the cycle of perception-communication that unites
and relates them. This approach suggests that no constitutive
order is an absolute truth, for in reality its ability to lead to
coherent and consistent activity is always limited.
While this may seem overgeneral and not a little abstract, a
simple example will indicate its general trend. Some cities, such
as New York, have regular grids of streets and avenues. In such
cities the order of a grid ﬁts harmoniously into the activity
of walking through the city. But in a city of a more complex
order, like London, such an imagined grid does not ﬁt, and to
continue its use, as a visitor from the United States may attempt
to do, will lead only to confusion and frustration. In the case in
which the grid pattern provides a satisfactory order for the activ-
ity of wandering through the city then it could be said to corres-
pond to reality. But as this correspondence begins to fail, the
walker will be alerted to the need for new acts of perception-
communication and the creation of new orders. Clearly no one
order will cover the whole of human experience, and as contexts
change, orders must be constantly created and modiﬁed.
The example of the order of the grid was not chosen by
chance, for in its form, as the Cartesian grid or coordinate sys-
tem, it has dominated the basic order of physical reality for the
past three hundred years. In many cases the Cartesian grid
worked well, in the sense that it led to a coherent activity and
thus corresponds to reality fairly well. However, in this book, the
general appropriateness of the Cartesian description is called
what is order? 115

into question. Just as the New Yorker who travels to London
will require a subtler notion of order than the rectangular grid
of streets and avenues, so new orders are required to describe
those aspects of reality that have revealed themselves during
this century.
CHAOS, RANDOMNESS, AND INFINITE ORDER
Let us return to the notion of order as similar diﬀerences
between successive segments of a curve or other geometric ﬁg-
ure. In order to expand this notion it is ﬁrst necessary to intro-
duce the idea of an order of orders, which leads naturally to the
notion of a degree of order. In the previous examples, curves were
described in terms of single diﬀerences, which could be made as
complex as desired. Such curves are determined by two pieces of
information: the location of the starting point and the common
diﬀerence in successive line elements (this remains similar to
itself throughout the curve). These curves therefore have an
order of second degree.
Subtler curves, corresponding to orders of higher degree, can
be deﬁned when the diﬀerences themselves become diﬀerent,
but similar in a higher order. For example, consider the line
opposite. The segments a, b, c, d all form an order in which the
diﬀerences of successive segments are all similar. Similarly,
the segments e, f, g, h form an order of similar diﬀerences. But the
similarities that deﬁne these two successive orders are diﬀerent,
since the segments lie in diﬀerent directions. The segments
i, j, k, l also form an order. However, the diﬀerence between
a, b, c, d and e, f, g, h is similar to the diﬀerence between
e, f, g, h and i, j, k, l. In other words, there are two orders of
similar diﬀerences underlying the curve below. In this fashion
it becomes possible to generate higher levels of order which
relate lower levels of order and in this way describe an order
of orders.
science, order, and creativity
116

Since the above curve is deﬁned by three items of informa-
tion, the starting point of the ﬁrst segment, the diﬀerence
between adjoining segments, and the diﬀerence of the diﬀer-
ences, it has an order of third degree. In principle such orders can
be continued indeﬁnitely to orders of higher and higher degree,
and even to orders of inﬁnite degree.
As pointed out earlier, the order of movement of a particle in
Newtonian physics is of second degree. The motion of particles
is normally described by a second order diﬀerential equation,
derived from Newton’s second law of motion. This means that
the rate of change of velocity of a particle (that is, its acceler-
ation) is determined once the nature of the external force is
given. It is possible to analyze the movement into very small
steps that succeed each other in short intervals of time. The
what is order? 117

actual change of velocity between one very small step and the
next is therefore determined as being proportional to the force
operating within that step. Indeed this statement is equivalent to
Newton’s second law of motion. In other words, if the force is
deﬁned throughout the particle’s whole trajectory, then once
the particle’s initial position and velocity have been given, the
entire motion and trajectory are determined.
In the case of a constant force, such as gravity or other forces
commonly met with in nature, then the diﬀerences between
successive velocities are equal. Hence the trajectory has an order
of second degree. But what if the force happens to vary with
position, even with time as well? What will be the order of the
curve? The answer to this question opens up the whole discus-
sion of what is the true nature of randomness and chaos in
nature and it requires some careful working through.
In a way, even if the force varies with time and position, the
order is still one of second degree. How can this be? The answer
is that provided the actual law of force is known, then the trajec-
tory is still determined by two items of information: the initial
position and the initial velocity. For at each interval, knowing
the law of force, the actual diﬀerence between segments can be
computed. So that, knowing the initial values of position and
momentum, a unique trajectory can be deﬁned. However, in
another sense, the motion is of much higher degree, since the
curve appears to be far more complex than other second-degree
curves. Indeed, if the value of the force is not known for each
segment, then a large number of parameters will be required to
deﬁne the curve.
It appears that the motion of a body is capable of two diﬀerent
descriptions, of being both of high and of second degree at one
and the same time. To see this requires the examination of a
more concrete example. Think of a ball that rolls easily downhill.
If the hill is smooth, like a ﬂat plane inclined to the horizontal at
an angle, then if the ball is released from rest it will roll down the
science, order, and creativity
118

hill in a straight line. If it happens to be given a little push to
the side, then the ball will roll along a curved path. But in either
case the motion has an order of second degree. Now, suppose
that the hill is highly irregular, full of corrugations, bumps,
rocks, saddle points, and hollows. The trajectory of the ball
will depend very sensitively on just where it is released and
how it is set in motion. If it is given even the slightest push to the
side, on being released, it may eventually come up against an
obstacle which will deﬂect it a great deal. A typical trajectory of
the ball will undulate and turn, undergoing a complex series of
large and small deﬂections in a very complex way. Clearly the
similar diﬀerences of velocity within successive small steps of
the motion are no longer constant. The ball meets an ever-
changing force, because of the irregularities of the hill, so that
the diﬀerences in velocity are constantly changing. Since the
changes in these velocity diﬀerences are themselves subject
to change in a complex way, it would appear that the order of
the motion must be very high indeed, certainly higher than the
second degree.
On the other hand, if all the details of the slope of the hill are
known, with every bump and hollow being deﬁned, then only
two items of information are needed to deﬁne the trajectory.
Once the initial position and velocity of the ball are established,
then a unique trajectory down the hill is established. A slightly
diﬀerent value to initial position and velocity may produce
a very diﬀerent trajectory; nevertheless only these two items of
information are required. In this sense the trajectory is also of
second degree.
This apparent paradox can be easily resolved by proposing
that the notion of order is in fact context-dependent. Therefore,
in the context in which the details of the shape of the hill
are not taken into account, the motion is of very high degree.
But in the context in which all the ﬁne details of the slope are
known, the order is of second degree, because only two items of
what is order? 119

information are needed to deﬁne any trajectory. Clearly both
kinds of order are relevant and both correspond, each in its own
way, to the reality of the curve. This clearly indicates that order is
neither subjective nor objective, for when a new context is
revealed, then a diﬀerent notion of order will appear. This
example harks back to the three people walking through a forest.
In each case the order of the forest they perceived depended
upon the context of their overall activity.
In the limit in which the hill becomes excessively bumpy and
irregular, the motion of the ball will appear to be that of inﬁnite
degree, or in more familiar language, random. Hence the above
discussion suggests that there is a connection between random-
ness, chance, and chaos on the one hand, and order on the
other. This can be seen in the case of the generation of random
numbers. In order to carry out certain operations, computers
sometimes need to call upon strings of random numbers and
therefore they contain their own internal programs for generat-
ing them. A particularly simple program takes a given eight-
digit number and multiplies it by itself. The resulting number
will be very large but the program selects only the middle
eight digits, which are then multiplied by themselves, the center
digits taken, and so on. In this way a series of numbers are
generated which do not appear to have any particular order to
each other.
The program that generates these random numbers has an
order of quite low degree. The numbers themselves are gener-
ated according to a determinate rule and in the context of this
rule they could be said to be of low degree. However, in a con-
text that does not include the computer program, the numbers
appear to succeed each other in a very complex and unpredict-
able way. This sequence will be, as far as it is possible to test,
free from all correlations and without any signiﬁcant suborder.
In this sense, therefore, the order of the numbers is essentially
random. To put it another way, this set of numbers cannot be
science, order, and creativity
120

distinguished from any other set that is called random. Yet in the
context of the computer program, a simple order of low degree
determines the succession of numbers. Depending on the con-
text, therefore, the order of these numbers is of inﬁnite or of low
degree. Again, it appears, the notions of a random order and an
order of low degree depend upon the wider context in which
they are embedded.
Recently this whole topic of chance and randomness has
become the focus of a new mathematical development called
chaos theory. In this theory a number of diﬀerential equations of
the second degree have been shown to give rise to trajectories
that possess orders of inﬁnite degree. In addition to random
curves, these trajectories also include subtler curves which are
nonrandom but of very high degree. Such curves are extremely
sensitive to initial conditions, like the ball rolling down the
bumpy hill, and can wander across whole regions of space in
highly irregular ways. They correspond to the intuitive notion of
what constitutes chaotic motion.
An example of such motion is given by the ocean as it breaks
on rocks near the seashore. At ﬁrst sight this seems to be totally
irregular, yet closer inspection shows many suborders of swirls,
ﬂows, and vortices. The word chaotic provides a good description
for the order of such a movement. Within the context of order
that is visible to the eye of a close observer, this motion contains
a number of suborders and is far from random. Nevertheless,
to a more distant viewer these suborders become so ﬁne that
they are no longer visible to the eye and the order would be
called random.
More generally a random order can be deﬁned as a special
case of a chaotic order. It has the following characteristics:
1.
It is of inﬁnite degree.
2.
It has no signiﬁcant correlations or stretches of suborder of
low degree.
what is order? 121

3.
It has a fairly constant average behavior and tends to vary
within limited domains. This domain remains more or less
constant, or else it changes slowly.
This deﬁnition of random order accounts well for the distri-
bution of shots from a ﬁxed gun. For to begin with, there is no
order of ﬁnite degree that can predict where an individual shot
will exactly hit the target. Second, the successive shots are not
signiﬁcantly correlated. Third, the mean position, and mean
variation of this position, is fairly constant, since the shots will
scatter over an area that depends on the ﬁne details of the gun,
ammunition, wind velocity, and other factors.
The shots from the gun are called random. However, if the
context is extended, then each shot becomes more nearly pre-
dictable. For example, if the wind velocity is measured, or if
variations in the gun emplacement are observed, then more
information is available to determine this new context and indi-
vidual variations can be calculated. This emphasizes again that
the notion of randomness is inherently context-dependent. This
context can be either objective or subjective. For example, the
variation of the wind velocity may be measured to provide an
objective context, or subjectively an observer may deﬁne a new
set of conditions. In general, however, the context of order is a
combination of both.
Randomness is being treated not as something incommensur-
able with order but as a special case of a more general notion of
order, in this case of orders of inﬁnite degree. This may appear to
be a curious step to take, since chance and randomness are gen-
erally thought of as being equal to total disorder (the absence of
any order at all). This question of the meaning of chance, ran-
domness, and disorder has been a particular headache, not only
in science, but also in mathematics and philosophy. But here it is
proposed that whatever happens must take place in some order so
that the notion of a “total lack of order” has no real meaning.
science, order, and creativity
122

Indeed even what are called random events do happen to take
place in a deﬁnable and describable sequence and can be dis-
tinguished from other random events. In this elementary sense
they obviously have an order.
The notion of chance as a form of order can be illustrated
by considering the random number generator in a computer.
The actual sequence of these random numbers is generated
by a deterministic sequence of instructions. However, the dis-
advantage of this procedure is that each time the program is
activated it will generate an identical sequence of “random”
numbers. If such a sequence were to be used in a video game,
for example, then the chance movements of the rocketships
would be the same in every game. One way of overcoming
this obvious drawback is to begin the program each time at
a diﬀerent starting point, or to choose some starting conﬁgur-
ation more or less by chance. For example, the setting on the
electronic clock that monitors the computer’s internal time
could be used as a parameter in the program. Each particular
time on the top would determine a fresh input parameter
and, therefore, a new set of “random” numbers. As the clock
setting changes, one random sequence is therefore replaced
by another.
Each of these sequences of random numbers has a deﬁnite
order of succession that can be distinguished from that of any
other. In the context which includes the computer, its program,
and the clock setting, each sequence is of an order of low degree.
However, in the absence of such a context the sequences are of
inﬁnite degree and cannot be determined by any ﬁnite number
of diﬀerences. It is clear that randomness cannot be equated with
a complete absence of order, which in itself has no meaning.
Rather, randomness is a particular kind of order which satisﬁes
the three requirements that were given earlier.
what is order? 123

THE FULL RICHNESS OF THE SPECTRUM OF ORDER
Not all orders of inﬁnite degree are random. More generally
there is a broad spectrum of order, going from second to inﬁnite
degree which contains a very rich but little explored domain.
Within this domain are to be found whole ranges of subtle and
complex orders, some of inﬁnite degree, which contain embed-
ded within them many orders of lower degree. This hierarchical
nesting of these suborders forms a greater order of its own.
Considerations of this kind make it possible to look in a new
way at some traditional problems and questions concerning the
whole notion of order. Language, for example, may be con-
sidered as having an inﬁnite order, because its potential for
meaning is unlimited and cannot be determined by any ﬁnite set
of diﬀerences. On the other hand, it also contains many diﬀerent
suborders of lower degree—the various rules of syntax and
semantics for example. The higher orders also contain and con-
dition these suborders. Within the inﬁnite order of language of a
novel, for example, is contained the order of the sentence; the
orders of tense, action, and the subject of the paragraph; and the
orders of character and plot that link the chapters together. Each
of these suborders, complex as they are, is not independent, for
it is conditioned by the overall ﬂow of the novel. Tenses may
suddenly change, in a disjointed way, to suggest tension and
rising action. Narration may change from third to ﬁrst person to
accompany a more subjective passage. Certain rules of syntax
may be deliberately broken or distorted. Semantic meanings may
be played with and even the basic sentence structure may be, at
times, broken. All these various transformations within the sub-
orders combine together to further the order of the novel itself.
The inﬁnite order of language in the novel therefore contains
a richness which is not predictable and cannot be fully pinned
down within any ﬁnite series of diﬀerences and similarities.
Although locally certain forms of order may be recognized, it is
science, order, and creativity
124

possible that at some other point the structure may change.
Although language is of inﬁnite order, it is clearly not random;
rather it is intelligible and meaningful at a very high level.
An essential point in this discussion of the order of language is
the context dependence of its meaning. Only within the context
of a human being, with his or her capacities, knowledge, and
experience can an order of meaning in what is read or heard
emerge. If a particular person lacks this context, for example, if
he or she does not know anything of the semantics of a particu-
lar language, then, at least initially, the order will appear to be
nothing more than a rhythm of sounds. The overall order there-
fore belongs both to the language and to the person who uses it.
A similar dependence of meaning on a broad context is found
in music which is thought of as being “modern” or “avant-
garde.” Such music may even be judged as “meaningless” or
“oﬀensive” by a listener who does not have the adequate context
from which to perceive the whole order of the music and who
attempts to understand its meaning in terms of an earlier and
outmoded context. It is only as more and more of such music is
heard that the listener learns about its diﬀerent forms of struc-
ture, particular sonorities, and the composer’s intentions. In this
way a context is developed in which the music becomes mean-
ingful and satisfying. Only now is the full order of the music
unfolded by the listener.
The development of a context, in which a novel or a musical
composition assumes its full meaning, depends strongly on the
tacit infrastructure of ideas, knowledge, and skills that are avail-
able in a given community and subculture. Likewise, such an
infrastructure plays a signiﬁcant part in the case of scientiﬁc
research as well. Obviously it is of key importance that such an
infrastructure should not be maintained in a rigid and inﬂexible
way. This, of course, holds as much for language and music, and
indeed for every area of life, as it does for science. Without
proper free play of the mind, the context provided by the tacit
what is order? 125

infrastructure will be far too limited for the creative perception
of new orders.
The subtle orders of inﬁnite degree discussed above are nei-
ther random nor simple regular orders. This implies that ran-
domness can in fact be thought of as one aspect of a general
spectrum of order. At one end of this spectrum are the simple
orders of low degree. At the other are the random orders, and in
between is a whole world of complex and subtle order, includ-
ing language and music as well as other examples that could be
drawn from art, architecture, games of all kinds, social struc-
tures, and rituals. But this discussion need not be limited to
human activities alone. Clearly life itself is of such an inﬁnite and
subtle order. Such orders are also found in inanimate, physical
systems. Consider, for example, the motion of a ﬂuid, such as
water, which is described by a diﬀerential equation. The motion
is, in principle, determined by this equation, along with the
initial movements of each element in the ﬂuid and by the form
of the boundaries of the ﬂuid. Under the most simple condi-
tions, in which the boundaries of the ﬂuid, along with the
ﬂuid’s initial movements, are smooth and regular, the ﬂuid will
ﬂow in a correspondingly smooth and regular pattern which has
an order of low degree. This can be seen in a slowly ﬂowing
river, which contains no rocks or obstructions. However, if
irregular banks or obstructions are present, or if the water is
initially agitated, then the same diﬀerential equation will predict
a motion that may become chaotic. In an extreme limit, it might
even become random.
The ﬂowing river gives a good image of how a simple order
of low degree can gradually change to a chaotic order of high
degree and eventually to a random order. In this process, com-
plex whirlpools may develop and the water may break up into
foam, bubbles, and spray. The origin of this behavior lies in the
relationships between the elements of the ﬂowing water. Each
element would, if left to itself, follow an order of low degree. But
science, order, and creativity
126

in fact, each is aﬀected by all others, which are, for it, external
inﬂuences that change its motion. These bring about a rapidly
changing force on the element in question that leads to an order
of high degree. In this sense the description of the motion is not
unlike the example of the ball rolling down the hill. Here a small
region of the ﬂuid takes the place of the ball while neighbouring
regions play the part of the highly irregular slope and surface of
the hill.
In this fashion it is possible to follow the change in order
from the smooth ﬂow of the river, through ever-increasing tur-
bulence, to chaos and eventually into motion with no correl-
ations or suborders that are signiﬁcant within the context in
question. Randomness is thus understood as the result of the
action of the very small elements on each other, according to
deﬁnite orders or laws in an overall context that is set by the
boundaries and the initial agitation of the water. By treating
randomness as a limiting case of order, it is possible to bring
together the notions of strict determinism and chance (i.e., ran-
domness) as processes that are opposite ends of the general
spectrum of order.
In this connection, it is important to emphasize that although
the order of a random sequence is of inﬁnite degree, it does not
have the subtlety possessed by the inﬁnite orders of music, art,
and language. A typical random order is generally of a relatively
mechanical nature. It can as a rule be correlated to mechanical
causes that are to be found in a broader context. This was dis-
cussed in the case of the distribution of gunshots and of the
random numbers generated by a computer program. A similar
but more complex case is that of Brownian motion. This is the
motion in a random path that can be seen in very small particles,
such as pollen grains, immersed in water. By itself, the natural
motion of a pollen grain is an order of second degree. However,
because this particle is acted on by repeated molecular collisions,
the eﬀect is to disturb this second-degree straight line, and to
what is order? 127

transform it into an order of inﬁnite degree. This is the result of
the action of forces that are external to the particle which are
very complex and multiple in nature, namely, the impact of
countless molecules.
As in the case of a ball rolling down a hill, chaotic motions
arise from the action of determinate forces. This conclusion is
reinforced in the case of systems of many particles. Each particle
is subject to forces arising from the others that are, for it, contin-
gencies that vary in an almost inﬁnitely complex way. In a con-
text in which all these forces are taken into account in detail, it is
possible in principle to obtain a deterministic account of the
inner movement within the system. In such a case, the forces
acting on each particle are speciﬁed and so its trajectory can, in
this context, be regarded as an order of second degree. In a
context in which all these details are not taken into account, the
order will be of inﬁnite degree. It can also, under suitable condi-
tions, satisfy the three criteria for randomness that were given
earlier. This can in fact be demonstrated mathematically for cer-
tain simple but typical kinds of interactions between particles.
A random order can thus be explained within such a system
without the need to take into account any contingencies which
are external to the whole system. From this standpoint random-
ness or chance is necessary, and this necessity is not subject
to external contingencies but is an inner necessity. This leads
us to propose a further metaphor: Chance is necessity (of a
particular form).
The above treatment, while valid up to a certain point, is,
however, still an abstraction and an approximation. For no system can
correctly be regarded as totally isolated and self-determined.
Thus, most systems of appreciable complexity are capable of
developing instabilities, so that they may be profoundly aﬀected
even by weak external interactions. And even more important,
no speciﬁed statement of the laws of nature will be completely
and universally valid. For, as has been pointed out many times,
science, order, and creativity
128

whatever we say anything is, it isn’t—it is also something
more and something diﬀerent. A more comprehensive law
would leave room for this by allowing even the most basic
orders known to be at least potentially of very high or inﬁnite
degree. In extreme cases, these would approach chaotic or
random orders.
In the limit of large numbers, such random orders can
approximate simple causally determinate orders of low degree.
Insurance statistics are a simple example of this, and the deduc-
tion of the laws of thermodynamics from a statistical treatment
of the mechanics of molecules is another. It is in this way
possible to reverse the original metaphor and to say (at least in
certain contexts) that necessity is a particular form of chance.
This implies the interweaving of simple orders of necessity
and inﬁnite orders of randomness in a potentially inﬁnitely
complex structure of law.1 What is randomness in one context
may reveal itself as simple orders of necessity in another broader
context. And vice versa, what is a simple order of necessity in
one context may reveal itself as chance in another broader con-
text. But in a still broader context, both are to be seen as
extremes in the rich spectrum of orders of varying degrees that
lies between them. Thus, there is no need to fall into the assump-
tion of complete determinism (although this may in certain
fairly broad contexts be a correct abstraction and approximation).
Nor is there any need to assume that chance and indeterminism
rule absolutely (though these too will provide correct abstrac-
tions and approximations in their appropriate contexts). No
matter which system of law may be appropriate in the context
that is currently under investigation, there is always room for
something more and something diﬀerent—something that will
be more subtle and that has the ultimate potential for being a
manifestation of creativity.
what is order? 129

THE QUANTUM THEORY AND “HIDDEN” ORDERS
In the quantum theory (at least as this is usually interpreted), it
does not seem to be possible to maintain the notion of the
interweaving of the orders of chance and necessity as abstrac-
tions from inﬁnite order with unlimited creative potential. The
principal diﬃculty arises because a system of particles cannot
simply be treated by analysis into independently existent but
interacting constituent particles. Rather, the quantum theory
implies a certain quality of wholeness in the sense that a system
cannot be dealt with properly as a set of separate parts. Hence in
the usually accepted interpretation, there is no way to discuss
how randomness might arise. Randomness is therefore assumed
to be a fundamental but inexplicable and unanalyzable feature of
nature, and indeed ultimately of all existence. Such an approach
complements Bohr’s notion of the inherent ambiguity of con-
cepts at the quantum mechanical level, which was discussed in
Chapter 2. For within the range of this ambiguity, the quantum
theory implies that the experimental results will ﬂuctuate with
an irreducible kind of randomness. And thus the very nature
of quantum mechanical ambiguity will imply a corresponding
limit to the possibility of meaningful order.
This book, however, proposes the notion that everything that
happens takes place in some order (which, however, depends on
broader contexts for its meaning). Therefore, while there is
ambiguity within particular contexts, the notion of an ultimate
limit to the meaning of order that holds in all possible contexts
is not admitted. For example, in the previous chapter the causal
interpretation of the quantum theory was discussed in which a
further kind of order is proposed. This order, which underlies
the randomness implied in the probabilistic laws of the quantum
theory, can be understood as the causally determined motion of
the particle under the quantum potential. Because this latter
potential gives rise to a complex and highly irregular force, the
science, order, and creativity
130

motion will in general be fairly chaotic. In such complex sys-
tems, an essentially random order is to be expected which
explains the probabilistic assumptions of the theory.
However, as proposed at the end of the discussion on the
causal interpretation of the quantum theory in the previous
chapter, such a simple deterministic theory is an abstraction,
which is valid only up to a point. Beyond this point, one may
have to consider the possibility that even the basic laws of the
particles involve orders of inﬁnite degree, which reﬂect levels of
reality beyond those treated adequately by the current quantum
theory. In a certain approximation, this may be considered as a
random order. But as we have indeed already suggested earlier,
the motion may more generally be in an order of very large or
inﬁnite degree, which is in the rich domain between simple
orders of low degree and inﬁnite chaotic or random orders.
When understood in terms of the causal interpretation, the
quantum theory is therefore capable of ﬁtting into the general
notion of the interweaving of chance and necessity, considered
as lying at the extremes of an inﬁnitely rich order that is context-
dependent. In quantum theory this order is at present hidden in
the contexts available so far in physics, because science has not
been able to respond with the necessary subtlety of meaning. But
in contexts that may one day be discovered, new possibilities for
creativity within such orders may be revealed, and these context
orders will then cease to be “hidden.”
The notion that both simple regularity and randomness in a
given context may contain orders that are “hidden” in that con-
text, but which can be revealed in other contexts, is of quite
general signiﬁcance. For example, the order of a language or
music cannot be found by studying the regular orders of vibra-
tion in sound waves, or the almost random orders of motion of
the molecules in the air that carries them. Indeed, unless the
mind is free of rigid commitments to familiar notions of order,
such as the kind described above, it cannot provide a context
what is order? 131

within which basically new orders might be perceived. When
music and art explore new orders, these are not even appre-
hended by those who are rigidly habituated to the older and
more familiar ones. It is quite possible that in nature, there are
further new orders, going beyond those that can be compre-
hended in terms of the quantum theory, even with its causal
interpretation, as extended by the notion of orders of inﬁnite
degree in the motions of the particles.
Some examples of these will be explored in the next two
chapters, notably the generative order and implicate and super-
implicate orders which may be relevant for the understanding
of life, consciousness, and intelligent perception. Nevertheless,
there is little or no room for such orders within currently
accepted notions of physics, chemistry, biology, and other sci-
ences. So, in terms of present conceptions, whatever could be the
basis for such order in natural processes would probably be
apprehended as “no order at all”; that is, what is commonly
called disorder or randomness. It should therefore be clear how
important it is to be open to fundamentally new notions of
general order, if science is not to be blind to the very important
but complex and subtle orders that escape the coarse mesh of the
“net” of current ways of thinking.
ORDER FROM CHAOS AND CHAOS FROM
ORDER—THE MEANING OF ENTROPY
In addition to the transformation of order into randomness,
as discussed above, there is a corresponding transformation of
randomness into order, which has been much studied by Ilya
Prigogine. Prigogine considers systems that undergo random
molecular motions away from equilibrium. Within such sys-
tems, a gradient or ﬂow is established. For example, a diﬀerence
in temperature may result in a ﬂow of heat, or a diﬀerence in
chemical potential may result in a ﬂow of atomic or molecular
science, order, and creativity
132

ions. Such a ﬂow corresponds to an order of very low degree,
generally the second. Given the conditions of an order of inﬁnite
degree—the random molecular motions—on which is super-
imposed an order of very low degree, there appears a very com-
plex but regular array of patterns which undergo systematic
movements. In the case of a temperature gradient in a liquid, this
can take the form of what is known as the Bénard instability,
a spectacular phenomenon in which, in the words of Ilya
Prigogine and Isabelle Stengers, “Millions of molecules move
coherently, forming hexagonal convection cells of characteristic
size.” In the case of chemical gradients, a number of complex
oscillating reactions, such as the Belousov-Shabotinsky reaction,
are produced. Many other examples of the emergence of global
orders out of underlying chaos are discussed in Prigogine and
Stengers’s book.2
Such transformations between randomness and simple regu-
lar orders are intimately related to the entropy of a system.
The notion of entropy is a concept of particular importance,
not only in physics but in chemistry and the life sciences.
Entropy is popularly described as the measure of disorder in a
system, a notion that clearly carries subjective overtones. On the
other hand, the science of thermodynamics enables the quantity
known as entropy to be measured objectively in terms of the
amount of heat and work that is associated with a system. Left to
itself, a physical system tends to maximize its entropy, a process
which is therefore associated with decay, disintegrating, “run-
ning down,” and increasing disorder in the system. But accord-
ing to the metaphor that chaos is order, an increase in entropy
has to be understood in a diﬀerent way, that is, in terms of a kind
of change of order.
Of key importance in this connection is the idea of a range of
variation in random and chaotic motion. This idea was introduced
earlier in the case of the grouping of shots from a gun. A
more interesting example, however, arises from a river that is in
what is order? 133

chaotic movement. Imagine an irregular and changing whirl-
pool that ﬂuctuates in a very complex way, but always remains
within a certain region of the river. The whirlpool may perhaps
be roughly determined by neighboring rocks or features in the
riverbed. As the velocity of the river increases, this variation in
space may grow. But in addition, there will also be an inward
growth of subvortices of ever ﬁner nature. Therefore, a measure
of the overall range of variation of the whirlpool should include
both of these factors—the inward and the outward growth.
As a matter of fact, in classical mechanics, a natural measure of
this kind has already been worked out. Its technical name is phase
space and its measure is determined by multiplying the range of
variation of position and the range of variation in momentum.
The former, the range of variation in position, corresponds
roughly to the changes in location of the vortex as it spreads out
into the river and the surrounding water becomes more agitated.
The latter, the range of variation of momentum, corresponds to
the extent to which the whirlpool is excited internally so that it
breaks into ﬁner and ﬁner vortices.
Clearly the measure in phase space corresponds quite well to
an intuitive notion of the overall degree of order involved in the
ﬂow. For the more the general location of the vortex expands,
the higher is the degree of order; and the more the internal
vortices subdivide, the higher also is the degree of order.
What is particularly interesting about this measure in phase
space is that it corresponds to what is actually used in physics to
deﬁne entropy.
Entropy is a concept which is of vital importance in many
areas of science, yet which lacks a clear physical interpretation.
For example, there has been much debate on the extent to
which the concept of entropy is subjective or objective.
However, with the present approach to the notion of order,
chaos, and randomness, it is now possible to clarify what is
meant by entropy.
science, order, and creativity
134

Consider an isolated system of interacting particles. Each
particle acts as a contingency for all the others, in such a way that
the overall motion tends to be chaotic. When such a system is
left to itself, it moves toward what is called thermal equilibrium,
a condition in which there is no net ﬂow of heat or energy
within the system and regular suborders vanish almost entirely.
In this state of equilibrium, the entropy of the system is at its
maximum. This maximum entropy is therefore associated with
the inability of the system to carry out work, transfer useful
energy from one region to the other, or in any other way gener-
ate global orders of activity.
In statistical mechanics the numerical value of this entropy
is calculated from the range of random motion in phase
space. (To be more exact, it is the logarithm of this measure.)
This means that when energy is added to the system, the range
of random motion will grow and the corresponding entropy
will increase.
A change in entropy is therefore a measure of the change in
the range of ﬂuctuations that occur within the random order.
Entropy now has a clear meaning that is independent of subject-
ive knowledge or judgment about the details of the ﬂuctuation.
This approach to entropy does not require any discussion of
disorder, which in any case cannot be deﬁned in a clear way.
Treating entropy in this fashion avoids many of the diﬃculties
normally associated with this topic, such as the subjective notion
of what could be meant by disorder. After all, since entropy is an
objective property of a system which can actually be observed
with the aid of thermodynamic processes, why then should sub-
jective and ultimately undeﬁnable feelings about disorder aﬀect
the objective behavior of such a system?
To sum up, the question of randomness is an aspect of
the general context dependence of order. In a microscopic
context that takes the details of the forces between the particles
into account, a particular thermodynamic system may have a
what is order? 135

well-deﬁned order of its inner movements, of quite low degree.
Nevertheless, in a macroscopic context that does not take such
details into account, the same system will have an order of
inﬁnite degree in its random ﬂuctuations. These determine its
entropy and therefore its general thermodynamic properties.
Both orders are equally objective and equally subjective.
In this connection, it would be clear that this discussion
embraces many of Prigogine’s notions. Prigogine considers his
basic idea to be the emergence of order out of chaos. Here, this is
described as the emergence of orders of low degree out of a
chaotic order of inﬁnite degree. Indeed what Prigogine calls
“chaos” is not actually complete chaos, but rather, it is an initial
random order on which is superposed yet another initial order
of low degree. Out of this complex interweaving of the original
inﬁnite chaotic order with the order of low degree emerges yet
another order of low degree. Thus, the whole process is basically
a transformation between one overall order and another (in
which the net entropy is increased, in spite of the emergence of
the new order of low degree).
More generally in physical systems there is a whole spectrum,
with orders of low degree at one end and chaos and randomness
at the other. In between are further kinds of order of great
subtlety that are neither of low degree nor chaotic.
Science, however, has not yet explored these intermediate
orders to any signiﬁcant extent. They may turn out to be
quite important in many areas and indeed life itself may depend
on them.
Until now, science generally has regarded orders of low
degree and random orders as being “incommensurable” or
mutually irrelevant. This leads to breaks in communication and
continuity between those aspects of research which use these
orders in diﬀerent ways. There is already, however, a kind of
connection in which causal orders are treated as emerging from
random orders in the limit of large numbers. Insurance statistics
science, order, and creativity
136

are a simple example of this, and the deduction of laws of
thermodynamics from a statistical treatment of the laws of the
mechanics of molecules is another. More recently, with the
emergence of chaos theory, it has become clear that it is possible
to go in the other direction, and treat statistical laws as emerging
from causal laws. However, it is being proposed in this book to
start from the whole spectrum of order, and to consider causal
laws and statistical laws as being limiting cases. In this way there
is no break in communication, and ﬁelds which concern them-
selves with diﬀerent parts of this spectrum will now have a
common conceptual basis so that creative communication is in
principle possible between them.
To return to the question of social order discussed at the
beginning of this chapter: It is now possible to explore the ques-
tion of whether the eternal order and the secular order can
be similarly regarded as two extremes of a spectrum, between
which lies a rich ﬁeld in which new orders of society could be
creatively perceived. More generally, an approach carried out in
this spirit could perhaps embrace diﬀerent social orders that at
present cannot meet, and might help to avoid the irreconcilable
conﬂicts that are now arising between such orders.
STRUCTURE
The concept of order is, by itself, of very general interest. But
one of its most fundamental and deepest meanings is that it lies
at the root of structure, which is a key issue, not only in science,
but in life as a whole. Structure is often treated as being static and
more or less complete in itself. But a much deeper question is
that of how this structure originates and grows, how it is sus-
tained, and how it ﬁnally dissolves. Structure is basically dynamic,
and should perhaps better be called structuring, while relatively
stable products of this process are structures. But even these latter
structures should not be considered as basically static, for they
what is order? 137

are the results of processes which sustain them and keep them,
for a time, more or less within certain limits.
As with order, so with structure there can be no complete
deﬁnition. Rather, to put it again: Whatever we say structure is, it
isn’t. There is always something more than what we say and
something diﬀerent. At any given stage, it is possible to abstract a
certain structure as relevant and appropriate. But later, as the
context is made broader, the limits of validity of this abstraction
are seen and new notions developed. In the time of the ancient
Greeks, matter was commonly abstracted as having a continuous
structure, but later there arose the abstraction of a discrete par-
ticle structure. In the nineteenth century this, too, was seen to be
limited, and deeper continuous ﬁeld structures were proposed.
With the advent of quantum mechanics arose a further abstrac-
tion of structure which went beyond the dichotomy of the con-
tinuous and the discrete. In the future, as the context is extended
even further, still newer notions of structure may arise in a
similar way.
Structure itself is based on order, but involves much more.
According to the dictionary, structure is the order, arrangement,
connection, and organization of simpler elements. But it must
be emphasized that these “elements” are not necessarily separate
physical entities. More generally, they are terms introduced in
thought for the sake of conceptual analysis, as with the elements
of ﬂuid in the river that were discussed in an earlier example.
For the sake of illustration, structure will ﬁrst be developed in
terms of simpliﬁed elements that have a separate existence. But it
must always be remembered that, at a deeper level, attention
must be given to the whole, which, in turn, acts to guide
thought as it abstracts elements which do not in fact have a
separate existence. Consider the example of the novel discussed
in the previous section. While its use of language illustrates a
complex and subtle inﬁnite order, it is more comprehensively
described as being a structure, but one of inﬁnite complexity.
science, order, and creativity
138

The various suborders within the novel, of tense, mood, char-
acter, location, and so on, are all arranged, connected, and
organized together. Yet each suborder, or element, is clearly
inseparable from the greater whole. In a similar way there could
be said to be structure in music or in a painting.
This method of conceptual analysis of structure makes it pos-
sible to unfold the whole notion, to articulate it, and to connect
it to the notion of higher order. To begin, it is possible to go
from a simple linear order to an arrangement of such orders. This
involves putting similar orders together. The system of parallel
lines below is clearly such an arrangement. Each line is charac-
terized by a set of similar diﬀerences and its relationship to
other lines gives a further set of diﬀerences that are similar.
The arrangement of lines is, therefore, an order of orders. Such
a notion could be developed further to give a hierarchy of
orders, which clearly would form an important component
of structure.
But the above arrangement of parallel lines could by no means
be called a structure. What is needed is some connection of the
elements. For example, bricks in a wall are arranged in an order
and in an order of orders, but they are also in contact so that they
make a wall. In turn, walls in contact make a room and rooms in
contact make a house. In many such examples, contact is of a
local nature in which neighboring elements touch. However,
structures can also be created through nonlocal contact in which
elements may be physically separate but held together by, for
what is order? 139

example, electrical or magnetic ﬁelds. It is therefore possible
to arrive at the notion of a static structure which involves a
hierarchy of orders, together with some form of local or
nonlocal contact.
But to return to the more basic dynamical view of structure:
Even in the case of something as static as a house, it is necessary
to ask how it comes to be built, how it is maintained, and how it
eventually falls and is destroyed. It is clear then that any such
structure is subject to a process of organization and disorganization.
This includes, in the ﬁrst instance, the overall principles (as sup-
plied, for example, by an architect) which determine how the
suborders are to be organized to ﬁt together, with appropriate
arrangements and connections. To these must be added the pro-
cesses that are involved in actually bringing about, sustaining,
and breaking down such an organization of structure.
The house is not a particularly graphic illustration of this key
dynamical aspect of structure. A better example is to be found by
considering life and intelligence. Thus, in a tree, a structure is
clearly visible. For not only are there the many interrelated
orders and arrangements of trunk, branches, twigs, and leaves,
which we have discussed earlier, but these are also connected
onto a single whole. This whole is organized through the pro-
cesses of metabolism, in which the tree is formed and sustained,
and eventually dies. According to current theories, the DNA
molecules carry what is equivalent both to the architect’s plans
and to instructions needed for growth, maintenance, and repair.
With living animals, this process of organization is much more
complex and it depends on several systems, including a brain
and a nervous system. Finally, with intelligent beings, new levels
of organization appear, involving many very subtle kinds of
structures, such as language, music, thought, and so on, which
all contain orders, arrangement, and connections of elements
organized in an extremely dynamic way.
It must be emphasized again that the stability of structure
science, order, and creativity
140

is not static but arises through a form of mobility in which
any forces which tend to break the structure down are compen-
sated by processes taking place within the structure itself. It is
evident that this notion of stability of structure through mobility
is of crucial importance not only for an understanding of
inanimate matter but also for living beings, consciousness,
and society.
RATIO OR REASON
The understanding of structure and its expression in thought
and language takes place primarily through reason. The word
reason is based on the Latin ratio. A little consideration shows
that a kind of ratio is indeed a key feature of reason. The
general form of ratio may be written as A:B as D:C, with the
numerical ratio A/B = D/C being a special form of this. Such
a ratio means that A is related to B as C is related to D.
However, two things can be related only if they are diﬀerent.
But in Latin, the root meaning of diﬀerence is “carrying apart.”
To “relate” comes from the past participle of “to refer,” which
means to “carry back.” In this process two things are, at least
in the mind, carried apart to diﬀerence and then carried back
to similarity and relationship.
The order of the line that was introduced earlier can therefore
be described by the ratio A:B as B:C as C:D, and so on. Further,
since any ratio can be represented by the symbol R, it is possible
to relate ratios in a similar way, R1:R2 as R2:R3 and so on.
Hence from a simple ratio, a relationship or relationships can
be deﬁned.
The full development of such a hierarchy of ratios or relation-
ships, which occurs in all areas in which the mind is used, is
essentially the power of rational thought or reason. Irrationality
can then be taken as the failure of such ratios to cohere. Rational-
ity is thus an order, and indeed is the essential order of thought.
what is order? 141

Ordinarily a test for rationality is made with the aid of logic
(which is generally taken to be a set of formal rules that thought
must satisfy if it is to be judged rational). The common attitude
to such formal logic is to regard it as a static set of norms, which
stands entirely on its own. Moreover, formal logic is in fact only
a limiting aspect of a much broader, overall movement of reason.
In harmony with the general approach to science in earlier chap-
ters, it can be said that in its origin, the broader movement of
reason is basically a perceptive act and that formal logic is a rela-
tively ﬁxed abstraction from this movement. The German lan-
guage illustrates this better than English does, because its word
for reason is vernuntt, based on the verb vernehnen, which means to
perceive, with the connotation of perceiving through the mind.
This can be rendered into English as “intuitive reason” or “per-
ceptive reason.” The corresponding word which, in some sense,
covers formal logic would be verstand, meaning in this context not
“to understand,” in the sense of comprehension, but rather “to
stand ﬁrm.”
Clearly it is necessary that thought should have the possibility
of standing ﬁrm, if it is to function properly. But this “ﬁrm
standing” must ﬁnd its appropriate place in the broader context
of the ﬂowing movement of intuitive reason. It is only in this
broader context that thought can become the vehicle of creative
perception. Indeed, when there is free play of the mind, thought
has its ultimate origin in such perception. It then unfolds in
a natural way, through proposition, composition, supposition,
and disposition. It is transformed into something fairly well
deﬁned and, as it were, crystallized. Such crystallization of
reason, which is ruled by formal logic, is indeed absolutely
indispensable if the proposals in which thought begins are to be
tested properly for their rationality and for their coherence with
the actual fact. Nevertheless, formal logic has to be ready to
dissolve back into ﬂowing reason, whenever a sustained contra-
diction or opposition develops in the application of its relatively
science, order, and creativity
142

ﬁxed forms. In such a case the mind will be able to respond with
creative intelligence, to perceive new orders and new categories
that generally lie “between” the static and unrelated extremes
presented by pure logic (for example, simple orders of low
degree and chaotic orders of inﬁnite degree).
The above is a description of the proper order of rational
thought. If, however, the mind is rigidly attached to ﬁxed cat-
egories and orders, then, as has already been seen through many
examples, the free play needed for such a rational order becomes
impossible. Instead the mind is caught up in false play, from
which a creative response may be impossible.
However, it should be added that, as suggested in Chapter 1,
the false play can take many subtle forms that are diﬃcult to
detect. One form is to see truth as absolutely identiﬁed with
formal logic. But another is, similarly, to identify truth with
intuition and to fail to be open to the need for rigorous tests of
this intuition, under appropriate circumstances, with the aid of
formal logic. Moreover, rigidly ﬁxed opinions, which are actu-
ally based on the misuse of formal logic, often present them-
selves in a somewhat vague and undeﬁned guise that pretends to
be genuine intuitive perception. This is especially common in
the case of prejudices, that is, pre-judgments. They are evidently
of a basically intellectual character but are nevertheless generally
experienced in a deceptive way as intuitive perceptions and feel-
ings. It follows then that the proper function of reason requires a
creative intelligence that is free of every kind of excessive ﬁxing
of thought, in whatever form this may appear.
Mathematics is an especially signiﬁcant example of the inter-
weaving of intuitive reason and formal logic in the kind of
process that has been described above. In this connection, it
is interesting to note that the mathematician von Neumann
deﬁned mathematics as the relationship of relationships. Evi-
dently this implies an indeﬁnitely extended structure of thought,
which is in some ways similar to a hierarchy. This structure is
what is order? 143

formed in a process in which relationships of one kind are
interwoven with relationships of other kinds, while this whole is
organized by relationships of yet diﬀerent kinds, and so on with-
out limit. The really creative act of a mathematician is to perceive
the germ of this vast structure of relationships, and to unfold it
into an ever more developed structure of thought that is con-
stantly tested for coherence against the rules of formal logic.
It is clear from the above discussion that ratio or reason is the
essence of mathematical structure. But such ratio can be dis-
covered in all areas of life. Thus, a person can ﬁnd a complex
structure of ratio in his or her experience of nature: for example,
in the ﬂowering movement of perception of the ever-changing
orders to be observed in the wood, as was discussed earlier.
Similarly, there are such structures of ratio in a house, a crystal,
the panorama observed from a high mountain, a human body, a
painting, the use of language, and society itself. Such ratio is
grasped intuitively as well as through the intellect. Its ﬁeld is
not exhausted through sense perception alone, for it also applies
to the inward perception of feelings. Thus, a person may say
of an emotion that it is, or is not, in proportion to the situation
that generates it. Indeed whatever we apprehend is apprehended
through some form of ratio. For example, to recognize anything
whatsoever is to see that as various ratios are related in the
object, so are they related to our mental concept of it. This
is of course just what is also done in mathematics and in
its applications.
Mathematics, however, has the advantage of being able to dis-
cuss pure ratio (for example, ratios of ratio) without requiring a
speciﬁed substratum lying in some object or sensory experience.
In some areas this ratio may be so clearly deﬁned that it permits
an unfoldment of long chains of inference, whereas in other
areas these chains are relatively short. But, as indicated in the
Introduction, this is done at the expense of going to high levels
of abstraction.
science, order, and creativity
144

A key form of ratio is analogy, which is, according to the
dictionary, a kind of proportion. As thought develops from the
initial ﬂash of creative perception, the ratio in it unfolds and
articulates and so develops into a structure, in the way that was
earlier described. This kind of structure is essentially an analogy
to whatever the thought is about.
If the analogy is good, the “proportions” in the ratios of the
thought are similar to those within the object of thought;
otherwise it is a poor analogy. This leads to the suggestion that
thought moves naturally toward the improvement of analogy.
The notion proposed above brings us back once again to
Korzybski’s statement that whatever we say anything is, it isn’t.
For after all, no analogy is equivalent to the object itself. Every
analogy is limited. And if what we say is an analogy, then the
object cannot be what we say. However, the essential proportions
or ratios in both may be similar, but there is always room for
newer and better analogies.
To test the success of such analogies involves the cycle of
activity that was discussed in earlier chapters. Each thought, with
its content of analogy, gives rise to a disposition to act, which
contains within it a set of proportions or ratios similar to those
in the thought. The action is therefore imbued with a similar
ratio or reason. The fact that objects so generally respond in
harmony to such action suggests that everything must likewise
contain something at least basically similar to ratio, and that this
is what makes it possible for the world to be intelligible to
human beings. Thus, intelligence, which includes creative per-
ception of ratio, and intelligibility are not two separate and
unrelated qualities, but rather are inseparable aspects of a single
overall reality.
The fact that there is such an intimate relationship between
human intelligence and the intelligibility of the universe can be
understood in terms of a notion, commonly held during the
Middle Ages, that each person is a microcosm, and thus stands as
what is order? 145

an analogy to the whole cosmos. This would explain how such a
person could, through intelligent perception of ratio, produce
analogies to whatever exists in the universe and even to the
universe itself. For if this person already is an analogy to all this,
then looking outward and looking inward will be two sides of
one cycle of activity in which any aspect of the totality can in
principle be revealed.
SUMMARY
The basic theme of this chapter is the proposal that order per-
vades all aspects of life and that it may be comprehended as
similar diﬀerences and diﬀerent similarities. An essential distinc-
tion was introduced between constitutive order and descriptive
order, while at the same time it was noted that any actual order
lies in a kind of spectrum between these limits. Order is there-
fore neither solely in the subject nor solely in the object, but
instead in the cycle of activity that includes both.
Orders of varying degrees were then explored, leading to
those of inﬁnite degree and including all sorts of very subtle
orders, such as those in language and in music. Order in general
was seen to lie in a spectrum between simple orders of low
degree and chaotic orders of inﬁnite degree of which ran-
domness is a limiting case. Indeed there is no place in all this
for the concept of disorder but only for random orders of
inﬁnite degree that are free from signiﬁcant correlations and
suborders of low degree. In this fashion, it is possible to dis-
cuss not only the emergence of orders of low degree out of
chaos, as treated by Prigogine, but also the inverse process of
the transformation of orders of low degree into chaos. This
enables entropy to be considered as a particular feature of the
general order of movement.
Structure was treated as an inherently dynamic notion,
which includes not only the order of whatever elements are
science, order, and creativity
146

abstracted in thought, but also an arrangement, connection, and
organization of these elements. Each structure was considered
to be stabilized as the result of the mobility of whatever are
regarded as its elements. The chapter concluded with a
discussion of how structure is comprehended through a hier-
archy of ratio, which may be apprehended in a perceptive act of
intuitive reason.
what is order? 147

4
THE GENERATIVE ORDER AND
THE IMPLICATE ORDER
Up to now, order has been considered as arising, basically,
through a sequence of successions. This is indeed a very com-
mon form of order and perhaps the one that is most familiar. In
this chapter, however, another kind of order, called the generative
order, is introduced. This order is primarily concerned not with
the outward side of development, and evolution in a sequence of
successions, but with a deeper and more inward order out of
which the manifest form of things can emerge creatively. Indeed
this order is fundamentally relevant both in nature and in con-
sciousness. In the following chapters its relevance to society will
also be discussed.
The generative order will be explored with the help of a
number of examples drawn from mathematics, physics, and the
ﬁelds of art and literature. This will lead, in turn, to the implicate
order, which is a particular kind of generative order that has been
most fully worked out in physics. However, the implicate order
will be found to have a broader signiﬁcance, not only in physics

but also in biology, consciousness, and the overall order of
society and each human being.
Although speciﬁc proposals for how the generative order may
be used will be discussed, it is not the main purpose, in intro-
ducing this new notion of order, simply to pursue its application
in detail. Rather, it is to use these ideas in order to go more
deeply into the meaning of creativity. In succeeding chapters,
these notions will provide a base from which to move yet
further in the general direction of creativity.
FRACTAL ORDER
In the previous chapter, order, as discussed in terms of similar
diﬀerences and diﬀerent similarities, was considered largely as a
means of understanding curves, structures, and processes that
are already present in nature or in the mind. However, it is
equally possible to use such a notion of order, based on similar-
ities and diﬀerences, to generate shapes, ﬁgures, forms, and pro-
cesses. For example, starting from a single segment it is possible
to generate a line by means of a process of repetition, in which
each element is similar (equal to) the next. A polygon can be
produced through a similarity of angle and length. In a related
fashion all second-degree curves can be generated from an initial
diﬀerence which is repeated in a way that is similar to itself.
Higher-degree curves require the repetition of more diﬀerences,
but they can all be constructed in the same fashion.
This idea could be pursued in ever greater reﬁnement. How-
ever, for the purposes of this section, a more developed form of
order will be used: the mathematical theory of fractals, which
was recently invented by B. B. Mandelbrot,1 which is closely
related to the theory of chaos, as discussed in the previous chap-
ter. Fractals involve an order of similar diﬀerences which include
changes of scale as well as other possible changes. A simple
example is to start with a base ﬁgure, the triangle:
the generative order and the implicate order 149

and then consider a generator, which is really a small triangle
that can be applied to each side of the basic ﬁgure.
In this way a six-pointed star is produced:
In the following step, the generator is reduced in scale and
applied again to each line segment, giving rise to the ﬁgure:
and then to
Clearly this process can continue indeﬁnitely and results in a
ﬁgure with extremely interesting properties. The reader may
turn to Mandelbrot’s book for details but, for the moment,
accept that the circumference of this ﬁgure has grown to
science, order, and creativity
150

be inﬁnite and has no slope.2 These are particularly curious
properties to have been generated in such a straightforward
fashion.
By choosing diﬀerent base ﬁgures and generators, but each
time applying the generator on a smaller and smaller scale,
Mandelbrot is able to produce a great variety of shapes and
ﬁgures that have very interesting mathematical properties. Some
of these have the appearance of islands, mountains, clouds,
dust, trees, river deltas, and the noise generated in an elec-
tronic circuit. All are ﬁlled with inﬁnitesimal detail and are
evocative of the types of complexity found in natural forms. In
addition, they reﬂect the way in which the details of a form
appear to be similar over a wide range of scales of size: Often
when we “zoom in” on some object in nature it continues to
exhibit similarities of form at greater and greater magniﬁca-
tion. Other fractals show ever new detail at smaller and
smaller scales.
Mandelbrot points out that the geometry of fractals lies much
closer to the forms of nature than do the circles, triangles, and
rectangles of Greek geometry. It could be said that traditional
geometry, out of which much of mathematics and the tools of
physics have evolved, is, in fact, a highly artiﬁcial way of describ-
ing the world. Something closer to the fractal order, on the other
hand, should be an appropriate starting point for discussing
the generative order and the implicate order 151

nature in a more general way, and for providing better formal
descriptions of the processes of physics and biology.
The complex ﬁgure generated from the triangle is a little like
a very irregular island which, of course, possesses a coast
line that is ultimately inﬁnite in length, when analyzed on an
indeﬁnitely ﬁne scale. Other fractals begin as simple lines which
expand in highly subtle ways until they appear to cover the
entire page. An interesting question is therefore generated by
these fractal ﬁgures: What is their dimension? Are they lines,
of one dimension, or planes, of two dimensions? The answer is
that a fractal is of fractional dimension, lying somewhere between
a line and a plane. (Other fractals may have a dimension that
lies between that of a point [zero] and a line [one].) Indeed
Mandelbrot argues that the fractal dimension of an object is a
signiﬁcant characteristic and, for example, a river delta or a
country’s coastline can be characterized by its particular
fractal dimension.
But how can a geometrical ﬁgure, drawn on a piece of paper,
have a fractional dimension? Consider a plane, this page for
example. If a dot A is made on this plane, then any neighboring
point B, C, D, or E, no matter where it is printed on the page, will
also be in the plane.
This is not, however, true of a simple line XY. Although a
point A, for example, is on the line, and the neighboring
points B and C are on the line, it is always possible to ﬁnd
neighboring points D, E, and F that are not on this line. Hence
one property of a line, which has one dimension, is that
points in its immediate neighborhood can be found that do not
lie on it.
science, order, and creativity
152

Now consider a fractal line with its unlimited complexity. As
the fractal generator is successively applied, more and more
points that previously lay outside this line will be included.
Clearly, in some sense, it has more than one dimension. In the
limit, in which the fractal line ﬁlls the plane so that no point
remains in the plane that does not also lie on the fractal line, it
will have become two-dimensional. So, in general, the dimen-
sions of a fractal line lie somewhere between one and two.3 And
in three dimensions, general fractals can be constructed whose
fractional dimension lies between zero and three.
While the fractal ﬁgures illustrated so far appear quite complex,
they could hardly be called disordered, for they are composed of
a quite simple order involving a single similar diﬀerence that is
repeated at constantly decreasing scale. Moreover, ﬁgures of even
greater complexity can be created using more than one generator
and applying the alternative generators according to some ﬁxed
rule. One such rule of application, selected by Mandelbrot, is to
use random numbers generated in a computer. In this way,
through the introduction of random successive diﬀerences, he is
able to generate the curves for Brownian motion as well as totally
irregular coastlines.
It should be possible to generalize Mandelbrot’s ideas still
further by introducing additional categories of diﬀerences other
the generative order and the implicate order 153

than simple scaling, for example, diﬀerences in direction, shape,
and so on, to arrive at yet more subtle fractal ﬁgures. Indeed, the
principles involved in producing fractals may be much closer to
those employed by nature than those associated with the ﬁgures
and structures of traditional geometry. However, since so much
attention has been given in the past to sequential order, it may
be some time before a large number of concrete applications
of Mandelbrot’s ideas are discovered. Rather, the overall notion
of generative order should be regarded as a very fruitful area for
investigation, which may reﬂect not only on science but on
many aspects of life.
GENERATIVE ORDER
Mandelbrot’s fractals are only one example of a generative order
(in the fractal case, a generation which proceeds by repeated
applications of a similar shape but on a decreasing scale). Many
other generative orders could be constructed in mathematics.
However, the whole idea of generative order is not restricted
simply to mathematics but is of potential relevance to all areas
of experience.
Generative order can, for example, be seen in the work of a
painter. Indeed, in a certain restricted sense the generation of
form using Mandelbrot’s fractals can be compared with the vari-
ous stages of painting. At least until this century an artist did not
generally begin to work with detail but, in the case of a portrait
for example, attempted to capture the overall form and gesture of
the sitter with an initial sketch on the canvas. Such a painter may
have even employed the trick of squinting at the sitter in order to
cut down detail and emphasize tone and shadow. Gradually this
initial sketch was built up and made more detailed, solidity being
indicated by modeling, as the ﬁrst layer of paint was added. As
the painting progressed, detail was created in a progressive way,
each time by building on the whole. Just as the complex forms of
science, order, and creativity
154

nature appear to be generated through successive additions of
smaller and smaller detail, so at one level, a painting could be
thought of as growing in a similar fashion.
But of course the generative order of a work of art is far more
complex than the preceding description might suggest. For
many orders of growth are involved which, in a great painting,
are united within a single more comprehensive generative order.
The painter may begin with a general idea, a feeling that con-
tains, in a tacit or enfolded way, the whole essence of the ﬁnal
work. The next stage may be to observe the general scene and
make sketches that rely upon the sense of visual perception. But
in addition to the outward perception, there is also an inner
perception in operation which is inseparable from the painter’s
whole life, training, knowledge, and response to the history of
painting. The outward and inward perceptions are, in turn,
inseparable from an emotional and intellectual relationship to
the theme and even to its literary and social values. Yet this vision
is by no means rigid and ﬁxed, for as the painter begins to work
on the canvas, a new interaction takes place. He or she is con-
stantly faced with both physical limitations and new potentials,
in the very muscular activity of painting and in fresh perceptions
of the growing painting beneath the brush.
In all this activity, what is crucial is that in some sense the
artist is always working from the generative source of the idea
and allowing the work to unfold into ever more deﬁnite forms.
In this regard his or her thought is similar to that which is
proper to science. It proceeds from an origin in free play which
then unfolds into ever more crystallized forms. In science as in
art it is necessary that what is done with more deﬁnite forms
should continue at each stage to be open to the kind of free play
that is essential to creativity. This holds even if, as with certain
artists, such as Matisse, the ultimate form may be a simpliﬁcation
and generalization of what the artist started with, rather than an
articulation of greater detail. Matisse’s initial creative perception
the generative order and the implicate order 155

was the constant guide to his activity. This can be seen in the
large number of sketches and studies that he made for each of
his ﬁnal paintings, prints, and drawings. His generative idea was
clearly the motivation for a subtle and meaningful simpliﬁcation
of lines and forms.4
While the essence of the generative order of a painting ultim-
ately escapes deﬁnition, it is clear that this order is very diﬀerent
from that of a machine, in which the whole is built out of the
parts (i.e., in which the whole emerges through accumulation of
detail). By contrast, one of the most important activities during
the creation of a work of art is its unfolding, within a particular
medium from the original perception. Something similar can be
seen in music. Each composition is played in sequential, tem-
poral order, yet its generation can never take place completely
within such a sequential way. For that matter the unfolding of
the meaning of the music in the mind of a perceptive listener is
never totally sequential. This is especially clear in the work of
Mozart, who is said to have seen a whole composition in a ﬂash
and then to have unfolded it by playing it or rapidly writing it
down. Beethoven, by contrast, does not appear to have conceived
his works directly as a whole in precisely this fashion, for his
notebooks contain themes and sketches worked over long
periods of time. Nevertheless, the basic activity in Beethoven’s
creative work is clearly still a constant unfoldment from a gen-
eral notion of order.
Bach, for his part, appears to have comprehended fairly dir-
ectly and as a whole the potential contained within a theme a
few bars long, as the following story, told by his son Wilhelm
Friedermann Bach, indicates:
After he had gone on for some time, he asked the King to
give him a subject for a Fugue, in order to execute it immedi-
ately without any preparation. The King admired the learned
manner in which his subject was thus executed extempore;
science, order, and creativity
156

and, probably to see how far such art could be carried,
expressed a wish to hear a Fugue in six Obligato Parts. But as it
is not every subject that is ﬁt for such full harmony, Bach chose
one himself, and immediately executed it to the astonishment
of all present in the same magniﬁcent and learned manner as
he had done that of the King.5
But on returning to Leipzig, Bach was to accept the King’s
challenge and compose a six-part fugue, nine canons, and a trio
sonata on the Royal Theme which he submitted, along with his
original fugue, as a Musical Oﬀering. Clearly, in some implicit
way the potential of Bach’s magniﬁcent composition was per-
ceived by him as enfolded within the King’s theme.
There is evidence that in speech the whole meaning is simi-
larly generated quite quickly, along with the language needed to
express it, which comes out as a sequence of words. What is
said at any given moment, for example, has never been said in
exactly the same way before. In this sense the generative order of
language is creative and bears a relationship to artistic and
musical creation.
A major feature of a generative order is that through it a pro-
cess of creation may begin from some broad encompassing over-
all perception. There is a clue from our language, for the word
generate has the same root as general and genus. This supports the
earlier claim that, in the arts, creative generation is basically from
some general perception, which is then unfolded into particular
forms. These may move toward greater and greater detail or, as is
the case with Matisse, toward an expression of the general.
FOURIER ANALYSIS
In moving between two extremes, such as art and mathematics,
the aim has been to suggest the universal and pervasive character
of generative order. For the moment, however, the mathematical
the generative order and the implicate order 157

side will be stressed, by considering Fourier analysis. For by
means of Fourier analysis, a particular arbitrary form can be built
out of sets of periodic waves, each of which is of a global order.
Consider such a single wave:
This wave is deﬁned by an order which is similar to itself from
period to period. It represents, for example, a wave on a string
stretched out in space, or a wave evolving in time. Clearly its
order is global in that it repeats itself in a similar way indeﬁnitely.
Now add to the ﬁrst wave a second of double the frequency:
Adding the two together produces:
The diagrams show how more and more waves can be added
together to create shapes of any form whatsoever. While each
simple wave represents a global order, when they are put together
they add up to produce a complex local order as well.
science, order, and creativity
158

It is possible to create a well-deﬁned ﬁgure in this way based
on a generative order which relates the waves of successive fre-
quencies together. This indeed is just how a Fourier series is
constructed, for any complex ﬁgure can be generated, given
a series of coeﬃcients which determine the ways in which
the global waves are to be related together. As an example of a
Fourier summation, consider a music synthesizer in which
a series of oscillators each produce a wave of given frequency, a
pure tone. The characteristic sound of any instrument, with all
its complex local order, can then be generated by turning
appropriate dials on the machine and thereby adding diﬀerent
pure tones together. (In fact a synthesizer also adds character-
istics for the attack and decay of each note.)
GOETHE’S URPFLANZE
The simple example of a Fourier series demonstrates how a
local order may basically follow from a global order, a reversal
of the normal point of view in which global order is regarded
as the outcome of local order. But as pointed out earlier, genera-
tive orders, especially of a global nature, have so far not been
used extensively in science. It is interesting to note, however,
that Wolfgang Goethe seriously investigated such a notion two
centuries ago. In considering the relationships between the
many varieties of plants there are in the world, and the variations
that exist within a particular family and genus, Goethe was led to
the notion of the Urpﬂanze. Literally this means an original
plant and may, at ﬁrst sight, appear to anticipate Darwin, who
envisioned the proliferation of forms as arising through the evo-
lution of original plants and animals. Goethe, however, was not
referring to a particular physical manifestation of an original
plant but rather to a generative principle or movement from
which all plants of a particular kind emerged. There could, there-
fore, be no actual concrete example of an Urpﬂanze.6
the generative order and the implicate order 159

Goethe’s idea was that this generative principle is subject to a
series of transformations of form, a dynamic movement as it were,
and that the actual physical manifestations are plants of diﬀerent
but related shapes and features. For example, Goethe considered
plants within a particular genus and arranged them as shown in
the ﬁgure. The various forms of this plant are all related by similar
diﬀerences. Therefore, the generative principle which, according
to Goethe, gives rise to the whole set of plants contains an order
of forms implicit within it. Such an ordered set of forms related
by similar diﬀerences can also be obtained, for example, from a
fractal generative process, if a series of small changes in the
parameters determining the basic fractal order are made.
Because most of the prevailing ideas concerning the develop-
ment of form were, at that time, expressed in terms of Euclidian
geometry and sequential order, Goethe’s notion found little
These diagrams, taken from Goethe’s original researches on morphology,
clearly illustrate the nature of the dynamical movement inherent in the
urpﬂanze. Two particular leaves are linked by a series of transformations that
originate from a deeper generative movement.
science, order, and creativity
160

resonance in the science of his day. Nevertheless, perhaps with
the development of new ways of looking at such questions, the
time has come to explore such directions more fruitfully.
It would seem reasonable, and probably Goethe would have
agreed, to suppose that the particular generative order described
above is part of a still higher generative order of a wider range of
species of plant, going on ultimately to the generative order of
plants as a whole and even perhaps to life as a whole. In this way,
the generation and evolution of life are thought of as more like
the work of an artist than of an engineer. Moreover, consider-
ations of this nature involve a fundamental change in the whole
notion of what is meant by a hierarchy of orders. At present the
word hierarchy, whose root meaning is a government by priests,
contains the tacit idea that lower parts of a hierarchy are domin-
ated by higher ones. But in the spirit of generative orders it is
possible to consider hierarchies in quite a diﬀerent sense. More-
over, the inclusiveness of orders, one within the other, is no
longer a mere abstract subsumption in the sense that a more
general category contains its particulars. Rather the general is
now seen to be present concretely, as the activity of the generative
principle within the generative order. This suggests a new
notion of hierarchy, in which the more general principle is
immanent, that is, actively pervading and indwelling, not only in
the less general, but ultimately in reality as a whole. Emerging in
this fashion, hierarchies are no longer ﬁxed and rigid structures,
involving domination of lower levels by the higher. Rather, they
develop out of an immanent generative principle, from the more
general to the less general.
The novel, discussed in the previous chapter, is an example of
such a hierarchy, for it grows out of a basic generative order
within the author’s mind through the generative suborders of
plot, character, atmosphere, means of expression, and so on. In
addition, this generative order must be expressed within various
conventional forms of syntax as they apply within the sentence,
the generative order and the implicate order 161

paragraph, and chapter, and to the tacit conventions of the novel.
Therefore, while within a particular sentence the orders of syn-
tax and semantics may appear to dominate, they are in fact serv-
ing the much larger generative order of the novel as a whole. In
turn, this larger generative order must serve the aesthetics of
style, ﬂow, and readability. So the complex hierarchical order
that can be analyzed within a novel is never truly ﬁxed. In a great
work of art, it is dynamical and always used in a creative fashion.
ORDERS IN ART
The nature of this dynamical hierarchy of orders, and the genera-
tive order that gives rise to it, can also be seen within paintings
and musical compositions, and in our relationship to them. For
the sake of simplicity, consider a drawing which is composed of
lines of varying length, shape, and density made on a piece of
paper. At one level the drawing can be apprehended as a series
of marks, without any attempt being made to understand or
interpret their meaning. The viewer becomes aware of the various
orders that are created within this pattern of marks, the sym-
metry and balance they achieve on the paper as a whole, their
rhythms and movement. The marks contain the potential for
pattern, repetition, and imitation; that is, for an order of diﬀer-
ences and similarities that appear as the eye moves across the
ﬁeld of the paper. In addition, variations and internal diﬀerences
in their individual structure are also important. Their speed,
changing thickness, and means of attack on the paper itself can
give rise to complex emotional and aesthetic responses: to feel-
ings of tension, sadness, energy, beauty, and so on. Clearly at the
surface level of the marks themselves, with their symmetries and
patterns, many orders are involved, with each individual line
participating in several diﬀerent orders and, in the context of
each order, bearing diﬀering relationships with its neighbors.
But the surface order of the lines is only one aspect of a
science, order, and creativity
162

drawing, for if it is representational, each line has a particular
meaning that can be interpreted as being, for example, part of a
body, foliage, a building, or as helping to indicate the solidity of
a form or the eﬀects of light. In addition, the relationships
between the lines enable the artist to convey a sense of three-
dimensional space on a ﬂat surface. Therefore, as well as the
complex orders of the surface itself there are a host of additional
orders that involve the representation of space, movement, and
solid objects. Again, each individual line participates in many
diﬀerent orders, each qualifying and complementing the others
in subtle and complex ways. When all these orders are integrated
through a comprehensive generative order, a great work of art
results, but where integration is only partial or fragmentary then
a mediocre work results.
What is particularly interesting about responding to a drawing
or painting is the way in which the viewer interprets, decodes,
and responds to this complexity of orders. For in diﬀerent his-
torical periods and in diﬀerent cultures, marks and interpret-
ations are made in diﬀerent ways. The art critic Ernest Gombrich
refers to what he calls schema, an idea not too dissimilar to Kuhn’s
paradigms, which take the form of tacitly accepted conventions
employed in the construction and viewing of a work of art.7
Within a given period, most artists employ particular schema,
which are then absorbed unconsciously by the viewing public,
who interpret the meaning of their works. When a school of art
changes, the particular schemata are also transformed and the
public may, at ﬁrst, consider the new work to be ugly, meaning-
less, or “wrong.” Until the new schema have been absorbed, the
public are unable to interpret, and integrate with their inner
perceptions, the work that stands before them. In one sense,
therefore, an appropriate syntax has to be employed in reading
the painting, just as a syntax is required to read and understand a
novel or other piece of writing. In Chapter 3 a similar response
was discussed with regard to modern music.
the generative order and the implicate order 163

Just as a paradigm is realized when scientists develop ﬁxed
habits of mind that leave them insensitive to subtle changes and
overemphasize certain obvious diﬀerences, so in a similar way
can the artist and the viewer become rigid in their responses.
Generally it is believed that some “genius” must come along and
develop new ways of painting which then enable the public to
“see” in exciting new ways.
A drawing or a painting contains many orders that operate
together in a dynamical fashion as the work is being made and,
for that matter, as it is being viewed. A particularly important
aspect of this order is based on the notions of geometry used in
its composition. Classical paintings can often be analyzed in
terms of simple geometric forms, such as intersecting lines, tri-
angles, rectangles, and circles, that are balanced and arranged in
a harmonious fashion. Gestures made with the arms and glances
of the eyes, if continued across the painting, will be found to
make up one side of a geometric ﬁgure which is completed by
other gesture lines or a spear, thigh, tree, cloak, or pillar. In
addition, the invention of perspective by the architect Brunel-
leschi gave to painters, beginning with Masaccio, the possibility
of a linear order generated by the receding lines and planes of
buildings and even of the human body. In a sense this under-
lying order, which gives structure to many Renaissance paint-
ings, is similar to what we have called the Cartesian order: that is,
the underlying use of a grid to portray space and, in the case of a
painting, the tacit backdrop on which buildings, people, boats,
rivers, and roads are ordered. It is not beyond the bounds of
plausibility to see something of a Newtonian order also being
anticipated in these Renaissance paintings.
On the other hand, the overwhelming passion of J. W. Turner
both in his paintings and poetry was the power of light and the
movement of water, so that the underlying order of his art became
a form of swirling motion or gyre. In addition, by borrowing
from and going far beyond Goethe’s theory of advancing and
science, order, and creativity
164

receding colors, Turner was able to give the impression of a
constantly rotating vortex within his paintings, a vortex of
light, or of the violent motion of air and water that dissolves
linear forms.
While Turner’s paintings are, of course, important for several
reasons, one particularly striking aspect is the way in which the
painter was able to overcome the old orders of geometrical
structure through the power of his new vortexlike order of light,
air, and water in constant motion. It is curious to note that these
paintings were made some three decades before J. C. Maxwell
published his electromagnetic theory of light, which replaced
the Newtonian order of linear trajectories and rigid forms with
ﬁelds in constant motion and internal rotation. In Turner’s
“Regulus,” reproduced overleaf, it is almost possible to see a new
order of movement in which light and air replace the old rigid,
linear structure. According to legend, the Roman general Regulus
was blinded by the Carthaginians, who cut oﬀ his eyelids and
forced him to stare at the sun. Turner’s painting is created from
the perspective of Regulus himself. Around the general is a geo-
metrical order of ships and buildings which are in the process of
being dissolved by the blinding sun, whose light radiates from
the center of the canvas to cover sea, ships, sky, buildings, and
people alike. The painting seems, therefore, to symbolize a
movement toward a new order in art that at least tacitly and
implicitly aims to replace the old.
Fresh generative orders, with their hierarchies of line, form,
movement, and color require the viewer to respond in new and
creative ways that are, for this reason, disturbing. The ﬁrst attempts
the Impressionists made to exhibit their paintings were met with
considerable ridicule and critical attack. For in place of the trad-
itional orders and schema of nineteenth-century French paint-
ing, Monet had begun to use spots of primary color in an
attempt to express his perception of nature through a new way
of re-creating, on the canvas, a sense of the order of space. Thus,
the generative order and the implicate order 165

if you stand close to such a painting, you become aware of the
pattern and strength of the color and of its apparent lack of
representational form, but as you step back, a whole world
with its three-dimensional order seems to come into being. For
the viewers of nineteenth-century Paris, however, this use of a
new generative order was so diﬀerent from everything that had
gone before in art that it proved to be, initially at least, totally
unacceptable to most viewers.
This sort of thing has also happened with scientiﬁc revolu-
tions (e.g., relativity). However, just as with scientiﬁc revolutions,
it turned out that the degree of change had been overestimated,
and that the Impressionists had really preserved much of what
went before, while making subtle changes in what appeared
similar. Corot and Rousseau had also painted in the open air,
Constable had loaded his brush with pure white, Delacroix had
Regulus (1828, reworked 1837). Joseph Mallord William Turner. The Tate
Gallery, London.
science, order, and creativity
166

placed spots of primary color one against the other, and Turner
had anticipated Monet’s discovery that light dissolves form. So
during this whole earlier period, which might perhaps have
been called one of “normal art,” by analogy with “normal sci-
ence,” a succession of fundamental changes were already taking
place. With Monet, however, the change was ﬁnally so great that
it had to be acknowledged that something really diﬀerent had
appeared, and suddenly people began to feel that they were in
the midst of a “revolution in art.”
The process was carried further by later artists. Thus to
Cézanne, Monet was “just an eye, but my God what an eye.”8
Cézanne went on to transform Impressionism by radically
exploring composition and the structure of objects and land-
scapes while still preserving some of the Impressionistic order.9
Cézanne’s contribution is particularly apparent in his paintings
of Mount St. Victoire, which are highly organized globally
according to various planes. Indeed, Cézanne’s generative order
is reminiscent of the Fourier order described earlier. In its most
extreme form, this new order was used by Picasso and Braque in
their Cubist paintings but can also be found, in more subtle
ways, in many other schools of twentieth-century art.
What then lies in the creation of a new form of art and in the
viewer’s ability to perceive it?
Each artist creates using a generative order which contains a
highly complex and dynamic hierarchy of orders of line, form,
color, meaning, and so on. While the mediocre are content to
pursue their habits of mind and do not have suﬃcient passion
and energy to create beyond the generative schema that went
before, the great artist is able to perceive the world in new ways
and to create fresh orders within his or her paintings. Likewise
the viewer who is both passionate and sensitive will be able to
explore new generative orders within the mind and respond to
the various clues that are present on paper or canvas. Looking at a
work of art is a creative act which leads to an order similar to
the generative order and the implicate order 167

that which the artist had in mind when the original work was
created. In this way it can be truly said that an artist teaches us to
see the world in new ways. For the activity of reading and under-
standing a work of art involves the creative perception of new
generative orders which ultimately lie beyond that individual
work and extend to the whole of nature and experience.
THE IMPLICATE OR ENFOLDED ORDER
In science as in art, it is necessary to allow for the emergence, in
creative perception, of new generative orders, which go beyond
the individual content and involve the whole, common cultural
experience. It is our suggestion that the implicate or enfolded
order has such a potentiality. This form of order, which has been
treated by David Bohm in Wholeness and the Implicate Order,10 is in a
close relationship to that of fractals in the sense that, in both,
there is a kind of whole generated from certain basic principles.
Nevertheless, the implicate order extends the notion of genera-
tive order beyond what can be done with fractals. For this reason
a detailed discussion of this form of order is given in this sec-
tion. It will provide a powerful tool for exploring the ideas of
creativity and generative order later on in the book.
The implicate order can be illustrated with the aid of the
following device: Consider two concentric glass cylinders, the
inner one ﬁxed and the outer capable of being slowly rotated.
The space between the cylinders is ﬁlled with a viscous liquid
such as glycerin. When the outer cylinder is turned, ﬂuid close
to it is dragged along at nearly the same speed, but ﬂuid close to
the inner, stationary, cylinder is held nearly at rest. Hence ﬂuid
in diﬀerent regions of the space moves at diﬀerent rates, and in
this way, any small element of the glycerin is eventually drawn
out into a long thin thread. If a drop of indissoluble ink is
placed in the liquid, then it becomes possible to follow the
movement of the small element by watching how the drop is
science, order, and creativity
168

drawn out into a thread until eventually it becomes so ﬁne as to
be invisible.
At ﬁrst sight one may be tempted to say that the ink drop has
been totally mixed into the glycerin so that its initial order has
been lost and is now random or chaotic. But suppose that the
outer cylinder is now rotated in the reverse direction. If the ﬂuid
is very viscous, like glycerin, and the cylinder is not rotated too
quickly, then the ﬂuid element will in fact retrace its steps exactly.
Eventually the element will return to its original form and the
droplet of ink will appear as if from nothing. (Such devices have in
fact been constructed and the eﬀect is indeed quite dramatic.)
Clearly what was taken for a chaotic or random loss of order was
in fact a hidden order of high degree that was generated out of the
initial simple order of the drop by means of the turning cylinder.
Likewise this hidden order was transformed back into the ori-
ginal simple order when the cylinder was reversed. Clearly, there
is a correspondence between this hidden order and the discussion
in the previous chapter of how hidden order may quite generally
be contained in what seems to be chance or randomness.
While the drop is present in hidden form, it may be said to be
enfolded into the glycerin rather as an egg may be said to be
folded into a cake. When the cylinders rotate in the reverse direc-
tion, the droplet then unfolds. With the egg in the cake, this is of
course not possible, the reason being that the ﬂuids in the cake
are not suﬃciently viscous.
To obtain an enfolded or implicate order from such hidden
orders it is, however, necessary to consider a whole series of ink
drops, enfolded in succession. Let us put in the ﬁrst drop and
rotate the cylinder n times. A second drop is now added and like-
wise enfolded n times, which also has the net eﬀect of enfolding
the ﬁrst drop 2n times. A third drop is added and enfolded n times,
the second being enfolded 2n times and the ﬁrst 3n times. This
process is repeated until many droplets have been enfolded. When
the cylinder is reversed, one droplet after another will emerge into
the generative order and the implicate order 169

an unfolded or explicate form and then fold back into the
glycerin again. If this is done rapidly, the overall eﬀect will be
of a droplet which appears to subsist for a time within the
moving liquid.
The experiment can now be extended so that the droplets are
added in successively diﬀerent positions. When the cylinder is
reversed, the droplets will unfold in a line that moves across
space. If the movement is rapid enough, this will give the
impression of a particle that crosses space along a trajectory.
However, this particle is simply a manifestation of a much
greater enfolded or implicate order within the whole of the
glycerin, most of which is hidden. As has been explained in
Wholeness and the Implicate Order, this provides a good analogy to
many of the basic quantum properties of particles, such as elec-
trons. For example, the ink droplets may be so arranged that they
produce a continuous track up to a certain point which then
jumps continuously to start another track at a ﬁnite distance
away, thus providing a way of understanding discontinuous
“jumps” of the electron from one quantum state to another.
The above example helps to indicate what is meant by the
implicate or enfolded order. What is essential to such an order
is the simultaneous presence of a sequence of many degrees of
enfoldment with similar diﬀerences between them, for example,
the ink droplets in the glycerin. Such an order cannot be made
explicit as a whole, but can be manifested only in the emergence
of successive degrees of enfoldment. This may be contrasted
with an explicate or unfolded order, in which the similar diﬀer-
ences are all present together, in a manifest and extended form.
This explicate order is of course commonly found in ordinary
experience and in classical physics.
It is clear that the explicate order corresponds very well to a
worldview in which the basic notion is one of separate objects
moving on trajectories. These trajectories, in turn, can be
described in terms of Cartesian coordinates, as was indicated in
Chapter 3. Although physics has gone through a revolution in
science, order, and creativity
170

which the notions of particle and trajectory have ceased to be
basic, the underlying Cartesian coordinates still pervade the
mathematical formalism. And thus, the mathematics has hidden
within it a key survival of the old order. This may well account
for some of the diﬃculties that science has in connection with
relativistic theories, both special and general. The implicate
order, however, has the possibility of opening up very diﬀerent
approaches in which these diﬃculties may perhaps not arise.
Analogies like that of the ink drop are, however, limited
because the actual particles that make up the ink droplet them-
selves move in an explicate way, even though the development
of the droplet itself may be quite complex. A better analogy to
the behavior of an electron, for example, can be obtained by
considering a holograph, which is a photographic record of
light waves that have been reﬂected from an object.
In normal photography a lens is used to focus light from an
object, so that each small section of the object is reproduced in a
small section of the photographic plate. In holography, however,
the photographic record made by laser light does not in fact
resemble the object but consists of a ﬁne pattern of interference
fringes. Each portion of the plate now contains information
from the whole of the object. When similar laser light is used to
illuminate the plate, the light waves emerging from it resemble
those that originally came from the object. It is therefore pos-
sible to see, in three dimensions, an image of the original object.
What is particularly signiﬁcant, however, is that even if only part
of the plate is illuminated, an image of the whole object is still
obtained. This is because light from every part of the object is
enfolded within each region of the plate. In normal photo-
graphy, information is stored locally, but with the holograph it is
stored globally. As successively smaller regions of the holograph
are illuminated, the images as a whole are not lost. Instead ﬁne
detail becomes progressively more diﬃcult to resolve. This
global property of enfoldment of information and detail has
something in common with both fractal and Fourier orders.
the generative order and the implicate order 171

The holograph provides a good analogy to the general nature
of movement according to quantum mechanics. This movement
is described mathematically by what is called a Green’s function,
which can be thought of as representing a summation of very
many waves, similar in some sense to those that scatter oﬀ an
object. It is possible to obtain an intuitive picture of the meaning
of the Green’s function by considering what is known as a
Feynmann diagram. This is a representation of the movement
of waves in terms of a diagrammatic structure of lines.
To start, consider a wavelet that emanates from a ﬁxed point P:
The lines radiating from P show how the wavelet spreads from
this point. Now consider any point Q, at which the wavelet
from P arrives. This in turn is the source of another wavelet,
which spreads as follows:
science, order, and creativity
172

In this way the point R is reached, which itself becomes the
source of yet another wavelet and so on. The essential idea is that
each point is reached by wavelets, from all other points. In turn
it becomes the source of a wavelet, proportional in strength to
that of the wave which reaches it. Evidently there is a basic
notion of order here, because the diﬀerences in any given step
are similar to those in the next, and so on.
Now look at this process as a whole, and begin by considering
all those waves, emanating from A and arriving at B, after a large
number n of intermediate steps.
Below is a typical path that connects A and B.
the generative order and the implicate order 173

The total wave at B is the sum of the contributions of all possible
paths of this kind that connect A and B.
This way of looking at wave movement was proposed ori-
ginally by C. Huygens in the eighteenth century, but around
1950, R. P. Feynmann developed his diagrammatic represe-
ntation of the approach of Huygens. The result was a very
powerful new tool for dealing with quantum mechanical
ﬁeld theory.
At ﬁrst Feynmann did not intend this simply to be a tool,
for he hoped that it would provide physical insight into quan-
tum processes. Indeed, the informal language used in connec-
tion with Feynmann diagrams, i.e., that they are the deﬁnite
“paths” of particles, would suggest that such physical insight
is possible. However, these diagrams actually represent only
the contributions of diﬀerent wavelets, which may add or sub-
tract to produce interference eﬀects, and so they are not coherent
with the idea that a particle actually follows such a path.
Since the electron not only is a wave but also has a particle
nature, the Feynmann diagrams cannot provide an adequate
image of the actual movement from whichever standpoint they
are regarded.
What was left to physicists therefore was only to look at these
diagrams as being an extremely useful tool in performing certain
diﬃcult calculations. However, it may turn out that Feynmann’s
original intuition may have some further meaning which has
not yet been seen. Perhaps the implicate order will be relevant to
seeing this.
Returning to a consideration of the implicate order: Evidently
the Feynmann diagrams give an imaginative picture of a wave
motion. In this picture, wavelets can be seen unfolding from
each point toward the whole. Yet the very same movement can
also be thought of as wavelets enfolding toward each point from
the whole, as shown in the diagram.
science, order, and creativity
174

The basic movement of enfoldment and unfoldment is thus a
dual one in which there is ultimately no separation between
enfoldment and the unfoldment. The movement has the order of
similar diﬀerences of degrees of enfoldment and unfoldment
that has already been indicated. It therefore provides an example
of the implicate or enfolded order, which is described math-
ematically by the Green’s function and graphically by the cor-
responding Feynmann diagrams.
Clearly this interpretation of the Green’s function is ultimately
an outcome of physical intuition, on the part of Feynmann, so
that the source of the ideas is not primarily in the mathematics.
In quantum theory all movement is described in terms of
Green’s functions in the way indicated above. It follows therefore
that the basic movements and transformations of all matter and
all ﬁelds are to be understood in terms of a process of this kind.
It is even possible to obtain some fairly direct experience of how
it takes place by considering that as a person sits in a room, light
from all points in it must enfold together to enter the pupil of
the eye. This complex information is then unfolded by the lens
of the eye and the nervous system into a consciousness of the
room as constituted out of extended objects in an explicate
order. Indeed there is even evidence that the memory of this
event will not be stored locally within the brain but is distrib-
uted in some global fashion that resembles the implicate order.
More generally, with a telescope, the entire universe in space
and time is enfolded within each region and can then be
unfolded with the aid of lenses and cameras. At ﬁrst sight it
the generative order and the implicate order 175

could be supposed that the light coming from all the stars would
produce a totally disordered pattern of waves within any small
region of space. Yet each region enfolds the whole universe.
Indeed, it is just this process of enfoldment and unfoldment that
allows scientists to learn about the whole of the universe, no
matter where they may be in it.
In the usual way of thinking, something like an implicate
order is tacitly acknowledged, but it is not regarded as having any
fundamental signiﬁcance. For example, processes of enfoldment,
such as those described by the Green’s function, are assumed to
be just convenient ways of analyzing what is basically a movement
in the explicate order, in which waves are transmitted continu-
ously through a purely local contact of ﬁelds that are only inﬁni-
tesimal distances from each other. In essence, however, the main
point of the implicate order is to turn this approach upside
down, and to regard the implicate order as fundamental, while
the explicate order is then understood as having unfolded from
the implicate order.
This has been illustrated through the analogies of the ink
droplets and of the hologram. It is possible to combine certain
features of both these analogies by imagining a wave that comes
to a focus in a small region of space and then disperses. This is
followed by another similar wave that focuses in a slightly
diﬀerent position, then by another and another and so on
indeﬁnitely until a “track” is formed that resembles the path
of a particle. Indeed the particles of physics are more like
these dynamic structures, which are always grounded in the
whole from which they unfold and into which they enfold, than
like little billiard balls that are grounded only in their own
localized forms.
It is necessary, however, to go further than this. Up to now
particular kinds of entities, such as electrons and neutrons, have
been discussed, each of which has its own implicate order. But
there may be a further unknown set of entities, each having
science, order, and creativity
176

its implicate order, and beyond this there may be a common
implicate order, which goes deeper and deeper without limit
and is ultimately unknown. This unknown and undescribable
totality will be called the holomovement. It acts as the fundamental
ground of all matter. As in the case of the analogy, in which a
particle is taken to be a succession of wave pulses, so each object
or entity emerges as a relatively stable and constant form out of
the holomovement and into the explicate order. This form is
sustained by the holomovement, into which it eventually dis-
solves. Therefore it must be understood primarily through this
holomovement. It is clear that the implicate order ultimately
prevails, although it is always in an essential relationship with
the explicate order.
THE SUPERIMPLICATE ORDER
The discussion based on the hologram provides only a limited
view of the implicate order because it is based on a classical
treatment of the transformations within a light wave. To obtain a
deeper and more extensive understanding of the implicate order,
it is necessary to start from quantum mechanical ﬁeld theory.
This is, in essence, the most basic and general form of the mod-
ern quantum theory that is available to date. Such a step will lead
to an extension of the implicate order, called the superimplicate
order. This is much subtler than the implicate order and goes
deeper. In addition, it is capable of further extensions in ways
that go beyond quantum theory altogether.
As with the quantum mechanical particle theory, it is neces-
sary to proceed from the standpoint that the mathematical for-
malism of the quantum ﬁeld theory is essentially correct, at least
within some suitable limits. However, the informal language
describing physical concepts is even more unclear in the ﬁeld
theory than it is in the particle theory.
The causal interpretation will therefore be extended in order
the generative order and the implicate order 177

to obtain a clear physical notion of the quantum ﬁeld theory, as
well as to gain insight into the superimplicate order.11
To be more speciﬁc, the key new property treated by quantum
ﬁeld theory is the appearance of discrete particlelike quanta, in
what was initially assumed to be a continuous ﬁeld. In certain
ways this process is similar to what was described in the analogy
of a wave that focuses in a succession of small regions and thus
resembles the track of a particle. In other ways, however, it
is quite diﬀerent so that this analogy, too, is limited. But in
the causal interpretation, a clear and well-deﬁned physical con-
cept of the appearance of discrete particlelike quanta in a
continuous ﬁeld can be given. This interpretation fully and faith-
fully expresses the meaning of the mathematical equations.
It must be emphasized, however, that although the particular
example of the superimplicate order is obtained from the causal
interpretation of quantum ﬁeld theory, the essential idea of the
superimplicate order is not restricted either to the causal inter-
pretation or to the quantum theory itself. Rather, these are only
special forms of the more general superimplicate order.
The basic discussion of quantum ﬁeld theory in terms of the
implicate order and the causal interpretation is quite simple.
Instead of taking a particle as the fundamental reality, start with
the ﬁeld. And instead of having a particle acted on by a quantum
potential, suppose that the ﬁeld is acted on by a superquantum
potential. This superquantum potential is far subtler and more
complex than the quantum potential, yet the basic principles
governing its behavior are similar. Its net eﬀect is to modify the
ﬁeld equations in a fundamental way so they become nonlinear
and nonlocal. This brings about the new quantum properties of
the ﬁeld.
The ﬁeld is continuous and by itself would tend to spread out
from any source. However, because the superquantum potential
is nonlinear and nonlocal, it is able, under certain conditions, to
provide a very subtle kind of immediate connection between
science, order, and creativity
178

distant regions of the ﬁeld. Suppose, for example, that the ﬁeld
meets an atom that can absorb a deﬁnite amount of energy. The
superquantum potential will “sweep in” energy from the whole
ﬁeld, in a deﬁnite amount equal to what can be absorbed by the
atom. This explains how a continuous ﬁeld can act in matter as if
it were made up of discrete elementary units.
In the particle treatment, the wave-particle duality was
explained as an eﬀect of the quantum ﬁeld on the particle. But
the wave-particle duality can now be treated as an eﬀect of the
superquantum “ﬁeld” on the original ﬁeld itself. Therefore, the
particle is no longer used as a basic concept, even though
the ﬁeld manifests itself in discrete units, as if it were composed
of particles.
So far the implicate order has not been brought in. Indeed, in
the particle theory, the causal interpretation, with the promin-
ence given to the quantum potential, appears, at least at ﬁrst sight,
to be a step away from regarding the implicate order as basic. But
in the causal interpretation of the ﬁeld theory, this is not so.
Indeed, in this case there are two implicate orders in a speciﬁed
relationship. The ﬁrst implicate order is just the ﬁeld itself, and its
movement, as described by Green’s functions, is just a form of
the implicate order. The second implicate order is then obtained by
considering the superquantum wave function. This is related to
the whole ﬁeld as the original quantum wave function is related
to the particle. A more detailed treatment shows that the super-
quantum wave function also moves in a kind of implicate order
which is, however, far subtler and more complex than is the ﬁrst
implicate order. This then comprises the second implicate order.
In the earlier version of the causal interpretation, given in
Chapter 3, the quantum potential represents information which
guides the self-active movement of the particles. In the ﬁeld case,
the superquantum potential now represents information that
“guides” or organizes the self-active movement of the ﬁeld.
The ﬁrst implicate order applies to the original ﬁeld which,
the generative order and the implicate order 179

however, now has new features brought about by the action of
the superquantum potential. And the second, or superimplicate,
order applies to the “superﬁeld” or information that guides and
organizes this original ﬁeld.
A good analogy to the ﬁrst and second implicate orders is
provided by considering a computer or video game. The ﬁrst
implicate order corresponds to the television screen, which is
capable of showing an indeﬁnite variety of explicate forms,
which are essentially manifestations of an implicate order. In earl-
ier television sets this could clearly be seen through the action of
the synchronizing adjustment. When synchronism failed, the
images would be seen to enfold into an apparently featureless
background. But when the correct adjustment was made, the
hidden images would suddenly unfold into explicate forms again.
The second implicate order corresponds to the computer,
which supplies the information that arranges the various
forms—spaceships, cars, and so forth—in the ﬁrst implicate
order. Finally the player of this game acts as a third implicate
order, aﬀecting the second implicate order. The result of all this
is to produce a closed loop, from the screen to the player to the
computer and back to the screen.
Such a loop is, in a certain sense, self-sustaining, for with
only the computer and the screen in operation, all that would
happen would be an unfoldment of a predetermined program.
But when the player, as third implicate order, is introduced, a
closed loop results and the possibility is opened up of a
genuine dynamic development in time, in which creative
novelty may enter.
We speculate that, in nature, there is something like a third
implicate order that aﬀects the second and is aﬀected by the ﬁrst,
thus giving rise again to a closed loop. Or more generally there is
an indeﬁnite series, and perhaps hierarchies, of implicate orders,
some of which form relatively closed loops and some of which
do not. Of course such an idea implies that the current quantum
science, order, and creativity
180

theory is of limited validity. This theory is covered only by the
ﬁrst and second implicate orders. Where anything beyond the
second implicate order is active, then quantum theory would no
longer be valid.
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE IMPLICATE
ORDER AND THE GENERATIVE ORDER
The implicate order and the generative order are very closely
related. Indeed, the implicate order may be understood as a par-
ticular case of the generative order. Thus, in the discussion of the
Green’s function, it is possible to see how explicate forms are
generated in an order of unfoldment, step by step. In this pro-
cess, the whole is relevant to each part, unlike the case of fractals
where the details are generated from local forms belonging only
to the next less detailed stage of generation. While the implicate
order is similar in a certain way to the order of fractals it is much
more extensive and subtle, since the process of unfoldment is
related to the whole and not to a local order of space.
There is, however, a much more fundamental sense in which
the implicate order is a generative order. For in quantum ﬁeld
theory, and the computer game analogy, the second implicate
order is basically the source from which the forms of the ﬁrst
implicate order are generated. If there are higher implicate
orders, then a similar generative order will prevail throughout
all the levels. Ultimately, it is, of course, the holomovement, and
what may lie beyond, from which all is generated.
THE IMPLICATE ORDER AND CONSCIOUSNESS
So far only material processes have been discussed in terms of the
implicate order. But consciousness is much more of the implicate
order than is matter. This is brought out in some detail in David
Bohm’s Wholeness and the Implicate Order. A few of the main points
the generative order and the implicate order 181

discussed in that book, along with some further notions on the
relationship between mind and matter, will be presented here.
First of all, it is clear that thought is deﬁnitely in the implicate
order. The very word implicate, meaning enfolded, suggests that
one thought enfolds another and that a train of thought is actu-
ally a process of enfoldment of a succession of implications. This
is not entirely dissimilar to the process described by a Green’s
function, or to what takes place in the video game. In addition,
thoughts and feelings unfold into each other, and these in turn
give rise to dispositions that unfold into physical actions and on
to more thoughts and feelings.
Language is also an enfolded order. Meaning is enfolded in the
structure of the language, and meaning unfolds into thought,
feeling, and all the activities that have already been discussed. In
communication, meaning unfolds into the whole community
and unfolds from the community into each person. Thus, there is
an internal relationship of human beings to each other, and to
society as a whole. The explicate form of all this is the structure of
society, and the implicate form is the content of the culture, which
extends into the consciousness of each person. What is seen on
one side as society and the explicate forms of culture enfolds
inseparably within what is seen on the other side as the con-
sciousness of each individual in the society. For example, the
laws and customs and limitations of the society do not actually
operate as external forces that are alien to the people on whom
they act. Rather, they are the expression of the very nature of
these people, and in turn, they enfold to contribute to this nature.
Evidently, the implicate order of consciousness operates on
many levels, which are related to each other as are the implicate
and superimplicate order of the quantum ﬁeld, and of the
computer game. For example, as in the discussion of reason in
the previous chapters, it was shown how one level of thought
will organize the next level. This can go on to produce a struc-
ture that may develop indeﬁnitely with relatively closed loops
science, order, and creativity
182

of many kinds. This implies that consciousness is organized
through a generative order whose totality is in many ways simi-
lar to the totality of the generative and implicate order that
organizes matter.
It is now possible to look into the question of how conscious-
ness and matter are related. One possibility is to regard them as
two generative and implicate orders, like separate but parallel
streams that interrelate in some way. Another possibility is that
basically there is only one order, whose ground includes the
holomovement and may go beyond. This order will unfold into
the two orders of matter and mind, which, depending on
the context, will have some kind of relative independence of
function. Yet at a deeper level they are actually inseparable and
interwoven, just as in the computer game the player and the
screen are united by participation in common loops. In this view,
mind and matter are two aspects of one whole and no more
separable than are form and content.12
THE EXPLICATE AND SEQUENTIAL LIMITS OF THE
IMPLICATE AND GENERATIVE ORDERS
If the implicate and generative orders are fundamental, both to
mind and matter, how is it possible to account for the fact that, in
ordinary experience, explicate orders of succession appear to
dominate? In the causal interpretation of quantum theory, it
happens that a simple answer can be given to this question with
regard to matter. In Chapter 2 it was explained that the quantum
potential becomes negligible in the domain of large-scale
experience. To put it another way, what we take to be our own
domain of experience is just that in which the eﬀects of the
quantum potential can be neglected. A similar situation also holds
for the superimplicate order so that all the subtle eﬀects of the
implicate and generative orders do not normally manifest them-
selves at the level of ordinary (classical mechanical) experience.
the generative order and the implicate order 183

The behavior of matter, in this limit, reduces either to that of
Newtonian particles or classical continuous ﬁelds that do not
manifest themselves in a “quantized” or particlelike way.
Something similar also happens with regard to thoughts and
feelings in the ﬁeld of consciousness. To see how this comes
about, note that explicate orders are in fact simple patterns or
invariants in time, that is, aspects which persist or repeat them-
selves in similar ways and have well-deﬁned locations in space.
In other words, these orders are associated with relatively simple
orders of similarities and diﬀerences. Sense perception, while
operating at its deepest levels within a generative, implicate
order, tends to abstract that which is relatively invariant or slowly
moving against a subtler and more dynamic background. It then
deals with the environment in terms of such relatively simple
similarities and diﬀerences.
Recall the example of human vision, in which the center of
the eye selects structures of similar diﬀerences against a back-
ground of subtler and more dynamic similarities and diﬀerences
sensed by the periphery of vision. In addition, in walking around
a form, its appearance changes in radical ways, both through a
change of orientation and as a result of variations in illumin-
ation. Perception and consciousness, however, abstract from this
continuous change what is invariant or slowly varying and
identify this as a single solid object. (A discussion of such
abstraction, which also compares this process with what is
done in physics, can be found in David Bohm’s The Special Theory
of Relativity.13)
Abstraction of invariants from a deeper implicate order is even
more strikingly demonstrated by considering that an individual
human face can be identiﬁed in a crowd of moving people. A
face changes considerably over a lifetime and under varied con-
ditions of lighting, makeup, or facial hair, yet it is still possible to
recognize the face of a friend who may not have been seen for
many years.
science, order, and creativity
184

In weak illumination, however, there is no clear perception of
form. Instead we begin to become aware of a constantly chan-
ging sensation of light and shadow, and of how the mind acts
within its generative orders in an attempt to incorporate these
constantly changing impressions until they ﬁt in a relatively
invariant way. Visual perception under these conditions is closer
to the original implicate order, as the mind tries to construct
something explicate out of the shifting information. The expli-
cate order that it endeavors to build will not be ﬁrm at ﬁrst. With
the advent of new information, the experience of a form may
suddenly change in a radical way. Only after this process has
continued for some time does the explicate form remain stable.
With regard to thoughts, feelings, and other internal mental
processes, it is clear that these arise also from an ever-changing
and ﬂuctuating background of the stream of consciousness. Most
of these are transient, and have little ﬁrm deﬁnition. Thus it is
only through organized thought, which generally takes place in
a social and cultural context, that ideas are able to take deﬁnite
form and to “stand ﬁrm.” Also, emotions tend to change rapidly,
and it is primarily through naming them and forming concepts
about them that it is possible to hold them ﬁxed. Moreover,
naming an object and forming concepts about it plays a crucial
role in giving a deﬁnite shape and form to sense perception. This
was clearly brought out in the case of Helen Keller.
Finally the implicate order can be experienced directly, not
only in connection with the ﬂuctuating background of con-
sciousness but also in relationship to perception of certain kinds
of well-deﬁned forms. Consider, for example, how music is
comprehended. At any given moment, a particular note may be
sounding in awareness, but at the same time, a kind of
“reverberation” of a number of earlier notes can also be sensed.
Such reverberation is not the same as recollection or memory.
Rather it is more like a part of an unbroken enfoldment and
unfoldment of the notes concerned into ever subtler forms,
the generative order and the implicate order 185

including emotions and impulses to physical movement, as well
as a kind of “ethereal” echo of the original notes within the mind.
Indeed if successive notes are played several seconds apart, then
they no longer combine together in such a way as to convey the
dynamic sense of unbroken ﬂow that is essential to the meaning
of the music. But when they are played at their proper speed, the
notes fold together into an overall tune or musical theme.
This suggests that, at any given moment, a number of notes
are present in awareness in various degrees of enfoldment. The
simultaneous awareness of all of these is what constitutes the
sense of unbroken ﬂow that has been described above. But this
means that it is possible to be directly aware of an implicate
order as a set of similar diﬀerences that are present simul-
taneously in diﬀerent degrees of enfoldment of successive notes.
This corresponds roughly to the simultaneous presence of a
set of droplets in similar diﬀerent degrees of enfoldment in
the glycerin.
On a much greater scale, the perceptions of Mozart and Bach
of whole musical structures in single ﬂashes of insight probably
involved an order that was not only implicate, in the sense of
containing an overall hierarchy of structure all at once, but also
generative, in the sense that it contained the overall order out of
which it enfolded.
This perception of the implicate order is generally common to
all works of art. For example, the montage, or editing together of
successive images, in the ﬁlm of a great director has something
in common with music, for the internal structure, quality, and
feeling of each image infuses all the others. In this way the value
and meaning of a particular image, seen alone, is totally trans-
formed and the resulting scene is viewed as an organic whole
rather than as a succession of explicit images. In poetry the vari-
ous resonances of words and images act together in highly com-
plex orders so that associations of memory and meaning in an
individual word or image, together with the particular sounds its
science, order, and creativity
186

vocalization (aloud or in the mind) evokes, are all enfolded
together. The act of reading a poem is that of realizing the order
of these enfolded forms and attempting to reach the generative
order at the heart of the work.
It follows that implicate and generative orders of such kinds
are ultimately at the ground of all experience. However, this is
generally ignored, probably because societies have generally
deemed it to be absolutely necessary for their survival to
emphasize explicate orders, which are especially suitable for
large-scale organization and technology.
It is clear then that the explicate order of succession, which
appears to stand on its own, actually arises out of an organization
that lies in the implicate and generative orders and that is never
free from the possibility of collapsing as further data appear.
The implicate and generative world is clearly the ground of all
experiencing, and the explicate world of succession is con-
structed out of this ground. Through habits of thought and
language, people have come to take the explicate world of suc-
cession as the true ground and the implicate and generative
orders as something that is secondary to such a ground in
the explicate world. It is therefore particularly important that
this view be turned around in order to understand reality
more deeply.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
This chapter moved beyond the idea of a sequential order, to
introduce the notion of a generative order. The ﬁrst example was
in terms of fractals. Following this, it was shown how the gen-
erative order is relevant to creativity in art and to the creative
perception and understanding of nature. The next step was to go
into the implicate order, showing how it leads to the super-
implicate order, which in turn organizes the implicate order.
This opened the way for an indeﬁnite extension into even higher
the generative order and the implicate order 187

implicate orders, which organize the lower ones, while capable
of being aﬀected by them. In this way it became apparent that
the implicate order is a very rich and subtle generative order.
Finally, consciousness was discussed as a generative and impli-
cate order, and through this, notions of how mind and matter
are related were proposed.
In the ﬁnal chapters, this approach will be extended to throw
light on nature, mind, and society in a general way. This will
help to open the door to a kind of dialogue that may creatively
meet the breakdown of order that humanity is experiencing in
its relationships in all these ﬁelds.
science, order, and creativity
188

5
GENERATIVE ORDER IN SCIENCE,
SOCIETY, AND CONSCIOUSNESS
In the previous chapter the new notion of generative order was
introduced. Its close relationship to the implicate order and, by
extension, the superimplicate order was shown. In this chapter
the generative order will be explored further and its importance
in physics, cosmology, biology, and consciousness will be dis-
cussed. However, it is not the main purpose of this book to use
the generative order to develop new scientiﬁc theories, although
such possibilities should of course be explored in other contexts.
Rather, the study of the generative order is aimed at helping to
understand the meaning of creativity and to discover what is
blocking it.
As the operation of the generative order is unfolded, in this
chapter, it will become apparent that creativity, in its essence,
cannot really be divided into diﬀerent ﬁelds of specialization, for
it is one whole. Therefore a fundamental and far-reaching surge
in science would have to be combined with a similar surge in
these other ﬁelds and in all areas of life. The discussion of the

generative order will, therefore, help to prepare the ground for
the ﬁnal chapter, which explores the question of how such
general creativity may be fostered.
GENERATIVE ORDER IN PHYSICS AND
IN COSMOLOGY
A number of reasons have already been given for the proposal
that a generative order, in the form of the superimplicate order,
lies at the foundation of physics. This was shown explicitly in the
case of light. In the ﬁrst implicate order this is basically a move-
ment of a ﬁeld, and yet, through the information in the second
implicate order, this movement is organized into a particlelike
behavior. More generally, all of the so-called elementary particles
can now be treated in this way, as quantum mechanical ﬁelds
that are organized by information in their superimplicate orders
which makes possible the creation, sustenance, and annihilation
of particlelike manifestations. They are thus relatively constant
and autonomous particlelike features of the holomovement that
emerge through the generative order.
Such “particles” can therefore, in a wide range of circum-
stances, be abstracted as relatively stable units. When such sim-
pliﬁcation is appropriate, the theory reduces to the original causal
interpretation in which the wave function, now dependent only
on the “particle” coordinates, provides a pool of information
that fundamentally aﬀects the behavior of each eﬀective “particle”
through the quantum potential. These eﬀective “particles” can
be organized in this way into higher-level entities, such as atoms
and molecules. In this way the activity of structuring can be
seen to be sustained from a deeper generative order. This order
organizes the particles in ways that depend crucially on the
common pool of information in the wave function of the whole
system. This, however, cannot be expressed solely in terms of
the particles and preassigned relationships between them. As a
science, order, and creativity
190

result, new kinds of properties can arise, not anticipated in clas-
sical theories, in which the feature of quantum mechanical
wholeness, which was discussed in Chapters 2 and 3, plays a
key part. Such properties pervade the whole of physics and of
chemistry as well.
Even to abstract an atom or molecule out of its general
environment, as an autonomous entity, is still an approximation.
For, in principle, the relevant common pool of information
may encompass larger systems and ultimately the whole of
the universe. As an example, consider the property of super-
conductivity in metals, in which quantum mechanical features
appear at low temperatures and over macroscopic orders of dis-
tance. At higher temperatures the wave function of the whole
system breaks up into many independent pools of information,
and so the electrons move relatively independently. Each elec-
tron is then easily deﬂected by irregularities in the arrangement
of atoms in the lattice, including especially those produced
by thermal vibrations in the lattice itself. And in this way the
current-carrying electrons are scattered in random directions,
with the result that free ﬂow is impeded and electrical resistance
results. On the other hand, at low temperatures, the wave func-
tion corresponds to a single common pool of information which
“guides” electrons and keeps them moving together in spite of
the irregularities that would otherwise deﬂect them and break
up the coordination of their movements. The net result is that
the current ﬂows without resistance. This situation may be com-
pared to that of a ballet in which all the dancers move and go
around obstacles together, according to a common score, which
constitutes a single pool of information. At higher temperatures,
however, the electrons do not behave in this way but, rather, like
a disorganized crowd of people, in which each person is guided
independently by his or her own information. As a result, the
movements tend to disperse in random directions.
In chemistry, the properties of a molecule also depend critically
generative order in science, society, and consciousness 191

on the common pool of information which is enfolded in its
wave function and which may extend into wider and wider
contexts. Therefore, the explicate order cannot give a complete
account of the emergence of new chemical properties, just as it
cannot account for the emergence of superconductivity. This
implies that the general goal of absolute reductionism is not
feasible; if by this is meant the proposal that all properties of
matter can be explained through explicate structures alone. This
limitation arises because the generative and implicate orders are
involved in an essential way, even at this rather elementary level
of physics and chemistry.
In Chapters 2 and 4 it was shown that there is a limit in which
the contributions from the quantum potential can be neglected.
In this limit ordinary classical (Newtonian) motions provide a
good description; on the whole they give a good approximation
to the domain of common, large-scale experience. Nevertheless
under special conditions, for example, extremely low temperat-
ures, the quantum potential may be signiﬁcant even on the
large scale. Superconductivity and superﬂuidity, for example, are
large-scale manifestations of the eﬀects of the quantum potential.
More generally, this potential plays a signiﬁcant role in many
other ways. Without it, it would not be possible to account for
the stability of atoms and the chemical properties of molecules
that constitute bulk matter. Nor could many of the basic proper-
ties of solids, such as crystals and metals, be explained. In add-
ition, the possibility must be kept open that in macromolecules,
and in other contexts, certain properties, as yet unexplained,
may be very sensitive to the quantum potential. But, it must be
emphasized, in spite of all this a suitable classical limit does exist
in which explicate forms appear to dominate. This explains why
generative and implicate orders are not signiﬁcant in the broad
areas of experience in which classical physics is valid.
The causal interpretation has been discussed as a particular
way of describing the generative order in physics. But even if this
science, order, and creativity
192

particular theory is sooner or later replaced, the essential idea of
the generative order, which operates through various levels
of information, will still be relevant. Indeed, throughout this
book it is being suggested that such a generative order goes far
beyond the quantum theory and is a key feature of the general
notion of order that is relevant for understanding creativity in all
areas of life.
When it comes to a consideration of the cosmos, it is clear
that the current big bang theory, along with its various devel-
opments, has produced a great many interesting results. How-
ever, it also contains a number of serious diﬃculties. Among
these, one of the most problematic, which was referred to in
Chapter 2, is the collapse of the wave function. This problem is
particularly serious near the moment of origin of the universe,
where there can be neither observers nor instruments which
make measurements, and so bring about the “collapse of the
wave function.” Nevertheless the usually accepted interpret-
ations, including the many worlds approach of Everett, all
require either the assumption of measuring instruments or, as in
Wigner’s interpretation, an observer outside the material
universe in the form of a pure disembodied spirit, in order to
give physical meaning to the mathematical equations.
In the present approach, however, there is no need to bring in
such assumptions, which in any case are extraneous to the mathe-
matical laws of quantum theory. Rather, the universe can be
discussed as grounded in that which is, out of which emerges an
overall reality that also includes subjects, who can act as observers.
As was suggested in Chapter 3, each subject can be considered
as a microcosm, who stands in relation to the whole as an
inexhaustible source of analogies. The observer and the observed
are thus internally related by a totality of “ratios” or proportions,
which are enfolded in both. This relationship can then unfold in
the cycle of perception-action between the two. There is there-
fore no need, as in the usually accepted interpretations of the
generative order in science, society, and consciousness 193

quantum theory, to depend on the assumption of an observer to
give meaning to the theory. Rather, the whole process of the
universe can be discussed in an approach that does not require a
fundamental distinction between observer and observed. For
this reason, it is not necessary to become involved in the various
complicated and arbitrary assumptions that have been proposed
about the nature of observers in which the other interpretations
are entangled.
In a discussion of the “wave function of the universe,” the
implicate and generative order of the whole is involved. Out of
this whole emerge subwholes (including observers), which
themselves can be organized into wider contexts, and these in
turn are further organized until the total universe is encompassed
in this way. As far as the interpretation of the present status of
physics is concerned, this generative order need be carried only
from the ﬁrst implicate order to the second (i.e., the superimpli-
cate order). But in accordance with the proposals of this chapter,
this is itself an abstraction from a much vaster generative order,
with a complex structure of relatively closed loops, which can in
principle go on indeﬁnitely to ever greater depths of subtlety.
Current physics has only “scratched the surface” of this order
so far. For example, in a deeper study that would go beyond the
current quantum theory, intimate connections in the implicate
and generative orders may be discovered between diﬀerent
scales of time, mass, energy, and distance, and a complex web of
relationships between all these diﬀerent scales may be found.
Already such correlations between diﬀerent regions of space
have been found through the Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen
experiment. It is now possible to speculate that such scales may
stand in the relationship of analogies to each other, with similar
forms and proportions in diﬀerent contexts. In general, such
relationships will be of an essential nonlocal nature. In this way,
the universe could exhibit new kinds of large-scale regularities
that could not be explained in terms of movements of matter
science, order, and creativity
194

or transmission of inﬂuences at speeds not greater than that
of light.
What have these arguments to say about the deeper nature
of time? As pointed out in Chapter 4, science has, up to now,
emphasized the sequential order of successive changes. In the
larger scale this includes, for example, the theory of evolution. In
the generative order, however, time is not put into the ﬁrst place.
Rather, time has to be related in a fundamental way to the
generative order. The image of a stream is helpful in this respect.
The stream can be studied by following an object that ﬂoats
along it, in a time process. However, it is also possible to con-
sider the entire stream all at once, to reveal the overall generative
order that goes downstream from the source or origin.
But the stream is only an image. The essential ﬂow is not from
one place to another but a movement within the implicate and
superimplicate (generative) orders. At every moment, the total-
ity of these orders is present and enfolded throughout all space
so, just as with successive enfoldments of the ink droplets, they
all interpenetrate. The ﬂux or ﬂow is therefore between diﬀerent
stages and developments of these orders. However, because of
the possibility of loops, this ﬂow may go in a pair of opposite
“directions” at the same time.
The temporal process of evolution of the universe is con-
stantly generated within this ﬂow from a “source” or “origin”
that is inﬁnitely far into the implicate and generative orders. To
see the universe in this way is to see “the whole stream at once”
and this perception may be called timeless, in the sense that what
is seen does not involve time in an essential way. However, the
modes of generation and unfoldment in the stream imply that
everything changes in successive moments of time. So in the ﬂux
described above, the timeless order and the time order enter into
a fundamental relationship. However, because this relationship is
now seen through the generative order, the time order appears
very diﬀerent from what it is in the traditional approach. It is not
generative order in science, society, and consciousness 195

primarily a transformation within a given level of organization
and explication. Rather it is, in the ﬁrst place, a transformation of
the entire “stream” of the implicate and generative orders that
takes place from one moment to the next.
This discussion appears, at ﬁrst sight, to reduce the time
order so that it could, in principle, be derived completely from
the timeless order. This would indeed be so, if the “ﬂow” in
the implicate, generative stream were only in the “direction”
from the source or origin down to ever more explicate orders
of succession. However, because of the two-way nature of this
ﬂow, there is an inherent dynamism in the theory and such a
reduction is not actually possible. The timeless order and the
temporal order therefore both make essential contributions to
the overall order.
What is called for is to consider both of these as extremes and
to explore the question of where there is not a rich new domain
of order that is intermediate between the two. Until now, physics
has not, however, been carried far enough to provide a context
of suﬃcient subtlety to allow questions of this general nature to
be studied usefully. Within the present chapter, this will, how-
ever, be done in other ﬁelds. But with regard to physics, so far
the “stream” has been studied only up to the stage of the second
implicate order. This contains the “information” represented by
the wave function of the universe. This information aﬀects the
ﬁelds and particles in ways that have been described earlier so
that they no longer satisfy the classical equations of motions, and
the laws of quantum theory then apply. But if the information
from “higher up the stream” also becomes active in this context,
the laws of the quantum theory may cease to hold, for these
come about by abstraction from the total stream. If this should
happen, then physics could begin to provide more indications of
the nature of the “stream” than it does now.
According to this, the big bang no longer has the unique
signiﬁcance that it does in the historical-evolutionary approach.
science, order, and creativity
196

In any case, reality contains immensely more than science may
happen to know, at this moment, about the universe. For
example, the universe may involve laws that go far beyond those
on which the current theory of the big bang is based. Therefore
it is quite possible that the big bang is only incidental in a
totality that is immeasurably more than anyone could ever hope
to grasp as a whole.
Current quantum ﬁeld theory implies that what appears to be
empty space contains an immense “zero point energy,” coming
from all the quantum ﬁelds that are contained in this space.
Matter is then a relatively small wave or disturbance on top of
this “ocean” of energy. Using reasonable assumptions, the
energy of one cubic centimeter of space is far greater than would
be available from the nuclear disintegration of all the matter in
the known universe! Matter is therefore a “small ripple” on this
ocean of energy. But since we, too, are constituted of this matter,
we no more see the “ocean” than probably does a ﬁsh swimming
in the ocean see the water.
What appears from our point of view to be a big bang is
thus, from the perspective of the ocean, just a rather small ripple.
On an actual ocean, waves from all around sometimes fortuit-
ously combine at a certain point to produce a sudden surge
of such magnitude that it can overturn a small ship. For the sake
of illustration it is possible to suppose that what we call the
universe originated in a similar way.
THE GENERATIVE ORDER OF LIFE AND
ITS EVOLUTION
The current approach in biology and the theory of evolution is
to treat explicate and sequential orders as basic. It is assumed that
ultimately everything in nature can be reduced to explanations
using such orders, for example, in terms of atoms, molecules,
DNA, cells, and other structures. But if the generative order is
generative order in science, society, and consciousness 197

basic to inanimate matter, then it is even more essential for the
understanding of life. In the explicate and sequential orders, life
appears to arise as a fortuitous chance combination of molecules
which leads, in a more or less mechanically determined way, to
further developments which produce ever higher and more
complex forms. While this approach can be admitted as signiﬁ-
cant for study, it is now seen as an abstraction and approxima-
tion in the light of the generative order. Its deeper meaning is to
be understood by exploring how it reveals the inward generative
order of the “whole stream” that is constantly present.
In this connection some scientists, notably Erwin Schrödinger,
have suggested that the quantum theory, with its new feature of
wholeness, could explain the basic qualities of life. However,
current work in biology hardly takes the quantum theory into
account, even though it is necessary for understanding the very
existence of molecules. The current approach is justiﬁed by
pointing out that the relatively high temperatures at which life
becomes possible make long-range quantum connections not
particularly important (although it may turn out that in certain
macromolecular processes, such as protein folding, long-range
quantum correlations may indeed be relevant). In conclusion,
therefore, it does not appear likely that the essence of life is
to be understood in terms of the details of conventional
quantum theory.
Rather it is necessary, for the understanding of life, to go
beyond the quantum theory and the superimplicate order,
into an inﬁnity of generative and implicate orders from which
present theory has been abstracted. In doing so, however, it is
not intended to seek the “ultimate origin of life” in a reduction-
ist way by going, for example, to an even more fundamental
microscopic theory than the quantum theory. Rather it is being
proposed that a deeper generative order is common to all life
and to inanimate matter as well. It is not therefore an attempt to
explain life in terms of matter, but rather to see how both
science, order, and creativity
198

emerge out of a common overall generative order. Within this
order there is room for new kinds of “pools of information”
from which life could be generated. The wholeness of the living
being, and even more of the conscious being, can then be under-
stood in a natural way, rather as the wholeness of the molecule
and the superconducting system is understood (although it
must not be forgotten that life is much subtler and more com-
plex than molecules and superconducting systems). Life is no
longer seen as the result of somewhat fortuitous factors, which
perhaps happened only on an isolated planet, such as Earth.
Rather it is seen to be enfolded universally, deep within the
generative order.
Consider the implications of this approach for the theory of
evolution. While the current neo-Darwinian theory is valid in
its proper domain, it represents an abstraction from a much
larger implicate and generative order, and its main signiﬁcance is
to be found in its relationship to this latter order. As a matter of
fact, there are a number of features, within the neo-Darwinian
view, that appear to be unsatisfactory and that give rise to prob-
lems of interpretation. In particular, an individual organism is
regarded as being an expression of its genetic material, within a
particular environment. To be sure, this environment has an
eﬀect on the individual expression of genetic material and on
the variations in the overall form of a plant or animal. For
example, plants of identical genetic stock but grown in the
absence of certain minerals will be stunted in comparison with
those grown under normal conditions. However, it is believed
that the environment has no eﬀect on the genetic material itself,
other than to contribute to random mutations and determine,
through natural selection, which forms will survive. Hence,
while the environment aﬀects the actual physical makeup of the
individual plant or animal, its only action on the genetic material
itself is to induce random changes. In this sense chance is
assumed to play an absolute role in evolution as well as in the
generative order in science, society, and consciousness 199

origin of life; just as it is believed to be absolute within the
conventional interpretation of the quantum theory.
While this overall approach may be adequate when it comes
to the explanation of relatively small changes and variations, it
may not be suﬃcient to account for more spectacular changes,
such as the appearance of an entirely new species. For major
evolutionary changes require the coordinated development of
many diﬀerent pieces of genetic code. It is not suﬃcient, for
example, to give a bird wings if it is to ﬂy. In addition its bones
must be made lighter while at the same time maintaining their
strength, feathers must be aerodynamically adapted, the center
of gravity must shift, the breastbone and musculature must
develop, and changes in metabolism are required to provide
suﬃcient energy for ﬂight. If such changes do not all occur
together and in a coordinated fashion, then they may well be
disadvantageous to survival. It is diﬃcult to understand how so
many of the highly coordinated chances demanded by evolution
could have come about by fortuitous chance combinations of
small random mutations.
It is proposed here that the generative order enfolds orders
that go beyond those that can be contained even in the quantum
domain, orders that have so far been “hidden” to science. Such
orders may involve implicit totalities of structure of the organ-
ism which can all emerge together. This is somewhat similar
to Goethe’s notion of the “original plant.” Goethe was speaking
of, not a beginning in time, but rather a source of order in the
generative principle that implicitly contains a totality of struc-
tures and forms of a range of related species. Orders of the kind
discussed above may be called a kind of “protointelligence.”1 This
does not refer to a form of conscious awareness but to the active
generation of new order, from levels that are at present “hidden”
to science, rather than to a more or less mechanical adaptation to
an existing order.
This protointelligence could be regarded as manifesting
science, order, and creativity
200

through a kind of “free play” similar to that in which, it is
suggested, actual human intelligence emerges in thought and
action. Under ordinary conditions, the scope of this free play is
limited, as in the neo-Darwinian approach, to small variations of
a more or less random nature. However, it seems to be generally
accepted that when species undergo large mutations, for
example, from reptiles to birds, the process is so rapid that it
gives rise to few intermediate fossil records, if any. To explain
this, it is proposed that, for reasons not yet known, the genetic
material of organisms can, from time to time, enter into a
state of greater scope for “free play” in which whole new
totalities of structure may be put forth, as it were, for a “test” of
their viability.
The essential feature of the protointelligence would be that
these totalities are not formed in a random fashion, but that
they emerge as relatively integrated wholes from subtler levels
that are enfolded beyond the ﬁrst and second implicate orders.
(These latter orders, as has been pointed out, are all that physics
and chemistry are currently able to treat.) If such new structures
continue to survive for some time then, as happens with thoughts
that survive sustained tests of validity, the structures will become
stabler. After this they will undergo only small random variations
until, once again, conditions arise in which the genetic material
becomes capable of a wider range of free play.
But what determines the conditions under which this “free
play” operates? One possible answer is to consider, along the
lines discussed in Chapter 3, that each part of the universe is a
kind of analogy to the whole and is therefore structurally related
to the whole. In this way there could be a kind of subtle percep-
tive response to the environment which would, under appropri-
ate circumstances, give rise to new kinds of active information.
This would dispose the organisms to enter a state of “free play,”
in which new totalities of structure are “proposed” which are
in some kind of harmonious “proportions” or “ratios” with
generative order in science, society, and consciousness 201

the environment. Perhaps there could even be a closed loop,
similar to that within the computer game, in which this active
information is able to feed back into the “perception.” This
whole process would, of course, take place within the general
context of natural selection, which would act as a “test” of
these “proposals.”
A number of biologists, including the late C. H. Waddington,
Stephen Jay Gould, Brian Goodwin, and Rupert Sheldrake,
have expressed serious reservations with regard to the current
approach to the whole question of morphology, especially in
connection with the appearance of new species.2 In particular,
Sheldrake has suggested that the accumulated experiences of a
species constitute a kind of formative memory, which disposes
individual members to develop accordingly. From the present
point of view, this could be regarded as a relative ﬁxing of the
primary creative action of the protointelligence in matter. This
relatively ﬁxed form would therefore be closer to a protointellect.
The approach now being proposed contains something of
Lamarckism and Darwinism while going beyond them. The
nature of protointelligence has evident similarities to Lamarckism
in the sense that it creatively responds to a particular situation.
On the other hand, the notion of protointellect is closer to
Darwin, in the sense that the species depends on “memories”
contained in the DNA, and possibly in the formative ﬁelds of
Sheldrake. However, this is only part of a total generative order
that goes on ultimately to include all life, all matter, the whole
known universe, and what may lie beyond.
THE GENERATIVE ORDER IN SOCIETY
This discussion of the generative order in physics, cosmology,
life, and evolution can now also be applied to human societies,
where similar ideas have already been hinted at. For example,
Arnold Toynbee proposed that new civilizations arise out of
science, order, and creativity
202

a creative surge, expressed most strongly perhaps in certain
individuals.3 Following this surge these civilizations ﬂower, are
maintained for a time, but eventually decay. The notion that
Western civilization is subject to such a cycle is not uncommon.
The Renaissance, in which our present civilization has its roots,
may be considered as the creative surge that was partly inspired
by the example of the creative surge of the ancient Greeks. But as
early as the eighteenth century, Diderot, in Rameau’s Nephew, saw a
fading and decay of this impulse, and later writers, such as
Nietzsche and Spengler, spoke openly on the death of God and
the decline of the West. In modern times, this theme of decay
has become a major one, not only in literature and drama but,
at least implicitly, in a considerable part of the visual arts. This
suggests that the generative order of societies has two basic
sides, that of growth and that of decay.
The most stable society known is that of the Australian
aborigines, which anthropologists estimate has lasted for about
thirty thousand years in more or less its present form. The
ancient Egyptian society lasted for several thousand years, but
with a number of ups and downs. The Chinese and Indian
societies have roughly a similar history. The ancient Greek and
Roman societies were much less enduring. Modern society has,
thus far, existed for a relatively short time, and it is now common
to predict that it may not last much longer.
The instability of societies is, of course, partly due to external
invasions, but history has shown that a stronger cause can gener-
ally be found in internal conﬂict and breakdown. The Australian
aboriginal society does not appear to have had conﬂicts serious
enough to cause internal decay. However, that society was
not only relatively simple but was, within certain bounds, fairly
ﬂuid and mobile in its structure, so there was no elaborate
organization that could easily break down. Moreover, at least in
relation to nature, there was a pervasive creativity in daily life.
This society was therefore able to go on meeting the rather
generative order in science, society, and consciousness 203

simple challenges it had to face for tens of thousands of years.
With the coming of the Europeans, the very simplicity of this
society became a serious limit, in the sense that it lacked the
degree of subtlety and complexity that would have been needed
to meet this challenge. By contrast, the Chinese society showed
its ability to absorb its invaders and make them Chinese.
Clearly, the notion of mere survival is much too simple for
discussing the evolution of societies; rather it is the ability to
make dynamic and creative responses to whatever changes may
take place. A society that has gone beyond its ﬁrst creative surge
hangs on indeﬁnitely to the habitual orders that are contained
in its customs, taboos, laws, and rules and that are held in its
unconscious infrastructure. Because these orders are ﬁxed and
limited, they will be bound, eventually, to become inadequate,
in the face of the ever-changing nature of reality. Changes may
be precipitated by natural environmental occurrences, such as
the failure of crops or game, or by the pressure of external
groups. But more generally, especially as civilization grows more
complex in its structure, what is most signiﬁcant is the activities
of society itself. These may lead eventually to decay, more or less
independently of the institutions, will, and desires of the people
who make up this society.
In nature as a whole, orders of growth and decay are insepar-
ably interwoven, as two sides of one overall generative process.
For example, with plants such growth and decay give rise to the
ground out of which can grow other plants. Indeed, without the
death of the individual organism, life would not go on. It is also a
rather common feeling that perhaps it is natural for societies to
take part in this cycle, so that the ultimate decay of each society is
therefore inevitable. In early times, such as the Stone Age, this
cycle was, in a certain sense, a viable possibility for humanity as a
whole. Decay could take place in some part of the world, while
growth and ﬂowering occurred in other parts. Furthermore the
decay of one society could provide a kind of fertile ground for
science, order, and creativity
204

the growth of a new one. Thus it can be plausibly argued that this
whole cycle is in some sense conducive to creativity.
But even if this argument is accepted as applying in the past, it
should now be clear that the very forces that have been liberated
by the development of modern societies make this kind of process
no longer appropriate. What faces humanity today is not the con-
tinuing cycle of civilization but worldwide annihilation, which
may even destroy the order of nature on which all life depends.
If the cycle of birth and decay continues, it would take a very
optimistic person indeed to say that the human race will survive
for as much as a thousand years, which is after all a rather short
period in human history, and much less in human evolution.
The challenge that faces humanity is unique, for it has never
occurred before. Clearly a new kind of creative surge is needed
to meet it. This has to include not just a new way of doing
science but a new approach to society, and even more, a new kind
of consciousness.
A consideration of the historical background of this state of
aﬀairs may be helpful in understanding what is required for
such a transformation. Arnold Toynbee has described the origin
of ancient Greek society as lying in a creative impulse which
emerged out of its response to some kind of challenge that it
faced in those early times. It is diﬃcult at such a historical dis-
tance to analyze this response in detail. However, Greek art, in its
early vigorous phases, certainly reﬂects a creative energy that
must have characterized the society as a whole. This energy led
to a ﬂowering not only in art but also in philosophy, mathemat-
ics, theater, poetry, and the development of democracy in polit-
ics. But within a relatively short time this had begun to decay,
partly as a result of internal dissension. In art it is possible to see
this process of losing touch with the creative surge as works
become elaborately reﬁned and eventually cease to express the
original vital energy.
In the Renaissance, there appeared a whole new spirit of
generative order in science, society, and consciousness 205

the age, which could be characterized as “the new secular order.”
In the previous eternal order, the highest value was that which
never changed. But in the Renaissance the way things changed and
the power to change them became the highest value. For example,
Galileo argued that it is precisely the transformations of nature
that are the most interesting. Francis Bacon carried this further,
opening up the prospect that through the understanding of such
processes humanity could dominate nature for the general good.
In sculpture Michelangelo explored the dynamic transformations
of human form that could be contained within a single block
of marble, and Leonardo, in his notebooks, was preoccupied
with energy, change, the Deluge, and the general expression of
power in nature. Throughout the whole culture, there spread a
wave of infectious exhilaration. This released the energy neces-
sary for a vast surge of new creative activity. Clearly, a new vision
had entered the generative order of European society.
If all societies have similarly started from a creative perception
in the generative order, then how do those of appreciable com-
plexity begin to decay? A basic reason may be that as new know-
ledge and institutional structures accumulate, they tend to
become ever more rigidly ﬁxed. Eventually it seems as if the whole
order of society, and the security of each individual, would be
endangered if these structures were to be seriously questioned or
changed. In order to hold things ﬁxed, therefore, the culture feels
itself forced to react in ways that are basically false, for example,
by becoming fragmented. In Chapter 1 it was shown that by
ignoring the connections of each thing to its whole context, the
illusion can be created that the ideas, structures, and institutions
that are the dearest can go on indeﬁnitely and unchanged. This
fragmentation is itself part of a broader process in which society
and culture “defend themselves” against acknowledging the
actual facts that call for change. Thus, as pointed out in Chapter
1, the mind is then caught up in the general process of “playing
false” in order to create illusion and delusion. This leads society
science, order, and creativity
206

into collusions in order to defend the illusions and delusions.
This attitude has also been called “bad faith.”
Clearly this process is a breaking down of the basic generative
order of the society. Those who see this will call for a funda-
mental and revolutionary change. But this provokes only fear and
hatred because so many people believe that society cannot func-
tion in any other way and, for many other reasons as well, do not
wish for change. Even in those cases where change is able to take
place, it is limited by the very factors that lie behind the original
decay in the generative order in the ﬁrst place. People now
become disillusioned by the ultimate and deep failure of their
eﬀorts to change. They are lost in despair, or else they entertain
false hopes which are essentially based on fantasy. This leads to
a further stage in the breaking up of the generative order in
which those in authority attempt to establish more and more
rigid control in order to prevent further deterioration. But rigid-
ity is ultimately the very source of this deterioration, so things
can only get worse in the long run. Indeed the whole process of
breakdown is sustained and constantly extended, because all
the proposed remedies are actually diﬀerent forms of the same
illness that they aim to cure.
The breakdown in the generative order of society is more
than mere decay, which might be regarded as the opposite
side to a natural process of growth, in the generative order of
society. Rather, the rigidity in the generative order constitutes an
extremely pervasive and far-reaching blockage of free play of the
mind, and this makes for the constant spread of false play and
prevents creativity that could adequately meet this situation.
Indeed, as with the individual, to the extent to which society
is no longer creative in its basic generative order, it becomes
destructive to itself and to everything that it touches. Thus both
with regard to human beings and society as a whole, the basic
distinction in the generative order is not between growth and
decay, but rather between creativity and destructiveness.
generative order in science, society, and consciousness 207

Becoming caught up in the false processes of a destructive
generative order, as described above, has been the ultimate fate
of all known civilizations. But is this inevitable? If so, the outlook
for the human race is very grim indeed. For the means of
destruction are now global and almost total, and no part can be
isolated from the rest of the world.
Need this cataclysmic failure of the human race necessarily
take place? Can it be avoided by a creative approach to all areas of
life? What is needed is not simply a new creative surge but a new
order of creative surge. One that extends into science, culture,
social organization, and consciousness itself. In order to explore
this issue properly, it will ﬁrst be necessary to enquire into the
nature of consciousness, for this contains the key to both creativity
and the factors that are impeding it.
CONSCIOUSNESS AND MATTER
There is a great deal of evidence that consciousness is inseparable
from the material processes of the brain and nervous system,
and indeed of the whole body. Thought, feeling, and intention
can radically change the distribution of blood ﬂow and various
chemicals within the brain. Likewise, changes induced in the
brain’s chemistry can modify overall mental states. More subtly,
abstract information concerning the meaning of some external
circumstance, such as the presence of danger, can aﬀect the
hormones, such as adrenaline as well as the neurotransmitters,
neuropeptides, and other brain chemicals, when they move out
through the whole body. In this fashion, brain and body, in turn,
profoundly change thought, feelings, and intention.
One commonly accepted view of all this is that ultimately
the whole of mental function can be reduced to nothing
more than physical and chemical processes of this kind. Thus it
is held by many neuroscientists that “consciousness is an
epiphenomenon of the brain.” An opposing view is that
science, order, and creativity
208

consciousness is a pure disembodied spirit in some kind of
interaction with matter.
Rather than arguing the merits and drawbacks of these posi-
tions, an alternative view will be advanced. This is based on the
notion that reality is inexhaustible and whatever we say a thing
is, it is something more and also something diﬀerent. Hence,
for example, if we say that consciousness is a material process,
this may well be fairly accurate up to a point. But it is also more.
Its ground is in the inﬁnite depths of the implicate and
generative orders, going from the relatively manifest on to ever
greater subtlety.
The word subtle means elusive, rareﬁed, delicate, intangible, and
ultimately indeﬁnable. This would at ﬁrst sight suggest that con-
sciousness is some form of disembodied spirit. However, in view
of the neurophysiological evidence cited above, which has of
course only relatively recently been made available, it seems rea-
sonable to conclude that consciousness always has a material
aspect or side that can in principle be studied scientiﬁcally. But
in this latter endeavor, no matter how far science goes, there is
always more and the totality will always elude the grasp of
science. That elusive side, which is nevertheless always present in
some form, is generally called the mental aspect. Consciousness
can then be understood, at each stage, as the interweaving of these
two sides. Hence it is possible to go beyond the usual approaches
in which mind and matter are two separate but interacting
streams, or in which consciousness is considered as just a
material process.
This way of looking at the nature of reality can be extended
to all life, and even to what is normally called inanimate matter.
The root of what is manifest in these forms lies in the ultimate
depths of the implicate and generative orders of the totality of
matter, life, and mind. In this sense, therefore, even inanimate
matter must have some kind of mental aspect. Indeed it has
already been shown that the ﬁrst implicate order in quantum
generative order in science, society, and consciousness 209

mechanics is organized by information in the second, super-
implicate order. Therefore, for the ﬁrst implicate order, such
information could be regarded as a subtler mental side. Like-
wise, for the second implicate order, the third is a more subtle
mental side and so on. Of course, this does not imply that
“consciousness” can be imputed to electrons or to other such
“particles.” This arises only at much deeper levels of the genera-
tive order.
The essential point, however, is that there is no absolutely
sharp “cut” or break between consciousness, life, and matter,
whether animate or inanimate. Of course each of these can be
analyzed in thought as categories with a degree of relative
independence upon each other. This makes it possible for each
to be studied, up to a point, in its own right. But more generally,
each of the stages of consciousness described above can be
regarded as lying somewhere along the “stream” of the
generative order. As its origin is approached, the subtle
mental side becomes more and more important, while in the
journey “downstream,” the manifest physical side becomes
more evident.
AWARENESS AND ATTENTION
If consciousness always has, at each stage, a subtler mental side
and a more manifest material side, the question then naturally
arises: How are these two sides related? It will be argued that
this relationship comes about, in the ﬁrst instance, through
awareness and attention.
In order to see what is meant by awareness, note that according
to its Latin root, consciousness is “what is known all together.”
Originally this meant “what everybody knows all together” and
thus referred to something that is essentially social and cultural.
By now, however, it generally refers to “what the individual
knows all together,” that is, to the total state of “knowingness”
science, order, and creativity
210

of the individual. This change of meaning goes together
with the change in the order of society, which was discussed
earlier, in which the individual came to have an ever-
increasing prominence.
If consciousness is some kind of “knowingness,” then what is
meant by the “unconscious mind”? Is it an “unknowing know-
ingness”? The resolution of this paradox depends on bringing
in the distinction between consciousness and awareness. These
terms are generally used in a fairly interchangeable way and yet
they do have diﬀerent connotations. Awareness is based on the
word wary or aware, meaning “watchfulness” or “heedfulness.”
The term sensitive awareness suggests the image of a person who is
very watchful and perceptive and therefore disposed to respond
even to the subtlest impressions of all kinds. Such watchfulness
may, for example, be precipitated by the presence of danger. This
sensitivity is not, however, primarily concerned with already
organized knowledge. Rather it responds to subtle diﬀerences,
similarities, and relationships in impressions from sense organs,
muscular movements, reactions, feelings, and thoughts, and in
“ratios” of all kinds, both material and mental. This sensitivity is
the source of all information that may later give rise to a percep-
tion and knowledge of form, order, structure, and ultimately all
that has meaning in consciousness. It is constantly transforming
any given context to an ever subtler level, and thus plays an
essential part in relating mental and material sides at each stage
of consciousness.
Evidently, it is possible to have consciousness, that is, “know-
ingness,” with little or no awareness. For example, a great many
of our habitual and automatic responses imply a considerable
amount of knowledge. This includes not only abstract know-
ledge but concrete knowledge in the form of skills that are
needed to deal with familiar situations. Yet the individual who
carries out these responses is often hardly aware of what he or
she is doing. That is to say, there is little sensitivity to most of
generative order in science, society, and consciousness 211

the diﬀerences, similarities, and relationships that could give rise
to new responses. Instead the individual operates from largely
“unconscious” physical and mental predispositions.
The term conscious awareness is in fairly common usage, and is
taken to mean a consciousness (i.e., a knowingness) that is per-
vaded, to one degree or another, with a sensitivity to the
immediate processes of environment, body, and mind. Rather
than using the self-contradictory term the unconscious, meaning
by this “unconscious consciousness,” it would seem better
to distinguish between unaware consciousness and aware con-
sciousness, or alternatively, conscious awareness.
A very large part of what may properly be termed consciousness
or knowingness is not normally accessible to awareness, and indeed,
there is no reason why it should be accessible. This includes
the kinds of “knowledge” that are built into the structure of the
brain and body: for example, the activity of the autonomic ner-
vous system, the processes determining motor control, and a
whole range of other functions, such as the release of various
hormones and neurochemicals. Also there are areas closer to
awareness, for example, tacit knowledge, such as that involved in
riding a bicycle, to which the philosopher Polani refers. And in
addition, there is the action deep within the generative order
from which creativity emerges.
Such areas are not usually accessible to awareness and may
be generally regarded as being in various kinds of implicate
orders. However, it is possible, for example, in listening to
music, to become directly aware of some of these implicate
orders. Indeed it would seem that there is no absolutely sharp
boundary between the kind of content that can enter awareness
and the kind that cannot. It is possible to become sensitive to just
how the muscles are aﬀected by impulses to act and thus become
somewhat aware of the tacit knowledge that is involved in riding
a bicycle. Nevertheless, although the boundary of awareness may
be moved, perhaps even a long way, conscious awareness is,
science, order, and creativity
212

broadly speaking, only a small part of the total ﬁeld of con-
sciousness or knowingness.
Another part of consciousness that remains fairly unaware is
the tacit infrastructure of ideas, which has been discussed
throughout this book. When this structure operates properly, it
serves us well by providing “knowledge at our ﬁngertips.” In
this way our minds are then free to concern themselves with
other things that require conscious awareness. However, as hap-
pens in science, this infrastructure can also become so rigid that
it interferes with proper awareness. Scientists then take a per-
manent bias, for example, in favor of whatever gives rise to
pleasant sensations which imply harmony and security. Equally
they react to sensations of disturbance or insecurity. Such a
permanent bias in sensitivity is evidently not compatible with
proper awareness. Rather it could better be called a kind of
unawareness, in which the response of the mind is inhibited or
blotted out in certain directions, while it is exaggerated in
others. In this way, the mind is caught up in playing false with
sensitivity and awareness.
Any discussion of awareness must, however, bring in the ques-
tion of attention, which is closely related. Indeed, the two words
are to some extent interchangeable, insofar as awareness can
mean heedfulness, which also signiﬁes attentiveness. Neverthe-
less, there is an important diﬀerence of connotation between
these two words. Thus, the word attention means literally “stretch-
ing the mind toward something.” This implies an inner activity
that is needed to grasp the object of interest mentally. Even
physically it has been demonstrated that a kind of attention
must operate as, for example, in the eye’s scanning pattern,
which varies according to each person’s concept of the object
that is being looked at. With an inappropriate scanning pattern,
this would mean that the object could not be seen properly. In a
similar way, suppose that the mind is able to “scan” its overall
content, including not only knowledge, but also what is revealed
generative order in science, society, and consciousness 213

in the sensitive response of awareness. The mind is thus able to
“take hold” of this content and grasp it as a kind of whole, at a
higher and subtler level. This is the beginning of attention
within the mind, which can move, if necessary, to indeﬁnitely
subtler levels. This movement, along with the sensitivity of
awareness, is constantly bringing content, on the more physical
side, toward the subtle “mental” side (which is closer to the
origin of the generative order).
As happens with awareness, however, rigidities in the tacit
infrastructure of consciousness act to interfere with the sort of
free movement of the mind that is needed for proper attention.
In this connection it is important to recall that each object
and each aspect of the content of consciousness has to be
“scanned” in a way that is appropriate to it. Rigid assumptions
as to the nature of these objects or aspects lead to an
inappropriate or limited scanning pattern and to the inability
to see properly in unfamiliar contexts. When combined with
permanent biases in sensitivity and with a variety of diversion-
ary and distracting tactics, such a mental habit produces sud-
den jolts, leaps of excitement, or absorbing but irrelevant
thoughts. These capture and beguile the attention and keep it
in an area that is judged not to be too disturbing. In this way
the mind is capable of grasping only a restricted content,
determined largely by the tacit infrastructure of consciousness,
for whatever content is outside the range of this attention is
not seen. This whole response therefore involves being caught
up in playing false with attention, which can be regarded as a
kind of inattention.
Of course, both with attention and awareness, it is often
necessary to focus for some time on a given context. For ex-
ample, if a person is thinking mainly about accomplishing a
certain task, then it is important to concentrate upon the proper
order that is needed for carrying out the task. But if the mind
holds on to this order in an extremely rigid manner, then
science, order, and creativity
214

creative new perceptions will not be able to emerge. For creativ-
ity to ﬂower there must be an easy mobility of sensitive aware-
ness so that attention can move freely and in any order that may
be relevant at the moment in question. Clearly the free move-
ment of awareness and attention has no inherent restrictions and
is limited only by the genuine necessities of the moment and by
permanently rigid features of the tacit infrastructure of con-
sciousness. Such free movement of awareness and attention is
closely related to the free play of thought, which was discussed
in earlier chapters. Indeed, both these kinds of freedom, which
are ultimately one, are necessary for creativity.
CREATIVE INTELLIGENCE
Awareness and attention bring about a movement of content
from the more manifest physical levels toward the subtler levels
of the generative order. The response to this is a movement in
the other direction, an unfoldment of the creative action of
intelligence. This originates, ultimately, in the depths of the
generative order.
In earlier chapters it was shown how, in the free play of
thought, creative intelligence responds to opposition and con-
tradiction with new proposals. These are “put forth” for testing,
in further thought and action. A similar response also takes
place in the area of sense perception. When something new is
encountered, which does not ﬁt into what is already known,
creative intelligence can put forth new sensory orders and
structures that form into new perceptions. These are tested in
cycles of perception-action, which were described in Chapters 1
and 2. Such a perceptive response to creative intelligence may,
however, be not only sensate but also aesthetic, kinesthetic,
and emotional. It can in principle happen in any area of life, but
is especially evident in music and dance, in which a creative
orchestration of themes and movements unfolds from and
generative order in science, society, and consciousness 215

enfolds into a similar orchestration of very subtle feelings and
impulses to act.
All of this emphasizes the universality of creative intelligence,
which has ultimately the same origin in every area of life. In this
connection it is not appropriate to think of experience as being
something which exists on its own, and which is from time to
time somewhat modiﬁed by the perceptions, thoughts, and
actions that come out of creative intelligence. Rather, every aspect
of such experience, whether physical or mental, emotional or
intellectual, can be profoundly aﬀected by creative intelligence,
wherever this is able to act. For through its action everything
may take on a new meaning.
Not only is intelligence ultimately indeﬁnable in its origin,
in the depths of the generative order, but it is also intrinsically
whole. For certain limited purposes, it may of course be abstracted
from the total response of intelligence and be treated as if it
were a part of life that had a deﬁnable source. But basically,
because of the extreme subtlety and pervasiveness of the action
of intelligence, such abstractions are only of limited validity. For
intelligence cannot be separated from the whole and assigned to
any deﬁned structure or order. Thus, no matter how far the
generative order is investigated in thought, there is always an
unlimited horizon beyond, which is too subtle to be considered
in the level in which this investigation was stopped. Probably
even the notion of the generative order itself is not adequate for
going to the ultimate origin of intelligence, which will always be
more than we can say and diﬀerent from it. This also means that
intelligence cannot be properly understood as something that
has evolved in the order of time. Rather, for the proper discus-
sion of the origin of intelligence, it is necessary to bring in the
timeless order (discussed earlier) in a primary role, while time
itself plays a relatively secondary part, in the description of the
manifestation of intelligence.
In this respect, a large part of what is commonly called
science, order, and creativity
216

intelligence should properly be called intellect (this was pointed
out in Chapter 3), which comprises relatively ﬁxed knowledge
and skills of various kinds. The intellect is essentially based on
the tacit infrastructure of consciousness and functions with little
conscious awareness. It is a little like a computer program,
although it goes far beyond anything that a computer could
accomplish today.
It should be emphasized in this connection that intellect,
emotion, and will cannot actually be separated, except for the
purpose of analysis in thought. For example, the categories of
the intellect can have profound emotional impact. Words
expressing totality, such as all, always, forever, never, and only, are the
key ingredients of many popular songs, which weave these
words together in a context whose meaning is aimed at stirring
up all sorts of strong feelings. Demagogues also use such words
with telling eﬀect. Yet these totality words are in fact the most
intellectual part of the language. Vice versa, powerful emotions
very strongly aﬀect the course of thought; indeed without some
emotional arousal, we would think very little at all. In the case
of the will, it is hardly necessary to point out that it depends
crucially on the content of thought, without which it would not
have the necessary determination. This content depends in turn
on intellectual concepts, such as necessity, the root of which is
ne-cess, meaning “not yielding.” Necessity, therefore, becomes a
disposition not to be readily deﬂected, which is, of course, an
essential characteristic of the will. In short, it is not possible to
determine where the will begins and intellect ends.
The inseparable nature of emotion, intellect, and will is in
harmony with what is known about the general structure of the
brain. For example, a very thick bundle of nerves connects the
frontal lobes, which have an intellectual function, to the base of
the brain, which is more associated with the emotions and
from which the whole organism is bathed in chemicals that
aﬀect all parts profoundly. Recent knowledge goes much further
generative order in science, society, and consciousness 217

toward revealing a similar but far more extensive and pervasive
interconnection in various structures and processes that must
be involved in the actual operation of thought, feeling, and
will. The activity of each individual nerve cell is directly con-
nected, via synaptic links which involve the activity of various
neurochemicals, to some thousand other nerves. In any neural
network, therefore, the number of interconnections is astro-
nomical. In turn, the strength of each interconnection is inﬂu-
enced by neurochemicals, such as the neurotransmitters, as well
as by the actual electrical activity within the network. The system
is of an almost unanalyzable complexity and subtlety in the
operation of its various processes, for individual nerve impulses
are mediated by an enormous range of chemical and electrical
responses, some of them local and others global, some general
and others highly speciﬁc in nature. An extreme reductionist
view may suggest that the nerve impulses are “processing data”
relating to movement, senses, and the intellect, while the neuro-
chemical bath would be close to a basis of experiencing an
emotional response. But in view of the enormous complexity
of the brain, such an image is clearly too crude a simpliﬁcat-
ion. Rather, the insights of neurochemistry and the nature of
nerve networks indicate very strongly that there can be no
fundamental separation at this level between thought, feeling,
and will.
The subtle mental side to these processes indicates that there is
even less reason for making such a separation. For it is possible to
sense and experience directly an intimate connection between
thought, feeling, and will and show that there is no point at which
one of them ends and the others begin. Moreover, creative intelli-
gence can profoundly aﬀect the whole meaning of these func-
tions, as well as the entire way in which they proceed at the level
of physics and chemistry. Indeed, it has already been suggested
why a large part of this content probably cannot be understood
in terms of the current laws of physics and chemistry and
science, order, and creativity
218

requires a level of explanation that goes beyond the superimpli-
cate order.
Ultimately the origin of all of this lies in the creative intelli-
gence, which is beyond anything that can be discussed in the
manifest physical side. This intelligence is universal and acts in
every area of mental operation.
In its depths, such intelligence can involve no separation
between knowing, feeling, and will. Thus, one way in which
intelligence becomes manifest is by organizing the categories,
orders, and structures of the intellect in new ways. It may orches-
trate feelings in an ever-changing movement, like that which is
experienced in music. Such a movement goes beyond the sort of
succession of ﬁxed patterns of feelings that can be identiﬁed in
fairly well deﬁned forms, such as pain, pleasure, fear, anger,
desire, and hatred. Orchestrated movement of feelings may
perhaps be what is meant most deeply by words such as love,
beauty, vitality, and so on. But where these feelings emerge from
the whole of the generative order, they must evidently have
meanings that are not adequately signiﬁed by what is commonly
conveyed by these words.
In everyday consciousness, however, the mind is absorbed
largely in the tacit infrastructure of ideas and dispositions to
feel and act, which are mainly mechanical in their operation. In
a metaphorical sense, at least, this activity of the mind could
be said to be “programmed.” But it should be clear that these
programs, while both useful and necessary, are limited, since
something more and something diﬀerent, creative intelligence,
is always in principle available.
THE BRAIN AND ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Within the current, generally mechanistic and reductionist,
worldview of science, it is only natural that a serious attempt
should be made to model the function of the brain on some
generative order in science, society, and consciousness 219

extension of what is now meant by a computer. This has led to
the attempt to develop what is called artiﬁcial intelligence, a ﬁeld
that is associated with several diﬀerent approaches, some of
which are quite subtle. For example, the ﬁeld of cognitive
psychology includes the study of perception, language, problem
solving, and concept formation. Other research ﬁelds combine
with the neurosciences, particularly in the areas of vision and
motor control. Other lines of investigation are leading scientists
to develop computers that are far more sophisticated than those
in use today. For example, there are “massively parallel” com-
puters, analog systems, and computer languages that deal with
concepts directly and are able to examine their own strategies
and goals.4 Such research has great value, but much of it seems
to be based on postulates that are of a generally reductionist
nature. One of these is that all cognitive processes can ultim-
ately be revealed through suﬃciently subtle experiments and
from inferences that are drawn from these investigations.
Another assumption, perhaps more fundamental, is that at
some stage scientists will come to the end of this cognitive
analysis, or if not, then what lies beyond will not be particu-
larly signiﬁcant.
It should be clear that these assumptions are not in harmony
with the approach taken in this book, where cognitive processes
are based on the intellect alone. Clearly this does not capture
the essence of the whole generative order of the mind. Very
probably it will be possible to simulate an unlimited number
of aspects of the intellect, which is after all a relatively mechan-
ical crystallization of the intelligence. In this sense, the proper
description of these studies should be called artiﬁcial intellect.
However, if scientists still claim that artiﬁcial intelligence and not
artiﬁcial intellect is genuinely involved in their researches, then
certain important questions must be answered, some of which
are indeed already being considered by researchers in this ﬁeld.
The basic problem is similar to that which is also encountered in
science, order, and creativity
220

human consciousness: How is it possible to question funda-
mental assumptions that have been ﬁxed as necessary for the
whole system of operations within the computer? In the case of
a computer, programs and strategies correspond to ﬁxed tacit
assumptions in the mind. But these assumptions are just what
must change in an appropriate way to meet the challenge of
new and hitherto unknown situations. One solution is to have
additional “higher order” internal or external computers that
control these changes. But these machines would themselves
also contain ﬁxed elements in their programs that would in turn
be required to change.
Moreover, the design of these ﬁxed elements, as well as indeed
that of the whole system, depends on a host of further assump-
tions made by the designers, most of which are part of the tacit
infrastructure of the general consciousness of humanity. For
example, in planning how to deal with a given problem, it is
generally taken for granted, without any explicit discussion, that
the current laws of physics and chemistry will be valid in any
situation that may come up. To provide an adequate simulation
of human intelligence, the computer would have to be able to
become “aware” of such implicit assumptions, and to question
them when necessary. This, however, would require that the
computer be able to uncover and question the whole tacit
and largely “unconscious” basis of the society in which it
was made.
To the extent that human intelligence is able to confront such
questions adequately, there is free play in thought and a corres-
ponding free movement in awareness and attention, which
makes possible the action of creative intelligence. How could
this be simulated by a computer? One suggestion is to introduce
random changes in some of its basic programs and strategies.
However, as with Darwinian evolution, such “mutations” would
for the most part be inappropriate and destructive. A possible
way to deal with this would be to suggest that only those
generative order in science, society, and consciousness 221

programs or strategies should survive that best ﬁt the environ-
ment. But here, the criterion or selection has simply been
externalized to include, for example, the scientists themselves, or
else the human society with its requirements. If the computer
itself is justiﬁably to be called intelligent, then it would have to
contain its own internal criteria for what is beneﬁcial or “ﬁt-
ting.” As far as can now be seen, this again would have to be
preprogrammed, and in facing a new situation it is just these
very criteria which themselves may have to change. This recalls
Kuhn’s notion of a scientiﬁc revolution in which the criteria for
judging theories are themselves subject to change.
Moreover, it can be called into question whether random
mutations, of the kind discussed here, can ever give rise to totally
“creative” perceptions, of the kind experienced by Bach and
Mozart. This question is related to an earlier one of whether
large changes in animal species can be accounted for by random
mutation in DNA. In that connection it was suggested that major
changes may have their origin in “hidden” orders, beyond those
that are now studied in terms of current physics and chemistry.
More generally it was proposed that creative intelligence origin-
ates in the subtle depths of the generative order, beyond any-
thing that could be speciﬁed in terms of well-deﬁned concepts
at all. It is there, too, that the free play of thought and the
free movement of awareness and attention have their ultimate
ground. It does not seem possible for any novel design of
computer or language to simulate such freedom adequately,
although it may be capable of providing signiﬁcant develop-
ments within the relatively limited area of artiﬁcial intellect. In
conclusion, it should be clear that creative intelligence cannot be
grasped by the intellect in any form and that it will necessarily
elude all such attempts to capture it in this way.
science, order, and creativity
222

CREATIVE INTELLIGENCE, TIME, AND THE
TIMELESS ORDER
If creative intelligence originates in the inﬁnitely subtle depths
of the generative order, which is basically not in the order of
time, then it follows that the discussion of creative intelligence
must bring in this timeless order in a fundamental way. This
order must be considered all at once, rather than in an order of
succession. However, to do this properly requires not only a
comprehension through the intellect but also a more immediate
and direct perceptual contact in which there is actually a sensi-
tive awareness and an alert attention to this “whole stream.” In
general this is not easy to do. We have become habituated to a
limited sensitivity and an attention that are appropriate only for
apprehending partial aspects of reality and for focusing on the
orders of succession that are appropriate to our notion of time.
This has come about through a long historical process, in which
the order of time has assumed an ever-increasing importance to
society in general.
In preindustrial societies, time, as an order of succession, is
not strongly emphasized. Time is generally understood through
the natural cycles of light and dark seasons, growth, and decay,
which are in essence, aspects of an eternal order. The past is
often seen timelessly through mythology, while the noncyclical
aspects of time are contained largely in vague notions, such as
“tomorrow,” that may mean “any time in the future, perhaps
never.” But in a modern industrial society, the signiﬁcance of
time is all-pervasive. Every moment from awakening to falling
asleep is ordered and organized in terms of time. The past is
ordered through records, which are now greatly extended with
the aid of computers, and the future is generally regarded as
being fairly well mapped out for many years ahead. This notion
is not cyclical but progressive. Time is considered to arise in
irreversible change, aimed at various ends and goals. A great deal
generative order in science, society, and consciousness 223

of pride is taken in the organization of time, and to follow time is
to be regarded as virtuous. People should not “waste time,” for
“time is money” and punctuality is a sure sign of inner discipline
and order. It is really striking to reﬂect on how much this attitude
has been strengthened, even in the past few centuries.
It is therefore not surprising to discover that, by now, our
awareness appears to operate almost solely in terms of time and
that attention is almost entirely dominated by the need to “scan”
an experience in an order that is appropriate to time. As a result
each of us may really feel that “time is all there is,” and that the
notion of a timeless order is either an illusion or an empty
construction of the intellect. In this way attention has been
captured within a rather limited and rigid pattern.
Nevertheless there are no inherent structural limitations on the
free movement of attention. It is possible for attention to turn
toward the implicate and generative orders, as in the example in
Chapter 4 of listening to music. Attention may operate in a similar
way while contemplating nature, for example, in observing the
ﬂow of a stream. Sooner or later the overall ﬂow of the “whole
stream” is sensed, in which various subsidiary movements, such
as eddies and ripples, take their places as minor variations. In
such a situation, consciousness itself seems to be ﬂowing, in a
manner that is analogous to the ﬂow of the stream of water itself.
But this is not a ﬂow in the ordinary visual or tactile space, from
one place to another. Rather it is felt to be a kind of space of the
mind, that is “everywhere and nowhere.” It may be experienced
as the implicate order, which is also generative in the sense
that content from the “origin” of the ﬂow tends to unfold far-
ther downstream. In this implicate order, time is of secondary
importance and is not very relevant to the “whole stream.”
Generally speaking, as soon as one returns to the ordinary
concerns of the day, this mode of perception will vanish as atten-
tion is given to patterns which emphasize time and analysis into
separate but interacting parts. However, if the signiﬁcance of
science, order, and creativity
224

what is happening is actually realized, then the free movement
of attention may itself turn toward that which is constantly
diverting attention toward time and analysis. In this way the free
mode of attention may then be available whenever there is a
quiet period.
It is useful to visualize the analogy of an obstruction which
causes water to back up, sometimes a long way toward the
origin of a stream, and in this way profoundly modiﬁes its ﬂow
downstream. Rigidly ﬁxed ideas similarly obstruct the ﬂowing of
the “stream” in the space of the mind. To free this ﬂow therefore
requires the removal of the obstruction. But how can this take
place? The suggestion here is that if such a free ﬂow comes about
in any area, such as the observation of nature, then through
proper attention to the whole question, a similar ﬂowing move-
ment can, as it were by analogy, come about in other areas and
will act to remove the obstructions that operate there.
As attention moves toward the encompassing order, which is
sensed as a kind of “present moment” that is constantly ﬂowing,
the aspect of change plays a smaller and smaller role in the
“space” of such a perception. The “timeless” ﬂow, which is
constantly renewed from the origin of the generative order, is
thus sensed as eternal. This is the deeper meaning of the eternal
order, which was discussed in Chapter 3. That is to say, the
eternal order is not properly to be regarded as static, but rather
as eternally fresh and new. As attention goes to the consideration
of succession, however, it begins to be directed toward the
temporal or secular order.
In terms of the superimplicate order, it is clear that if the
ﬂow were only from the subtler to the more manifest, then it
would reduce to a purely timeless order as described above. Such
an order could in a certain sense be intensely creative. But if
what happens in one moment would not be related to the next
moment, such creativity would resemble an arbitrary series of
kaleidoscopic changes with little total meaning. Moreover, the
generative order in science, society, and consciousness 225

more manifest levels would have no autonomy in relation to
the subtler ones. A more meaningful kind of creativity can be
obtained by relating the eternal order to the time order, and by
allowing the more manifest orders to have some degree of
relative autonomy.
In the superimplicate order a similar relative autonomy of
the manifest, or explicate, forms has already been explained as
arising in closed loops, similar to that found in the computer
game. This also introduces a relatively self-determined order of
development in time. The “tighter” this loop is, the more nearly
self-determined will be the order and the more nearly “secular”
it will become. As the connections in the loop are “loosened,”
however, allowing for some degree of free play, it becomes pos-
sible for the creative action from the subtler levels to enter into
the activity within such a loop. So, there is in general a whole
spectrum of orders available between the eternal and the secular
extremes. Within this spectrum there is a broad and rich area for
human creativity. Thus, for example, the “tightness” or “loose-
ness” of the closed loop has to vary to ﬁt each new situation
appropriately. Each change in these qualities will bring about a
diﬀerent order in which the timeless and temporal sides will
have diﬀerent degrees of importance.
Clearly an attempt to stay rigidly at one of these extremes will
seriously impede creativity. For example, if the mind is rigidly
set on accomplishing a given goal in a certain order of time,
creativity is eﬀectively blocked. Rather whoever has the interest
and passion needed for creativity will often be hardly aware of
the passage of time. However, if all awareness of time order were
permanently blotted out, then a person would be incapable of
the consecutive, sustained activity that is also genuinely needed
for creativity. As indicated above, the particular degree of
emphasis on the timeless and the temporal orders will have to
vary with the particular context. A proper attention to this ques-
tion clearly opens up a new order of possibilities for creativity.
science, order, and creativity
226

There is a commonly accepted view that it is not actually
possible to say anything relevant about creativity, because to do
this would necessarily limit the latter in a mechanical and there-
fore uncreative way. However, this viewpoint is extreme and has
the eﬀect of preventing any inquiry into the question of what
impedes creativity and how creativity could be fostered. Indeed
the rigid extremes of the timeless and the temporal, or the verbal
and the nonverbal, are precisely one of the major blocks to
creativity itself. Therefore it is possible that something relevant
may be said about creativity, provided it is realized that whatever
we say it is, there is also something more and something
diﬀerent. In this way any discussion of creativity acts as a point
of departure rather than a deﬁnitive statement about “what is.”
This section has in fact gone beyond the normal scope of
discourse in the book so far, which has mainly dealt in terms of
facts and ideas. It has investigated and suggested approaches that
may be favorable to creativity, or at least to “loosening” the rigid,
tacit infrastructures that impede its operation. In the next chapter
this approach will be developed even further to indicate a num-
ber of key approaches that may favor the ﬂowering of creativity.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
This chapter brought together science, nature, society, and con-
sciousness in terms of an overall common generative order.
Creativity was found to act, not only through the free play of
thought but also through a similar free movement of awareness
and attention. These are what make possible the action of
creative intelligence which unfolds from its indeﬁnable sub-
tle source toward manifestation down the “stream” of the
generative order.
The question was then raised as to whether computers will
ever adequately simulate this action. It was suggested that they
should instead be regarded as providing a kind of artiﬁcial
generative order in science, society, and consciousness 227

intellect rather than artiﬁcial intelligence. Finally the question of how
the timeless generative order and the temporal order of succes-
sion may be related was explored and it was seen that an
immense new creative domain of order lies between these
two extremes.
science, order, and creativity
228

6
CREATIVITY IN THE
WHOLE OF LIFE
In the previous chapter it was suggested that the potential for
creativity is natural but that an excessively rigid attachment to
ﬁxed “programs” in the tacit infrastructure of consciousness is
primarily what prevents this creativity from acting. The present
chapter will explore the nature of these blocks in greater detail,
and the social and cultural conditioning that lies behind them.
This leads to a discussion of free dialogue, which is proposed as
a key activity in which this sort of conditioning can be dissolved.
Such free dialogue is fundamentally relevant to the whole ques-
tion of how conditioning of the individual and of humanity,
to falseness at the sociocultural level, can come to an end.
This chapter also contrasts the approaches of East and West to
these important questions and suggests that a new order is in
fact needed which goes beyond both. Finally the overall planet-
ary culture is discussed in terms of three basic attitudes of
mind to the whole of life: the scientiﬁc, the artistic, and the
religious. The main purpose of the book is then summed up in a

discussion suggesting what would be involved in a general
release of human creative energies.
CREATIVITY AND WHAT BLOCKS IT
In the Introduction, a call was made for a new surge of creativity
in science. By now it will be clear that such a surge must extend
into all areas of human activity if the actual challenge, which
has ﬁnally revealed itself, is to be met. But does this mean that
creativity must somehow be elicited from an organism that
does not have in itself a natural potential for creativity? It is
proposed that, on the contrary, human beings do indeed have
such a potential. However, as children grow older, this creativity
appears to be blocked.
Some insight into the nature of this block can be gained from
the work of Desmond Morris, published in The Biology of Art.1
In one experiment chimpanzees were given canvas and paint
and immediately began to apply themselves to make balanced
patterns of color, somewhat reminiscent of certain forms of
modern art, such as abstract expressionism. The signiﬁcant point
about this experiment is that the animals became so interested
in painting and it absorbed them so completely that they had
comparatively little interest left for food, sex, or the other activ-
ities that normally hold them strongly. Additional experiments
showed somewhat similar results for other primates. When very
young children are given paints, their behavior is remarkably
like that of the chimpanzees.
This seems to indicate that creativity is a natural potential. Yet
somehow, in most cases, the urge to create fades as the human
being gets older. Or at best it continues in certain limited areas,
such as science, music, or painting. Why should this happen?
An extension of Morris’s experiment involved rewarding the
chimpanzees for producing their paintings. Very soon their work
began to degenerate until they produced the bare minimum that
science, order, and creativity
230

would satisfy the experimenter. A similar behavior can be
observed in young children as they become “self-conscious” of
the kind of painting they believe they are “supposed” to do. This
is generally indicated to them by subtle and implicit rewards,
such as praise and approval, and by the need to conform to what
other children around them are doing. Thus creativity appears
to be incompatible with external and internal rewards or pun-
ishments. The reason is clear. In order to do something for a
reward, the whole order of the activity, and the energy required
for it, are determined by arbitrary requirements that are extrane-
ous to the creative activity itself. This activity then turns into
something mechanical and repetitious, or else it mechanically
seeks change for its own sake. The state of intense passion and
vibrant tension that goes with creative perception in the way
discussed in Chapter 1 then dies away. The whole thing becomes
boring and uninteresting, so that the kind of energy needed for
creative perception and action is lacking. As a result, even greater
rewards, or punishments, are needed to keep the activity going.
Basically, the setting of goals and patterns of behavior, which
are imposed mechanically or externally, and without under-
standing, produces a rigid structure in consciousness that blocks
the free play of thought and the free movement of awareness
and attention that are necessary for creativity to act. But this does
not mean that rules and external orders are incompatible with
creativity, or that a truly creative person must live in an arbitrary
fashion. To write a sonnet or a fugue, to compose an abstract
painting, or to discover some new theorem in mathematics
requires that creativity should operate within the context of a
particular artistic or mathematical form. Cézanne’s particular
creativity in art, for example, was directed toward the discovery
of new forms and orders of composition within the context of a
particular form of freedom that had been previously established
by the Impressionists. Some of Bach’s greatest works are simi-
larly created within the conﬁnes of strict counterpoint. To live in
creativity in the whole of life 231

a creative way requires extreme and sensitive perception of the
orders and structures of relationship to individuals, society, and
nature. In such cases, creativity may ﬂower. It is only when cre-
ativity is made subservient to external goals, which are implied
by the seeking of rewards, that the whole activity begins to
wither and degenerate.
Whenever this creativity is impeded, the ultimate result is not
simply the absence of creativity, but an actual positive presence
of destructiveness, as was suggested in Chapter 5. In the case of
the painting experiment, this shows up as a false attitude. Both
the chimpanzee and the child are engaged in an activity that
no longer has meaning in itself, merely in order to experience
a pleasant and satisfying state of consciousness, in the form
of reward or the avoidance of punishment. This introduces
something that is fundamentally false in the generative order
of consciousness itself. For example, the continuation of this
approach would eventually lead the child to seek pleasing words
of praise from others, even if they are not true, and to collude
with others in exchanging ﬂattering remarks that lead to mutual
satisfaction. This, however, is achieved at the expense of self-
deception that can, in the long run, be quite dangerous.
What is of even greater danger to the child, in such an
approach, is that it eventually brings about violence of various
kinds. For creativity is a prime need of a human being and its
denial brings about a pervasive state of dissatisfaction and bore-
dom. This leads to intense frustration that is conducive to a
search for exciting “outlets,” which can readily involve a degree
of force that is destructive. This sort of frustration is indeed a
major cause of violence. However, what is even more destructive
than such overt violence is that the senses, intellect, and emotions
of the child gradually become deadened and the child loses the
capacity for free movement of awareness, attention, and thought.
In eﬀect, the destructive energy that has been aroused in the
mind has been turned against the whole creative potential itself.
science, order, and creativity
232

Most education does in fact make use, in explicit or in more
hidden and subtle ways, of rewards and punishments as key moti-
vating factors. For example, the whole philosophy of behavior
modiﬁcation and positive reinforcement, which is particularly
prevalent in North American education, holds that a system of
rewards is essential for eﬀective learning. This alone is a tremen-
dous barrier to creativity.
In addition, education has traditionally given great value
to ﬁxed knowledge and techniques. In this way it places an
extremely great importance on authority as determining the very
generative order of the psyche. What is involved is not only the
authority of the teacher as a source of knowledge that is never to
be questioned, but even more, the general authority of know-
ledge itself, as a source of truth that should never be doubted. This
leads to a fundamental loss of self-conﬁdence, to a blockage of
free movement and a corresponding dissipation of energy, deep
in the generative order of the whole of consciousness. Later on, all
of this may show up as a disposition to be afraid of inquiring into
fundamental questions, and to look to experts and “geniuses”
whenever any diﬃculty or basic problem is encountered.
Of course, a certain reasonable kind of authority is needed to
maintain necessary order in the classroom. And the student has
to realize that, in broad areas, the teacher has valuable know-
ledge that can be conveyed in an appropriate way. But what is
important is the overall attitude to this knowledge. Does it seek to
impose itself arbitrarily and mechanically deep within the gen-
erative order of the mind, or does it allow itself to be discussed
and questioned, with a view to making understanding possible?
Similar questions can be raised with regard to conformity to
arbitrary norms, which come not only from the teacher, but
even more from the peer group and from society at large.
Beyond school, society operates in much the same way, for it
is based largely on routine work that is motivated by various
kinds of fear and by arbitrary pressures to conform as well as by
creativity in the whole of life 233

the hope for rewards. Moreover, society generally regards this as
necessary and valuable and, in turn, treats creativity as irrelevant
for the most part, except in those special cases, such as science
and the arts, in which it is rewarded. In fact, no society has thus
far managed to organize itself in a complex way without using a
system of rewards and punishments as a major inducement to
bring about cooperation. It is generally felt that if society tried
to do without these, whether in the family, in the classroom, at
work, or in broader contexts, it would incur the risk of eventual
total disruption and chaos. Creativity is nevertheless a major
need of each human being and the blockage of this creativity
eventually threatens civilization with ultimate destruction.
Humanity is therefore faced with an urgent challenge of
unparalleled magnitude. Speciﬁcally, rigidity in the generative
order, to which control through rewards and punishments makes
a major contribution, prevents the free play of thought and the
free movement of awareness and attention. This leads to false play
which ultimately brings about a pervasive destructiveness while
at the same time blocking natural creativity of human beings.
A proper response to this challenge requires the kind of over-
all creativity in society that is implicit in the call being made in
this book for a general creative surge in all areas of life. Clearly
from this it would follow that the various forms of rigidity that
have already been discussed would all change fundamentally.
But such a change cannot be restricted to a single overall ﬂash of
insight. Creativity has to be sustained. For example, in Chapter 4 it
was shown how the artist has to work constantly from the creative
source in the generative order. An artist does not have a creative
vision and then apply it mechanically, in a sequential process by
means of rules, techniques, and formulae. Rather, these latter
ﬂow out of the sustained creative vision in a creative way.
To pay serious attention to this need for sustained creativity is
extremely relevant for bringing about a creative change in culture
and in society. In most cases, however, creative new discoveries
science, order, and creativity
234

are generally followed by an attempt to reduce them to some-
thing that can be applied mechanically. While mechanical appli-
cation is necessary in certain contexts, the basic impetus for each
individual must come from the creative origin, and this is beyond
any mechanical, explicate, or sequential order of succession.
It is possible to point to speciﬁc areas in which a creative
change would be of great beneﬁt to society and the individual.
For example, by means of a tremendous creative common
action, education must no longer depend on rewards and pun-
ishments, no matter how subtle these may be. It must also cease
to place an excessively high value on arbitrary authority, ﬁxed
knowledge, and techniques and conformity. Some partial and
preliminary work in this direction has been done from time to
time. For example, there has been an eﬀort to present the child
with a great deal of meaningful material to arouse interest, so
that the child does not have to be oﬀered a reward to learn. Also,
some people working in this ﬁeld have emphasized free play as
a way of arousing creativity. Others have given much attention
to relationships that avoid unnecessary authority and conform-
ity. By the further development of such approaches, it should in
principle be possible for children to learn without the induce-
ment of rewards.
However, there are deeper diﬃculties, which prevent these
approaches from actually working in the long run. The problem
does not stem primarily from the ﬁeld of education alone. Rather,
it arises ultimately out of the tacit infrastructure of the entire
consciousness of humanity. This is deeply and pervasively con-
ditioned, for example, by general tradition that takes the absolute
necessity of rewards and punishments for granted. Both teachers
and students are caught up in subtler forms of the same false
structure that they are explicitly trying to avoid. This may, in the
long run, be at least as destructive as was the original pattern
that the whole experiment in education was designed to avoid.
It seems that the whole conditioning of all who take part must
creativity in the whole of life 235

in fact change: society, the family, and the individual. It is thus
clear that there is no single stationary point at which these prob-
lems might be attacked. The educational system, society, and the
individual are all intimately involved. But it is ultimately the
overall order of human consciousness that has to be addressed.
BLOCKS TO CREATIVITY IN THE GENERATIVE
ORDER OF SOCIETY
Creativity, in almost every area of life, is blocked by a wide range
of rigidly held assumptions that are taken for granted by society
as a whole. Some of these have already been discussed in this
book, but in addition, every society holds additional assump-
tions that are of such a shaky nature that they are not even
admitted into discussion. There is therefore an unspoken require-
ment that everyone must subscribe to these assumptions, but
that no one should ever mention that any such assumptions
indeed exist. They are tacitly denied as operating within society,
and even this denial is denied. The overall eﬀect is to lead people
to collude in “playing false” so they constantly distort all sorts of
additional thoughts in order to protect these assumptions. Such
bad faith enters deep into the overall generative order of society.
These rigidities and ﬁxed assumptions, many of which must
not be mentioned but must nevertheless be defended, may be
compared with a kind of pollution that is constantly being poured
into the stream of the generative order of society. It makes no
sense to attempt to “clean up” parts of this pollution farther
downstream while continuing to pollute the source itself. What
is needed is either to stop the pollution at its source, or to
introduce some factor into the stream that naturally “cleans
up” pollution.
In the body a similar problem arises. As a person grows older,
through infection, allergies, contaminants, misadventure, and the
processes of aging, considerable “misinformation” or irrelevant
science, order, and creativity
236

information accumulates in the system. Indeed it is possible to
look at a disease like cancer as arising from misinformation in
the structure of DNA. Viruses also introduce misinformation, in
the sense that DNA from the virus acts to replace some of the
DNA in the host cell and therefore causes this cell to replicate
foreign DNA rather than serving the needs of the body.
There are basically three ways of dealing with this problem of
misinformation in the body. The ﬁrst is to avoid the introduction
of misinformation in the ﬁrst place, for example, by keeping
away from infection through good sanitation and a careful diet.
Second, where misinformation exists, it may be possible to do
something to remove it through various kinds of medical inter-
vention. But more signiﬁcantly, the third option involves the
body itself, which possesses an immune system which is able to
“clear up” misinformation in a natural way. This is indeed the
body’s main mode of dealing with misinformation. This can be
clearly seen from the fact that drugs are of little use in treating
a disease like AIDS, which destroys this immune system itself.
Furthermore, the whole practice of immunization relies on
activating the immune system and so avoiding the onset of
particular diseases.
The immune system itself is particularly complex and contains
a very subtle kind of information that can respond to the whole
“meaning” of what is happening to the order of the body. In this
way it is able to distinguish misinformation from information
needed for the body’s healthy operation. It can be compared to
a kind of “intelligence” that works within the body. Moreover
there is evidence that this sort of “intelligence” can respond to
the higher levels that are usually associated with thought and
feeling. It is well known that depressing thoughts can inhibit
the activity of the immune system, with the result that a person
becomes more susceptible to infections. Indeed there is much
evidence that a vigorous, creative state of mind and a strong “will
to live” are conducive to general health and even to recovery
creativity in the whole of life 237

from dangerous illnesses.2 More generally, it could be said that
good health is basically a manifestation of the overall creative
intelligence, working in concert with the body, through various
means that include exercise, diet, relaxation, and so on.
Returning to a consideration of society, clearly there is also a
vast amount of misinformation in circulation which acts toward
society’s degeneration. The media and various modern means
of communication have the eﬀect of rapidly disseminating and
magnifying this misinformation, just as they do with valid infor-
mation. It should be clear that by “misinformation” is meant
a form of generative information that is inappropriate, rather than
simply incorrect statements of fact. In a similar way a small
“mistake” in DNA can have disastrous consequences because it
forms part of the generative order of the organism and may set
the whole process in the wrong direction.
In society, the generative order is deeply aﬀected by what has
a very general signiﬁcance. Indeed the generative order may be
regarded as the concrete activity of the general. This takes the form of
general principles, general aims, and generally accepted values,
attitudes, and beliefs of all kinds that are associated with the
family, work, religion, and country. In going from these general
principles to the universal, it is clear that the eﬀect on the genera-
tive order will become yet more powerful. When a given prin-
ciple is regarded as universally valid, it means that it is taken as
absolutely necessary. In other words, things cannot be otherwise,
under any circumstances whatsoever. Absolute necessity means
“never to yield.” To have something in the generative order that
can never give way, no matter what happens, is to put an absolute
restriction on free play of the mind, and thus to introduce a
corresponding block to creativity that is very diﬃcult to move.
Of course, both the individual and society require a certain
stability, and for this, thought must be able to hold itself ﬁxed
within certain appropriate limits and with a certain kind of
relative necessity.
science, order, and creativity
238

Over a limited period of time, certain values, assumptions,
and principles may usefully be regarded as necessary. They are
relatively constant, although they should always be open to
change when evidence for the necessity of the latter is perceived.
The major problem arises, however, when it is assumed, usually
tacitly and without awareness and attention, that these values,
assumptions, and principles have to be absolutely ﬁxed, because
they are taken as necessary for the survival and health of the
society and for all that its members hold to be dear.
In the beginning of this book it was argued that science, which
is in principle dedicated to the truth, tends to be caught up in
necessity which then leads to false play and a serious blockage
of creativity. It is now clear that the assumptions of absolute
necessity, with their predispositions to unyielding rigidity, are
only part of a much broader spectrum of similar responses
that pervade society as a whole. General principles, values, and
assumptions, which are taken in this way to have absolute neces-
sity, are thus seen as a major source of the destructive misinfor-
mation that is polluting the generative order of society.
As with the body, society attempts to deal with this sort of
misinformation by trying to prevent it from entering its fabric,
or attempting to “cure” it with some form of therapy. For
example, on a rather superﬁcial level, there are laws to prevent
false information and information which may engender hatred,
anger, and prejudice from being spread about various races, reli-
gions, and groups. Writers, dramatists, and ﬁlmmakers go some
way to making people aware of prejudices and rigidly ﬁxed atti-
tudes. But in the long run, all these attempts are limited by the
overwhelming, and yet often very subtle, pressures within soci-
ety toward colluding to defend one’s own group and its ideas.
In addition, there is the whole problem of the intolerance and
mistrust that have grown up between nations, religions, ideolo-
gies, and other groups which go all the way down to the family
itself. To some extent psychotherapy and group therapies can
creativity in the whole of life 239

help to clear up individual misinformation of this kind, which
may go back to early childhood, or start in a later phase of life.
But these approaches have very little eﬀect in the larger sphere
of society as a whole.
A particularly important piece of misinformation is the key
assumption that creativity is necessary only in specialized ﬁelds.
This assumption pervades the whole culture, but most people
are generally not aware of it; there is always a tendency for
misinformation to defend itself by leading people to collude
in playing false, whenever such an assumption is questioned.
Assuming the restricted nature of creativity is obviously of ser-
ious consequence for it clearly predetermines any program that
is designed to clear up the misinformation within society and
suggests that it cannot be creative.
All that seems to be left is to ask whether society contains
some kind of “immune system” that could spontaneously and
naturally clear up misinformation. If such a system exists, then
it is certainly not obvious, nor does it appear to be in common
operation within our society today.
DIALOGUE AND CULTURE
In this section it is proposed that a form of free dialogue may
well be one of the most eﬀective ways of investigating the crisis
which faces society, and indeed the whole of human nature and
consciousness today. Moreover, it may turn out that such a form
of free exchange of ideas and information is of fundamental
relevance for transforming culture and freeing it of destructive
misinformation, so that creativity can be liberated. However, it
must be stressed that what follows is not given in the spirit of
a prescription that society is supposed to follow. Rather it is an
invitation to the reader to begin to investigate and explore in
the spirit of free play of ideas and without the restriction of the
absolute necessity of any ﬁnal goal or aim. For once necessity
science, order, and creativity
240

and absolute requirements or directions enter into the spirit of
this exploration, then creativity is limited and all the problems
that have plagued human civilization will surface yet again to
overwhelm the investigation.
To begin, it should be noted that many of the ideas to be
explored were ﬁrst investigated by Patrick de Maré, who is a
psychiatrist working in England.3 De Maré has used his wide
experience of dialogue in therapeutic groups to support his
arguments. However, it is essential to emphasize that his ideas
about dialogue are not concerned primarily with psychotherapy,
but rather with the transformation of culture, along the general
lines that have been indicated in this chapter.
In the ﬁrst two chapters it was shown how rigid conditioning
of the tacit infrastructure of scientiﬁc thought has led to a frag-
mentation in science and to an essential breakdown in com-
munication between areas which are considered to be mutually
irrelevant. Nevertheless a closer investigation of actual cases sug-
gested that there is nothing inherent in science which makes such
breaks in communication and fragmentation inevitable. Indeed
wherever fragmentation and failures in communication arise,
this clearly indicates that a kind of dialogue should be established.
The term dialogue is derived from a Greek word, with dia
meaning “through” and logos signifying “the word.” Here “the
word” does not refer to mere sounds but to their meaning. So
dialogue can be considered as a free ﬂow of meaning between
people in communication, in the sense of a stream that ﬂows
between banks.
A key diﬀerence between a dialogue and an ordinary discus-
sion is that, within the latter, people usually hold relatively ﬁxed
positions and argue in favor of their views as they try to convince
others to change. At best this may produce agreement or com-
promise, but it does not give rise to anything creative. Moreover,
whenever anything of fundamental signiﬁcance is involved, then
positions tend to be rigidly nonnegotiable and talk degenerates
creativity in the whole of life 241

either into a confrontation in which there is no solution, or
into a polite avoidance of the issues. Both these outcomes are
extremely harmful, for they prevent the free play of thought in
communication and therefore impede creativity.
In dialogue, however, a person may prefer a certain position
but does not hold to it nonnegotiably. He or she is ready to listen
to others with suﬃcient sympathy and interest to understand the
meaning of the other’s position properly and is also ready to
change his or her own point of view if there is good reason to do
so. Clearly a spirit of goodwill or friendship is necessary for this
to take place. It is not compatible with a spirit that is competitive,
contentious, or aggressive. In the case of Einstein and Bohr, which
was discussed in Chapter 2, these requirements were evidently
met, at least initially. However, because each felt that a diﬀerent
notion of truth and reality was involved, which was not negoti-
able in any way at all, a real dialogue could never take place.
This brings us to an important root feature of science, which
is also present in dialogue: to be ready to acknowledge any fact
and any point of view as it actually is, whether one likes it or
not. In many areas of life, people are, on the contrary, disposed
to collude in order to avoid acknowledging facts and points of
view that they ﬁnd unpleasant or unduly disturbing. Science
is, however, at least in principle, dedicated to seeing any fact as
it is, and to being open to free communication with regard
not only to the fact itself, but also to the point of view from
which it is interpreted. Nevertheless, in practice, this is not often
achieved. What happens in many cases is that there is a blockage
of communication.
For example, a person does not acknowledge the point of
view of the other as being a reasonable one to hold, although
perhaps not correct. Generally this failure arises when the other’s
point of view poses a serious threat to all that a person holds
dear and precious in life as a whole.
In dialogue it is necessary that people be able to face their
science, order, and creativity
242

disagreements without confrontation and be willing to explore
points of view to which they do not personally subscribe. If they
are able to engage in such a dialogue without evasion or anger,
they will ﬁnd that no ﬁxed position is so important that it is
worth holding at the expense of destroying the dialogue itself.
This tends to give rise to a unity in plurality of the kind dis-
cussed in Chapter 3. This is, of course, quite diﬀerent from
introducing a large number of compartmentalized positions
that never dialogue with each other. Rather, a plurality of points
of view corresponds to the earlier suggestion that science and
society should consist not of monolithic structures but rather of
a dynamic unity within plurality.
One of the major barriers to this sort of dialogue is the rigidity
in the tacit infrastructure of the individual and society, which
has been discussed throughout this book. The tacit infrastructure
of society at large is contained in what is generally called culture.
Within each society, however, there are many subcultures which
are all somewhat diﬀerent, and which are either in conﬂict with
each other, or more or less ignore each other as having mutually
irrelevant aims and values. Such subcultures, along with the
overall culture, are generally rigidly restricted by their basic
assumptions, most of which are tacit and not open to awareness
and attention. Creativity is therefore, at best, an occasional occur-
rence, the results of which are quickly absorbed in a fairly
mechanical way into the general tacit infrastructure.
At present, a truly creative dialogue, in the sense that has been
indicated here, is not at all common, even in science. Rather the
struggle of each idea to dominate is commonly emphasized in
most activities in society. In this struggle, the success of a per-
son’s point of view may have important consequences for status,
prestige, social position, and monetary reward. In such a con-
ditioned exchange, the tacit infrastructure, both individually
and culturally, responds very actively to block the free play that
is needed for creativity.
creativity in the whole of life 243

The importance of the principle of dialogue should now be
clear. It implies a very deep change in how the mind works.
What is essential is that each participant is, as it were, suspend-
ing his or her point of view, while also holding other points
of view in a suspended form and giving full attention to what
they mean. In doing this, each participant has also to suspend
the corresponding activity, not only of his or her own tacit
infrastructure of ideas, but also of those of the others who are
participating in the dialogue. Such a thoroughgoing suspension
of tacit individual and cultural infrastructures, in the context of
full attention to their contents, frees the mind to move in quite
new ways. The tendency toward false play that is characteristic
of the rigid infrastructures begins to die away. The mind is then
able to respond to creative new perceptions going beyond the
particular points of view that have been suspended.
In this way, something can happen in the dialogue that is
analogous to the dissolution of barriers in the “stream” of the
generative order that was discussed at the end of the previous
chapters. In the dialogue, these blockages, in the form of rigid
but largely tacit cultural assumptions, can be brought out and
examined by all who take part. Because each person will gener-
ally have a diﬀerent individual background, and will perhaps
come from a diﬀerent subculture, assumptions that are part of
a given participant’s “unconscious” infrastructure may be quite
obvious to another participant, who has no resistance to seeing
them. In this way the participants can turn their attention more
generally to becoming aware, as broadly as possible, of the over-
all tacit infrastructure of rigid cultural and subcultural assump-
tions and bringing it to light. As a result, it becomes possible for
the dialogue to begin to play a part that is analogous to that
played by the immune system of the body, in “recognizing”
destructive misinformation and in clearing it up. This clearly
constitutes a very important change in how the mind works.
There is, however, another extremely important way in which
science, order, and creativity
244

the operation of the mind can be transformed in such a dialogue.
For when the rigid, tacit infrastructure is loosened, the mind
begins to move in a new order. To see the nature of this order,
consider ﬁrst the order that has traditionally characterized cul-
tures. Essentially this involves a strong fragmentation between
individual consciousness—“what the individual knows all
together”—and social consciousness—“what the society knows
all together.”
For the individual, consciousness tends to emphasize subject-
ivity in the sense of private aims, dreams, and aspirations that are
shared to some extent with family and close friends, as well as
a general search for personal pleasure and security. In society,
however, consciousness tends to emphasize a kind of objectivity
with common aims and goals, and there is an attempt to put
conformity and the pursuit of the common welfare in the ﬁrst
place. One of the principal conﬂicts in life arises therefore in the
attempt to bring these two fragments together harmoniously.
For example, as a person grows up, he (or she) may ﬁnd that his
individual needs have little or no place in society. And in turn, as
society begins to act on the individual consciousness in false and
destructive ways, people become cynical. They begin to ignore
the requirements of reality and the general good in favor of their
own interests and those of their group.
Within this generally fragmentary order of consciousness, the
social order of language is largely for the sake of communicating
information. This is aimed, ultimately, at producing results that
are envisaged as necessary, either to society or to the individual,
or perhaps to both. Meaning plays a secondary part in such
usage, in the sense, for example, that what are put ﬁrst are the
problems that are to be solved, while meaning is arranged so as
to facilitate the solution of these problems. Of course, a society
may try to ﬁnd a common primary meaning in myths, such as
that of the invincibility of the nation or its glorious destiny. But
these lead to illusions, which are in the long run unsatisfactory,
creativity in the whole of life 245

as well as dangerous and destructive. The individual is thus
generally left with a desperate search for something that would
give life real meaning. But this can seldom be found either in
the rather crude mechanical, uncaring society, or in the isolated
and consequently lonely life of the individual. For if there is
not common meaning to be shared, a person can be lonely even
in a crowd.
What is especially relevant to this whole conﬂict is a proper
understanding of the nature of culture. It seems clear that in
essence culture is meaning, as shared in society. And here
“meaning” is not only signiﬁcance but also intention, purpose, and value.
It is clear, for example, that art, literature, science, and other
such activities of a culture are all parts of the common heritage
of shared meaning, in the sense described above. Such cultural
meaning is evidently not primarily aimed at utility. Indeed, any
society that restricts its knowledge merely to information that it
regards as useful would hardly be said to have a culture, and
within it, life would have very little meaning. Even in our present
society, culture, when considered in this way, appears to have
a rather small signiﬁcance in comparison to other issues
that are taken to be of vital importance by many sectors of
the population.
The gulf between individual consciousness and social con-
sciousness is similar to a number of other gulfs that have already
been described in this book, for example, between descriptive
and constitutive orders, between simple regular orders of low
degree and chaotic orders of inﬁnite degree, and, of course,
between the timeless and time orders. But in all these cases, broad
and rich new areas for creativity can be found by going to new
orders that lie between such extremes. In the present case, there-
fore, what is needed is to ﬁnd a broad domain of creative orders
between the social and individual extremes. Dialogue therefore
appears to be a key to the exploration of these new orders.
To see what is involved, note that as the above dialogue
science, order, and creativity
246

develops, not only do speciﬁc social and cultural assumptions
“loosen up,” but also much deeper and more general assump-
tions begin to be aﬀected in a similar way. Among these, one of
the most important is the assumption that between the indi-
vidual consciousness and the social consciousness there is an
absolute gulf. This implies that the individual must adjust to ﬁt
into the society, that society must be remade to suit the indi-
vidual, or that some combination of both approaches must be
carried out. If, however, the dialogue is sustained suﬃciently,
then all who participate will sooner or later be able to see, in
actual fact, how a creative movement can take place in a new
order between these extremes. This movement is present both
externally and publicly, as well as inwardly, where it can be felt
by all. As with alert attention to a ﬂowing stream, the mind
can then go into an analogous order. In this order, attention is
no longer restricted to the two extreme forms of individual and
social. Rather, attention is transformed so that it, along with
the whole generative order of the mind, is in the rich creative
domain “between” these two extremes.
The mind is then capable of new degrees of subtlety, moving
from emphasis on the whole group of participants to emphasis
on individuals, as the occasion demands. This is particularly sig-
niﬁcant for proper response to the strong emotional reactions
that will inevitably arise, even in the friendliest group, whenever
fundamental assumptions are disturbed. Because the mind is
no longer rigidly committed to the individual or to the social
extremes, the basic issues that arise in a disagreement between
participants are to a considerable extent “defused.” For the
assumptions that are brought to the common attention are no
longer implied to have absolute necessity. And as a result, the
“emotional charge” that is inevitably associated with an assump-
tion that is dear to one or more members of the group can
be reduced to more manageable proportions, so that violent
“explosions” are not likely to take place. Only a dialogue that
creativity in the whole of life 247

can, at the same time, meet the challenge both of uncovering
the intellectual content of a rigidly held basic assumption and
of “defusing” the emotional charge that goes with it will make
possible the proper exploration of the new order of mental
operation that is being discussed here.
It is possible to have such dialogues in all sorts of circum-
stances, with many or just a few people involved. Indeed even
an individual may have a kind of internal dialogue with himself
or herself. What is essential here is the presence of the spirit of
dialogue, which is, in short, the ability to hold many points of
view in suspension, along with a primary interest in the creation
of a common meaning. It is particularly important, however, to
explore the possibilities of dialogue in the context of a group
that is large enough to have within it a wide range of points of
view, and to sustain a strong ﬂow of meaning. This latter can
come about because such a dialogue is capable of having the
powerful nonverbal eﬀect of consensus. In the ordinary situ-
ation, consensus can lead to collusion and to playing false, but in
a true dialogue there is the possibility that a new form of con-
sensual mind, which involves a rich creative order between the
individual and the social, may be a more powerful instrument
than is the individual mind. Such consensus does not involve the
pressure of authority or conformity, for it arises out of a spirit
of friendship dedicated to clarity and the ultimate perception of
what is true. In this way the tacit infrastructure of society and
that of its subcultures are not opposed, nor is there any attempt
to alter them or to destroy them. Rather, ﬁxed and rigid frames
dissolve in the creative free ﬂow of dialogue as a new kind of
microculture emerges.
People who have taken part in such a dialogue will be able to
carry its spirit beyond the particular group into all their activities
and relationship and ultimately into the general society. In this
way, they can begin to explore the possibility of extending the
transformation of the mind that has been discussed earlier to a
science, order, and creativity
248

broader sociocultural context. Such an exploration would
clearly be relevant for helping to bring about a creative and
harmonious order in the world. It should be clear by now that
the major barriers to such an order are not technical; rather
they lie in the rigid and fragmentary nature of our basic
assumptions. These keep us from changing in response to the
actual situations and from being able to move together from
commonly shared meanings.
THE INDIVIDUAL, THE SOCIAL, AND THE COSMIC
DIMENSION OF THE HUMAN BEING
Dialogue, in the sense that has been described here, may be
able to contribute in a very signiﬁcant way to clearing up the
“pollution” or “misinformation” in social and cultural spheres.
But humanity does not live only in these spheres. Broadly speak-
ing it has three principal kinds of dimension—the individual,
the social, and the cosmic—and each of these must receive its
appropriate attention.
Consider ﬁrst how conditioning operates in the individual
dimension. Each individual, throughout his or her life, accumu-
lates from society at large a vast amount of misinformation in
the generative order. This individual misinformation is perhaps
described by the word idiosyncrasy, whose Greek root means
“private mixture.” Each human being has thus to address his or
her own particular “mixture,” which has been built up since
the day of birth.
One of the most important ways of dealing with individual
problems, which has developed in relatively recent times,
involves psychiatry and allied approaches. In this ﬁeld, the work
of Sigmund Freud stands out as playing a seminal role. It is based
on the observation that neuroses in adults have their roots in
experiences of childhood and infancy that were never under-
stood properly, and were so painful that they were repressed
creativity in the whole of life 249

from conscious awareness. Such repressed material evidently
corresponds in some sense to the notion of a rigid tacit infra-
structure, which is largely unconscious and tends to lead to false
play and the blockage of creativity. Freud’s treatment essentially
was to try to bring this repressed material into conscious aware-
ness so that the misinformation in the generative order could be
corrected or spontaneously dropped.
Freud’s approach, and that of a large number of other psych-
iatrists who followed him, was to put a major emphasis on clear-
ing up misinformation acquired in early childhood. Clearly,
common sense would imply that what happens in the ﬁrst few
years of life must be very important in this regard. As the saying
goes, “As the twig is bent, so grows the tree.” However, a
number of psychiatrists have felt that Freud concentrated too
exclusively on the early years and paid too little attention not
only to what comes later but also to other factors, such as
society, the culture, and the general inheritance of the human
race as a whole, for example, Jung’s archetypes and collective
unconscious. Nevertheless, in spite of such disagreements, it is
clear that the psychoanalytic approach has achieved worthwhile
results and insights.
However, in the context of this book, it is necessary to ques-
tion Freud’s notion that creativity, especially in the intellectual
spheres, arises essentially from a displacement or sublimation of
what he calls the libido. According to the dictionary, this latter
concept means pleasure, desire, eager longing, and sensual pas-
sion. Freud for his part gave it a more extended meaning so that
it implies a kind of general mental energy, at ﬁrst directed
toward sex and later invested in any object that is signiﬁcant to
the ego.4 Freud’s theory argues that when this mental energy is
seriously frustrated early in life, it is turned or displaced toward
some other outlet, such as art or science. Of course, there can
hardly be any doubt that something like this actually happened
to a number of leading scientists and artists. For example,
science, order, and creativity
250

Newton suﬀered a diﬃcult childhood and it is plausible that
this led him to turn to science by way of compensation.
However, this is clearly not an explanation of what creativity
actually is, and how it originates. It could hardly be said that the
libido, in itself, is creative. Indeed, insofar as it may lead to an
excessively strong investment of mental energy in certain ﬁxed
objects, it will tend to bring about the kind of rigidity that
interferes with creativity.
Rather, when early in life the natural mental energy ﬁnds it
impossible to respond creatively in relationships within the fam-
ily, it may turn toward other areas in which this can be done. In a
limited sense, this is a kind of “solution,” though clearly a much
more thoroughgoing and pervasive kind of creative response is
needed in the long run. However, what may happen with such
individuals who are called geniuses is that they manage some-
how to sustain creativity throughout at least a signiﬁcant part
of their lives, albeit in some limited area, whereas with most
people this is largely “damped down” by various social mechan-
isms, such as rewards and punishments. It is the view of
this book that the potential for creative perception is natural.
Creativity originates in the depths of the generative order, and
the proper role of mental energy is to respond to such percep-
tion, and ultimately to bring it to some manifest level of reality.
One of the main functions of psychiatry should be to free cre-
ativity from rigid blocks within the individual, whether these
begin in early childhood or in other contexts.
Such a proposal, however, appears to run counter to what is
commonly taken as the main aim of psychiatry, namely, to help
the individual to adjust to society. This would perhaps have
seemed to have made some kind of sense in Freud’s time,
when people believed society to be basically sound and healthy.
Following two world wars, however, the decay of society has
become so evident that many psychiatrists are no longer satisﬁed
with this sort of aim. One of the most outspoken is R. D. Laing,
creativity in the whole of life 251

who feels that what is called insanity can actually be a “sane”
response to a “mad” society. De Maré for his part does not take
such an extreme position but calls for a creative transformation
of culture through dialogue, which will deeply aﬀect both the
individual and the society together.
De Maré has also pointed out a close similarity between a
free dialogue, with no ﬁxed tasks or goals, and Freud’s method
of free association in psychoanalysis, which helps to bring
repressed content into awareness. In our approach, both of these
can be considered as examples of how the mind can begin to
move in new ways that are not bound by its rigid conditioning.
With psychoanalysis, it is mainly the individual’s particular con-
ditioning that is revealed. But in dialogue, what is revealed is
primarily the cultural conditioning.
Both kinds of conditioning are mainly “unconscious,” for
since the mind defends itself by various forms of self-deceptive
false play, it is not able to give awareness and attention to the
nature of its own conditioning. In addition, just as a person is
not aware of his or her accent, so does cultural conditioning
escape awareness in this subtler sense. The general cultural con-
ditioning is probably in the long run even more powerful than
that which originates in the early years of life. Moreover, the
usual psychiatric approach has little or no impact on basic
cultural assumptions, which are as likely to be “unconsciously”
held by the psychiatrist as by the patient.
In a free dialogue, however, with many diﬀerent individuals
representing a variety of subcultures, all having a speciﬁc interest
in becoming aware of rigid cultural assumptions, a new order
of operation of the mind between the individual and society
can develop. In this way cultural conditioning can be dissolved
in a dialogue in which the participants operate between the
individual and social dimensions of the human being.
Having discussed the individual and social dimensions of the
human being, it is now time to turn to the cosmic dimension.
science, order, and creativity
252

This is concerned with the human relationship to the whole,
to the totality of what is. From the earliest times it has been
considered crucial, for the overall order of the individual and
society, that a harmonious relationship be established with
this whole. Indeed it was commonly believed that such a rela-
tionship would serve to prevent or dissolve the various sorts of
diﬃculties that have been discussed in this book in connection
with destructive “misinformation” and with the tacit infra-
structure of consciousness.
In the very distant past, human beings obtained their sense
of harmony within the cosmic dimension through direct contact
with nature. When people were constantly immersed in their
natural environment, their attention naturally turned in this
direction and consciousness frequently moved into a dimension
beyond time and the limited concerns of particular social groups.
Even now, when people spend some time close to nature they
may experience something of this “healing” quality in body and
mind. In earlier times humans were in almost constant contact
with nature so that “misinformation” arising, for example, from
social contacts would have little or no ultimate signiﬁcance, as
it was constantly “washed away.”
However, as civilization developed, this immediate contact
with nature grew more tenuous. To some extent it was replaced
by philosophy and science, which also gave human beings a cer-
tain sense of relationship to the totality. But as science developed
into ever more abstract and institutionalized structures, the sense
of contact became more and more indirect and restricted to
limited groups of specialists who understood the highly mathe-
matical theories. While specialists had the skill to use the com-
plex instruments of theory and experiment to mediate between
nature and human beings, for the vast majority of people such
contact was superﬁcial and indirect. In general it is now restricted
to the writings of those who try to translate the mathematical
abstractions of physics into a nontechnical language.
creativity in the whole of life 253

Another approach to the totality, which was present even in
the very earliest times, was through religion. As civilization
developed and grew more separate from nature, religion prob-
ably became more and more important. By the time of the
Middle Ages, for example, religion was the main means by
which Europeans maintained a sense of contact with the whole.
But with the coming of the modern era, science began to make
this religious worldview appear implausible to many people.
Today in both East and West, religion has, by and large, ceased to
be the principal source of the ultimate meaning in life. Yet sci-
ence, for its part, has been unable to take its place in this regard.
Western religions emphasize belief in the Supreme Being as
the source not only of the cosmos but of all that makes life
worthwhile for human beings in the cosmos that this Being,
or God, has created. In Eastern religions, gods have played an
important role, but the general development has been toward
discovering the ultimate ground of all being. In the Indian reli-
gions, for example, the fundamental source has been named
Brahman, and the key insight is that the ultimate self, or Atman,
is identical with the ultimate being, or Brahman.
As a verbal statement, however, this means very little by itself.
The essential point of such a religious and philosophical attitude
is to enter directly into the absolute reality (or Brahman). This
frees the individual of all “misinformation” in the overall con-
ditioning of the tacit infrastructure of consciousness and brings
about a state of ultimate bliss and perfection. Only a few have
ever claimed to have achieved this, but vast numbers of people
have been profoundly aﬀected by such notions. In the West,
mystics have a somewhat similar notion of union with God or
the Godhead, but the emphasis has tended to be placed more on
grace rather than on individual perception and understanding.
For most people, however, religion is not primarily a question
of mysticism. Rather, for them the emphasis lies in some form of
belief in a Supreme Being and in a set of principles and practices
science, order, and creativity
254

that follow from such a belief, and are used in daily living.
(However, it must be added that in Buddhism, there is no belief
in a Supreme Being; rather the emphasis is placed on proper
understanding of the ultimate groundlessness of the “self.”)
The principal diﬃculty with the religious approach, and
indeed with any attempt to make a formal deﬁnition of the
totality and of an individual’s relationship with it, is that it tends
very strongly to produce rigidly ﬁxed ideas. These are very
heavily emotionally charged so that they prevent the free play
of the mind, and thus bring about destructive false play and
the blocking of creativity. In science a similar position arises
with the notion of absolute truth. In both cases, the attempt to
claim an absolute truth about the totality implies an absolute
necessity and therefore disposes the mind never to yield, no
matter what evidence may be found to the contrary. In the
face of such an attitude, a genuine dialogue is clearly impossible.
The human being is therefore caught up in an unusually rigid
infrastructure involving a whole set of assumptions, presupposi-
tions, and practices.
History shows that a true dialogue has never taken place
between religions that have appreciably diﬀerent notions of abso-
lute truth. Indeed, within the same religion, it has seldom been
the case that two subgroups have come together again after a
doctrinal split. It seems clear that when two such groups diﬀer
about the totality, there is no way in which they are able to nego-
tiate their basic diﬀerences. At best, they may tolerate each other,
but such tolerance is precarious, for sooner or later it may change
into a destructive urge to overwhelm the “erroneous” point of
view, if necessary by destroying those who hold it. A similar
tendency is also present in the secular ideologies that claim to
be valid for the totality of life and perhaps even of existence.
But despite these major diﬃculties, and the implausibility
with which many people now view religious assumptions about
the totality, it must be recalled that in earlier times religious
creativity in the whole of life 255

notions moved entire peoples much more profoundly than sci-
ence has ever been able to do. These notions entered into great
works of art, music, architecture, literature, and poetry. It is
therefore important to understand where this extremely power-
ful impetus came from, and whether or not it may still have a
valid place today. This is surely an essential part of the overall
challenge to humanity that is being discussed here. To put it in
the form of a question: Is the human religious impulse now
forever antiquated, or is it something that the human being
misses profoundly?
If there is to be a new creative surge it seems clear that it must
bring in all three basic dimensions: the individual, the socio-
cultural, and the cosmic. Indeed with the loss of contact with
nature and the general decrease in importance of religion, the
civilized world is approaching a state in which it has little sense
of direct contact with the totality. It is therefore in danger of
losing contact with its key cosmic dimension, just at a time
when it needs it more than ever because both the individual and
society are overwhelmed with destructive “misinformation.”
The following sections will therefore explore the question of
whether the religious impulse can be freed from its dangerous
tendency to become rigidly attached to particular views as to
the nature of the totality. For this appears to be the main reason
why religions have so often become involved in particularly
destructive forms of fragmentation.
THE RESPONSES OF EAST AND WEST TO THE
CONDITIONING OF CONSCIOUSNESS
The previous sections have focused mainly on the response of
the West to the challenge of “misinformation” within human
consciousness. The East, however, over several thousand years,
developed its own response, which is only now beginning to
penetrate Western culture to any signiﬁcant extent. In general,
science, order, and creativity
256

it places major emphasis on self-awareness, through inward
observation and meditation, in dealing with the conditioning
of individual consciousness.
The Western tendency to emphasize outward action and
dynamism is thus played down, and in some cases simply rejected
altogether, in favor of a tendency toward the suspension of such
action, and the encouragement of inward observation and con-
templation. This latter is generally regarded as helping to lead to
the union of individual consciousness with some kind of cosmic
order or ground, as a way of coming to the solution of the
problem of human existence.
Such an approach can be seen, for example, in the ancient
Chinese notion of the Tao. The Tao emphasizes an inward
harmony with nature and with the totality, and implies the
minimum of directed purposeful action. (The latter is seen as
generally being an interference with the natural order, which is
regarded as basically good.) Thus, Lao-tzu, the author of the Tao,
praises detached inaction, by saying that “the sage keeps to the
deed that consists in taking no action. . . . Do that which consists
in taking no action and order will prevail.”5 This theme, that a
certain kind of inaction is itself an action, and indeed, the very
highest form of action, is one that frequently recurs throughout
Eastern culture.
A similar tendency is to be found in Indian culture, starting
from ancient times, for example, with the development of
Yoga.6 The form of Yoga most commonly known in the West
is Hatha Yoga, which emphasizes bringing about harmony
within the body. Although it focuses on movements of the body
and therefore does involve a certain kind of outward action,
its principal aim is to use such action as an aid to inward
perception. To this end, it utilizes a variety of ﬁxed positions
(or Asanas), whose main purpose is to make a person aware of
the tensions and blockages in muscular responses, which are
usually “unconscious.” It does this by preventing the habitual
creativity in the whole of life 257

movements of the muscles that surround the blockage. These
ordinarily serve to hide the blockage by “easing” the tension that
would otherwise indicate its presence. Through careful attention
to all that is happening, especially inwardly, the nervous impulses
that are responsible for the rigid pattern of muscular excitation
begin to die away. In eﬀect, a relatively superﬁcial kind of move-
ment in the explicate order is being stopped, and this allows the
operation of a much subtler and deeper kind of inward move-
ment in the implicate and generative orders. It is this movement
that removes the “misinformation” and heals body and mind.
Such an approach is used in other forms of Yoga, which are
concerned with the emotions, the will, the intellect, and so on,
as well as also recurring in many other systems of philosophy,
meditation, and practice. Thus, in Buddhism, each person is dir-
ected, through reﬂection and meditation, to be aware, moment
to moment, of the whole train of his or her thoughts. It is stated
that in this process the fundamental “groundlessness” of the self
can be seen. In this way a key piece of “misinformation” can be
cleared up, i.e., the almost universal assumption that the self is
the very ground of our being. This leads ultimately to Nirvana,
in which there is a blissful uniﬁcation with the totality.
A particular form of Buddhism is Zen, which contains the
practice of “sitting” in a given position for indeﬁnitely long
periods, which is somewhat reminiscent of the ﬁxed positions of
Hatha Yoga. If this position, which may become somewhat pain-
ful, is maintained, then it is found that all sorts of previously
repressed thoughts and feelings begin to come out. It seems that
even simple bodily movements that “ease” a sense of tension are
deeply involved in avoiding awareness of the unpleasant aspects
of the general content of consciousness. As happens with Yoga,
the suspension of such outward movements makes possible the
deeper inward movement which acts to “dissolve” those fea-
tures of the rigid infrastructure that are basically responsible for
the mental and physical tensions.
science, order, and creativity
258

Clearly, approaches of this general kind are concerned primar-
ily with suspension of outward activities and impulses in various
areas, in order to prevent the mind from “escaping” awareness
of the fact that it is conditioned so as to produce blockages of
various kinds. The aim is, by careful attention, especially to the
inward responses of mind and body to these suspensions of
outward activity, to bring the blockages into awareness. This
action, which from the outward point of view may be called
a kind of “inaction,” then makes it possible to clear up the
accumulated misinformation of false conditioning that is behind
the blockages. Approaches of this kind move in the direction
of the transcendental, in that they ultimately merge with the
religious-philosophical goal of union of the individual with the
ultimate totality. The major emphasis therefore tends toward
that which is timeless and beyond the measure of the human
mind.7 In all this, the sociocultural dimension tends to fall into
the background and the main interest is in the relationship
between the cosmic and the individual dimensions.
A particularly interesting and unusually thoroughgoing
example of this approach is from a modern thinker, Jiddu
Krishnamurti. His writings go extensively and deeply into the
question of how, through awareness and attention to the overall
movement of thought, the mind comes to a state of silence and
emptiness, without any sense of division between the observer
and the observed. In this state, the mind’s perception is clear
and undistorted. Krishnamurti feels that such a mind is neces-
sary to dissolve the kind of problems that have been discussed
throughout this book.8 However, for him, this is all of secondary
importance. His main point is that such a mind is in a suitable
state for entering into what may be called the ground of all being
and that this is the ultimate meaning of existence.9
What is particularly signiﬁcant in this regard is Krishnamurti’s
insistence that it is precisely the nonmovement, or inaction, of
thought that is necessary for the very being of this other state,
creativity in the whole of life 259

which transcends time, space, and anything that can be grasped
by thought. Clearly, the principle of the suspension of explicate
activity is essentially the same in Tao, Yoga, and Buddhism. It
should also be apparent that an immense extension of this prin-
ciple has also taken place, in the sense that the entire movement
of the whole of consciousness is, as it were, suspended to allow
the mind to enter the ultimate ground.
It can be seen from this that the East is inclined toward sus-
pension of overt or explicate activity in favor of a kind of move-
ment at subtler levels. A vivid example of this can be seen in
the many statues of the Buddha, which suggest perfect repose,
balance, and harmony that are not outwardly imposed but which
arise from an inward freedom from attachment to anything. In
the West, however, what now tends to be emphasized is outward
movement, dynamism, and unending transformation. This can be
seen in much of its art, such as Michelangelo’s statue of David and
his painting of the Creation on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel.
Perhaps both cultures were fairly similar in their early days,
but because of what was probably only a small initial diﬀerence
in tendency, they developed diﬀerently, until by now they are far
apart. Each of these cultures has had its own characteristic
accomplishments, some of which are very impressive. Neverthe-
less, despite its many creative accomplishments, the Occidental
culture is now basically in a state of decline and it does not
appear to know of any fundamental way of dealing with the
problems that brought this about. These problems include not
only the dangers of nuclear annihilation but also the destruction
of the earth’s environment through deforestation, denudement
of arable land, pollution, and much more. However, the Oriental
culture, which experienced its major creative surge a very long
time ago, has also brought about a corresponding range of fun-
damental problems which it does not appear to be able to solve.
While interest in the religious-philosophical line of inquiry has
been sustained, at least in India, a great many other aspects of
science, order, and creativity
260

the society at large have remained relatively stagnant over the
centuries or have declined. It is true that there has been a recent
renewal of energy in such countries as China, India, and Japan.
Nevertheless the primary motive force has not come out of
the Eastern culture itself but through the adoption of Western
science and technology, along with the attitudes and general
culture that go with them.
What is clearly needed in East and West is a creative surge of
a new order. Such a surge will not be possible while humanity
goes on with its current fragmentation, represented by the
extremes of Eastern and Western cultures. Nor is it suﬃcient for
each culture to adapt to its own needs certain features from the
other that it may ﬁnd convenient or attractive. For to do this is to
still go on with the rigidity of basic assumptions that are charac-
teristic of both cultures. That would lead only to false play and
the blockage of creativity. A genuine dialogue between the two
cultures is clearly called for, in which there is no holding to ﬁxed
points of view, so that a new free and ﬂuid common mind could
perhaps arise. Such a mind would have rich new possibilities for
creativity, by moving in a diﬀerent order in the area “between”
the extremes of current Eastern and Western cultures. Perhaps
ultimately the dialogue could be extended to include the rela-
tively wealthy North and the relatively impoverished South, as
well as East and West, so that a truly planetary culture with a
socially shared meaning could come into being.
Only the free movement of the mind that can arise in a
dialogue will be able to make a major impact on the cultural
rigidities that ultimately give rise to the general problems faced
by societies everywhere. In this way, for example, East and
West could move forward toward a broad “middle ground,”
between Western dynamism and Eastern suspension of outward
activity, as well as between the timeless and the temporal orders,
the individual and the social orders, with the cosmic order on
one side and the social and individual orders on the other.10
creativity in the whole of life 261

This would open up a rich new ﬁeld for creativity in which all
could share.
CREATIVITY IN SCIENCE, ART, AND RELIGION
It has been argued that the full unfoldment of creativity requires
the ending of rigidity, and therefore of fragmentation in the
overall planetary culture. To clarify what this would mean, it is
convenient to sum up the cultural life of humanity in three
dispositions, approaches, or attitudes of mind: namely, the
scientiﬁc, the artistic, and the religious.
Although science literally means “knowledge,” the scientiﬁc
attitude is concerned much more with rational perception
through the mind and with testing such perceptions against
actual fact, in the form of experiments and observations. In
making such tests, what is crucial is the attitude of acknowledg-
ing an actual fact, with properly made inferences, without being
caught up in the tendency of the human mind to play false. In
most of life this principle does not play a large part. For example,
in international relations the actual fact is generally distorted
according to what is regarded as most useful or desirable to the
state, a position which seems to have ﬁrst been openly advocated
by Machiavelli.
In the light of these implications of the scientiﬁc attitude, it
seems particularly strange that, in Western culture at least, it
has been thought to be necessary only in limited ﬁelds. It is as
if someone were to say, “In my laboratory I try seriously to
acknowledge the actual fact, but in other areas of life, such as
human relationships and politics, it is best to play false whenever
it is convenient, and to ﬁt the fact to whatever is needed.” Clearly
it would produce a tremendous revolution if the scientiﬁc
attitude were genuinely and seriously acknowledged to be
valid and necessary for the whole of life. In such a case the
very core of the contribution of science to the creative surge
science, order, and creativity
262

would take the form of an extension of the scientiﬁc attitude
into all human relationships.
Art is based on the Latin root meaning “to ﬁt” and shows up in
such words as article, artisan, and artifact. The history of this word
clearly indicates that, in earlier times, there was no separation
between art and the rest of life. Thus, an artifact is something
made to ﬁt in both an aesthetic and a practical sense. Today,
however, a work of art is generally judged as “ﬁtting” in the
aesthetic sense alone and this indicates the current state of frag-
mentation between art and other areas of life.
Art, which includes music, drama, literature, poetry, dancing,
and the visual arts, is strongly concerned with beauty, harmony,
and vitality. However, more fundamentally, one of its essential
meanings seems to be that the “ﬁtting” or “nonﬁtting” is seen,
from moment to moment, in an act of fresh creative perception,
rather than through mechanically applied rules as to “what is
ﬁtting and proper.” In this sense, everything may be thought of
as being a kind of art. Thus, in science, the question as to the
meaning of a given set of facts and equations has ﬁnally to be
answered through such a perception, which is basically artistic
in nature. And more generally, while much of life is determined
by mechanical rules and formulae, it is possible to speak of an
“art of living” in which the artistic attitude is conducive to a
sustained creative perception.
The artistic attitude is particularly important, with regard to
its emphasis on the role of the imagination. Literally imagination
means “the ability to make mental images,” which imitate the
forms of real things. However, the powers of imagination actu-
ally go far beyond this, to include the creative inception of new
forms, hitherto unknown. These are experienced not only as
visual images but also through all sorts of feelings, tactile sensa-
tions, and kinesthetic sensations, and in other ways that defy
description. The ability of Mozart and Bach to sense whole
musical works all at once could be regarded as a kind of musical
creativity in the whole of life 263

imagination. The activity of the imagination does not therefore
resemble a static picture but rather it is closer to a kind of “play”
that includes a subtle orchestration of feelings, as well as a sense
of intention and will. Imagination is thus the beginning of the
entry of creative perception into the domain of the manifest.
Moreover, since form is deﬁned by proportion and ratio, the
imagination must also possess these in some implicit or enfolded
sense. Intuitive or perceptive reason is the act, then, of making
explicit the ratio or proportion that is already implicit in creative
imagination. In this way reason unfolds from imagination, as
indeed some of the leading scientists and mathematicians
have implied. Einstein, in fact, has described his experiences
of concepts which originate in vague undescribable “feelings”
and sensations.
As the imagination “crystallizes,” its forms become relatively
ﬁxed and give rise to fancy or fantasy.11 This is the power to
form mental images of known kinds, to combine them, and to
relate them. Evidently this power is both necessary and useful in,
for example, making plans and designs. It corresponds roughly
to the power of reason to form concepts of known kinds and
then to combine and relate them. But with imagination and
reason, the danger is, however, that the “crystallized forms”
become excessively rigid when they are regarded as absolutely
necessary for the well-being of the psyche and of society. The
result is that the mind is caught up in playing false, as it tries to
defend them. In this process fantasies are confused with reality,
and the formal logical relationships of concepts are confused
with truth.
It is clear that a proper appreciation of the artistic attitude
should not be left solely to those who specialize in art. An artistic
attitude is needed by all, in every phase of life. Indeed, harmony
can be achieved only through a constantly fresh artistic percep-
tion of what is “ﬁtting and proper.”
Finally, religion must be examined, which is concerned
science, order, and creativity
264

primarily with wholeness, as can be seen in the word holy, which
means “whole.” Religion tends to emphasize the eternal and
timeless, as well as contact with the ultimate ground of being.
The word worship is based on the same root as worthy, and thus
implies that act of “giving a very high value,” that is, to the
source of all that is. Indeed, religion is very much concerned
with values, and most religions have argued, either explicitly or
implicitly, that it is not possible to give the right values to things
unless there is a correct relationship with what has supreme
value, that is, with God. The tendency of human beings to put a
supreme value on something is indeed so great that those who give
up religion generally tend to attribute this sort of value to some-
thing else, such as the welfare of the state, or the happiness of the
individual. It seems clear, therefore, that either humanity goes on
with religion or it decides to drop it, in which case it still must
deal with the question of what, if anything, has supreme value.
As with science and art, a truly religious attitude has to be free
of rigid commitments in the tacit infrastructure of conscious-
ness, so that all that is done comes out of creative perception.
Religion could then be deeply concerned with an inquiry into
whether, and how, a human being can come into contact with
the ground of all. But at the same time, it would also be deeply
concerned with the sociocultural and individual dimensions of
human life, and especially with the question of how and why
human beings have such a strong tendency to be caught up in
playing false, which, in current religious terminology, is called
“sin” or “evil.” Above all, a religious attitude has to be compas-
sionate, to acknowledge the ultimate value of the human being,
and to realize that each individual shares in the general human
conditioning over the ages to confuse and to play false.
Throughout history, however, it must be admitted that reli-
gions have tended to be caught up in all kinds of self-deceptions
and in the exploitation of others. The origin of this can often
be traced to the uneasy balance between religion and secular
creativity in the whole of life 265

powers, a tension which is now giving rise to similar problems
in science. But more fundamentally, the role of absolute belief,
whether in some notion as to the nature of God or to the ultim-
ate nature of being, has given rise to the most serious problems.
Any belief in some deﬁnable form of the absolute entails the
notion of absolute necessity, which leads to an unyielding atti-
tude in which basic assumptions are nonnegotiable. In the grip
of this attitude, people ﬁnd themselves compelled to ﬁght to the
death over their diﬀerent views, and even religions that proclaim
love for all have become involved in the spread of hatred.
In this context it is useful to investigate more carefully what is
meant by belief. The word itself is based on the Teutonic Aryan
word lief, which means “love,” so that what is believed is
“beloved.” The danger in belief should therefore be clear, for
when the “love” for a set of assumptions and their implications
is strong, it may lead to playing false in order to defend them.
The end result is inevitably destructive. On the other hand, it
should be recalled that belief also implies trust, conﬁdence, and
faith in the essential honesty and integrity of something—for
example, a person, an institution, a cultural activity, and ultim-
ately life and creativity. Without such belief, the serious and
sustained commitment that is necessary for creativity will not
be possible.
What is needed is clearly a middle ground between the
extremes of credulous belief, aimed at making people feel hap-
pier and more secure irrespective of whether the beliefs happen
to be correct, and a total skepticism which results in a cynical
attitude to everything. It may be possible, for example, to enter-
tain a range of assumptions with trust and conﬁdence, in which
none is so sacrosanct as to lie beyond serious questioning. If
such an approach were an integral part of the religious attitude,
then the basic conﬂict between religious and scientiﬁc attitudes
would cease. Indeed a religious inquiry would be just as open
as a proper scientiﬁc inquiry.
science, order, and creativity
266

With such an attitude the principal objections to religion that
were discussed earlier would vanish. For the religious approach
would no longer imply any absolute commitment to rigidly
ﬁxed notions as to the nature of the totality. Indeed such an
attitude could be expressed by the statement, Whatever we say
the totality is, it isn’t—it is also more than we say and diﬀerent
from what we say.
Originally, science, art, and religion were not distinct but
were inseparably united. Considering that these three have
such a deep signiﬁcance throughout human history, it seems
clear that the present gulf between them must have a harmful
eﬀect in the generative order of the consciousness of human-
ity. But there is no intrinsic reason why these three attitudes
have to be separated. Rather, while one of them may be
emphasized in a particular activity, the others must always be
present although, for the moment, they may be in the back-
ground. Nevertheless humanity has become conditioned to
accept such a rigid separation. What is clearly needed is a
dialogue between these attitudes, in which sooner or later they
can all come into the “middle ground” between them, which
will make available a new order of operation of the mind with
rich possibilities for creativity. The opening of such a dialogue
could play a crucial role in freeing the consciousness of human-
ity from one of the most signiﬁcant blocks to creativity in its
tacit infrastructure.
A NEW ORDER OF CREATIVITY
It should now be clear that the creative surge that was called for
at the start of this book cannot take place in science alone. Rather,
every phase of human life has to be involved. Something along
these lines must have taken place during the Renaissance in a
radical transformation that included science, art, and a new
view of humanity, culture, and society. What is needed today is
creativity in the whole of life 267

a new surge that is similar to the energy generated during the
Renaissance but even deeper and more extensive.
It is not appropriate here to give a detailed program for how
such creativity could be brought about. In fact the very nature
of creativity precludes any such program, which would have to
include within it a tacit deﬁnition of what creativity is, or at least
some assumption of how it is to be achieved. Such deﬁnitions
and assumptions would in eﬀect become rigid commitments
in the tacit infrastructure of consciousness, and would sooner
or later constitute blocks to the very creativity that they were
designed to elicit.
Since the potential for creativity is natural, the principal
question is that of revealing the rigid assumptions in the tacit
infrastructure that block this creativity and then being able to
dissolve them. This will bring about a transformation in the
order of awareness and attention, which enables the mind to
respond freely to fresh creative perceptions. A number of ways
have already been suggested in which this question can be
explored through dialogue, as well as Eastern approaches that
are aimed at bringing about a degree of self-awareness. What is
essential, however, is for the mind to move into the broad
“middle ground” between extremes. Indeed creative intelligence
may quite generally be regarded as the ability to perceive new
categories and new orders “between” the older ones, which are,
in this case, the disjointed extremes. In doing this, it is not just
“mixing” the extremes, or “selecting useful bits” from them.
Nor is it a matter of engaging in some “middling” or “mediocre”
type of action. Rather, as in the case of regular orders of low
degree and chaotic orders of inﬁnite degree, what lies between is
a new domain for creativity, which is qualitatively diﬀerent from
either of the extremes.
It is important to extend creativity beyond the spheres in
which it is traditionally supposed to lie. This should include not
only the exploration of overall global sorts of domains, such as
science, order, and creativity
268

science, art, and religion, but also the more limited activities
of everyday life. For example, if there are serious problems in
human relationships, it is necessary to become aware of rigid
assumptions in the tacit infrastructure of consciousness that
are giving rise to them, and to cease to be caught up in these
assumptions, along with the “emotional charge” that goes
with them. In this connection, recall how, in her work with
Helen Keller, Anne Sullivan had to become aware of tacit
assumptions concerning the roles of language and concepts
that were taken for granted. Her mind was freed to respond
creatively in new ways, in which previously “insoluble” prob-
lems were “dissolved.”
It is clear that something like a pervasive creativity should be
present in all aspects of life. To bring this about it is necessary to
question, very seriously, the current assumption that creativity is
needed only from time to time, and then only in certain special
areas, such as art and science.
A very important question is that of how this new order of
creativity can ever get started. For both individually and socially,
consciousness is rigidly conditioned by a host of assumptions
that lead to their own concealment through false play. In the
resulting confusion and illusion, the mind is not even able to be
aware of these assumptions, or to give proper attention to them.
Various ways have already been suggested in which the mind
may be able to “loosen” some of these assumptions. The essen-
tial point, however, is that any kind of free movement of the mind
creates the opportunity for revealing and loosening the rigid
assumptions that block creativity. Here it should be noted that
this blockage is never total, for everyone has some areas that are
still open to free and honest inquiry, in spite of the eﬀects of a
lifetime of conditioning in a society that generally discourages
creativity. It is therefore important to discover where these areas
are. Wherever a person ﬁnds that he or she can be creative, this
will be a good starting point.
creativity in the whole of life 269

Usually, when a person ﬁnds the possibility of creativity in
certain areas, he or she is happy to go on with the resultant
activity. But the crucial point is not just to stay with this particular
activity but to give attention to the creative movement itself.
For as in the case discussed in Chapter 5 of observing the stream,
it is possible for a similar movement to go, as it were by analogy,
to other areas. What is especially signiﬁcant is that whatever
its content, this creative movement has the kind of passionate
intensity and vibrant tension that is able to bypass and even to
dissolve the blocks to creativity. In this way, a far-reaching and
penetrating movement can start, which can eventually have a
profound eﬀect in all areas of life. Moreover any person who
reveals a sustained creativity throughout his or her life will tend,
also by a kind of analogy, to bring about a similar movement in
other people.
The key point is that it is not enough to be interested only in
the particular results or products of creativity, as they are mani-
fested in limited ﬁelds. The general decline of creativity in a
society is itself a kind of “illness” which must ultimately bring
about its destruction. It is therefore crucial that whatever creativ-
ity remains shall be turned toward the destructive “misinform-
ation” that is blocking and gradually choking oﬀ the natural
potential for creativity.
SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK
At the beginning of this book a new creative surge was called for
in order to meet the extraordinary challenge that is now facing
the human race, which has implications in almost every ﬁeld of
activity. The book began with an investigation of the nature of
creativity and what impedes its operation by considering creativ-
ity in science. In these examples it was clear that the essence of
the creative act is a state of high energy making possible a fresh
perception, generally through the mind. This is blocked by the
science, order, and creativity
270

rigidly ﬁxed tacit infrastructure of consciousness, which cannot
properly respond with “free play” to such perceptions. Instead
the mind “plays false” to create the illusion that no disturbing
new perceptions are needed.
The discussion was then extended to show that, in science at
least, free play in communication is also necessary for full creativity,
and that this, too, is blocked by the rigid content of the tacit
infrastructure of the general consciousness.
In discussing the whole question of order, which plays a key
role in creativity, it was shown that between two extremes, of
simple regular orders and chaos, there is a rich new ﬁeld for
creativity. What is particularly signiﬁcant here are the generative
and implicate orders. For through these, it becomes possible to
understand the unfoldment of creativity from ever subtler levels,
leading to a source that cannot be limited or grasped in any
deﬁnable form of knowledge or skill. This source cannot be
restricted to particular areas, such as science and art, but involves
the whole of life. Therefore, the creative surge that is called for
will have to be general and pervasive, rather than limited to
special ﬁelds.
It is crucial in this connection to understand that “errors” or
“misinformation” that are enfolded deep in the generative order
may have extremely wide-ranging and serious negative con-
sequences. Thus, if there are rigid ideas and assumptions in the
tacit infrastructure of consciousness, the net result is not only a
restriction on creativity, which operates close to the “source” of
the generative order, but also a positive presence of energy that is
directed toward general destructiveness. A clearing up of such
“misinformation” is therefore needed if this energy is to be
freed from its rigid and destructive pattern, so that it may
respond properly in order to unfold creative perception in
manifest forms. One of the main purposes of this book has been
to draw attention to the key importance of liberating creativity,
if human life is to have a worthwhile kind of survival. Indeed,
creativity in the whole of life 271

of all the discussions that have taken place over the various
crises that face humanity, this essential factor has not been
adequately emphasized.
A number of possible ways of clearing up the “misinforma-
tion” were described. In the West, various forms of psychology
are among the principal approaches to treating the human being
of such misinformation in the dimension of the individual. In
both the East and the West, various philosophical, religious,
and mystical approaches have also been developed for clearing
up the cosmic dimension in a similar way. However, with all
these approaches, an essential factor has been given too little
attention, namely, the sociocultural dimension. A major part
of the mind’s misinformation arises in this area, and cannot
be properly cleared up through the individual and cosmic
approaches. Moreover since a large part of our very being lies
in this dimension, confusion in this area can have particularly
disastrous consequences. Vice versa, to clear up this area can
liberate the considerable energies that are associated with a
properly operating consensual mind. Such a mind is moved by
a spirit of impersonal friendship and is open to creative intelli-
gence in ways that are beyond those accessible to the individual.
This is why dialogue has been so strongly emphasized in this
book, since it can “loosen” the collective, sociocultural rigidity
that holds all of us in its grip.
As long as this general sociocultural rigidity prevails, com-
munication on fundamental issues will be blocked, in the sense
that people will not be able to listen to each other seriously
whenever basic questions are raised. The result is a proliferation
of fragmentation, which so pervades society today and which
appears to have been characteristic of most if not all known
societies. Without an approach that addresses itself directly
to “misinformation” in the sociocultural dimension, it seems
unlikely that any of the approaches that operate through the
other basic dimensions of humanity can get very far.
science, order, and creativity
272

Consider, for example, a hypothetical individual whose con-
sciousness had been “cleared up” both in the individual and the
cosmic dimensions. Although this person might be a model of
wisdom and compassion, his or her value in the general context
would be limited. For because of “unconscious” rigidity in the
general infrastructure, the rest of humanity could not properly
listen to this person and he or she would either be rejected or
worshiped as godlike. In either case there would be no true
dialogue at the social level and very little eﬀect on the vast major-
ity of humanity. What would be needed in such a case would be
for all concerned to set aside assumptions of godlike perfection,
which makes genuine dialogue impossible. In any case, the truly
wise individual is one who understands that there may be some-
thing important to be learned from any other human being.
Such an attitude would make true dialogue possible, in which
all participants are in the creative “middle ground” between
the extremes of “perfection” and “imperfection.” In this
ground, a fundamental transformation could take place which
goes beyond either of the limited extremes and includes the
sociocultural dimension.
It is particularly important to emphasize dialogue and the
sociocultural dimension here, because they have generally
received so little attention in this context. But such emphasis
should not result in the neglect of the other dimensions. Indeed,
in any creative activity, all three dimensions will have to be
present, though at any given moment, one may be accentuated
in relationship to the others.
It is essential that in the long run, the context of dialogue
should include not only discussions relevant to the sociocultural
level but also discussions of the life and problems of the indi-
vidual, and of the cosmic context, both as this latter is revealed
scientiﬁcally and as it is felt psychologically and religiously. Vice
versa, creative activity in the other two dimensions will have to
have in it the spirit of the dialogue, in which many points of
creativity in the whole of life 273

view can be held in suspension, and in which the creation of
a common meaning is a fundamental aim.
In all three of these basic dimensions of culture, the essential
need is for a “loosening” of rigidly held intellectual content in the
tacit infrastructure of consciousness, along with a “melting” of
the “hardness of the heart” on the side of feeling. The “melting”
on the emotional side could perhaps be called the beginning
of genuine love, while the “loosening” of thought is the
beginning of awakening of creative intelligence. The two
necessarily go together. Thus, to be “warmhearted” and “gen-
erous” while keeping ideas rigid will lead only to frustration
in the long run, as will intellectual clarity that is allied with
cold hard-heartedness.
The ultimate aim of this book has been to arouse an interest in
the importance of creativity. Whoever sees this importance will
have the energy to begin to do something about fostering it, in
ways that are appropriate to the special talents, abilities, and
endowments of that person. All great changes have begun to
manifest themselves in a few people at ﬁrst, but these were only
the “seeds” as it were of something much greater to come. We
hope that this book will not only draw attention to all the ques-
tions that have been discussed in it, but will actually begin the
liberation of creative energy in as many of its readers as possible.
science, order, and creativity
274

7
THE ORDER BETWEEN
AND BEYOND
In the previous chapters we explored the meanings and implica-
tions of order. Order was considered both as a means of describ-
ing a system—its Descriptive Order—and as the actual way a
system is constituted—its Constitutive Order. Order was investi-
gated not only in the context of science but in art, education,
society, consciousness, and indeed the whole of life.
Within this new chapter we continue to explore ways in
which order inﬂuences perception, communication, and action.
In particular, we propose that the conﬂicts that have plagued
societies for as long as human history can be traced to contradic-
tions and entanglements deep within unexamined notions of
order. When such conﬂicts arise within a society, or between
nations, they tend to be defended with an almost blind energy.
For this reason we ask if it is possible to move from ﬁxed
positions to an order that lies both “between and beyond.”

OVERVIEW OF ARGUMENT OF THE BOOK
Before entering into these new areas let us ﬁrst review the argu-
ments of the book so far. Within the history of science there
have been periods of enormous activity with ideas changing at
a very rapid pace. These are followed by an interval of “normal
science” during which ideas change slowly. During these latter
periods it is almost as if scientists were working out the
implications of new ideas and consolidating their previous gains.
There are also occasions when science seems blocked and
progress is constantly frustrated. At such times scientists call
for new ideas and insights. In the period immediately preceding
Heisenberg’s discovery of quantum mechanics, for example,
scientists felt they had reached such a barrier. There appeared to
be something essential missing and a radically new approach
seemed necessary to procure a breakthrough. In most cases
scientists are not consciously aware of the nature or source
of these blockages. They only become apparent within an
historical retrospective.
We are suggesting that in each of these periods—blockage,
normal science, and revolutionary change—what is of most sig-
niﬁcance is not a new idea or a particular theory but the prevailing
scientiﬁc order and the possibility of its transformation.
To work within a particular order is to experience changing
theories and ideas from the same overall paradigmatic frame-
work. A change in order on the other hand involves a major
perceptual shift whose repercussions propagate through the
whole of science and beyond. Rather than viewing the history
of science in terms of advances in ideas, or progressive improve-
ments in theories, we are suggesting that the enterprise be
considered from the overall viewpoint of order.
science, order, and creativity
276

ENTWINED AND ENTANGLED ORDERS
A major shift in the scientiﬁc order, which took over a century
to play out, occurred at the time of Copernicus and Kepler.
Its repercussions extended beyond astronomy into a new vision
of the place of humanity within the cosmos. But even this
Copernican revolution took place within a much larger context,
that of the transformation of order associated with the Renais-
sance. More generally, the order of science, and indeed of society
itself, at any one time should not be thought of as being single
and well-deﬁned. Rather it is a nesting and entwining of several
diﬀerent orders, some of which remain static over time and
others that are in a state of transformation and change.
Just as the revolution from the Ptolemaic to the Copernican
order took place within the context of the changes associated
with the ending of the late Middle Ages and the beginning of the
Renaissance, so too the Renaissance transformation of order was
itself contained with an even larger transformation. According to
Alfred W. Crosby1 the second half of the thirteenth century saw
an unprecedented change in European consciousness. Crosby
associates this with the birth of visualization and development of
systems of representation in everything from musical notation
and the accurate depiction of space in map-making, to the adop-
tion of the Indo-Arabic number system and the invention of
bookkeeping. The repercussions of this transformation of order
were still being felt two hundred years later and made possible
the Renaissance and the subsequent rise of science.
The transformations within science and society, from the
second half of the thirteenth century to the elliptic orbits of
Kepler, span three and a half centuries. During this period an
entire set of orders—social, religious, and scientiﬁc—was trans-
forming, sometimes in subtle and sometimes in radical ways. At
times one order changed rapidly while other orders were largely
unaﬀected. At others, orders changed together.
the order between and beyond 277

Because the transformation of one order occurs within the
context of another, this does not mean that orders are conveni-
ently nested one within the other like Chinese boxes. Rather,
orders are entwined and enfolded in complex ways. When one
order changes rapidly this can produce a degree of entangle-
ment, confusion, and contradiction. In turn, such confusions
and contradictions play themselves out within the functioning
of society.
Take, as an example of transforming orders, the Darwinian
theory of evolution and its impact on society. Before Darwin,
scientists and theologians accepted that the world had been cre-
ated in a ﬁnished state, with continents, plants, and animals set
in their respective orders. Admittedly the discovery of fossil
bones presented a problem. It seemed to indicate that whole
species of quite diﬀerent animals had existed on earth in times
so remote they predated the six days of creation set at 4004 bc by
Bishop Usher. The only explanation was that these fossils were
not the remains of real, living creatures but had been placed
there by God as examples of his creative potential. Such an
account preserved the prevailing order that extolled hierarchical
social strata and stable government.
But by the time, in 1831, that young Darwin began his
voyage in HMS Beagle, England had suﬀered the repercussions of
the American and French revolutions. A spirit of change was in
the air with the idea of progress being advanced as a positive
virtue. At the same time, the Industrial Revolution was begin-
ning to transform the face of the English countryside and a
corresponding transformation was taking place within the struc-
ture of society. On the other hand, these changes took place
against the backdrop of a highly conservative social order, one
that extolled social stability, strong paternal values in the family
and factory, and made much use of Biblical quotations to
encourage sobriety and hard work. Mrs Alexander’s Victorian
hymn, “All Things Bright and Beautiful,” underlines the premise
science, order, and creativity
278

that social positions, particularly those of the privileged, are
divinely preordained:
The rich man in his castle,
The poor man at his gate,
God made them, high or lowly,
And order’d their estate.
Such stratiﬁcation was as true for the plant and animal kingdoms
as it was for Victorian society. But against this conservative order
was now set a notion of progress that suggested it was possible
to better oneself and change one’s estate through application
and hard work.
When Darwin set sail on the Beagle he was, on the one hand, a
product of a static, conservative social order and, on the other,
willing to entertain the possibility that the earth has not always
been in the same state of stability with all species neatly strati-
ﬁed. Indeed, the revolutionary notion had just been proposed
that the geological strata had not been forever ﬁxed but were the
result of successive periods in the earth’s evolution. It may have
occurred to Darwin that what was true about the earth itself
could equally be true about the life on its surface. This was
certainly conﬁrmed by his observations during his long voyage
on HMS Beagle.
Many years were to elapse before Darwin was willing to trans-
form his insights on the Beagle into a public, scientiﬁc statement
about the evolution of species. A number of explanations have
been oﬀered for this long gap in time, such as, for example,
chronic illness. It was certainly not the case that, during this long
period, Darwin lacked the basic idea or insight about evolution.
Rather, in the context of this book, it could be said that Darwin
had been involved in a deep conﬂict between the prevailing
social and religious order and his own emerging notions of
evolution, transformation, and progress.
the order between and beyond 279

Darwin’s Origin of Species pictured evolution as taking place
though competition. This competition ensured the survival of
the ﬁttest and, in this sense, reﬂected that new aspect of Victorian
order in which change, progress, invention, and innovation
were given the highest values. On the other hand it established
a deep contradiction between the virtue of change and that aspect
of order that extolled social and political stability. (If Darwin’s
theory had been created at the end of our own century it would
more probably have been based upon currently fashionable
notions of co-operation and self-organization. In turn this
would have generated new conﬂicts with the other aspects of
order within our society.)
While deeply oﬀending orthodox religious sensibilities about
the origin of human kind, the Darwinian notion of competition
and survival of the ﬁttest fed back into the competitive aspects of
Victorian society. It reinforced an ethic that justiﬁed economic
competition within a free market on the grounds that it would
result in the most eﬃcient businesses and the greatest good for
the greatest number.
In this way the economic, social, and scientiﬁc orders of the
nineteenth century enfold, entwine, inform, and contradict each
other in subtle and complex ways. It was within this enfoldment
of orders of progress and conversation, stability and revolution
that not only Origin of Species appeared in 1859 but also Volume 1
of Marx’s Das Kapital in 1867. In both cases revolutionary ideas
ﬂow out of the prevailing order of the time and then feed back
to inform it.
A similar enfoldment of scientiﬁc, medical, and social orders
is associated with the Freudian notions of neurosis, individual
psychology, and the growth of civilization through repression of
anti-social impulses. In turn, these ideas continue to exert a deep
inﬂuence on the order of our contemporary society. They have
changed, for example, the notion of what it means to be an
individual who makes free choices.
science, order, and creativity
280

These are but two examples of the many ways in which orders
transform, enfold, entwine, carry over, and even contradict each
other. In turn, such enfolded and entangled orders inform the
way we perceive, communicate, and act, both individually and as
a society in general.
THE UNCONSCIOUS NATURE OF ORDER AND ITS
SENSORY COMPONENT
To live within the context of a given order is to exercise a par-
ticular perception of the world. Order becomes the basis of
behaviour, action, communication, and motivation. This does
not mean that a particular order acts causally to produce these
eﬀects, but rather the whole spectrum of a person’s (and a
society’s) values, motivations, perceptions, and communication
actually is that order.
An order is lived and experienced. But, unlike a scientiﬁc
theory or concept, it is normally not directly available for intro-
spective analysis. Scientiﬁc theories are discussed openly within
the scientiﬁc community where they are challenged, tested, and
accepted or rejected by a combination of rational and empirical
means. (Although it is also true that personal, social, and polit-
ical pressures are played out within the scientiﬁc enterprise.)
This is not necessarily the case with order. When it is held by the
whole of society, an order is so deeply ingrained that it is never
questioned. Like the sun that rises in the morning, travels across
the sky and sets at night, order is such an inevitable part of reality
that it is accepted in an unseeing way.
But if the order out of which science, and society, operates is
not fully open to conscious introspection, this means that our
values, and the ways in which we communicate, perceive the
world, and act are also held in the thrall of particular kinds of
order. Just when we feel we are making progress in developing
new ideas, hidden order is restraining us.
the order between and beyond 281

Why should it be so diﬃcult to bring order into the light of
conscious reﬂection, or change it at will? In part, it is because the
orders within which we live are deeply entwined and enfolded
into other orders. Some of these latter orders even reach down
into the human sensory-motor system, so that while certain
of their aspects may be available for reﬂection and thought at
the verbal level—through discussion, spoken argument, and inter-
nalized verbal thinking—others only make themselves known in
the form of sensations, movements, feelings, and the like. More-
over, some aspects of order are absorbed during periods of
life so early as to precede the development of speech.
It is this whole entwined set of orders, whose spectrum
ranges from sensed muscular movements and responses to con-
scious logical, verbal argument, that is the order in which we
live. At any one time only certain aspects of this spectrum are
available for conscious examination.
To return to the notion of the Implicate Order for a moment,
only limited aspects of this order can, at any one time, be made
explicate. Others, by remaining implicate, are not available for
didactic reﬂection and explicitly shared communication. Some
can, in turn, be made explicate but only though the action of
the enfolding other aspects of order. So too it is the case with
the entwined orders in which we live. While it is always pos-
sible through insight to bring certain aspects into conscious
awareness, others remain hidden.
When we speak about the need to examine or change order,
we are dealing with an activity that must take place at many levels
at once including, but also going beyond, verbal reﬂection. To
take an example of these deeper layers, when “thinking” about
the ﬁeld equations of general relativity, Einstein would squeeze a
rubber ball to feel the muscular tensions in his arm. These mus-
cular movements formed an important aspect of his “thinking”
but were clearly not available for conscious examination.
Likewise, the painter Cezanne gave importance to the “little
science, order, and creativity
282

sensations” he felt before the motif he was attempting to realize
in the act of painting. In turn, it could be said that the orchestra-
tion of these “sensations” forms the basis of Cezanne’s new
order to painting. In both these cases the scientist and the artist
were concerned with the development of radical new orders.
These involved forms of thinking that included but went beyond
the verbal, or the symbolically visual, into somatic experience.
In the development of quantum theory, it is notable that
Werner Heisenberg, in recalling the night on which he developed
his matrix mechanics, associated it with freedom from chronic
hayfever while vacationing on treeless Heligoland. The math-
ematician Poincaré had a breakthrough in a long-term problem
in the act of lifting his foot in order to step onto a trolley car.
One of us, David Bohm, experienced such a radical revision of
order during childhood that it formed the theme of his later
thinking about wholeness and the holomovement.
As a child, Bohm sought security in ﬁxed positions and pre-
arranged strategies. One day, while approaching a stream with
some friends, he, as usual, planned out his set of moves, visual-
izing in his mind the way he would use rocks as stepping stones,
putting down each foot in order to traverse the stream. But as
soon as he began to cross he realized that if he stopped moving
for only a moment he would fall into the water. The only way he
could cross was to keep on moving rather than making a series
of transitions between ﬁxed stopping points. At that moment he
realized that security did not lie in grasping ﬁxed positions but
in continuous movement and ﬂow. It was this order, ﬁrst under-
stood in a purely somatic way, that had a major inﬂuence on all
Bohm’s later thinking in science and philosophy.
THE EVOLUTION OF ORDERS IN MATHEMATICS
We are suggesting that order extends from society right into an
individual’s body, and vice versa. This is conﬁrmed by the work
the order between and beyond 283

of developmental psychologists such as Jean Piaget. Piaget con-
ducted a series of experiments to discover the way young chil-
dren make visual discriminations. The earliest of these turns
out to be purely topological, made between interlocking and
spatially disconnected ﬁgures. Before children are able to dis-
tinguish between a square, a triangle, and a circle they notice the
diﬀerence between open and closed, disjoint and intersecting
ﬁgures. Later the child begins to diﬀerentiate not only between
open and closed ﬁgures but also between squares, triangles, and
circles. This transition is not the result of passive development
within the visual cortex but arises out of active learning.
(Experiments with animals suggest that when prehensile learn-
ing is prevented, development of the corresponding areas of
the cortex is impoverished.)
Visual learning takes place in association with a child’s phys-
ical manipulation of objects. Children use their ﬁngers and hands
to explore textures and shapes, to move things around, and see
how they ﬁt together. In this way, through eye, hand, and body,
children eventually learn to distinguish diﬀerent geometrical
shapes, as well as sizes, areas, and volumes. Clearly this type
of thinking involves processes other than an exclusively logical
reasoning. It includes internal visualization (both abstract and
concrete) as well as the muscular sensations involved in touching
and manipulating objects.
Such reasoning does not end in childhood. It continues
throughout life. It is used in a highly reﬁned form by mathemat-
icians and theoretical physicists as a sort of “intuition” that cannot
be reduced to sequences of logical algorithms. This “thinking,”
that extends from the early reasoning of the pre-verbal infant
to the insights of a pure mathematician, always includes com-
ponents that are not readily available to introspection.
A glance at the history of mathematics conﬁrms this assertion.
Deeper and developmentally earlier abilities are more diﬃcult
to access through the conscious, reﬂective mind. Historically the
science, order, and creativity
284

earliest mathematics—such as empirical rules of surveying for
calculating areas—involves mental processes similar to those
that develop much later in childhood. Surveying, for example,
involves the ability to compare areas and volumes of diﬀerent
ﬁgures and shapes, tasks beyond a very young child’s abilities.
It was out of these historically early rules for computing areas
of ﬁelds and buildings that the Greeks developed geometry. In
this system the properties of congruent, similar, and dissimilar
ﬁgures are related by abstract, logical reasoning. Euclid’s Elements
represents the logical culmination of the way reason abstracted
and ampliﬁed the original empirical rules for surveying. In dev-
elopmental terms, it involves those abilities present somewhat
earlier in childhood than those concerned with the calculation
of area and volumes.
In the history of mathematics a long time interval elapsed
before Euclidean geometry gave way to topology. Topology is
associated with much early abilities of discrimination between
open and closed ﬁgures amongst infants. Before a child has
acquired the necessary geometrical skills to distinguish a circle
from a square he or she knows the diﬀerence between linked
and unlinked rings. Finally, topology yields logically
cohomology and we enter the infant’s earliest world of
manipulative abilities.
In each case it is as if to pass from one stage of abstraction
and generalization to the next, mathematicians had to excavate
deeper and deeper into cognitive orders that were laid down
earlier and earlier in childhood. In a similar fashion, a child’s
logical operations with classes and sets developmentally precede
arithmetic. While, for mathematicians, the relationships between
classes and sets forms the logical foundation for arithmetic.
To reach what mathematicians consider to be ever more fun-
damental levels requires the mind to penetrate into the operation
of perceptual and sensory-motor orders that are to a large part
unconscious. The ability to dissolve one’s attachment to one
the order between and beyond 285

layer and expose others takes an enormous amount of creative
energy. This process is also connected with the experiencing of
a variety of sensations, feelings, and insights. It is as if orders,
their enfoldments and conﬂicts, have become so much a part of
the physical body that it must work to resolve blockages and
produce movement. This is why creative work can sometimes
be painful and distressing. It is also possible that during such
periods of creative work we are touching areas of our earliest
development that have become associated with a variety of
preverbal traumas and taboos.
GENERATIVE ORDERS
In developing new theories, scientists and mathematicians nat-
urally prefer to work in clear and reasoned ways. Assumptions
are to be exposed at all stages and each topic placed on ﬁrm
logical foundations. In addition, the whole investigation should
be open to critical debate within the scientiﬁc community
through seminars and refereed publications.
What is less clear is the particular way a scientist or mathemat-
ician arrives at a new idea or insight. In many cases, an idea in
physics or a theorem in mathematics appears within the mind in
a state that is more or less complete, yet without the intermedi-
ate logical steps being ﬁlled in. (The mathematician Ramanajuan,
for example, claimed that his mathematical theorems were gifts
from a goddess.) Only later, and in retrospect, are the logical
steps worked out so as to place the theorem, or scientiﬁc idea, on
a strict rational basis within a given body of knowledge.
While a new idea will eventually be logically connected to
the rest of its ﬁeld, the order of its generation is wholly diﬀerent.
A great deal of anecdotal material suggests that the creative gen-
eration of new ideas cannot be forced or controlled. Creativity
frequently involves an initial period of hard and sometimes
frustrating work. This is followed by a latency period and then
science, order, and creativity
286

a sudden breakthrough, often during a period of recreation or
reverie. Through dreams, insights, and symbolic forms, a certain
aspect of a new order may arrive in conscious awareness. In
this way scientists, artists, musicians, writers, and philosophers
bring about changes in their respective ﬁelds. As a consequence,
their insights transform the ways we all see and experience the
world. Yet even when new ideas are at their most radical they still
remain entwined within a whole spectrum of orders, many of
which remain largely unaﬀected.
ORDER IN SOCIETY
So far we have mainly been discussing order in the context of
science and art. But such orders are enfolded within the order of
society itself, within its values, meanings, and metaphors.
Dante’s Divine Comedy gives a picture of the order of the Middle
Ages. It is symbolized in the form of concentric circles, which
variously stand for the structure of the city (Florence), the social
order, the cosmological order, the psychological nature of
humanity, and the divine order. The orders of indigenous soci-
eties are expressed within songs, ceremonies, creation stories,
“maps in the head”, and, above all, the particular language of
the group which is often said to contain the essence of their life
and philosophy.
All societies have orders that are largely unexamined and, in
the main, inaccessible to immediate conscious reﬂection. When
traditional societies remain undisturbed by outside inﬂuence
over long periods, their orders remain stable and creative. But
when conditions external to a society change, as for example
when a traditional society comes into contact with new peoples,
technologies, and powerful ideas, then its order becomes sev-
erely stressed. Several outcomes are possible. The society may
fragment and vanish as a centre of coherence. Alternatively its
order may change in a radical way in the face of challenge. Or it
the order between and beyond 287

may simply absorb and incorporate the new orders that were
originally foreign to it.
European and, more generally, Western society has been
subject to major stresses over the last few thousand years. These
include migrations of peoples and language groups, the growth
of agriculture, the development of new philosophical and
religious ideas, the invention of writing, the development of
cities, and the constant impact of technological innovation.
There was a period of relative stability up to and including the
early Middle Ages. But then a series of technological and intel-
lectual innovations changed the face of society in a radical way.
These included the secularization of time, with the appearance
of the ﬁrst clocks on public buildings. Likewise the use of Indo-
Arabic numerals and the invention of double-entry bookkeeping
led to a better understanding of trade and the notion of ﬁnancial
planning. During this period people gradually learned to repre-
sent notions of space, time, and money in a variety of abstract
forms. New tools were given to the mind and, in turn, the mind
dreamed of controlling not only the ﬁnancial future but also
society itself.
Towards the end of the Middle Ages there was a shift of power
from Kings and Popes to city-states and the new merchant class.
It was the time of the rise of the individual and a new faith in the
power of reason. It is no coincidence that during this period the
Elizabethans introduced interior monologue onto the stage. Now
“Man” became the measure of all things. In the Renaissance,
and on through the later rise of the Romantic Movement, human
consciousness was changing. Yet at the same time much of this
change was taking place within the context of earlier static
orders, and in this way a variety of tensions developed. The end
result of this accelerating change was not only an entwining of
orders but our own present entanglement of conﬂicting orders.
Throughout the Middle Ages church music, for example,
was based on the idea of chanting together as a community.
science, order, and creativity
288

There was no audience and all present looked inward together,
towards the divine. Then, with the Romantic Movement and
composers such as Beethoven, a new musical form developed
—the concerto. This grew out of an earlier form in which a
small group of musicians played together “in concert.” But now
the music spoke of an individual’s struggle against fate. In
turn, the audience had become distinct from the performers.
It was not so much a case of all looking together towards the
divine, as an audience focusing on the individual virtuoso
engaged in a battle against the full power of an orchestra.
We are the inheritors of such a consciousness. It is one in
which the individual is privileged over the order of society. Yet
this order is itself entwined within earlier orders that stretch back
to the early Middle Ages and beyond. By virtue of the obvious
attractions of its technology and its economic power, the order
of progress and constant change has propagated and come to
inﬂuence many other societies on a global scale. In addition,
the West has absorbed elements from these other worldviews. The
result is that industrial societies now operate within a highly com-
plex entanglement of orders that contain unexamined tensions.
In turn, these are giving rise to a variety of conﬂicts.
There has probably never been a time when human groups
were without conﬂict. The very nature of orders, with their
entwining into earlier orders, means that confusion and mis-
information are being carried within a society. In turn, this
leads to a variety of tensions. These are felt more acutely
today. When societies consisted of a few families hunting
together it was possible for the meaning of the group to be
constantly examined.
The importance of free and open communication is still
understood by many indigenous societies. They give signiﬁcance
to talking circles, meetings that are structured in such a way that
each person can talk directly and from the heart. Talking feathers
and talking sticks confer authority on whoever is speaking at the
the order between and beyond 289

time. In this way their views are heard with respect, no matter
what position they may take. The autonomy of the circle is pre-
served and disputes do not dissolve into unproﬁtable argument
between factions. Even when strong tensions arise it is said that a
person should never leave the circle until resolution is reached.
And so discussion can continue right through the night.
Tensions and conﬂicts are openly acknowledged as they arise,
and emphasis is placed on the continued harmony of the
group rather than on aﬃrming or denying the arguments of a
particular individual.
Contemporary societies are vastly larger and technologically
more complex than these indigenous groups. As a consequence,
the tensions they suﬀer are far more acute and such societies
have no generally acknowledged mechanism for resolution. In
addition there is no shared sense of meaning within an indus-
trial society that is rapidly becoming global. Neither is there a
common acknowledgement of the cosmic dimension. Rather
there is constant conﬂict between the order of society and that of
the individual, as well as between various groups within that
society. The result is that many people experience a sense of
meaningless or lack of worth within their lives.
The problems faced by our society range through family
tensions and disruptions, to the breakdown of inner cities, racial
tension, famines, endemic diseases, battles between diﬀerent
ideologies, civil wars, wars between nations, and the overall threat
to the environment. It is the argument of this book that their
source lies in underlying and unexamined tensions and conﬂicts
that are entangled within the orders of our modern world.
In so many corners of the world violence and conﬂict pro-
duce great misery for the vast majority of the population. Yet
where people are divided, groups and individuals of good will
on both sides are actively seeking a resolution. Ironically in so
many cases, the divided peoples share a common language,
love a particular countryside, or have similar family structures,
science, order, and creativity
290

ethical values, modes of dress, lifestyles, and so on. What appears
to unite them should vastly outweigh what divides them.
Yet, despite the greatest of eﬀorts, and even with international
intervention, conﬂicts drag on for generation after generation.
As we have seen, the apparently unresolvable nature of these
tensions arises in deep conﬂicts of order that are largely
unexamined. Such orders hold considerable sway on the way
people think, see the world, communicate and act. To return, for
the moment, to the break in communication between Bohr and
Einstein. We have suggested that this did not involve a simple
disagreement of ideas. Such a situation could have been resolved
by calm debate and reasoning. Rather, something far deeper was
involved. Their dispute was reﬂected in the very language each
of them spoke. It was a language that arose out of their diﬀering,
underlying notions of order. While each of the disputants put
their position fairly and clearly and attempted to see the other’s
position, they were being subtly inﬂuenced by all manner of
strong and unexamined feelings. Their presuppositions were
reﬂected in the words they chose and the way they used them.
This is not to deny that the problems that beset us have real
and immediate material causes. Disease, famine, and pollution
are not illusions of a distorted consciousness. On the other hand,
the underlying causes of these problems have their origins in
conﬂicts of order. Famine is real enough. Its immediate origins
may lie in overpopulation, poor farming methods, inadequate
irrigation, absence of an infrastructure for distributing food, or
mass migrations brought on by warfare or economic change. In
turn, each of these causes has its source in yet other levels of
misinformation that can be ﬁnally traced to a society’s values,
shared meanings, and underlying conﬂictual orders.
A famine can be addressed through global cooperation involv-
ing massive airlifts of food and its distribution through the
United Nations and volunteer organizations. Yet such praise-
worthy actions do not get to the generative source of the
the order between and beyond 291

problem. They are akin to our earlier example of clearing up the
pollution of a river downstream. This certainly needs to be done,
but remains a stopgap measure unless the source of pollution is
addressed upstream.
CONFLICTS IN ORDER
The issue of this chapter is not the respective values of stasis
or change within order, nor is it the fact that order is necessarily
hidden from our immediate inspection, but, rather, what happens
when unresolved conﬂicts and confusions of order are defended
with blind passion.
Order not only resides within an individual’s brain and atti-
tude to life. It is enfolded within language and the particular
ways it is used in a variety of contexts. Order is manifest within
the way that an organization structures itself. It is present in
the architecture of the building of its head oﬃce, the physical
and electronic inter-connection of its branches and departments,
and in the way it presents itself to its customers. Order is reﬂec-
ted in the informal and formal structure and operations of
governments and legal systems.
When we say that a particular order, with all its misinform-
ation and unexamined conﬂicts, is entrenched, we mean that it is
manifest not only in the way people see, think, speak, and act
but also in the bricks and stone of their buildings and in the
global ﬂow of their electronic data. To speak of a change of order
involves a change of perception of the meaning we give to these
material and non-material structures.
During a paradigm shift, certain aspects of an order are, for
a time, made explicit and available for rational reﬂection, intro-
spection, and discussion. But because aspects of this order,
as well as its enfoldment within other orders, still remain hidden
and unexamined it is possible for internal conﬂicts and contra-
dictions to persist.
science, order, and creativity
292

As an example from science, take the major paradigm shift
associated with quantum theory. Quantum theory represents
a radically diﬀerent vision of the world than that given by clas-
sical physics. Yet, as we have seen, part of the old classical order,
speciﬁcally the Cartesian order for the description of space, is
carried over into the new quantum order. Notions of wholeness,
non-locality and indivisibility within the quantum order are
at odds with the Cartesian order. The uneasy co-existence and
mutual enfoldment of these two incompatible orders has resulted
in a deep and persistent internal tension.
Likewise Einstein, in positing the new space–time order of
relativity, gave a privileged position to signals. But for the notion
of a signal to have meaning one must have well-deﬁned and fully
separated receivers and transmitters. Such assumptions are
incompatible with the notion of the indivisibility of observer
and observed within quantum theory. When two initially separ-
ate systems are linked together in quantum theory it is no longer
possible to partition them in any unambiguous way into systems
and signal, or interaction. On the other hand, the deﬁnition of a
space–time structure requires accurate clocks and measuring
rods which, today, take the form of quantum devices. At a deep
level, relativity theory is in conﬂict with quantum theory. Yet, at
the same time, relativity requires the existence of quantum
devices in order to give practical meaning to its basic concepts.
Conversely, quantum theory demands, for the deﬁnition of
its states and wave functions, well-deﬁned measuring devices.
Yet their very existence is incompatible with relativity theory
which denies the existence of rigid bodies. Thus the orders of
both theories—quantum and general relativity—are entwined
within each other in ways that are basically incompatible.
Despite over half a century of activity on the part of theor-
etical physicists, relativity and quantum theory have not been
uniﬁed, in any satisfactory way, into a single coherent theory.
Clearly what is at stake is not some new idea or novel theory, but
the order between and beyond 293

an approach that addresses the tensions and conﬂicts within
the orders of quantum theory and relativity. A deeper order is
needed, one that contains the orders of both these theories as
limiting cases.
THE CONFLICT BETWEEN STASIS AND CHANGE
A further cause of confusion within order is the conﬂict between
change and stasis. When certain issues are seen as blockages
to progress there is a call for new ideas and new approaches.
Inevitably stasis is seen as being undesirable and is equated
with stagnation. Yet the orders of traditional societies remained
unchanged for centuries and even millennia. When a particular
society achieves a healthy equilibrium within the conﬁnes of
its environment, its order should by no means be termed
stagnant, even if it appears unchanging. The order of such a
society provides a deep and collective sense of meaning that
allows that society to live in a relatively harmonious and stable
way over long periods of time.
Stasis does not mean that a society has ceased to be creative, or
that it lives in a largely unconscious way within the grip of its
particular order. Many traditional societies practice ceremonies
of revitalization as, for example, the Sun Dance of the Plains
Indians of North America. Such ceremonies are said to renew
the compacts, or relationships, society ﬁrst made with what
could variously be called the spirits, keepers of the animals, or
energies of the cosmos. The maintenance of a traditional order
is, in this case, a creative and intentional matter. Should these
ceremonies cease to be performed, the order of that society, and
its relationship with the cosmos, would decay. In such societies
the basic order would only be called into question under the
impact of major environmental change, or the inﬂux of new
peoples and technologies with associated radically diﬀerent
orders of meaning.
science, order, and creativity
294

In Western society, particularly over the past century, we have
taken the opposite point of view by associating creativity almost
exclusively with constant novelty and change. This is yet another
source of conﬂict within the order of our society. The dictum of
the poet Ezra Pound was “make it new.” Within this century
music has moved from tonality to atonality, serialism, minimal-
ism, aleotoric composition, and electronic sound. The rise and
fall of entire schools of painting is now measured in years or
decades rather than centuries. And for much contemporary art or
music to be taken seriously it must either be associated with
some sort of novelty and change, or be consciously post-modern.
Yet despite what at ﬁrst sight appears to be a constant ﬂux of
revolution and change, the underlying order of Western music
and art, at a deeper level remains static, and at times stagnant.
Again, orders of stasis and change have become entangled.
Why do we say that the arts remain in a state of stasis?
Because, since the end of the Renaissance, art music has been
composed, more or less, and performed, more or less, before a
largely passive audience within salons and concert halls. Like-
wise the visual arts are largely associated with the production
of objects, having an associated commercial value, intended
for display in galleries or the homes of collectors. And while
in this century the needs and nature of Western society have
changed in certain radical directions, the arts have not always
responded in appropriate ways.
The artistic products of Africa, Asia, and many traditional
societies are generated within a radically diﬀerent order, and are
associated with quite distinct social purposes. For this reason
their artifacts are more generally displayed in anthropological
museums. It is only when a particular artist ascribes to the
general order associated with Western art that such work is
admitted, sometimes in a somewhat patronizing way, into an
art gallery.
While schools of art develop and change with great rapidity,
the order between and beyond 295

the underlying notion of “High Art” persists into our own con-
temporary period. Likewise with music the notions of perform-
ance, and passivity of the audience, have survived, unchanged by
other movements. While at one level the order of Western art and
music has changed, at another it is relatively static.
The premium we set on novelty, and the way we confuse this
with creativity, is somewhat superﬁcial. In other societies cre-
ativity is not automatically associated with novelty and change
but with respect for a particular tradition. In Western art before
the Renaissance, the subjects, design, colors, and even the ges-
tures of the ﬁgures in a fresco were strictly prescribed. True
creativity lay within the conﬁnes of such a schema and not in
breaking its boundaries. Icon painters in the West and Near East,
and temple sculptors in Asia, also conform to particular schools.
To paint within a strict style by no means implies an unthinking
procedure involving an almost mechanical reproduction but,
rather, the reanimation of an original exemplar. It is a form of
creativity that comes from long practice of a craft and the sub-
mission to a particular ideal. By contrast, what is taken in the
West as the radically new within the arts could be said to be just
another variation within the same overall social order.
When the arts—music, theater, writing, ﬁlm, and the various
visual arts—are healthy and creative they draw their inspiration,
in part, from society and, in turn, feed back to enrich and renew.
On the other hand, endless change for its own sake can indicate
an order that has become stagnant and uncreative. In this respect
the arts begin to lose touch with society, they no longer reach
the deepest issues of life, they do not renew or illumine, they
remain without wit or vitality. The condition of the arts today
gives a strong indication of the deep conﬂict within our Western
order. There are individuals who continue to produce important
work that stands by itself and justiﬁes its own existence. On the
other hand there is much that is glib and superﬁcial. Ironically,
much art criticism reﬂects this condition. Often the less authentic
science, order, and creativity
296

the work the more it accretes essays and articles exhibiting high
degrees of convolution and verbal obscurantism. (To some extent
this is a reﬂection of the style and fashion of the moment, but at
a deeper level it is an expression of the confusion of order.)
ATTACHMENT TO ORDER
We have shown ways in which orders become nested, entwined
and enfolded. When these entangled orders meet the impact
of changing conditions, or when a society is faced with quite
diﬀerent orders, tensions and contradictions develop that are
not necessarily visible at the time. But why should this attach-
ment to order be so strong that it leads us into conﬂict? We have
already suggested that one reason lies in the way orders extend
deep within the structure of our bodies; also in the subtle
ways an order pervades society through language, political struc-
tures, communication systems, business organizations, and even
architecture and town planning.
Attachment to order also satisﬁes our need for security. It is
natural to wish for security in our lives. The problem arises
when the source of security is built upon sand. In such cases
limited aspects of an order are elevated in importance to the
point where they are taken as the touchstone of truth and the
basis of belief. Moreover, this attachment to limited aspects of a
more general order itself takes place within what could perhaps
be called “the order of language.” We have earlier pointed out
the way in which European (Indo-European) languages tend to
be strongly noun based. Nouns and names form the backbone of
communication within such languages. Of course verbs are also
important, but loosely speaking they tend to be used as ways of
linking and manipulating subjects and objects.
Such languages carry within them a tendency to reify the
world and relevate objects. By contrast an Algonquian language
such as Blackfoot gives greater important to verbs. Loosely
the order between and beyond 297

speaking it could be said that when Blackfoot people communi-
cate they do so in terms of process and ﬂow. Within their
thought, and the order of their language, boundaries are ﬂuid
and objects are in transformation. While a European speaker
would see the world in terms of objects in interaction, the Black-
foot see a ﬂowing process out of which objects, for a time,
emerge and unfold.
“European languages” give primary importance not only to
objects in the world but also to categories. The origins of Greek
and medieval logic can be seen in the tendency of such lan-
guages to partition the world and analyze it into classes and
subclasses. In this way we form concepts and then manipulate
them within the mind as if they were real objects. Flow and
process are arrested by positing abstract concepts, boundaries
are relatively ﬁxed through classiﬁcations.
In this way “European” language and thought tend to isolate
limited aspects of order, transforming the world into ﬁxed con-
cepts, collecting these together within boundaries of thought,
and excluding that which lies outside these boundaries. In
turn, the attachment to these ﬁxed sub-orders is invested with a
great deal of emotional baggage. Within such limited aspects
of order is supposed to lie security. These limited aspects are
now viewed as the source of truth. But taking one position as
the foundation of truth implies that the aspects of order that
cannot be embraced within this position become its opposite, its
negation, all that the foundation is not.
Early Greek philosophy is full of such binary oppositions:
Plenum and Void, Flux and Stasis, Light and Dark, Essence and
Appearance, Comedy and Tragedy. They continue on through
European history to our own time. In the Middle Ages they
can be found in the opposition of nominalism to realism.
Shakespeare explores conﬂicts between extreme positions in
Romeo and Juliet. Coleridge discusses fantasy and imagination.
Other oppositions include classicism versus romanticism, rea-
son versus imagination, mind versus body, absolutism versus
science, order, and creativity
298

relativism, Darwinism versus Lamarckism, deconstruction ver-
sus structuralism, the material versus the mental, holism versus
reductionism, and heredity versus environment in the ﬁeld of
education and development.
Binary opposition was also known in Ancient China where
the symbol of the Tao consisted of a light and a dark region
within a circle. Yet Taoist philosophy understood that within
each ground stands its binary opposite. Thus within the darkness
of the Tao was inscribed a tiny dot of light, and within the light
a tiny dot of darkness.
The philosopher Hegel argued that each member of a binary
opposition contains an essential contradiction that transforms
the hitherto static into a dialectic movement. Whatever we take as
the ground of truth, the thesis, when pushed to its limit, will be
found to contain its own contradiction, or antithesis. Therefore
what has been taken as the static ground of truth contains a deep
contradiction that can only be transcended through the dialect-
ical movement towards synthesis. In turn, this synthesis becomes
a new ground and a new thesis. Eventually contradictions will be
found within this new ground which progressively leads towards
a new antithesis and a further movement of the dialectic.
Perhaps the most famous of these starting points is Hegel’s
investigation of attempts to establish philosophy on the ground
of Being. Since Being excludes all that is not, it includes within
its very deﬁnition the notion of non-Being. Out of the move-
ment of thought, between the thesis of Being and the antithesis
of non-Being, is born the synthesis of Becoming.
The French philosopher Jacques Derrida commented on
philosophy’s historical tendency to attach itself to one pole of a
binary opposition. He selected as a particular example the privil-
ege given to Speech over Writing and showed this to be entirely
contradictory within the actual practice of philosophy. Derrida’s
philosophical method of Deconstruction aims at showing
how every reading can be undermined by its direct opposition
the order between and beyond 299

in such a way that identities, texts, and meanings take on more
ﬂuid forms.
The conﬂicts inherent in adopting a ﬁxed position within a
spectrum of order were also clear to the psychologist Carl Jung.
Jung argued that beyond the personal nature of consciousness,
and the infantile repressed material addressed by Freud, lies
the collective unconscious. His friend the physicist Wolfgang
Pauli termed this “the objective unconscious.”
Jung’s experience, both with his patients as well as in his
study of the symbolic material of many cultures, led him to
propose that the collective side of the mind is subject to a variety
of objective structuring principles he termed the Archetypes.
A person can enter the thrall of an archetype that plays itself
out in repetitive structuring of behavior. This applies not only
to an individual but also to a society, a nation, and even an entire
historical period.
Jung also referred to what he termed the Shadow. The more
a person, or nation, adheres to one aspect of an archetype the
more its obverse, negative side is repressed, denied, and pushed
underground. Because it is inaccessible to conscious and reﬂect-
ive examination, the Shadow grows in an uncontrolled way. As a
result it becomes projected onto others, and even upon oneself,
as all that is negative, dark, and evil. Everything that is hated and
denied in oneself now becomes the overwhelming characteristic
of The Other. Inevitably a minority group becomes the scapegoat
for the Other. This group is now seen as a threat to society and
the origin of all that is evil and undesirable.
When we remain in the grip of an archetype, our behavior
becomes consequently limited, less rich and less creative. We
tend to project our anger, rage, fear, and repressed traumas out-
side ourselves and onto The Other. Yet because this Shadow, this
antithesis of all we hold to be good and worthy, is enfolded and
entangled within the order we so passionately embrace, it inevit-
ably leads to all manner of internal conﬂicts. The more this is
science, order, and creativity
300

denied, the more the Shadow gains in power, the more likely
we are to engage in hostile and destructive behavior not only to
others, but ultimately to ourselves.
Under such conditions our perception and communication
become deeply distorted. We live and act within a ﬁeld of mis-
information and our creative energies are diverted to support
what is ﬁxed and rigid.
NON-NEGOTIABLE ORDERS
Binary oppositions within order have their origin in a desire for
security and the need for a foundation to thought. But very
quickly they can lead to what we have been calling ﬁxed non-
negotiable positions. Because of the contradictions and conﬂicts
within orders, ﬁxed positions produce disputation, breaks in
communication, and even violence.
People of good will are generally able to dialogue together.
But in practice this only goes so far. The sticking point arises
when they reach what they believe to be bedrock positions,
positions that represent for them absolute values and absolute
moral positions. When bedrock beliefs are reached, a person
feels that they cannot compromise without sacriﬁcing every-
thing they hold dear and abandoning all that gives meaning
to their lives. Non-negotiable positions need not be simply per-
sonal and individual but can be shared by an entire community
or nation. They are even entrenched within a society’s infra-
structure, its public ceremonies and practices, and the particular
way language is being used.
Ironically, what divides people in this way may, to an outsider,
seem less signiﬁcant than all that unites them. In the case of
Bohr and Einstein, particular notions of order were opposed. Yet
the order to which each held in a non-negotiable way contained,
enfolded within it, a more extended order. Both men had faith in
the scientiﬁc enterprise, the signiﬁcance of rational discourse,
the order between and beyond 301

the unity of knowledge, the role of scientiﬁc law, empirical
investigation, and the need for cogent explanation. They were
united in their belief that the universe, as understood by science,
should be coherent from the subatomic to the cosmic levels.
Both experienced a strong aesthetic sense about scientiﬁc
theories—indeed it was this appeal to aesthetics that primarily
lay behind Einstein’s rejection of Bohr’s Copenhagen Interpret-
ation. Further, both men believed that scientists should be pre-
pared to take a strong moral social stance. In this sense although
they were divided at one level they were, at other levels, united
within similar orders.
ECOLOGICAL DAMAGE AS A RESULT OF
CONFLICTS IN ORDER
Beneath the issues that face us today lies this generative order
of mistakes and confusions. Take, for example, environmental
issues that range in scale from the destruction of a meadow,
stream, hedgerow, or ancient stand of trees, to transnational
issues of forests, oceans, ozone layer, and global warming.
Many of these problems are acute and potentially irreversible,
such as the extinction of entire species, cutting down vast areas
of rainforest, climatic change, and the possibility of a rise in sea
levels that could inundate major seaboard cities. Yet, equally
important to the hearts of ordinary people is the destruction
of a local beauty spot, or the fact that one’s children can no
longer swim at a nearby beach. Faced with these apparently
insurmountable problems people try to do the best they can
—recycling newspapers, cans, and glass, using less packaging,
driving a more eﬃcient car, or even car pooling. Yet they also
sense that this is a mere pinprick in a larger problem. In turn,
they feel guilt that, in the last resort, all they are doing is salving
their own consciences.
Some environmentalists paint an extremely dark picture of the
science, order, and creativity
302

future. Others, such as Mark Edwards2, while not necessarily
believing that things will, in the end, turn out for the good,
argue that at least we possess the means to resolve most of the
ecological diﬃculties that face us. In Edwards’s words, “It’s all a
matter of book-keeping”.3 It is not so much the problems them-
selves that are insurmountable but the fact that this bookkeeping
and these direct solutions are not being acted upon in a forth-
right way. For Edwards this is the real issue. It is also the issue
of this chapter.
When scientists call for new ideas often what is really needed
is an examination of blocks and conﬂicts present within the
current scientiﬁc order. So too, resolving environmental issues
does not so much involve the need for novel technologies and
new legislation as an entire change of consciousness. This
implies a major transformation in the order of the global society.
That is not to say that our present global order is new in
its destructiveness. While many indigenous peoples have lived
in harmonious ways with nature it is also the case that, in the
distant past, human societies brought about irreversible environ-
mental changes. The once wooded mountains of England’s
Pennine Chain and Lake District were irreversibly denuded by
the activities of Neolithic farmers. Certain parts of India have
been reduced to infertile desert when, lacking wood for fuel, the
indigenous population burned cattle dung that should have been
returned to the land as fertilizer. In converting the American
plains into one great wheat bowl, farmers tore up deeply rooted
buﬀalo grass that previously bound the soil and, in consequence,
lost much of the topsoil to erosion by wind.
Humans have always made an impact on the landscape. They
do so as a result of their particular perceptions about the world.
Indeed, the fact of these past environmental impacts is some-
times used to justify the argument that things today are little
diﬀerent and, given good will and tolerance on all sides, we will
somehow all pull through. But conditions today are quite
the order between and beyond 303

diﬀerent. Our technology vastly magniﬁes impacts on the
environment. We achieve in less than a decade a degree of devas-
tation that, in the past, took many generations. Moreover, change
today moves so fast that it is diﬃcult to assess the impact of new
technologies and developments until it is too late.
The issue of the environment is of the same underlying
order as the degradation of inner cities, family violence and
national tensions. It all comes down to a question of conﬂicts
and incompatibilities within order. A particular order deter-
mines a society’s perception of the world. It lies behind the way
it acts and the values it holds most important. In this sense,
the order by which people live becomes the Generative Order
of their actions and perceptions.
THE NOSTALGIC DESIRE FOR WHOLENESS
As we have seen, while conﬂicts in order divide individuals and
groups they are also connected within other aspects of order.
Take, for example, the issues of abortion and euthanasia. They
divide segments of society in particularly painful ways to
the point where continued dialogue appears impossible. While
in extreme cases these divisions have erupted into physical
violence, division is also manifest within the corruption of lan-
guage. Turning an opponent’s position into a series of simplistic
slogans makes communication even more diﬃcult. On the other
hand, both sides in this debate are concerned with the values
and assumptions by which people live, the responsibilities of
the individual and society, and the importance of acting accord-
ing to one’s conscience. In this respect those who engage in hot
debate seem to have more in common than those who remain
indiﬀerent to such questions.
Yet, again, what unites does not appear strong enough to
overcome that which divides. For this reason we must now
examine another deep confusion within order. This is the almost
science, order, and creativity
304

mythic desire for a unity that transcends division and conﬂict.
A true story from World War I illustrates this point. It tells of
the Christmas Day in which soldiers of both sides declared a
spontaneous truce, left their trenches, exchanged gifts, and even
began impromptu football matches. The nostalgia of Christmas
brought them together. For one day at least it showed the possi-
bility for human beings to transcend hatred, propaganda, and
indoctrination. On the other hand, nostalgia by itself could not
go deep enough into the conﬂicts of order to clear up its tangled
mistakes. And so on the following day the soldiers who had
celebrated together were shooting at each other again.
It is the deep desire for wholeness and human connectedness
that causes people to bond together into groups in the ﬁrst
place. Yet this same desire for wholeness can also foster fantasy
and illusion. It is far too easy to cement a group together by
focusing its opposition to some other group. Thus this nostalgic
wish for wholeness can create a deep and paradoxical conﬂict
within order.
The desire for human connection and wholeness is found in
cultural myths down through the ages. In our own time movies
often gain their appeal by addressing in direct and simple ways
our deep fears and longings. A perennial plot of the Western
concerns an external threat to a small community, which in the
face of danger unites and puts aside its feuds and diﬀerences.
During the Cold War many science ﬁction ﬁlms portrayed a
world united against the threat of an invader from outer space.
In their very artlessness such ﬁlms acknowledge the deep
longing for wholeness, along with the sentimentalized notion
that what divides people and nations is of less importance than a
common sense of humanity and a love for the Earth. At times
this sense of connection is particularly ironic, as when people
reminisce about the comradeship they experienced during
wartime, a friendship that transcended entrenched social divi-
sions. Again we see how a false sense of wholeness is born out
the order between and beyond 305

of division and, at the same time, this very division breeds a
longing for wholeness.
Of equal irony was the death wish that surfaced during the
worst aspects of the Cold War. It is still present in extreme sectors
of the environmental movement. This death wish involved a
fantasy that if things turned out for the worse, with cities des-
troyed and most of the population wiped out, the world that
followed would be peopled by those united in a common pur-
pose. There was a considerable seduction in this fantasy, with its
rejection of technology and impersonal government in favor
of people living in small groups, developing new myths and
new modes of co-operative self-government. Related fantasies
surfaced as December 31 approached.
Freud saw the death wish as the desire to return to an inanimate
state of matter. The death wish fantasies of today revolve around
global conﬂict, environmental disaster, global warming, and the
escape of a deadly virus against which medical science is impo-
tent. They are based upon the unconscious desire to ﬂee from
the complex responsibilities of our modern world into some
imagined Golden Age when things were simpler and cleaner,
one in which all problems could be overcome through goodwill.
But, as we have stressed in this book, the problems we face
today arise from the complex web of entangled conﬂicts, confu-
sions, and misinformation in the order of our world. Their
resolution cannot be achieved through fantasy and nostalgia.
Such illusions are particularly dangerous. What is needed is the
application of considerable creative energy. This is the responsi-
bility of each one of us, both individually and collectively.
NEGOTIATION: AN ORDER BETWEEN OR AN
ORDER BEYOND
Holding to ﬁxed, non-negotiable positions inevitably gives rise
to disputes and conﬂicts. In such cases people may resort to
science, order, and creativity
306

negotiation. Some couples having diﬃculties in their relation-
ship consult a marriage counselor. If this doesn’t work they may
ask a professional negotiator to draw up a settlement, rather than
face messy and expensive divorce proceedings. Negotiators also
work on the conﬂicts between business and labor, or within the
management structures of large organizations. World leaders,
judges, and senior politicians attempt to negotiate an end to
secular violence and civil wars, or try to defuse tensions between
countries before they erupt into warfare.
The aim of negotiation is to reopen communication so that
the parties involved gain insight into opposing viewpoints and
realize how their own position appears to their opponents.
When this is done in a creative way, with an intelligent and
perceptive negotiator, then each person gives, to the maximum,
of his or her energy. In this fashion it becomes possible to bring
to light the underlying conﬂicts and confusion of order to which
their respective positions are attached.
But the creativity of negotiation is not always present. In most
cases the immediate aim is to defuse a potentially dangerous
position by discovering “an order between”; something work-
able that lies between two extreme positions. Such an approach
contains an inherent danger. The immediate conﬂict may appear
to have been resolved but all too often the parties involved
reached this position though a process of compromise. In other
words, they engage in a “no-win game” in which each side
concedes points in order to achieve a resolution of tension.
While a temporary agreement is achieved, the underlying source
of conﬂict remains unexamined, only to ﬂare up at some later
time and in some other context.
Let us return again to our example of Bohr and Einstein. Des-
pite decades of hard work on the part of physicists, there has
been no resolution to the tensions between the two theories
these scientists came to represent—quantum theory and relativ-
ity. Some approaches attempt to recast relativity in a form
the order between and beyond 307

appropriate for treatment within quantum theory. This involves
expressing the gravitational ﬁeld in a similar way to the other
ﬁelds of quantum theory. The next step is to quantize this ﬁeld
and ﬁnally bring it fully into the domain of quantum theory. This
approach aims at extending the order of quantum mechanics to a
middle ground where it will embrace general relativity. In alter-
native approaches, relativity is extended in an eﬀort to embrace
quantum theory. For example, quantum theory is recast within
the curved, non-Euclidean space–time of general relativity.
There have, of course, been other attempts, but most involve
an order between—a position between the two theories. None
could be said to be totally satisfying. Clearly the answer does not
lie in an “order between” the two theories but rather in moving
to “an order beyond” that transcends compromise. In this
case it would involve a move into a diﬀerent order, one that will
contain both quantum theory and general relativity, yet go
beyond the limits of both.
Physics faced something similar at the end of the nineteenth
century when it was discovered that Maxwell’s theory of light,
the electromagnetic theory, did not accord with Newton’s
mechanics. At ﬁrst physicists tried to modify one or the other
theory in an eﬀort to make them ﬁt together in “an order
between.” It was not until Einstein with his theory of relativity
that an approach was discovered that lay beyond the limitations
of both Newton and Maxwell. In turn, Newtonian laws of
motion and Maxwell’s laws of the electromagnetic ﬁeld can be
recovered, in the limit, from Einstein’s theory.
A further example of a compromise, or “order between,” is
Neils Bohr’s ﬁrst atomic theory. As a young man Bohr worked
with Ernest Rutherford at Manchester and learned that the atom
consists of a tiny, charged central core, called the nucleus, sur-
rounded by electrons. By analogy with the solar system it made
sense to picture the electrons as planets in miniature orbiting the
nucleus. The only problem was that since the electron is electric-
science, order, and creativity
308

ally charged it should be radiating away its energy as it orbits the
nucleus. Instead of atoms lasting forever, the electron should
spiral into the nucleus in a very short space of time.
Bohr faced this dilemma. He asked: Why is matter stable?
Why don’t atoms disappear in the blink of an eye? The answer,
he felt, must lie in the new quantum ideas being developed by
Planck and Einstein. These two physicists had shown that
energy is exchanged in discrete, ﬁnite packages, rather than in
continuous ways. Maybe this had something to do with the sta-
bility of the atom. Bohr reasoned that, unlike a planet round the
sun, the electron cannot move in any orbit it likes but only in
one of a series of discrete orbits. This is the reason why it cannot
radiate away its energy and spiral inward. It is forced to remain
in its quantized orbit.
At one stroke Bohr’s theory explained the stability of atoms. It
allowed physicists to calculate atomic spectra—the light emitted
when atoms are excited—and accounted for the way elements
are arranged in the pattern of the periodic table. Based on the
assumption of quantized orbits the theory could account for so
much. It did not, however, satisfy Wolfgang Pauli, who felt that it
merely grafted the new idea of the quantum onto the old idea
of planetary orbits. As Pauli explained to his friend Werner
Heisenberg, Bohr had merely put new wine in old bottles. His
theory was a compromise, an order between. It remained for
Heisenberg to discover an “order beyond,” an order that trans-
cended classical mechanics and explained atomic stability and
spectra in an entirely new way, without the need for compromise.
Let us look at another example, this time from the arts rather
than science. In the second half of the nineteenth century a
number of French painters began to react to what they felt was
the sterile and stultifying atmosphere of the Salon. The Salon
represented a tradition that dictated which subjects were suitable
for painting, as well as the style in which they should be exe-
cuted. To Pissaro, Renoir, Monet, and their colleagues it was a
the order between and beyond 309

tradition that had lost its creative impetus. The Impressionists, by
contrast, chose everyday subjects and locations where ordinary
working people came to relax, eat, and dance. And so they left
their studios and went into the outside world to paint. (Renoir
joked that Impressionism was made possible by the technical
innovation of paint in tubes.) As we saw in Chapter 4, Monet
pursued this act of painting directly from nature in such a single-
minded way that Cezanne called him, admiringly, “Only an
eye, but my God what an eye.” Monet painted the same motif at
diﬀerent times of the day, and even added his own “fugitive
sensations,” after images and the “ﬂoaters” that move across the
eye when you stare hard at something.
Renoir, while preserving his relationship with the Impression-
ists, began to wonder if something might have been lost in
turning away from the discipline of the studio for the immedi-
acy of sensation. In rejecting the outworn order of Salon paint-
ings, he felt that the Impressionists had swung too far towards
the opposite pole of order. For a time he worked at an “order
between.” He wished to combine the freshness and pictorial
frontality of Impressionism with a return to the discipline of
painting in the studio. Renoir’s “order between” generally
involved portraiture, with a more classical approach to the nude
female body set against an “impressionistic” background. In this
sense Renoir’s solution could be regarded as a compromise or
“order between” Impressionism and Classicism.
Cezanne was not content with an order between and pursued
an “order beyond” the limits of both Impressionism (which
lacked a rigorous underlying structure) and Classicism (which
had fallen from attention to the vividness and truth of immedi-
ate visual sensation). Classicism in art placed an emphasis upon
mathematical perspective as one component in achieving pic-
torial unity. Cezanne, for his part, created a new perspective
based on color. While Impressionism gained its vivid eﬀects
through the use of local color, classicism, in seeking unity,
science, order, and creativity
310

placed all forms and colors as subservient to an overall plan.
But Cezanne’s scheme allowed him to achieve a new structural
unity without sacriﬁcing the new freshness of color. And while
Classicism gave the illusion of a space seen through a frame,
Impressionism treated space in a ﬂat frontal manner. Through
the deliberate use of ambiguity—does that green patch represent
the foliage of a nearby tree or distant vegetation?—Cezanne was
able to maintain both depth and ﬂatness under constant tension.
In this and many other ways lies the claim that Cezanne had
discovered “an order beyond” Classicism and Impressionism.
This is echoed by the painter John Adkins Richardson, writing
about one of Cezanne’s paintings of Mont Sainte-Victoire: “The
picture is an exquisite marriage of Classical structure and har-
mony with Impressionist sensibility and frontality. It contains
both and resembles neither.”4 By continuing to work directly
before the motif, as with the Impressionists, remaining true
to his “fugitive sensations” and exercising a highly perceptive
visual intelligence for form and structure, Monet moved beyond
compromise to develop a radically new order to painting.
OTHER EXAMPLES OF AN ORDER BETWEEN
What of the order between two points in space? The Cartesian
order holds that space is continuous. Between any two points,
no matter how close they lie, occur an inﬁnite of other points.
Between any two neighboring points in this inﬁnity lies another
inﬁnity and so on.
This notion of continuity is not compatible with the order of
quantum theory. One implication of Heisenberg’s Uncertainty
Principle is that there exists an ambiguity concerning the
amount of energy conﬁned within a particular region of space–
time. At our scale of things this uncertainty is so small as to be
totally negligible. At the dimensions of elementary particles this
uncertainty, which can be interpreted as a ﬂuctuation of energy,
the order between and beyond 311

becomes signiﬁcant. At even small distances, called the Planck
Length, these energy ﬂuctuations become so great as to cause
space to curve around itself. Thus the physicist John Wheeler has
suggested that, at very short distances, continuous space begins
to break up into a foam-like structure. Thus the “order between”
two points moves from the order of continuity to an order of
a discontinuous foam.
Earlier we have commented that the incompatibilities between
quantum theory and relativity cannot be resolved from within
an “order between” but require a new order that lies beyond
the limits of both approaches. Such an order may also involve
“an order beyond” two points in space. That is, an order beyond
continuity versus discontinuity. One of us, David Bohm, had
been working towards such an order, and his associate Basil
Hiley is continuing this work. We call such an order beyond
“pre-space.” Pre-space lies beyond the order of locality in space
and includes non-locality. It may be founded, for example, on
particular algebraic structures that include the temporal. In the
limit of distances above the atom pre-space would reduce to a
space–time structure, along with dynamics of motion.
A further example of an order between is that between sim-
ple order and chaos. Nineteenth-century physics distinguished
between order and disorder, linearity and non-linearity. The
former, ordered systems, were described by straightforward
linear equations. They exhibit small disturbances and small oscil-
lations. Such systems are repetitive, or change in smooth and
predictable ways. Knowing the solution to the system in one
circumstance enabled physicists to predict how it will behave in
other circumstances.
By contrast, to nineteenth-century science chaotic systems
appeared totally random. They had lost all semblance of order and
appeared to lie outside the pale of what would interest physicists.
Likewise, certain mathematical forms, such as the Peano curve,
were dismissed as mathematical monstrosities. (The Peano curve is
science, order, and creativity
312

a line of such complexity as to ﬁll the plane. It is a one-dimensional
ﬁgure that touches all points on a two-dimensional surface. Only
with the advent of fractals did such a ﬁgure make sense.)
Physicists took such an attitude, in part, because they were
generally unable to solve the non-linear diﬀerential equations
that describe systems beyond linearity and regularity. Such sys-
tems have unexpected ranges of behavior. Their properties
change in a discontinuous way. They contain bifurcation points
where a tiny perturbation will cause them to jump into radically
new types of behavior.
When forced to deal with systems beyond linear, simple
orders, physicists, astronomers, and mathematicians at ﬁrst
sought an “order between.” They did this by adding a series
of small corrections using a procedure called “perturbation
theory.” By adding together many (progressively smaller) cor-
rections they expected to reach an “order between” regular
behavior and chaos, or between linearity and non-linearity.
In some cases perturbation theory worked quite well, pro-
vided that the divergences from regular linear behavior were
not too great. In others the sum of a series of small corrections
diverged and the approach failed. In essence it indicated that
the solutions could not be approached through an “order
between” but demanded an order beyond. It was only by the
mid-twentieth century, with the development of new mathemat-
ical tools for the treatment of non-linear diﬀerential equations,
as well as the ability to simulate such systems on high speed
computers, that an “order beyond” was ﬁnally reached. In this
way physicists came to realize that an extremely rich and hith-
erto unexplored world lies in the order beyond pure chaos and
simple order.
In these examples artists, scientists, and mathematicians have
moved beyond ﬁxed and limited positions in order. They have
discovered the inherent limitations of the compromise involved
in “orders between” and moved to the richer domain of “orders
the order between and beyond 313

beyond.” What has taken place in art and science should also be
possible for human relationships and the structure of society.
To do so requires the considerable creative energy needed to
dissolve old forms, as well as a perceptual intelligence to become
aware of the misinformation entangled with order and, in turn,
move beyond the compromise of an order between to an order
beyond. This involves the important ﬁrst step of acknowledging
the seriousness of the enterprise, not only on an individual basis
but also within society as a whole. Through the exercise of such
intelligence, and a creative perception, it may be possible to go
beyond the problems and diﬃculties that beset our world and in
this way move towards a new consciousness.
science, order, and creativity
314

NOTES
INTRODUCTION
1
Sir James Jeans, The Mysterious Universe, Cambridge University Press,
New York, 1930.
2
A. Miller, Imagery in Scientiﬁc Thought, Birkhauser, Boston, Bern, and
Stuttgart, 1984.
3
A. Korzybski, Science and Sanity, International Neo-Aristotelian
Publishing Company, Lakeville, Conn., 1950.
1 REVOLUTIONS, THEORIES, AND CREATIVITY IN SCIENCE
1
A fuller discussion of this point is made in David Bohm’s Wholeness
and the Implicate Order, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1980,
Chapter 1.
2
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1962.
3
A discussion of metaphor also appears in John Briggs, “Reﬂecta-
phors,” in Basil Hiley and F. David Peat, eds., Quantum Implications:
Essays in Honour of David Bohm, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London,
1987.
4
Hutchinson, London, 1964.
5
Science Editions, New York, 1961.

2 SCIENCE AS CREATIVE PERCEPTION-COMMUNICATION
1
J. von Neumann, Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics,
Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1955.
2
For example, see E. P. Wigner, Foundations of Physics, vol. 1, no. 33
(1970); and E. P. Wigner, Epistemological Perspective on Quantum
Theory, in C. A. Hooker, ed., Contemporary Research in the Foundations
and Philosophy of Quantum Theory, Reidel, Dordrecht, Holland, and
Boston, 1973.
3
H. Everett, Jr., Reviews of Modern Physics, vol. 29, no. 454 (1957).
4
D. Bohm and J.P. Vigier, Physical Review, vol. 96, no. 208 (1954).
3 WHAT IS ORDER?
1
For a discussion of this, see David Bohm, Causality and Chance in
Modern Physics, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1957.
2
Order Out of Chaos, Bantam, New York, 1984.
4 THE GENERATIVE ORDER AND THE IMPLICATE ORDER
1
The Fractal Geometry of Nature, Freeman, New York, 1983.
2
For the more mathematically minded, this ﬁgure possesses no ﬁrst
derivative.
3
Actually fractals drawn on a page will generally have between zero
and two dimensions, for it is possible to generate fractals that have a
lower dimension than that of the line.
4
Simpliﬁcation in itself is a particularly subtle notion. By reducing
detail a painter may, in fact, establish an even more complex order in
the work. So-called “simple lines” may create a highly charged
dynamic relationship within the painting and its frame. The rhythms
of this surface activity will result in a very high perceptive order on the
part of the viewer.
5
Quoted in H. T. David, J. S. Bach’s Musical Offering, Dover, New York,
1972.
6
Ronald H. Brady, The Causal Dimension of Goethe’s Morphology, in
Amrine, Zucker, and Wheeler, eds., Goethe and the Sciences: A
Reconsideration, Reidel, Dordrecht, Holland, 1986.
7
Ernest H. Gombrich, Art and Illusion, Bollingen Series, Princeton
University Press, Princeton, 1972.
8
Ambroise Vollard, Cézanne, Dover, New York, 1984.
9
An instructive account of this transformation, along with its back-
notes
316

ground, is contained in C. Biederman, The New Cézanne, Art History
Publications, Red Wing, Minn., 1958. A structural analysis of the
paintings is made in Erle Loran, Cézanne’s Compositions, University of
California Press, Berkeley, 1985.
10
Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1980.
11
For a more detailed treatment, see D. Bohm and B. Hiley, The Causal
Interpretation of Quantum Mechanical Field Theory, forthcoming.
12
The possible connections between mind and matter are also dis-
cussed in F. David Peat, Synchronicity: The Bridge Between Matter and
Mind, Bantam, New York, 1987.
13
Benjamin, New York, 1985.
5 GENERATIVE ORDER IN SCIENCE, SOCIETY,
AND CONSCIOUSNESS
1
The astrophysicist Fred Hoyle has also argued that life on Earth
involves the action of some form of intelligence which pervades the
entire universe. His ideas are given in The Intelligent Universe, Michael
Joseph, London, 1983.
2
The ideas of Waddington and others are to be found in the three-
volume report on a particularly interesting symposium held in
Bellaggio, Italy: C. H. Waddington, ed., Towards a Theoretical Biology,
Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh, and Aldine Press, Chicago,
1969. For Sheldrake’s ideas, see Rupert Sheldrake, A New Science of
Life, Tarcher, Los Angeles, 1982.
3
Arnold Toynbee, A Study of History, Oxford University Press, New York,
1947.
4
Further discussion of such developments is given in F. David Peat’s
Artiﬁcial Intelligence: How Machines Think, Baen Books, New York,
1985.
6 CREATIVITY IN THE WHOLE OF LIFE
1
Methuen, London, 1962.
2
See, for example, Norman Cousins, Anatomy of an Illness, Bantam,
New York, 1981.
3
A brief, but fairly comprehensive presentation of de Maré’s ideas can
be found in Group Analysis, vol. XVII, no. 78, Sage, London, 1985.
4
See Charles Rycroft, A Critical Dictionary of Psychoanalysis, Nelson,
London, 1968.
notes 317

5
Lao-tzu, Tao Te Ching, Penguin, Harmondsworth, England, 1963.
6
See, for example, Aphorisms of Yoga, Bhagwan Shree Pantanjali,
translated by Shree Purahit Swami, Faber and Faber, London, 1938.
7
Thus, for example, the word Yoga has the same root as the English
word yoke and signiﬁes the joining of the ordinary life to the transcen-
dental ground. See Swami Venkalesanda, The Concise Yoga Vasistha,
State University of New York Press, Albany, 1984, for a good account
of the basic religious-philosophical worldview behind this approach.
8
For this phase, see The Ending of Time, Thirteen Dialogues Between J.
Krishnamurti and D. Bohm, Gollancz, London, 1984.
9
For this phase, see, for example, J. Krishnamurti, Freedom from the
Known, Gollancz, London, 1969.
10
It is interesting that Buddhism also seeks a “middle way,” though on a
basis quite different from that suggested in this book, which is dia-
logue and the consideration of creative orders that lie “between” the
extremes.
11
The distinction between creative imagination, called primary imagin-
ation, and fancy or fantasy was ﬁrst made by the poet Coleridge. For
a discussion of this point, see O. Barﬁeld, What Coleridge Thought,
Wesleyan University Press, Middletown, Conn., 1971.
7 THE ORDER BETWEEN AND BEYOND
1
The Measure of Reality: Quantiﬁcation and Western Society 1250–1600,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1997.
2
David Bohm and Mark Edwards, Changing Consciousness, Harper,
San Francisco, 1991.
3
Private discussion with David Peat.
4
John Adkins Richardson, Art: The Way It Is, Prentice-Hall, Englewood
Cliffs, New Jersey, 1986.
notes
318

INDEX
Page references to non-textual information are in italics
aborigines, Australian 203–204
abortion 304
abstraction 1, 35, 128, 129, 144, 198;
perceptive 2–3
acceleration 117
Act of Creation, The (Koestler) 23
active information 80, 84–85, 86
aesthetics, mathematical xv
algorithms 284
ambiguity 72, 76, 94, 97
analogy 145, 171, 201
ancient Greeks 99, 138, 203, 285;
see also Aristotle; Plato
ancient societies 203
animals: categorization of 106, 107;
experiments with 230, 232, 284
annihilation of humanity 205
apparatus, experimental 74; see also
scientiﬁc instruments
apple, fall of 19, 40, 113
approximation 128, 129
archetypes 114, 250, 300
Archimedes 22–23, 57
Aristotle 14, 15, 16, 19, 99, 101
arithmetic 285
arrays of numbers, matrices 34–35
art: Classicism 310–311; creativity in
263–264; Greek 205;
Impressionism 165, 166, 167, 231,
310–311; “normal,” 167; orders in
162–168; schools of 295–296;
works of 155, 156, 167–168; see
also artists
artiﬁcial intelligence 219–222,
227–228
artists 59–60, 95; French 309–310;
and generative order 154–156; see
also art; works of art; individual
artists, such as Picasso
asanas, yoga 257–258
Aspect, Alan 92
assumptions 38

Atman 254
atomic hypothesis 49
atomic ions 132–133
atoms/atomic systems 35, 190, 191,
192, 309
attachment to order 297–301
attention 213, 214, 223, 224, 225
awareness 210–215, 259
awe xi
Bach, Johann Sebastian 156–157,
186, 222, 231, 263–264
Bach, Wilhelm Friedermann (son of
Johann) 156–157
background details 106
Bacon, Francis xix, 206
bad faith 207
barriers to communication 61, 62;
see also communication breaks
Beagle (Darwin’s ship) 278, 279
Becoming 299
Beethoven, Ludwig van 156, 289
Being 299
belief 266
Bell, J.S. 92
Bénard instability 133
bicycles, learning to ride 6–7
bifurcation points 313
big bang theory 88, 102, 193–197
binary oppositions 298, 299, 301
biology 5, 114; molecular 6
Biology of Art, The (Morris) 230–231
birds, categorization of 106, 107
Birkbeck College, London xi, xviii
bisociation 23
“black holes,” 62, 102, 104
Blackfoot (Algonquian language)
297, 298
blindness 54
blocks to creativity 230–236; in
generative order of society
236–240
body, human 208, 236–238, 282;
nervous system 54, 212; sensory-
motor system 282, 285; yoga,
beneﬁts of 257–258; see also
brain; human being; mind; vision
Bohm, David 79, 184, 283, 312;
Wholeness and the Implicate
Order 168, 170, 181
Bohr, Niels xii, 30, 89, 94, 301, 307,
309; Bohr-Einstein dialogues and
breakdown of communication in
physics 75–79, 93, 96, 97–98,
242, 291; Copenhagen
Interpretation 302; ﬁrst atomic
theory 308–309; and
Heisenberg’s microscope
experiment 72, 73, 74; on
wholeness of experimental
situation 86–87
Boyle, Robert/Boyle’s law 4–5
Brahman 254
brain 208, 284; and artiﬁcial
intelligence 219–222;
information analysis 54–55
Braque, Georges 167
Brownian motion 127
Brunelleschi, Filippo 164
Buddhism 255, 258, 260
calculus 23
California Institute of Technology xii
canonical transformations 31, 32
Cartesian grids/coordinates 101,
115–116, 170, 171
Cartesian order 164, 293
Carthaginians 165
categories 108, 109; of differences
153–154; formation of 106, 107;
and orders 105–110
Catholic Church, authority of 11
causal interpretation xiii; and
generative order 192–193;
objections to 90–94; quantum
theory 79–94, 96; and
superimplicate order 177–178
causality 16, 17
index
320

Cézanne, Paul 231, 282–283,
310–311; Mont St. Victoire,
paintings of 167, 311
chance 120, 121, 122, 123, 127, 128,
129
change 46, 104; in order of society
98–99; in science 2–12; and
stasis 294–297
chaos theory 137
chaotic order/motion 118, 120, 121,
129, 133, 135, 136
chemistry 191–192
chimpanzee experiments 230, 232
Chinese society 203, 204
Christmas 305
Chronos (Greek god of time) 102
civilization 253
classical concepts 70, 90, 91,
293
classical limit 87
Classicism, in art 310–311
Cold War 305, 306
Coleridge, S. T. 298
collapse of the wave function 88,
193
communication xi, 59, 289;
essential to perception, in
science 50, 57–61, 96
communication breaks 96, 97;
metaphors as ways of healing
63–66; paradigms and
specialization as sources of
61–63; in physics 75–79
complementarity 94
composers 156, 156–157, 186, 222,
231, 263–264, 289
computers 56, 120–121, 123, 180;
artiﬁcial intelligence 220–221,
227–228
concepts xvi, 24, 25, 220;
relationship between 32–33
conﬂicts in order 292–294;
ecological damage as result of
302–304
confusion, and fragmentation 7, 8,
43, 71
consciousness: and awareness 211,
212–213; conditioning of,
responses of East and West to
256–262; everyday 219; and
implicate (enfolded) order
181–183, 188; individual and
social 245–246; and matter
208–210
consent, paradigm as form of 42
Constable, John 166
constitutive and descriptive order
113–116, 275
context-dependence 119–120, 122,
125
contexts 109, 125
contradictions, internal 8
convergence 44
coordinates concept 101, 115, 170
Copernicus 277
Corot, Jean-Baptiste-Camille 166
cortex, visual 284
cosmology 88, 146; generative
order in 190–197; see also
universe
creative intelligence 215–219, 268;
time and timeless order 223–227
creative play 37, 38
creativity xi, 53, 97; blocks to
230–240, 270; and metaphors
18–26; new order of 267–270; in
science, art and religion
262–267; science as
fundamentally creative 41–48; in
whole of life 229–274
crops xx
Crosby, Alfred W. 277
crown/water metaphor 22
“crystallised forms,” 264
culture: and dialogue 240–249; and
implicate order 182; Occidental
and Oriental 256–262, 295
curves, geometric 116, 117, 121, 149;
index 321

formal representation of order
111, 112, 113; Peano curve 312–313
cylinders 168–170
Dante Alighieri 287
Darwin, Charles/Darwinian
evolution 11, 159, 202, 221, 278,
279; Origin of Species 280
de Broglie, L. 29, 30
de Maré, Patrick 241, 252
death wish 306
decay, cycle of 204–205, 206
Deconstruction 299–300
defusion of emotional charge 247,
248
Delacroix, F.V.E. 166–167
demagogues 217
Democritus 49
denial of validity of new ideas 9
Derrida, Jacques 299
Descartes, René 101, 115–116
determinism 80, 127, 129
diagnosis 3
dialogue xi, 241; and culture
240–249; free 59, 78, 80, 93, 229,
252; internal 57–58; vs ordinary
discussion 241–242
Diderot, Denis 203
differential equation 31, 313
dimensions, fractional 152, 153
disorder 122, 133
displacement process 22, 23
Divine Comedy (Dante) 287
DNA 5, 140, 222, 237
double slit experiment 82, 83, 84,
85, 86
double-entry bookkeeping 288
Eastern religions 256–262
ecology xxi; ecological damage,
conﬂicts in order 302–304
education 233, 235
Edwards, Mark 303
Egypt 203
Einstein, Albert xv–xvi, 7, 8, 17, 29,
66, 73, 101, 282, 301, 302, 307;
Bohr-Einstein dialogues and
breakdown of communication in
physics 75–79, 93, 96, 97–98,
242, 291; Einstein/Podolsky/
Rosen experiment 92, 194; On
the Electrodynamics of Moving
Bodies 64–65
electricity 64, 65
electromagnetic theory 33, 64, 65,
165, 308
electron plasma xiii
electron waves 35
electrons xiv, 30, 176, 308–309; and
perception 70, 73, 80, 81, 88; see
also particles
elementary particle physics 33, 62,
190
Elements (Euclid) 285
emotions 185, 247, 248, 269
energy 86, 88–89; zero point 197
enfolded order see implicate
(enfolded) order
entropy 133, 134, 135
equations xiii, xiv–xv, 27; differential
31, 313
equilibrium 132
equivalence, mathematical 35–36
Eskimos (Inuit) 107–108
eternal order 99, 101, 225
ether theory 8
Euclidian geometry 160, 285
euthanasia 304
Everett, H. 74, 193
evil 265
evolutionary theory 195, 199, 278
experimental physics 5
experimentation 7, 48, 50, 60; see
also double slit experiment
eye xviii, 55, 175; scanning pattern
213–214; see also vision
face, human 3, 106, 184
index
322

false play 104, 143, 207, 244, 250,
252, 255, 261; <???> 269; and
blocks to creativity 234, 236, 239;
and thought as play 40, 41
falseness, play of thought 37, 39,
40, 143
familiarity: breaking away from 19;
holding on to 9–10, 12, 39, 40,
41, 50–51
famine 291–292
Feynmann, R. P./Feynmann
diagrams 172, 174, 175
ﬁrm standing 142
ﬂow: of rivers 126–127; of streams
195, 196; of time 101–102
ﬂuids see ink, indissoluble; water
ﬂux 195
form 185
formal logic 142, 143
formalism, mathematical xiv, xvi,
36, 71, 73
formulae xiii
fossil bones 278
Fourier analysis 157–159, 167
fovea (eye) xviii
fractal order 149–154, 181;
dimensions 152, 153
fragmentation 6, 10, 97; and
communication breaks 58, 61,
62, 67; and confusion 7, 8, 43, 71;
deﬁnitions 2; in science xx, xxii, 1,
2–12; see also tacit infrastructure
of scientiﬁc ideas
free association 252
free play 43, 52, 59, 109, 201, 235;
and changes in society 104–105;
in communication 271; and
falsiﬁability notion 48–51; and
thought as play 38, 40, 41
Freud, Sigmund 249, 250, 251, 252,
280, 306
frustration 232
Galileo 11, 16, 206
gases, study of 4, 5
generative information 238
generative order 80, 148, 154–157,
216, 286–287; blocks to creativity
in 236–240; explicate and
sequential limits 183–187; and
implicate order 181, 188; of life,
and its evolution 197–202; in
physics and cosmology 190–197;
in society 202–208
genetic material 199
genius 40, 43, 164, 251
geometry 22, 151, 160, 164, 285
see also speciﬁc shapes such as
curves, geometric
global order 158, 303
glycerin 168, 169, 170
God 254, 255, 265, 278
Goethe, Wolfgang 164–165, 200;
Urpﬂanze 159–162
Gombrich, Ernest 163
goodwill and friendship xxii, 59
Goodwin, Brian 202
Gould, Stephen Jay 202
grand uniﬁed theory 33
gravitation, Newtonian theory
18–19, 21, 39
Greek art 205
Greek geometry 22, 151, 285
Greek logic 298
Greek philosophy 298
Green’s functions 172, 175, 176, 179,
181
grids, coordinates as 101, 115–116
group velocity 29
growth and decay, cycle of
204–205, 206
gun shots, random order 122, 133
Hamilton-Jacobi theory 27–33, 43
Hatha Yoga 257–258, 258
hatred 266
heavenly and earthly matter 19, 39,
40, 99
index 323

Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich
299
Heisenberg, Werner 30, 93, 309,
311; on mathematics xv, 17;
microscope experiment 68–75;
on quantum theory 34–35, 43, 283
helix 112
hexagons 114
“hidden” orders 130–137, 169, 200
hierarchies 161, 180
High Art 296
Hinduism 254
holography 171, 172, 176
holomovement 177
hormones 208
human being: individual, social and
cosmic dimensions 249–256
see also body, human
Huygens, C. 174
hydrogen atom 35
hypotheses 3, 37
idiosyncrasy 249
illusion 37
imagination 263–264
immune system 237
implicate (enfolded) order xiii, 148,
168–177, 181, 188, 282; and
consciousness 181–183; explicate
and sequential limits 183–187;
ﬁrst and second 179–180, 194,
201, 209–210; process of
enfoldment 176
Impressionists 165, 166, 167, 231,
310–311
inattention 214
incommensurability 13, 14, 136;
communication breaks 63, 64,
66; wave-particle duality 27, 28,
32, 33
indeterminism 129
Indian society 203, 260
indigenous societies 289–290, 303
individual consciousness 245–246
Indo-Arabic numerals 288
industrial growth 103
Industrial Revolution 278
inﬁnite degree order 122, 124, 126,
127, 131
information: active 80, 84–85, 86;
processing of 54–55, 57; wave
function of universe 196; see also
misinformation
ink, indissoluble 168–170, 176
insanity 252
insight 58, 109, 186
integral 31–32
intelligence/intellect 108, 109, 140,
145, 201, 216–217, 237; artiﬁcial
intelligence 219–222, 227–228;
creative intelligence 215–219,
223–227, 268
interconnectedness x, 218
internal contradictions 8
intuitive reason 142, 143
IQ test 108
irrationality 141
James, William 44, 94
jargon 66
Jeans, Sir James xv, 17
Jung, Carl 114, 250, 300
Keller, Helen 23–26, 53, 59, 109, 185,
269
Kepler, Johannes xiv, xv, 16, 277
knowingness 210–211
knowledge xxii, 46, 57, 211, 212, 262;
specialization 1, 5; tacit
infrastructure of 6–7
Koestler, Arthur 23
Korzybski, Alfred xvi–xvii, 115, 145
Krishnamurti, Jiddu 259
Kuhn, Thomas 14, 18, 63; Structure
of Scientiﬁc Revolutions 12–13, 42
Lagrangian 32
Laing, R. D. 251–252
index
324

Lamarckism 202
language, in science 61, 66–67;
formal 88, 96; Heisenberg’s
microscope experiment 71;
informal 71, 72, 76, 77, 80, 88,
96; physics 71, 72, 73, 76,
97
language/languages 157, 182, 269,
297; European 142, 298; in
novels 124, 125, 138, 139
Lao-tzu 257
law of motion 118
learning 284
Lévi-Strauss, Claude 114
libido 250, 251
life and stage, metaphor 20–21
light 8, 28, 63–64, 190;
electromagnetic theory 33, 64,
65, 165
locality 92–93
logic, formal 142, 143
Logic of Scientiﬁc Discovery (Popper)
48
long-range connections 62
looking 56
loops 180, 182, 194, 195, 226
Lorenz, H. 8, 65
love 266
low degree order 120, 121, 123, 129,
131, 133
Machiavelli, N. 262
magnetism 64, 65
Magritte, René xvii
Mandelbrot, B. B. 149, 150, 151, 152,
153–154
Marx, Karl 280
Masaccio (Tommaso di Ser
Giovanni di Simone) 164
mathematics xii, xv, 28; attitudes to
17–18; equivalence,
mathematical 35–36; evolution of
order in 283–286; formalism xiv,
xvi, 36, 71, 73; history 284–285;
and reason 143–144; and
theories 21–22
Matisse, Henri 155–156, 157
matrices 34–35
matter 17, 28, 56, 63, 86, 184; and
consciousness 208–210;
heavenly and earthly 19, 39, 99;
wave-particle duality see wave-
particle duality
Maxwell, J. C. 64, 80, 165, 308
meaning 245, 246
mechanism, as teleology 32
medical examples/issues xx, 3–4,
47
metals, super-conductivity in 191
metaphoric perception 22
metaphors 22, 23, 31, 34, 65; and
communication breaks, ways of
healing 63–66; and creativity
18–26; notion of metaphor 21,
24; poetic 20–21, 25, 26, 51;
scientiﬁc 25, 26, 29–30, 51
Michelangelo 206
microcosm 145–146, 193
microscope 34, 55; Heisenberg’s
experiment 68–75
Middle Ages 15, 19, 47, 99, 145, 254,
287, 298; church music 288–289;
and new orders in society 100,
102
mind 19, 74; perception through
54–57; resistance to new ideas
9–10, 12, 39, 40, 41, 50–51; see
also brain
misinformation 271, 272; and
blocks to creativity 237, 238, 240;
conditioning of consciousness
249, 253, 254, 256, 258
molecular biology 6
molecular ions 132–133
molecules 190, 191–192, 198
momentum 67, 102, 134;
measurement of 68, 69, 70
Monet, Claude 165, 167, 310
index 325

monologue 288
Mont St. Victoire, paintings of
(Cézanne) 167, 311
moon 16, 19, 21, 40, 113
morphology 160
Morris, Desmond 230
motion: chaotic 121, 133, 135; laws
of 15, 16, 17, 21, 27, 67, 69, 82,
112–113, 117, 118; nature of 14–15;
of particles 27, 32, 67, 82,
117–118; range of variation in 133;
see also order
Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus 156,
186, 222, 263–264
music 125, 263–264; composers
156, 156–157, 186, 222, 231,
263–264, 289; comprehension of
185–186
mysticism 254
myths 245
narration 124
natural philosophy, science as xii
natural place (Aristotle) 14, 15
nature 10–12, 14–15, 144
necessity 217, 238, 239, 247
negotiation 306–311
neo-Darwinian theory 199, 201
nervous system 54, 212
neurobiologists/neurosciences 62
neurochemicals 218
neuroses 249–250
neutrons 176
Newton, Isaac 8, 11, 28, 29, 30, 71,
80, 101; childhood 250–251; laws
of motion 15, 16, 27, 67, 69, 82,
112–113, 117, 118; on universal
gravitation 18–19, 21, 39
Nirvana 258
nonlocality 91–92, 139, 194, 293
“normal science,” 13, 18, 27, 43, 75;
novelty and conservation, in
theories 14, 15, 17
nouns 297
novels 124, 125, 138, 139
novelty and conservation, in
theories 12–18
numbers, random 120–121, 123
objective unconscious 300
“Occam’s Razor,” 43
On the Electrodynamics of Moving
Bodies (Einstein) 64–65
opinions, ﬁxed 143
Oppenheimer, J. Robert xii
order and chaos 312
order between and beyond:
examples of order between
311–314; negotiation 306–311
order/orders 124, 133, 158; absence
of order 122, 123; in art 162–168;
attachment to order 297–301;
ball example 118–119, 128;
Cartesian 164, 293; and
categories 105–110; chaotic order
118, 120, 121, 129, 136; conﬂicts in
order 292–294, 302–304;
constitutive and descriptive
113–116, 275; deﬁnitions 97–146;
degrees of order 116, 117, 118,
119–120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 126,
127, 129, 131, 133, 136, 146;
entwined and entangled
277–281; evolution of order in
mathematics 283–286; formal
representation of 110–113; fractal
order 149–154, 181; generative see
generative order; global 158, 303;
“hidden,” 130–137, 169, 200; hill
slope example 119–120;
implicate see implicate
(enfolded) order; new, in society
98–105; non-negotiable 301–302;
order of orders 116; secular 100,
101, 102, 103, 206; society, order
in 287–292; spectrum of, full
richness 124–129; unconscious
nature of, and its sensory
index
326

component 281–283; see also
motion
organism, universe as 100
organization/disorganization 140
Origin of Species (Darwin) 280
Other, The 300
paradigm shifts 292, 293
paradigms 13, 44, 51, 101, 163; high
cost of 41–48; nature of 41–42;
as source of breaks in
communication 61–63
parallel lines 139
participation in reality 45
particlelike quanta 178
particles 92, 135; motion of 27, 32,
67, 82, 117–118; particle
hypothesis of matter 56;
subatomic 68, 86; and
trajectories 17, 28, 71, 80, 86, 88,
102; see also electrons
past, the 223
Pauli, Wolfgang 300, 309
Peano curve 312–313
perception 45, 53, 142;
communication as essential to
57–61, 96; metaphoric 22, 23, 24;
in science 55, 56–57, 57–61;
through senses and mind 54–57,
60, 185; see also sense perception
perception-communication 60, 61,
66, 115
perceptive abstraction 2–3
perceptive reason 142
perturbation theory 313
phase space 134, 135
philosophy xi, xi–xii, xiii, 95
photography 171
physics xiii, xiv, 4, 5, 17, 31, 56, 97,
101; breakdown of
communication, and Bohr-
Einstein dialogues 75–79, 93, 96,
97–98, 242, 291; elementary
particle 33, 62, 190; and
equations/formulae xiii, xiv–xv;
generative order in 190–197;
language use 71, 72, 73, 76, 97;
role of interpretations in 94–95;
technical questions emphasised
in xvii–xviii
Piaget, Jean 284
Picasso, Pablo 167
plague 47
Planck, Max 309
Planck Length 312
Planck’s constant 29, 70, 81
planets 16, 40
plants, Goethe on 160–161, 200
Plato 94
play: creative 37, 38; free see free
play; thought as 37–41, 46
plurality 44, 45
Podolsky, Boris 92, 194
poetic metaphors 20–21, 25, 26, 51
Polani, Michael 212
polygon 149
Popper, Sir Karl, falsiﬁability notion
48–51, 92, 93
positivism 45
Pound, Ezra 295
pre-judgements 143
prejudices 143
pre-space 312
Prigogine, Ilya 132, 133, 136, 146
primary color 165, 167
probability distribution 70
problems, inter-connections 10
professional language 66
progress xix, xx
protointelligence 200–201, 202
psyche 114
psychiatry 249, 250, 251–252
psychoanalysis 250, 252
psychology 272, 284
psychotherapy 239–240
Pythagoreans xiv, 94
quantum mechanics 138, 172, 177,
index 327

191; quantum mechanical
uncertainty 68, 69, 70
quantum potential 81–82, 87, 91,
130, 183, 192
quantum theory xiv, xvii, 5–6, 17, 67,
77, 95, 97, 102, 175, 293; causal
interpretation xiii, 79–90;
Heisenberg’s and Schrödinger’s
approaches to 34–36, 43, 283;
and “hidden” orders 130–137;
microscope experiment 68–75;
and wave-particle duality 28, 29,
31
radio waves 82, 85
Ramanajuan (mathematician)
286
randomness/random orders 118,
120–123, 124, 127, 129, 132, 133;
characteristics 121–122
ratio or reason 141–146, 147
rationality 141, 142
rays of light 28
reality xvii, 45, 57
reason or ratio 141–146
records 223
reductionism 192, 198
“Regulus” (Turner) 165, 166
relativity xiv, xviii, 17, 31, 64, 293,
307–308; development of theory
7–8; and ﬂow of time 101–102
relaxation times 90
religion: authority of 11; creativity in
264–267; decline of, with rise of
science 103, 254; see also God
Renaissance 203, 205–206, 277,
288, 295
Renaissance paintings 164
Renoir, Pierre-Auguste 310
repression 249–250, 252
rest 15
reverberation, in music 185
revitalization ceremonies,
traditional societies 294
reward and punishment 232, 233,
234, 251
Richardson, John Adkins 311
rigidity 18, 40, 52, 77, 207, 239, 243;
see also under familiarity; tacit
infrastructure of ideas
rivers, ﬂow of 126–127
Roman society 203
Romantic movement 288, 289
Rosen, Nathan 92, 194
Rousseau, Henri 166
Rutherford, Ernest 95, 308
sanitation 47
scanning pattern, eye 213–214
schemas 163
Schlick, Moritz 45
schools 233
Schrödinger, E., on quantum theory
29, 30, 34, 35, 36, 43, 81, 88,
198
science x, xix–xxiii, 1, 39, 103, 242;
creativity in 262–263;
developments in 100–101;
divisions of 4; fragmentation and
change in 2–12; as fundamentally
creative 41–48; language in
66–67; normal see “normal”
science; novelty and
conservation, in theories 12–18;
perception in 56–57; and
philosophy xi–xii, xiii; rise of, and
decline in religion 103, 254;
specialization in 4–5, 6
science ﬁction 305
scientiﬁc instruments 34, 55, 56,
175–176
scientiﬁc metaphors 25, 26, 29–30,
51
scientiﬁc revolutions 43, 51, 163;
novelty and conservation, in
theories 13, 14, 15, 17
scientists: communication between
57–61; “hard-nosed,” 95
index
328

second degree order 116, 117, 118,
119–120, 127
secular order 100, 101, 102, 103,
206
seeing xviii, 54–55, 56
selection 106
self-awareness 257, 268
semantics 124, 125
sense perception 34, 54–57, 184
sensory-motor system 282, 285
sentences 124
Shadow 300, 301
Shakespeare, William 20, 21, 298
shared meaning 246
Sheldrake, Rupert 202
signals 76, 85
similarities and differences 34, 149;
and categories 106, 107; and
quantum theory 78–79
sin 265
social consciousness 245–246
social positions 278–279
societies: blocks to creativity in
generative order 236–240;
generative order 202–208;
instability of 203; new orders in
98–105; order in 287–292
space-time 35, 36, 89, 293; absolute
17, 101; metaphors 65–66;
Newtonian concepts 7–8; three-
dimensional space 163, 166
Special Theory of Relativity, The
(Bohm) 184
specialization: vs fragmentation 1,
2, 4, 5; in medicine 3–4; necessity
for 61–62; in science 4–5, 6; as
source of breaks in
communication 61–63
species, new 200
speed of light 8
spiral 111, 112, 113–114
stability 309
stasis and change, conﬂict between
294–297
Stengers, Isabelle 133
Stone Age 204
stream: ﬂow of 195, 196, 247; of
generative order 223, 224, 225,
227, 244
stream of consciousness 94, 185
Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions
(Kuhn) 12–13, 42
structure/structures 114, 137–141,
146–147
structuring 137
subatomic particles 68, 86
subcultures 243, 244
suborders 124
subtlety 209
subwholes 194
succession, order of 187
Sullivan, Anne 23–26, 109, 269
superconductivity 192
superimplicate order 177–181, 190,
225, 226
suppositions 38
Supreme Being 254, 255, 265, 278
surveying 285
survival 204
symmetry 114
synchronism 180
syntax, rules of 124, 161
tacit infrastructure of ideas 40–41,
77, 91, 213; context 125–126; and
fragmentation in science 6–7, 8,
9, 10, 13, 15, 17, 30, 241
Tao 257, 260, 299
teacher, authority of 233
teleology 32
telescope 34, 55, 175–176
television screen 180
temperature 72, 87, 191, 192
tenses (grammatical) 124
theory/theories xvii, 34, 44, 48, 49;
and mathematics 21–22; novelty
and conservation, in scientiﬁc
theories 12–18; and perception
index 329

45, 55–56; quantum theory see
quantum theory; questioning
8–9
thermodynamics 133, 135–136, 137
third degree order 117
thought 19, 34, 106, 143, 145, 237;
and experience 38–39;
nonmovement of 259–260; as
play 37–41, 46; stream of
consciousness 94, 185
three-dimensional space 163, 166
time: creative intelligence 223–227;
essential meaning 102; ﬂow of
101–102; and timeless order 195,
196, 223–227
topology 285
Toynbee, Arnold 202–203, 205
trajectories 30, 32, 67, 69, 119, 128;
collection of 85, 89; and
implicate order 170, 171; and
order 113, 118, 120; and particles
17, 28, 71, 80, 86, 88, 102
triangles 149–152
truth: artistic 59; and formal logic
143; fundamental 10–12, 255;
relative 46
Turner, J. W. 164–165, 166, 167
unawareness 213
uncertainty principle 68, 69, 70, 71,
76, 311
unconscious 212, 300; and order
281–283
unity in diversity 75
universe xii, xvii, 99, 100, 107; big
bang theory 88, 102, 193–197;
eternal nature of ix–x; origin 88,
89, 193; wave function see wave
function; see also cosmology
Urpﬂanze (Goethe) 159–162
variation principle 31–32
velocity 8, 29, 119; of particles 117,
118
verbs 297
vibration 131
Victorian society 279
violence 104, 232, 290
vision xviii, 106, 175, 220; ﬁeld of
105–106; sense perception
54–55, 56; visual learning 284; see
also eye; looking
von Neumann, John 73–74, 75, 143
Waddington, C. H. 202
watchfulness 211
water: experience of 24, 25, 109;
motion of 126–127; rivers, ﬂow
of 126–127; stream, ﬂow of 195,
196
wave function 35, 36, 81, 89, 194,
196; collapse of 88, 193
wave movement 174
wave-particle duality 27–33, 71, 179;
double slit experiment, 82, 83; see
also particles, motion of
Weyl, Hermann 77
Wheeler, John 312
wholeness xi, xii, 94, 199, 265, 293;
of experimental situation 86–87;
nostalgic desire for 304–306
Wholeness and the Implicate Order
(Bohm) 168, 170, 181
Wigner, E.P. 74, 94, 193
William of Occam 43–44
wisdom xxii
words xvi
works of art: as creative act
167–168; generative order 155,
156; implicate order, perception
of 186–187; see also artists
worldview 15, 46, 47, 78, 79, 99
Yoga 257–258, 260
Zen Buddhism 258
zero point energy 197
zero velocity 15
index
330

