U
 tility Trailer  
 
 
 
OVERVIEW 
 
 
  
Introduction 
You can build this handy trailer to haul lumber, topsoil, lawn equipment.just about anything within a 2,000-
pound capacity. The lightweight, bolt-together design makes it easy to use and not too difficult to construct.  
  
 
  
 
  • Beginner - about a week 
  • Intermediate - about 4 to 5 days 
  • Advanced - about 2 to 3 days 
  
  
 
 
STEPS 
 
1.  
If you buy a complete axle assembly, you'll have no welding. It's also 
important that you use a very robust drill for the metal. A heavy-duty 
3/8" variable speed drill is the minimum required.  
Place the springs over the mounting pads on the axle and attach using 
the U-bolts and square plates. Using nuts with lock washers or 
compression nuts, tighten snugly for now. Over the ends of the springs, 
install the shackles. The swinging link, which allows the spring to distort 
under load, should be at the rear of the trailer. 

2.  
Install the back wheels to the wheel mounting studs, then measure the 
distance between the tires to determine trailer width. The space 
between the wheels must be large enough to allow at least 3/4" 
clearance between the tire and the finished side of the trailer. 
3.  
After cutting two crossbeams from the angle iron, center the 
crossbeams over the shackles and spring braces. Making sure that the 
springs are square to the axle, mark the location of the bolts on the 
crossbeams and drill 1/2" holes. With lock washers, bolt the crossbeams
through the spring braces and into the shackles, pointing the bolts 
downward. Now tighten the U-bolt firmly.  
4. a From the 2" angle iron, you'll cut your two side beams, the rear beam 
and the front beam to these dimensions.  
4. b Clamp the side beams, the rear beam and the front beam together at 
the corners using C-clamps or locking pliers and make sure the 
assembly is square.  
5.  
Now mark the center line of the trailer and place the frame over the 
wheel assembly with the center line of the wheels just behind the trailer 
center line. The width of the crossbeams should be the same as the 
width of the clamped-together frame. Clamp the frame to the 
crossbeams. Drill and bolt together the four corners of the frame with 
1/2" bolts. Drill and bolt the crossbeam assembly to the side rails with 
the same size bolts. All must point downward and have lock washers. 

6.  
Clamp the coupler at the end of the tongue. Drill the tongue and bolt 
the coupler in place using bolts.  
7.  
To install the tongue onto the front crossbeam, first cut two lengths of 
L-bracket and clamp the L-brackets to opposite sides of the tongue. 
Drill through them simultaneously, and bolt them together. Clamp the 
tongue into position at the front of the trailer and at the crossbeam. 
Then drill and bolt the tongue into the crossbeam using bolts, and onto 
the front beam with a 3" bolt. 
8.  
After cutting the two diagonals into 51" lengths of 2" angle iron, prop 
up the tongue of the trailer to a roughly horizontal position. Hold the 
diagonals into position and mark the angle on the ends. Cut the ends to 
the proper angle with a hacksaw or jigsaw. With a grinder, round over 
the protruding corners of the diagonals where they meet the side 
beams.  
9.  
Clamp the diagonals into place and drill and bolt them at the tongue, 
and along the frame.  
10.  Cut the center deck support to length from the 2" angle iron, and cut 
the rear deck support from the same stock. These lengths will have to 
be modified if 22" springs aren't used. Cut the L-bracket from 2" angle 
iron. Drill and bolt the deck supports using 1/2" and 1" bolts with lock 
washers.  

11.  Cut the eight boxframe uprights to length from the 1-1/4" angle iron. 
Clamp the two corner uprights to the front of the trailer frame, 
positioned so they wrap around the corner, drill 5/16" holes and bolt 
each of them at both the front and the side with carriage bolts. Now 
install the two corner rear uprights the same way, with the angle facing 
outward. 
12.  Cut the two box frame side rails to length from the 1 1/4" angle iron. 
Then install them at the top of the corner uprights. With flanges facing 
outward, mount the side rails on the outside of the front upright and on 
the inside of the rear upright. Clamp it into place and square it before 
attaching with your carriage bolts.  
13.  Now you can install the two inner uprights on the front frame and the 
two on the rear frame. Space and clamp them so that about 31" 
separates each upright. Drill and bolt the inner uprights into place with 
the carriage bolts.  
14.  Cut the box frame front rail to length from the 1-1/4" angle iron. Round 
over the ends with your grinder, clamp it into place against the corner 
uprights and drill and bolt. 
15.  Cut two box frame braces to length from your 1" flat iron, and bend the 
ends 1" on each side so that the brace fits diagonally across the rear of 
the trailer sides. Drill and bolt the lower end into the frame with 
carriage bolts. Remove the top bolt of the box frame, drill the hole 
through the brace, and rebolt the three pieces of metal together with 
the same bolt.  

16.  Install your taillights within the protective triangles formed by the 
braces, and with an L-bracket for mounting. Create the L-bracket out of 
the 1" flat iron, sizing and shaping it as required by the dimensions of 
the taillight. 
17.  There are several ways to wire your utility trailer, but we'll show a 
standard 4-wire harness with an outdoor-rated extension cord, which is 
less expensive than automotive wiring. Since this cord isn't available 
with four wires, you must tie together two cables with two wires each. 
You'll also need a short piece of 3-wire cable that will cross over from 
one taillight to the other.  
18.  Start by connecting the three wires of the crossover cable to the three 
wires of the right taillight. The color-coding of these wires don't matter, 
but you'll have to know which operates the bright filament and which 
operates the dim one. At the left taillight, connect the ground wire from 
the right taillight to that of the left and to one of the wires in cable 1, 
which is one of your 2-wire cables. The ground wire is always the one 
that connects to the metal case of the light bulb.  
19.  At the plug end, connect the ground wire to the white wire to complete 
the grounding circuit. At the left taillight, connect the dim light wire 
from the right taillight to that of the left and to the remaining wire in 
cable #1. At the plug end, connect that wire to the brown wire. The 
running lights circuit is now complete. At the left taillight, connect the 
bright light wire from the left taillight to one of the wires in cable #2.  
20.  Connect the bright light wire from the right taillight to the other wire of 
cable #2. At the plug end, connect the bright light wire from the left 
taillight to the yellow wire of the plug. Connect the bright light wire 
from the right taillight to the green wire of the plug. Test the lights, 
then solder and tape all exposed joints.  

21.  The bolt heads at the bottom of the trailer will prevent the bottom sheet
of the trailer from seating properly against the frame, so for shims, cut 
some strips of rot-resistant wood from a 2x4 or 2X6 to form strips 3/8" 
thick and 1 1/2" wide. Cut the shims to lengths that fit between the 
bolts, and cement them in place with silicone sealant.  
22.  To make a plywood box liner, start by cutting your two side liners to 
shape from 3/4" plywood. Remove the bolts holding the box frame 
together and drill the holes through the plywood, facing out. Then 
squeeze a bead of silicone sealant along the wood shims and drop the 
plywood bottom into place. Drill 5/16" holes through the plywood and 
the frame in about ten places along the perimeter and two places in the 
center of the sheet. Bolt it into place using carriage bolts.  
23.  Cut two 19 1/8" sections of 1-1/4" angle iron for the tailgate ends, then 
further cut one end of each down to 18" lengths. Note that they should 
be mirror images of each other. In each, drill a 1/2" hole centered in 
the piece, 5/8" from either edge and 1/2" from the end. Then grind the 
ends round.  
24.  Cut the two hinges from 2" angle iron as shown. Make sure the hinges 
are mirror images of one another, and grind the sharp edges round. The
1/2" hole position should be centered, 1/2" from the edge. Drill the two 
5/16" mounting holes below center. 
25.  From the 1-1/4" angle iron, cut two lengths for the tailgate ends.two 
lengths for tailgate rails.and two lengths for tailgate braces. Arrange the
parts in a horizontal frame with the rails on top and bottom, the braces 
in the middle, and the tailgate ends on either end. Form three roughly 
equal-sized boxes. 

26.  Next, cut four 1" long L-brackets from the 1-1/4" angle iron. Clamp the 
corners together and drill through both layers of metal together. Bolt 
them together with 5/16" bolts.  
27.  Cut your tailgate sheet to size to fit the tailgate. You may use either 18-
gauge sheet metal or plywood of 3/8" to 3/4" thickness. Whichever you 
use, drill through at the locations of the four center bolts and bolt it 
through the framework using the existing bolts. The corner bolts are 
intended to also hold the drop chains, so they should be sized 
appropriately.  
28.  Clamp the tailgate hinges into place. The tailgate should be centered 
and the aligned with the top edges of the trailer sides.  
29.  Using lengths of 1" flat iron, mount each of the two latches into a vice 
with about 3/4" protruding. With a torch, heat the bend line red hot and
hammer the end to shape. Grind away all sharp edges, and clamp each 
latch into place on the side of the trailer at the location of the bolts. 
Test latches to ensure that the tailgate snaps shut with little effort. Drill 
through the two layers of metal at the same time and bolt them 
together with 5/16" x 1" bolts. 
30.  Using light chain rated at 200 to 300 pounds, bolt the ends of the 
tailgate with 1 1/4" x 1/4" bolts. 

31.  Make your fenders by cutting an 8" wide ring from an empty plastic 
barrel with a wood-cutting jig saw. Cut the ring in two and trim the 
length to fit your wheel. The barrel diameter is smaller than the wheel, 
so it will have to be flexed into position and bolted to the fender 
brackets.  
32.  For the fender brackets, cut two 14" lengths of 1-1/4" angle iron. Clamp
them to the desired location and drill and bolt them into place using 
5/16" bolts. Note that there should be a 4" gap between the top of the 
wheel and the fender.  
Congratulations, you now have a utility trailer that will be one of the 
most useful pieces of equipment you own. 
  
 
 
SHOP LIST 
 
 
Materials List  
Axle assembly (abut 62-1/2" between wheel flanges) 
U-bolt kit (sized to fit the axle) 
Shackle kit (sized to fit the springs) 
(3) Wheels (12", 13" or 14", sized to fit axle hubs) 
Coupler (sized to fit over 2" square tubing) 
(2) Tail lights (sized to fit within triangle formed by boxframe brace) 
(2) Tailgate chains (500 lbs. or greater capacity, trimmed to fit)  
(2) Ramp hinges (6" gate hinges or 36" x 1" wide piano hinge) 
(2) Fenders (cut from plastic barrel or buy to fit wheels) 
(2) Spare tire mounting rods (10" x 3/8" dia. Threaded rod) 
(2) Springs (22" measured between mounting bolt centers) 
(2) Safety chains (18", 1,000-lb. rating, minimum) 
Tailgate sheet (53" x 18" 18-gauge sheet metal or plywood) 
Bottom liner (49" x 97" 18-gauge sheet metal or 4X8 3/4" plywood) 
(2) Side liners (18" x 49" x 3/4" plywood 
Front wall liner (18" x 49" x 3/4" plywood) 
(25) Bolts (1/2" x 1" long) 
(4) Bolts (1/2" x 3" long) 
Bolt (1/2" x 4" long) 
(64) Bolts (5/16" x 3/4" long) 
(200) Pop rivets (1/8" x 1/2" long) 
Tongue (78" x 2" x 3/16" square tubing) 
Tongue support (12" x 2" x 1/8" flat iron) 
Mild Steel: 
- (52 ft.) 2" Angle iron (3/16" or 1/4" thick) 
- (51 ft.) 1 1/4" Angle iron (1/8" thick) 
- (6 ft.) 1" Flat iron (1/8" thick) 
   
Tools List  
Jigsaw 
Hacksaw 
Heavy duty drill 
Wrenches 
Angle grinder or bench grinder 
Locking pliers 
B asic hand tools 

   
 
 

