 
Books That Have Made 
History:  
Books That Can Change 
Your Life 
Part I 
 
J. Rufus Fears, Ph.D. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE TEACHING COMPANY ® 
 


 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
i 
J. Rufus Fears, Ph.D. 
David Ross Boyd Professor of Classics, University of Oklahoma 
 
J. Rufus Fears is David Ross Boyd Professor of Classics at the University of 
Oklahoma, where he also holds the G. T. and Libby Blankenship Chair in the 
History of Liberty. He rose from Assistant Professor to Professor of History at 
Indiana University. From 1986 to 1990, he was Professor of Classics and 
Chairman of the Department of Classical Studies at Boston University. 
Professor Fears holds a Ph.D. from Harvard University. He has been a Danforth 
Fellow, a Woodrow Wilson Fellow, and a Harvard Prize Fellow. He has been a 
Fellow of the American Academy in Rome, a Guggenheim Fellow, and twice a 
Fellow of the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation. His research has been 
supported by grants from the American Philosophical Society, the American 
Council of Learned Societies, the National Endowment for the Humanities, the 
Kerr Foundation, and the Zarrow Foundation. He was chosen as Indiana 
University’s first Distinguished Faculty Research Lecturer. He is listed in Who’s 
Who in America and Who’s Who in the World. 
Professor Fears is the author of more than one hundred articles,  reviews and 
historical plaques on Greek and Roman history, the history of liberty, and the 
lessons of history for our own day. His books and monographs include Princeps 
A Diis Electus: The Divine Election of the Emperor as a Political Concept at 
Rome, The Cult of Jupiter and Roman Imperial Ideology, The Theology of 
Victory at Rome, and The Cult of Virtues and Roman Imperial Ideology and 
Selected Writings of Lord Acton. He has also lectured widely in the United 
States and Europe, and his scholarly work has been translated into German and 
Italian. He is very active in speaking to broader audiences, and his comments on 
the lessons of history for today have appeared on television and been carried in 
newspapers and journals throughout the United States and abroad.  Each year, 
he leads study trips to historical sites in the United States and Europe. 
On 21 occasions, Dr. Fears has received awards for outstanding teaching. In 
1996, 1999, and again in 2000,  students chose him as the University of 
Oklahoma Professor of the Year. In 2003, he received the Excellence in 
Teaching Award from the Great Plains Region of the University Continuing 
Education Association. In 2005 he was named the national winner of the 
Excellence in Teaching Award from the University Continuing Education 
Association. The Senior Citizens Great Books Course, which he teaches at the 
University of Oklahoma, was cited prominently in this National Excellence in 
Teaching Award. 
Books That Have Made History: Books That Can Change Your Life is the fifth 
course Professor Fears has produced with The Teaching Company. His other 
courses include Famous Greeks, Famous Romans, A History of Freedom, and 
Churchill. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
ii 
Table of Contents 
 
Books That Have Made History: 
Books That Can Change Your Life 
Part I 
 
Professor Biography ........................................................................................... i 
Course Scope...................................................................................................... 1 
Lecture One 
Bonhoeffer, Letters and Papers From Prison .......... 4 
Lecture Two 
 
Homer, Iliad.............................................................. 8 
Lecture Three 
 
Marcus Aurelius, Meditations................................. 12 
Lecture Four 
 
Bhagavad Gita ........................................................ 16 
Lecture Five 
 
Book of Exodus ...................................................... 21 
Lecture Six 
 
Gospel of Mark ....................................................... 26 
Lecture Seven 
 
Koran ...................................................................... 32 
Lecture Eight 
 
Gilgamesh ............................................................... 38 
Lecture Nine 
 
Beowulf ................................................................... 43 
Lecture Ten 
 
Book of Job............................................................. 47 
Lecture Eleven  
Aeschylus, Oresteia ................................................ 52 
Lecture Twelve  
Euripides, Bacchae ................................................. 57 
Timeline ............................................................................................................ 62 
Glossary ............................................................................................................ 64 
Biographical Notes........................................................................................... 67 
Bibliography..................................................................................................... 72 
 
 
 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
1 
• 
• 
• 
Books That Have Made History: 
Books That Can Change Your Life 
 
Scope: 
This course, Books That Have Made History: Books That Can Change Your 
Life, is a companion to my earlier Teaching Company courses: A History of 
Freedom, Famous Greeks, Famous Romans, and Winston Churchill. Like these 
courses, Books That Have Made History rests upon the conviction that history is 
made by great individuals, great events, and great ideas. This course explores 
these great ideas through a discussion of some of the most seminal writings in 
history, books that have shaped the minds of great individuals and events of 
historic magnitude. 
Our earlier courses, A History of Freedom, Famous Greeks, Famous Romans, 
and Winston Churchill, have all discussed some of the great books that have 
made history. In those contexts, we have studied such works as the Apology of 
Socrates, Oedipus the King, the Iliad, the Odyssey, the Aeneid, and the 
magisterial histories of Herodotus, Thucydides, Polybius, Gibbon, and 
Churchill. We will return to some of these treasured books from entirely new 
perspectives, but for the most part, we will strike off on new paths with new 
books.   
The books we will discuss range in time from the 3rd millennium B.C. to the 20th 
century. Our geographical scope will carry us from Mesopotamia and China to 
Europe and America. It is the ideas that are important, and our course will be 
organized thematically around eternal questions that endure throughout history 
and that every thoughtful person must seek to answer. Either by conscious 
choice or by omission, nations, groups, organizations, and corporations, as well 
individuals, answer these questions: 
Question 1: God. Does God or do gods exist? What is the nature of the 
divine?  Does God or do the gods care about humans and their actions?  
This is the first question with which every thoughtful person must come to 
grips. The other questions and some of the answers will flow from it. 
Question 2: Fate. What is fate? Do events, great and small, happen because 
they are predetermined by divine will or simply by chance and random 
occurrence? Do humans have free will? Do you determine your life, or is it 
already predetermined? Are you free to choose, or has your DNA already 
made the choice for you?  
Question 3: Good and evil. What do we mean by good and evil? Are there 
consequences for our actions, whether freely chosen or predetermined?  If 
there are consequences for our actions, does this mean that there are 
standards by which to judge these actions? Who or what determines those 
standards? Are those standards enduring for all time? Or are there no 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
2 
• 
absolute standards? Do circumstances determine what is right and wrong at 
any particular moment and for any particular individual, group, or nation? 
Does evil exist? Can we speak of evil as a real force that affects events and 
lives? 
Question 4: How should we live? Our answers or failures to answer or even 
to ask these questions have consequences. They determine how we, 
individuals, groups, nations, live our lives. They give us the values or 
absence of values to determine how we act toward others. Our great books 
course examines our actions under the following eternal human conditions, 
emotions, and challenges: 
– 
The meaning of life 
– 
Truth 
– 
Duty and responsibility 
– 
Law, government, and social justice 
– 
Love, jealousy, and hate 
– 
Courage, honor, and ambition 
– 
Beauty 
– 
Nature 
– 
History and the past 
– 
Education. 
These themes will provide the context in which we discuss the books that have 
made history and books that can change our lives. It is the hallmark of a great 
book that it may offer us insights into many of these conditions and emotions. 
Thus, the same great book may be brought into our exploration of several of 
these themes. 
We have repeatedly used the term great book. What do we mean by a great 
book? Can we even speak of great books? 
The answer is yes. Great book is an unfashionable, even controversial term 
today, because it implies value judgments. As a society, we do not wish to make 
value judgments. Judgmental is an expression of reproach. However, great 
books are great precisely because they challenge us to make value judgments. 
A great book has the following three essential qualities: 
• 
Great theme. A great book is concerned with themes and issues of enduring 
importance. 
• 
Noble language. Great books are written in noble language, language that 
elevates the soul and ennobles the mind. It is not the specific language, say 
Latin or English, that is noble. Any language can be used in such way that it 
conveys ideas and emotions powerfully and memorably. 
• 
Universality. A great book is “a possession for all time” (Thucydides). It 
speaks across the ages, reaching the hearts and minds of men and women 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
3 
far removed in time and space from the era and circumstances in which it 
was composed.  Thus, a great book summarizes the enduring values and 
ideas of a great age and gives them as a legacy to generations to come. 
For us, in this course, what ultimately makes a great book is its ability to speak 
to you as an individual. You can read a great book many times, and each time, 
you read it with new eyes. At each stage of your life, you will find new 
messages to address new concerns.  A great book gives you the personal 
wisdom to be better, better as an individual and better as the citizen of a free 
nation, empowered with the awesome responsibility of self-government.  
Ultimately, great books are an education for freedom. 
 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
4 
Lecture One 
 
Bonhoeffer, Letters and Papers From Prison 
 
Scope: This course, Books That Have Made History: Books That Can Change 
Your Life, is a companion to my earlier Teaching Company courses: A 
History of Freedom, Famous Greeks, Famous Romans, and Winston 
Churchill. Like these courses, Books That Have Made History rests on 
the conviction that history is made by great individuals, great events, 
and—above all—by great ideas. This course explores these great ideas 
through a discussion of some of the most seminal writings in history, 
books that have shaped the minds of great individuals and events of 
historic magnitude. Lecture One asks the question: What is a great 
book? Great theme, noble language, universality are fundamental 
elements in a great book. But most important is the ability of such a 
book to speak to you as an individual and to influence your life and the 
ideals by which you live. Dietrich Bonhoeffer, who chose a life of 
fighting the evil of totalitarianism over comfort and safety, embodies 
for us the ideal of an individual shaped by the lessons of the great 
books. 
 
Outline 
I. 
The subject of this course is great books. These are books that over the 
course of time have proven their ability to speak to us and have given us 
lessons for living our lives. 
II. On April 9, 1945, when Germany’s defeat in World War II was imminent, 
the German Gestapo hanged the Lutheran pastor Dietrich Bonhoeffer as a 
traitor to his nation and its leader. Bonhoeffer, who lived from 1906 to 
1945, was shaped by his knowledge of great books. 
A. Bonhoeffer was born into a comfortably well-off family in Berlin. He 
received a German classical education.  
B. He chose theology as a career and became a pastor. 
C. He became interested in the ecumenical church movement and went to 
New York in 1939. Although his friends urged him to remain in the 
United States, he decided to return to Germany. He later stated that as 
soon as he boarded the boat, his spirit became quiet, because he knew 
that he was doing what he was destined to do. 
D. By 1942, Bonhoeffer was involved in the resistance movement. He 
joined those who had realized that Hitler represented evil and must be 
destroyed; he understood that the only way to stop this evil was for 
individuals to take actions that others might consider treason and place 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
5 
a belief in good above what others would consider to be their duty to 
the country. 
E. Bonhoeffer was arrested on April 5, 1943.  
1. He wrote while he was prison. His friends who had also been 
arrested brought these writings out of prison, and they were 
posthumously published as Letters and Papers From Prison. This 
work joined the Apology of Socrates and the Crito of Plato as 
powerful statements of the soul in prison and how the soul could 
continue to speak despite cruel punishments. 
2. In prison, Bonhoeffer read Plutarch, the Bible, and the Prison 
Dialogues of Plato. He realized that such works could speak in a 
different voice at different times of life, in times of triumph or 
times of trial. 
3. While in prison, Bonhoeffer also evaluated his concept of God. He 
developed the theology of the cross, the theology of a world 
without God. He believed that God had been driven from the 
world and had abandoned it. This belief allowed him to come to 
grips with the concept of evil. He explored the question of why 
evil flourishes and whether evil exists. He believed that the 
individual must take action and in that action find his own God. 
His Christianity, therefore, became a Christianity without formulas 
of religion. 
4. Bonhoeffer’s Christian faith, his use of great books, and his 
thought and contemplation enabled him to deal with this crisis in 
his own life. 
5. Bonhoeffer had read the same books as those who tormented him. 
His judge, Otto Thorbeck, had received the same type of classical 
education as Bonhoeffer. Judge Thorbeck believed that his duty 
was to carry out trials that he knew were wrong. Bonhoeffer, 
however, read books with the moral compass of absolute right and 
wrong. Great books themselves are no cure. They offer a means to 
live life in a way that can do either good or harm. 
III. In hopes that we can gain some wisdom, this course, Books That Have 
Made History: Books That Can Change Your Life, explores the ideas that 
have made history and shaped lives by discussing some of the most 
influential writings in history. These books range in time from the 3rd 
millennium B.C. to the 20th century and range from the classical civilizations 
of China, India, Greece, and Rome to the Europe of the Renaissance to 
contemporary Europe. The books were chosen because of their intrinsic 
greatness and because they still speak to us today. 
IV. The course is organized thematically around the eternal questions that 
endure through history and that every thoughtful person must consider.  

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
6 
A. The first theme is God, and the question is: Does God exist? This 
theme includes books of polytheism, such as the Iliad, and books of 
monotheism, including the biblical book of Exodus, the Gospel of 
Mark, and the Koran. 
B. The second theme is fate, and the question is: Do things happen by 
chance, or is there a plan? Marcus Aurelius explores this theme. 
C. The third theme is good and evil, which explores several questions. 
1. Are good and evil absolutes that are true in all times and all places 
and for all people? Although Bonhoeffer believed in absolute 
good, he also believed that telling lies was necessary at times. 
2. Is it always right to tell a lie—or always wrong? Homer, for 
example, praises Odysseus as a man who knew how to tell many 
lies and tell them well. 
D. The fourth theme explores how we should live. Do these great books 
give us a way to learn the meaning of our lives? 
V. This course seeks answers to these questions under eternal conditions, 
emotions, and challenges that are interconnected. 
A. The meaning of life: Do we ask the question of whether life has 
meaning, or do we just go through life without asking? 
B. Truth: Do we live our lives with questions of good or build our lives on 
a fabric of lies? 
C. Duty and responsibility: What is our duty? Here we explore different 
conclusions of duty. Do we believe in Bonhoeffer’s conception of his 
responsibility to follow the higher calling of good or Judge Thorbeck’s 
adherence to the importance of duty? 
D. Justice, government, and society: What types of justice, government, 
and society are desired? 
E. Love, jealousy, and hate: Romantic love is extremely important in our 
lives. 
F. Courage, honor, and ambition: These emotions run through such works 
as the Iliad, the Gospel of Mark, and the story of Faust. 
G. Beauty and nature: These concepts speak to what is inside of us. Henry 
David Thoreau, for example, writes that our souls must commune with 
the beauty of nature. 
H. History and the past: Books are our link to the great ideas of the past. 
This course is built on the belief that great books, great ideas, and great 
individuals make history. This concept runs counter to the Marxist idea 
that social and economic forces make great ideas. Such great men as 
Socrates, Napoleon, and Lincoln all built on ideas of the past. In truth, 
great ideas propel people to become great in themselves. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
7 
I. 
Education: The lessons of the past come together to educate us. 
Wisdom is the ultimate goal of any great books course. We must take 
the information and knowledge from this course and transform it into 
wisdom, applying what we have learned from these great books to our 
lives. 
VI. How do we define a great book? 
A. A great book has a great theme. It discusses ideas of enduring 
importance. 
B. A great book is written in language that elevates the soul and ennobles 
the mind. 
C. A great book must speak across the ages, reaching the hearts and minds 
of people far removed in time and space from the era and 
circumstances in which it was composed. Thus, a great book 
summarizes the enduring values and ideas of a great age and gives 
them as a legacy to future generations. 
D. Great books are an education for freedom. 
 
Essential Reading: 
Bonhoeffer, Letters and Papers from Prison. 
 
Supplementary Reading: 
Bethge, Dietrich Bonhoeffer. 
Adler, Great Ideas. 
Fadiman, A Lifetime Reading Plan. 
 
Questions to Consider: 
1. How, at the outset of this course, would you define a great book? 
2. At the outset of this course, do you believe that ideas make history, or are 
ideas, as Karl Marx thought, made by social and economic forces?  
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
8 
Lecture Two 
 
Homer, Iliad 
 
Scope: The Iliad of Homer and the Bible are the two fountainheads of our 
literature. Both are attempts to explain the ways of God to man. Both 
thus offer answers to the first of our fundamental questions: Is there a 
god and does god have any effect on our lives? In Famous Greeks, we 
examined the Iliad as a work of history. Now, we discuss it as one of 
the most deeply religious books ever composed. For Homer, god is not 
one but many. The Iliad is an enduring statement of the living tradition 
of polytheism. Immortal and powerful, the gods of Homer are 
nonetheless strikingly human in their greed, arrogance, jealously, and 
promiscuity. However, far from being simplistic or childish, the gods 
of Homer are testimony to a profound effort to understand the meaning 
of life. 
 
Outline 
I. 
Some courses view the Iliad as a work of history. It has a strong kernel of 
historical accuracy and discusses the great events that led to the sacking of 
Troy. This course asks what in the Iliad speaks to us today and how it is 
relevant to modern people. 
II. The fundamental themes of the Iliad are gods, fate, and the meaning of life. 
For Homer, fate and the gods were means by which a person could learn 
more about the meaning of life. 
III. The Iliad consists of 15,693 lines, composed around 800 B.C. by a single 
creative genius, Homer.  
A. Homer composed the work in Asia Minor, in what is now Turkey. 
B. Iliad means “tale of Ilium,” or Troy. 
C. For the Greeks, the Iliad had the same role that the Bible once had in 
American life; it was a guide for moral instruction.  
D. In addition, it was a book written in sublime poetry. Some Greeks even 
knew it by heart.  
E. This narrative poem describes a few days in the struggle between the 
Greeks and the Trojans that lasted more than 10 years. 
1. Before the events of the Iliad take place, the story began with a 
dispute among the gods. The goddess of discord brought to a 
banquet a golden apple to be given to the fairest goddess. The gods 
requested that Zeus decide which one was the fairest, and he 
delegated the decision to Paris. Aphrodite, Hera, and Athena 
offered bribes to Paris, and Paris chose Aphrodite, who offered 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
9 
him the most beautiful woman in the world. Paris thereby incurred 
the wrath of Hera and Athena. Helen, the wife of Menelaus, eloped 
with Paris. 
2. Agamemnon, the brother of Menelaus, led the fleet that was to sail 
to Troy to retrieve Helen. However, the ships could not leave 
because there was no wind. A soothsayer indicated that the gods 
were outraged and would not be satisfied unless Iphigenia, the 
daughter of Agamemnon, was sacrificed. The winds came up, and 
the fleet sailed to Troy. The struggle lasted 10 years, during which 
the Trojans were too bound by honor to give Helen back and the 
Greeks were too bound by honor to return home. 
3. What began as an expedition to retrieve honor became a 10-year 
war in the Middle East. 
4. Homer’s poetic genius was such that he chose one episode in the 
war to crystallize all the great themes. 
5. The story of the Iliad begins with the outrage of Achilles about the 
wrong done him by Agamemnon. Achilles believed that he had 
been dishonored and refused to fight; after his withdrawal, the 
Trojans came near to victory. To save the honor of Greece, 
Patroclus, a friend of Achilles, put on the armor of Achilles and 
died at the hand of Hector, the noblest of the Trojans. Achilles, 
motivated by the death of his friend and driven by honor and 
anger, then went into battle and killed Hector. He finally returned 
Hector’s body at the request of Priam, Hector’s father, and the 
story itself ends with the funeral of Hector. 
IV. Central questions of the Iliad include the following: 
A. Why are we here? 
B. Why is war waged? 
C. Why do innocents suffer? 
V. The Iliad is considered the first great work of literature. It was the work 
most revered by the ancient Greeks. 
VI. One theme of the Iliad is the role of the gods. 
A. Homer states, “Thus was the will of Zeus fulfilled.” 
B. Who were the gods of Homer?  
1. Homer was a polytheist, believing in many gods.  
2. For Homer, these gods were real, not silly creations of mythology. 
These real gods embodied powerful forces. 
3. Polytheists define a divinity as a being capable of rendering 
supernatural benefits to the community. These powers could do 
good or harm. 
4. Mythology is a means of expressing a higher truth. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
10 
5. The god Zeus, the king of gods and men, represents a seed of 
development that leads to an idea of one all-powerful and all-
controlling god.  
VII.  Zeus can control fate, but men and women can make conscious decisions 
about good and evil.  
A. It was the will of Zeus that the Greeks and Trojans should suffer and 
that Troy be destroyed. 
B. Fate is what the gods decree for us in their power and knowledge. 
C. People make conscious decisions about good and evil, and these 
decisions give meaning to their lives. 
1. Agamemnon’s wife murdered Agamemnon because he had 
acquiesced in the sacrifice of their daughter. 
2. Hybris, defined as outrageous arrogance by which power is used to 
inflict pain upon the innocent, is a moral wrong 
3. Acquiescing in this sacrifice represented an act of hybris.  
4. Agamemnon believed his duty was to conquer Troy and return 
home in glory. The gods had made him morally blind. His absence 
of moral vision led him to commit hybris.  
5. The gods do not forget such outrages. His judgment would come. 
Agamemnon might come home, but he would die. 
VIII. One lesson of Homer is that the gods care about good and evil.  
A. Absolute right and absolute wrong exist. 
B. The gods ultimately punish what is wrong and reward what is right. 
C. Mortals lack vision to understand what is good and what is evil until it 
is too late. 
D. Homer believed that people do not understand the ways of the gods. 
The Iliad was a means of beginning to gain wisdom. 
1. Homer and the Bible agree that fear of god is the beginning of 
wisdom.  
2. The omens of the gods should be taken seriously, because they are 
the means by which the gods make their will known. 
IX. The Iliad is ultimately a book about the meaning of life and how to lead 
that life. 
A. It is a story of the education of Achilles. The mother of Achilles, who 
was divine, had given him a choice: He could either live a long life or 
live a life of glory and die young. He elected a life of glory and honor, 
which gave meaning to his life. He had a reputation for telling the 
truth, keeping his word, seeking vengeance for those who wronged 
him, and defending himself and the weak.  
B. The importance of moderation in pursuing one’s values is an important 
lesson. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
11 
1. Achilles attained wisdom when Priam came to claim his son; 
Achilles realized that the concept of honor could be pushed too far. 
2. Each person has an ideal that he or she prizes and will do anything 
to hold onto that concept. 
C. We increase our wisdom only by suffering. 
1. Achilles learned by suffering, that is, by the loss of what was 
dearest to him. 
2. Zeus willed that we learn and gain wisdom only through suffering. 
3. All generations must read the same books, repeat the same errors, 
and fight the same wars. 
X. True wisdom knows when to push a thing so far that other ordinary mortals 
will think it excessive. A truly wise person also must know how far is too 
far. Achilles gives us this lesson: All mortals must die, but how people live 
their lives is what matters.  
 
Essential Reading:  
Homer, Iliad. 
 
Supplementary Reading: 
Rose, Greek and Roman Religion. 
Willcock, Companion to the Iliad. 
 
Questions to Consider: 
1. What view of Zeus do you find in the Iliad? Do you see the beginning of 
the idea of monotheism? 
2. How can the Iliad be said to be a tale of moral growth and redemption, even 
for the gods? 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
12 
Lecture Three 
 
Marcus Aurelius, Meditations 
 
Scope: In Famous Romans, we discussed Marcus Aurelius as one of the most 
noble of the Roman emperors. But his importance goes far beyond his 
role in the policies and history of an empire he knew to be ephemeral. 
His book of Meditations was written to himself. But it has proven to be 
an enduring legacy, a reflection of an ethical life as applicable today as 
it was almost 2,000 years ago. The Meditations of Marcus Aurelius 
presents the culmination of the most creative current of Greek religious 
thought—Stoicism—and its belief that god is one, all-powerful, all-
knowing, all-good, all-just. True happiness lies in our recognition that 
all things happen in accordance with the will of god. We thus accept 
our roles in life and the events that happen to us, secure in our own 
inner fortress of self-knowledge. The wise man, like Marcus Aurelius, 
is self-sufficient. Wisdom lies in understanding that we can control 
only our minds, what we think with our minds, and our actions based 
on those thoughts. 
 
Outline 
I. 
The Meditations of Marcus Aurelius represents the culmination of Greek 
thought with regard to god, fate, and good and evil. 
II. The writings of Marcus Aurelius have had relevance throughout the ages. 
A. These writings spoke profoundly to such thinkers of the 18th century as 
Thomas Jefferson, who believed that a book of ethics comparable to 
the New Testament could be compiled from the writings of Marcus 
Aurelius. 
B. The Meditations inspired people ranging from entrepreneurs, such as 
Cecil Rhodes, to Matthew Arnold, a poet who spent much of his life 
attempting to reform the schools of England. 
C. This work can represent a source of meditation for even the busiest 
contemporary CEO.  
D. The Meditations are forever a call to duty—Marcus Aurelius himself 
saw them as a call to carry out the meaning of his life as god had given 
it to him. 
III. Marcus Aurelius was born to wealth and power in the vast Roman Empire 
of the 2nd century A.D., in which Greek and Latin were the common 
languages,  the one coinage was Roman money, and the law of Rome 
protected its people and property. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
13 
A. The father of Marcus Aurelius died young, and Marcus was adopted by 
his uncle and guardian, the emperor Antoninus Pius. 
B. Marcus had wanted to be a philosopher. The term philosopher referred 
to a love of wisdom; it was not a narrow academic specialty but the 
search for wisdom needed to live one’s life. 
C. Following the death of Antoninus Pius in 161 A.D., Marcus Aurelius 
became emperor. It was the duty of the emperor to protect individual 
rights and privileges, to create peace and prosperity for Rome, and to 
govern this “one world,” the unrivaled superpower of its day. 
D. As emperor, Marcus Aurelius spent much of his life campaigning to 
protect the borders of Rome. 
E. He wrote his Meditations, actually called “Thoughts for Myself,” in the 
evenings in his tent. 
IV. The great theme of the Meditations is the meaning of life.  
A. To arrive at the meaning of life, Marcus Aurelius began with god and 
fate. He believed that god exists and that even an intensely irritating 
person is part of that same god and has the same divine spark. Each 
person has a soul and that soul partakes of the essence of god. Fate, 
through god, has decreed a destiny for everyone. 
 
B. The writings of Marcus Aurelius represent the development of a theme 
found in Homer: The Zeus of the Iliad has transitioned from being a 
capricious and lecherous king to being a god of wisdom.  
1. The Stoics—who played a major role in this transition—taught 
that god is the universe and is all-good, all-beneficent, and all-
knowing. They, too, believed that god gave each individual a soul 
and decreed a particular fate for each individual. This monotheistic 
idea paved the way for Christianity. 
2. This god of the Stoics was the idea of god for Marcus Aurelius. It 
was a god who can be called Nature, Providence, or Reason. 
C. Marcus Aurelius believed that a fate had been laid down for each one 
of us and that all individuals must work out their own destinies. 
Whether an individual believed in “order or atoms” was irrelevant. A 
person might believe that order existed in the universe or that the 
universe consisted of a random collision of atoms. That belief, 
however, does not change how one should live. 
D. Marcus believed that both good and evil exist in the world and that 
wisdom lies in understanding that every person is a vehicle for doing 
good. 
E. All that a person can control is his or her own mind, the thoughts of 
that mind, and the actions taken on the basis of those thoughts. 
1. The mind must be trained. Meditation and contemplation, rather 
than books, lead to understanding. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
14 
2. No one can control the mind of another person. Actions of other 
people do not harm an individual; what matters is the individual’s 
opinion of that action. An individual has been harmed only if he 
believes that he has been harmed.  
3. People have no true control over their own property, other people, 
or even their own reputations. God controls events. He is like the 
pilot of a great ship who has let a person out on shore; when he 
calls, the person must return to him.  
F. Another idea found in the Meditations is that everything that happens is 
good, because god would not allow something to happen if it were not 
good. 
G. Everyone has a duty to perform.  
1. Marcus, who wanted to be a philosopher, had a duty as emperor. 
His role was to perform that duty as well as possible, because god 
called him to perform that duty. 
2. After death, a person turns into atoms and vanishes. A person is a 
mere individual, an atom in the universe. The soul does not 
endure. Glory does not matter. What matters is whether an 
individual has performed his assigned duty to the best of his 
ability. 
V. The only real reason for studying the great books is that they present 
absolute values for living life. These values, according to both Marcus 
Aurelius and Socrates, include the following: 
A. Truth: Truth is an absolute value. Some things are true in all places and 
times. Resisting evil, for example, is always right. 
B. Justice: Justice consists of treating others as one would wish to be 
treated. “Do unto others what you would have them do unto you” 
summarizes this concept of justice. 
C. Courage: Courage means standing up for justice. 
D. Moderation: Nothing should be carried to excess.  
E. Wisdom: Wisdom enables a person to know what justice is, to 
recognize when courage is required, and to do what is right. 
VI. These values—which are found in the literature of classical India and 
classical China, as well as contemporary literature—were, for Marcus 
Aurelius, the way to live life to find freedom. Education is ultimately 
freedom, freedom from worry about this world and from the fear of death. 
According to Marcus Aurelius, a fear of death implies wisdom in an area 
that people know nothing about. Death is as natural as life. 
VII.  For Marcus Aurelius, everything could be understood in terms of god, fate, 
and the central values. 
A. Justice was the essence of his role as emperor. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
15 
B. He believed that power, honor, and ambition were false ideas that led 
people astray. Power, for example, is ultimately unimportant. The 
desire to have power, obtain it, and maintain it is a false goal, because 
power vanishes after death.  
C. Marcus Aurelius dreamed of an empire in which individuals were free 
to live life as they chose and to follow their ambitions. He stated, “I 
dream of one world in which all are prosperous and all can take care of 
their children, and in which there is no war.” 
VIII. In addition, he believed that the world is beautiful and is full of god’s 
glory. 
IX. The philosophy found in the Meditations can be summarized as follows: 
“Get out of bed, get on with your duty, and appreciate what is around you. 
That is the meaning of life.” The goal of education, he believed, was to 
enable people to understand their duty, to find their assigned tasks, and to 
perform them to the best of their abilities. 
 
Essential Reading: 
Marcus Aurelius, Meditations. 
 
Supplementary Reading: 
Rutherford, The Meditations of Marcus Aurelius. 
Dill, Roman Society. 
 
Questions to Consider: 
1. Does Marcus Aurelius show us that we can live an ethical life without a 
personal vision of god? 
2. How could you, as a busy, practical person, put the lessons of the 
Meditations into your own life? 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
16 
Lecture Four 
 
Bhagavad Gita  
 
Scope: Mohandas Gandhi called the Bhagavad Gita the “religious book par 
excellence,” and it is regarded as the supreme creation of Sanskrit 
literature. Composed in the same period as the Iliad, this poem, “The 
Song of God,” is also an epic statement of polytheism, of the belief that 
god has fashioned many roads to the truth. As in the Iliad, a story of 
war and battle provides the vehicle to explore deeper questions of the 
nature of god. The Bhagavad Gita proclaims that beyond the multitude 
of deities, there is an all-encompassing, single divine power. This god 
is truth, and the search for wisdom is the pathway to god and to the 
freedom that is eternal. Wisdom lies in understanding that material 
goods and success are false idols. Freedom comes by overcoming our 
desires for what is false and devoting ourselves and our work to what is 
true and eternal. 
 
Outline 
I. 
This session begins with a review of the first three lectures. 
A. Great books are books that speak to us individually and represent 
books and authors that have made history. These books have lived past 
their time and can influence our lives and events today. Great books 
have a great theme, are written in noble language, and are able to speak 
across the ages. 
B. The course is developed around eternal themes: God, fate, good and 
evil, the meaning of life, and how people live their lives in pursuit of 
truth. The books discuss duty and responsibility; law, justice, and 
government; love and beauty; courage, honor, and ambition; our 
relationship to nature; and our definition of education. 
1. Bonhoeffer’s Letters and Papers From Prison is the work of a 
man in search of truth who found the courage to resist evil and 
who gave his life in the pursuit of good. His ideas have lived on 
despite Hitler’s attempt to crush them. The civil rights movement 
of the 1960s found special relevance in this work. 
2. Homer’s Iliad offers wisdom to us today in such central themes as 
God, fate, and the meaning of good and evil. It also teaches how to 
live life with courage while understanding the virtue of 
moderation. It is the first great work of classical Greek literature 
that has come down to us. 
3. The Meditations of Marcus Aurelius represents the summation of 
Greek thought on God, fate, and good and evil. The Roman 
Empire of Marcus Aurelius, which was the Roman Empire of the 
1st and 2nd centuries A.D., was the cultural heir of Greece, and 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
17 
Marcus Aurelius wrote the Meditations in Greek. The writings of 
Marcus Aurelius represent the culmination of the transformation of 
the god Zeus from the capricious and lecherous master found in 
the poetry of Homer to a god who is associated with absolute truth 
and good and who is equated with nature, is all-powerful, all-
knowing, and all-seeing. 
C. In the same way that the Romans were the cultural heirs of the Greeks, 
the United States of today is the cultural heir of Europe. 
II. The culmination of an image of god as a vision of truth can be found 
perhaps as early as 500 B.C. in the Bhagavad Gita, the “Song of God.” This 
work was a product of classical Indian civilization. 
A. Around 1800 B.C., the flourishing civilizations around the Indus River 
were overrun by invaders from the west.  
B. The language of these invaders was Sanskrit, also the language of the 
Bhagavad Gita. Sanskrit was related to Persian and more distantly to 
Greek, Latin, and the Germanic languages.  
C. These invaders, who called themselves Aryans, meaning “nobles,” 
imposed their rule by conquest. From warfare and destruction came a 
new civilization that produced rich poetry, including the Bhagavad 
Gita, in an epic form.  
D. The religion of this people was Hinduism, a polytheistic religion that 
rejects the notion that the world of the gods is finite, but is willing to 
recognize any new divine power capable of rendering supernatural 
benefits to the community of worshipers. All nature was seen as a 
manifestation of the divine. Sacrifice is fundamental to this worship; it 
can be used to offer homage to the gods in return for their blessings 
and to avert evil. Individual gods can take many forms. As in Homer’s 
Iliad and the writings of Marcus Aurelius, this polytheistic notion of 
the divine can foster an image of one all-powerful and universal god. 
III. The Bhagavad Gita is part of a longer work, the Mahabharata. 
A. It is a poem that presents an epic story of warfare. 
B. Its author is unknown. 
C. The warfare in the Bhagavad Gita is a symbol of the ongoing conflict 
of life and the struggle for the wisdom to live life in a way that is 
meaningful to us as individuals. It is the struggle between two warring 
tribes; it is also a struggle between right and wrong and between good 
and evil. 
D. At the beginning of the story, Arjuna, the hero, does not understand the 
nature of his struggle and wishes to withdraw from the war 
IV. Truth is a central idea of the Bhagavad Gita. 
A. The first word of the Bhagavad Gita is dharma, or “truth.” 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
18 
B. In this allegory, Krishna, the charioteer of Arjuna, is also the image of 
the supreme god of the universe; Arjuna is everyman, the soul. Krishna 
explains to Arjuna how he must travel the battlefield of life. 
C. Gandhi’s statements reflect the theme of the Bhagavad Gita. Gandhi 
said that it is more important to believe that truth is God than that God 
is truth. Truth comes first. 
D. Krishna’s message to Arjuna is that Arjuna must be steadfast in the 
truth and must fight the battle of life understanding what truth is. 
V. The Bhagavad Gita also explains that behind the changing formations of 
the divine, there is one underlying divine being who is all and that Krishna 
is one of his manifestations. 
A. God’s presence is everywhere throughout all things in the universe. 
B. In the Bhagavad Gita, God makes himself visible in his true form to 
Arjuna. This God is everywhere throughout the universe. The universe 
is contained in one atom of this divine being, and in every person, there 
is a part of this divine being. 
VI. After this glimpse of the majesty of God and the understanding that God is 
all, an individual can come to an understanding of his or her role in the 
universe that God has created. That role is our soul.  
A. This idea contrasts with the viewpoints seen in both the Iliad and the 
Mediations. Marcus Aurelius was unsure of the existence of the soul; if 
it did exist, he believed that it came to an end at death. For Homer, this 
life is what we have and we must live it. 
B. In the Bhagavad Gita, the soul endures, is eternal, and is divine. The 
task of mankind is to purify the soul and gain wisdom and truth so that 
the soul can gain ultimate liberation. 
C. This ultimate liberation is the next step. The body is seen as a prison; 
bodily desires are the result of false knowledge and false wisdom (for 
example, the desire for power and wealth). Wisdom enables a person to 
begin to shed false desires.  
1. The path of wisdom is to lead us to a stage that frees the soul for 
eternity from the bondage of the body. 
2. Power leads to no ultimate liberation; after death, an individual 
becomes some other creature. 
3. The fate an individual earns through making choices affects that 
individual for many cycles of death and rebirth. 
4. The Bhagavad Gita is about making the correct choices through 
wisdom. Earthly actions are good or evil and have enduring 
consequences. Choices using true wisdom allow a person to 
ultimately gain eternal liberation. 
D. Wisdom consists of understanding karma, which means the task that an 
individual has been assigned by God.  Karma is the role and the task of 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
19 
the individual. The choice to accept karma must be made with full 
realization of the difficulty of performing one’s duty. Krishna teaches 
Arjuna that his duty is to fight this war. 
1. A person who renounces his or her assigned task is doomed to 
eternal reincarnation and suffering. 
2. Accepting the assigned task with fear also leads to endless cycles 
of reincarnation. 
3. Accepting the task with a whole heart allows a being to rise a step 
or two. 
4. Accepting the task with supreme spirit and a fully dutiful 
conscience and understanding can lead to ultimate liberation and 
the pure bliss of unification with God, which is ultimate freedom. 
5. The decision to follow the assigned way can bring a being to 
liberation. Even the greatest sinner can be liberated by doing his or 
her task to the utmost.  
VII.  The religion of the Bhagavad Gita is not a renunciation of life. It is the call 
to learn the ultimate meaning of life. The Bhagavad Gita answers the 
questions of God, good and evil, and fate. It also deals with truth, duty, 
justice, and love. 
A. God is all, God is eternal and everlasting, and God pervades the entire 
universe.  
B. Good is following the mission of one’s life. 
C. On the subject of fate, the Bhagavad Gita indicates that every 
individual and particle of the universe has a destiny. An individual 
must have the wisdom to know his or her destiny. 
D. Truth is everything and all things. 
E. Duty and responsibility are assigned by God and may lead away from 
what other people recommend. 
F. Ultimate justice lies in every particle of the universe willingly and 
joyfully carrying out the will of God. The Bhagavad Gita does not 
separate the world, God, fate, life, and government. They are all 
mingled in the total vision of the world and justice. Justice is not of 
men but is part of the divine order. The person of justice is unshakable 
and steadfast in the truth. 
G. Love led Krishna to take form in this world so that Arjuna could see 
him. An individual’s love is to become absolutely immersed in the 
divine; to do that, one may forsake all things and put oneself on God’s 
path. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
20 
VIII. The ultimate message of the Bhagavad Gita is that God has created many 
roads to the truth; each person must find his or her own road.  
A. These roads may include ritual sacrifices, a life of religious piety, 
contemplation and study, or struggle for liberation. Gandhi understood 
that his path was to struggle for the liberation of his country. 
B. The Hindu never seeks to absolutely define the world of the gods. 
There are many different forms of God, and each one may have a role 
in leading one individual to an understanding of truth.  
C. The form or ceremonies of God are not important. What is important is 
the understanding that God is truth. That understanding gives one the 
courage to live life and follow karma.  
IX. The Bhagavad Gita, like the Divine Comedy, is one of the greatest works of 
education ever composed. It leads from the darkness of a life without 
meaning to the clarity of God’s wisdom.  
X. The civilizations of classical Greece and classical India may have had some 
contact with each other. However, classical Indian civilization has little 
regard for history or for concrete knowledge of the past. Although 
similarities exist between the vision of divine glory in Dante’s Divine 
Comedy and the Bhagavad Gita, the classical Indian view would be that 
these similarities represent eternal and enduring wisdom that is deeper than 
history. 
 
Essential Reading: 
Bhagavad Gita.  
 
Supplementary Reading: 
Carrithers and Champakalakshimi in Encyclopedia of India. 
Coomaraswamy, Hinduism and Buddhism. 
 
Questions to Consider: 
1. Compare the vision of God in the Meditations of Marcus Aurelius with that 
of the Bhagavad Gita. Compare and contrast the ethical teachings of these 
two great books. 
2. Can you translate the teachings of the Bhagavad Gita into your own life? 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
21 
Lecture Five 
 
Book of Exodus 
 
Scope: Exodus might be called the most influential religious book ever 
composed. It has shaped three great living religious traditions: Judaism, 
Christianity, and Islam. The Iliad and the Bhagavad Gita give us 
insight into the deeper religious meaning to be found in polytheism. By 
contrast, Exodus proclaims that God is one and demands that we have 
no other god but this one God. The God of Exodus is all-powerful and 
totally other than man. He is a god of law and judgment, the grantor of 
a freedom that is based on absolute surrender. Moses is his prophet, the 
man chosen against his will to proclaim the message of God. The 
prophet embodies the ideal of a divine calling. Prophets, from Moses to 
Socrates, from Jesus to Muhammad, and perhaps, even until our own 
day, call us to challenge our conventional assumptions and change our 
lives.  
 
Outline 
I. 
The Bhagavad Gita still speaks to mankind today. 
A. Three words summarize a good part of its message. 
1. The word om is the sacred word of God. It is the word with which 
a person should begin every day and every task that is undertaken 
simply because it is that person’s work, that person’s task, and that 
person’s karma. 
2. The word tat means a task being fulfilled without any thought of 
gain or profit. 
3. The word sat is the perfect conclusion of a work done for God. 
B. The Bhagavad Gita, the sacred work of the Hindu religion, is still read 
by millions every day. 
C. The life of Gandhi, who believed that one must stand fast in the truth, 
epitomizes the way in which the Bhagavad Gita changed history. 
D. The lessons of the Bhagavad Gita are eternal, but the date that the 
Bhagavad Gita was written is unknown. 
E. The ideas in the Bhagavad Gita enlightened Buddha in the 5th and 6th 
centuries B.C., and Buddhism subsequently shaped the civilizations of 
China, Korea, Tibet, and Nepal. 
II. The biblical Book of Exodus is the most influential book ever written. It 
shaped Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. 
A. Tradition indicates that Moses was the author. 
B. The Bhagavad Gita and the Iliad are tributes to polytheism. In them, 
God has fashioned many roads to the truth. In the Book of Exodus—as 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
22 
in the Gospel of Mark and the Koran—only one path to the truth exists. 
God will allow no other gods to be worshiped. 
III. Moses was an actual historical figure, and a true historical context exists for 
the Book of Exodus. 
A. Egypt was the great power of the Middle East. Ramses II, who reigned 
from 1279 to 1213, sought to consolidate and centralize the imperial 
power. Ramses II may be “the pharaoh who knew not Joseph,” that is, 
the pharaoh in the Book of Exodus.  
B. Biblical stories have some historical grounding. Wandering tribes did 
come in from the deserts, famines did occur, and foreigners rose to 
positions of power. 
C. The name Moses is actually an Egyptian name. One way to read the 
familiar story that Moses was raised as an Egyptian is that he really 
was an Egyptian and that this tale was a way of making him a Hebrew 
after the fact. 
D. In the Book of Exodus, Moses killed an Egyptian and fled into exile.  
1. In exile, God found Moses and gave him his calling. When Moses, 
a shepherd, saw the burning bush, he asked what it was, and God 
answered, “I am who I am.” 
2. God told Moses that he was to lead the Hebrews from Egypt. 
3. Moses, a reluctant prophet, did not want to lead the Hebrews, but 
he found meaning for his life in absolute submission to the will of 
God. 
E. On a divine level, the Book of Exodus is a story of God and about the 
acts of God in history; on a personal level, however, it is about a man 
who was called to a great task and who gained fame and enduring 
meaning through acceptance of this calling. 
F. Moses returned to Egypt to request that pharaoh allow the Hebrews to 
leave. The details in this story speak of history, including the 
description that the work of the Israelites involved gathering straw to 
make bricks for the city. 
G. Because the pharaoh refused to let the Hebrews leave, God sent the 
plagues. Although contemporary historians can find practical 
explanations for these events, they were considered miracles by the 
Israelites and proofs of God’s power. 
H. Following the most terrible of the afflictions, the slaying of the 
firstborn, the Israelites fled Egypt under the guidance of Moses. 
I. 
When the Israelites came to the Red Sea, the sea parted, and they 
miraculously escaped their Egyptian pursuers. This historic event is 
commemorated in the biblical song of rejoicing: “The horse and his 
rider He has thrown into the sea. The Lord has triumphed. Blessed be 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
23 
his name.” That kernel represents real history and deliverance from a 
historical danger. 
J. The Israelites may have been an assortment of peoples who came 
together under a charismatic leader, who in turn, brought them to a new 
land and gave them a history. The tradition that Moses composed the 
first five books of the Bible may rest on the realization that a people 
need a common history and common rites that separate them from 
others. Such Jewish traditions as ritual circumcision and avoidance of 
pork may represent a legacy of the time that the Israelites spent in 
Egypt. 
K. The Israelites made their way from Egypt and began wandering in 
search of the holy land that God had promised to them.  
IV. After wandering through the desert, Moses brought the Israelites to Mount 
Sinai, where God spoke to Moses and gave him the law under which the 
Israelites were to make their absolute submission to God. 
A. These Ten Commandments have shaped history through our own day. 
B. The Ten Commandments reflect what we know about treaties in the 
Middle East at the time that the Book of Exodus was written (in 
approximately the 13th century B.C.). In these treaties, an absolute ruler 
or king makes an agreement to protect a people if they accept his 
complete domination. Such an agreement reflects the Middle Eastern 
(Mesopotamian) definition of freedom as rights and privileges granted 
by an absolute ruler that the ruler can take away at any time if his will 
is disobeyed.  
1. God’s first stipulation is “I am the Lord thy God, who brought you 
out of Egypt, out of the land of bondage.” Thus, the story of the 
Israelites begins with freedom from the slavery of Egypt and the 
boon that “I am” has bestowed. 
2. “You will have no other gods besides me” represents monotheism 
in its most extreme form. This grant of freedom depends on the 
Israelites worshiping God and God alone. 
3. The statement “You will make no graven images” is a second 
stipulation. It prohibits the worship of false gods. 
4. “You will not take my name in vain” means that the people should 
swear no oaths that they will break. This God of absolute truth 
requires that the truth must not be breached in any way. 
5. God next required the Israelites to show obedience by keeping one 
day, the Sabbath, holy. 
6. The next commandment, to honor one’s father and mother, is a 
bridge from commandments dealing with man’s relationship to 
God to how individuals should deal with others. 
7. The remaining commandments reflect absolute prohibitions. The 
Israelites were enjoined from killing others, committing adultery, 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
24 
stealing, bearing false witness, and being jealous of others. These 
absolute truths could not be disobeyed. 
C. Following the Ten Commandments would lead to salvation and 
freedom; breaking them would lead to destruction and enslavement. 
V. The Book of Exodus is a book of social justice. It elaborates the Ten 
Commandments and sets up a social system, balancing the need for justice 
with compassion. The God of the Book of Exodus is a God who is vengeful 
and stern but also forgiving and compassionate. 
A. As soon as the people received the commandments, including the 
commandment prohibiting graven images, they made a golden calf. 
B. Moses kept interceding for his people. God relented and forgave them 
many times and treated them with compassion. 
VI. Moses, the great prophet, never saw the Promised Land.  
VII.  The Israelites moved on and took Canaan by fire and sword, which is also 
validated by the archaeological record. 
VIII. The origin of monotheism appears to have its roots in Egypt.  
A. The pharaoh Akhenaton, who ruled from 1352 B.C. to 1336 B.C., tried 
to foster a religion of only one god, Aten, whose beauty was shown in 
the sun itself. This god was seen as an all-powerful being under which 
the universe prospered. Akhenaton wrote poetry about Aten and built 
temples to him.  
B. Although Akhenaton could not impose his will on his Egyptian 
contemporaries, who favored polytheism, this seed of monotheism may 
have lived on and found an enduring form in the prophet Moses and his 
mission. 
IX. The Book of Exodus made history and can still arouse controversy today in 
a society that really does not want commandments. 
 
Essential Reading: 
Book of Exodus. 
 
Supplementary Reading: 
Barth, Word of God and Word of Man. 
Wright and Fuller, Book of the Acts of God, pp. 1–98. 
 
Questions to Consider: 
1. Compare the idea of liberty in Exodus with your own personal concept of 
liberty. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
25 
2. Do you believe that it is suitable to place copies of the Ten Commandments 
in American law courts? 
 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
26 
Lecture Six 
 
Gospel of Mark 
 
Scope: The four gospels, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, are our sole sources 
for the life of the teacher and prophet Jesus of Nazareth. For two 
millennia, that story has changed untold millions of lives and has made 
history. It has been the source of great art and philosophical treatises, 
poetry, novels, and motions pictures. Each of the Gospels presents a 
portrait of Jesus, differing in emphasis. Mark is the most concise and 
dramatic, drawn from the firsthand account of Peter. The power and 
success of Jesus’ teaching and the uncompromising message that he 
taught brought Jesus into direct and conscious conflict with the 
established political and social powers of his day. The Jesus of the 
Gospel of Mark is a prophet and a philosopher, who testifies to his 
search for wisdom by his trial and death. 
 
Outline 
I. 
The previous lecture, on the Book of Exodus, began the exploration of the 
prophet, a figure who compels people to deal with the theme of God. The 
previous lecture dealt with Moses, the prophet who founded Judaism; this 
lecture deals with Jesus, who founded Christianity. 
II. The Gospel of Mark begins in Judaea, a province of the Roman Empire in 
36 A.D., at the Sea of Galilee. 
A. To several fishermen, one of whom was Peter, appeared a man about 
whom they knew nothing. The man said, “Follow me, and I will make 
you fishers of men.”  
B. Peter followed Jesus for reasons that he perhaps could never explain 
and continued following him and teaching about him until his (Peter’s) 
death in Rome. 
III. All we know about Jesus is contained in the four Gospels. Three of them—
Matthew, Mark, and Luke—have a great deal in common.  
A. John, which has a profound message, differs substantially from the 
other three, even in chronology. Matthew, Mark, and Luke were named 
by the early church as the “Synoptic Gospels,” those that see things in 
the same way. 
B. Matthew appears to have been written for a primarily Jewish audience. 
C. Luke, the most historically minded of the Gospels, was written for a 
Gentile audience. 
D. Mark is believed to represent the firsthand account of Jesus, as taught 
by Peter and taken down by John Mark, the friend and disciple of 
Peter; it is believed to represent the message of Jesus that Peter 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
27 
preached. Like the other Gospels, it was first published around 70 A.D., 
but it may have been the first one written. 
IV. Mark, unlike Luke or Matthew, does not begin with the birth of Jesus or 
with a long introduction. Instead, it begins with Jesus being called by John 
the Baptist, then suddenly appearing at the Sea of Galilee.  
A. After calling Peter and the other fishermen, Jesus went with the men to 
the town of Capernaum. 
B. Jesus began his public mission in the synagogue at Capernaum, which 
was built in the style of a Greek temple. This building style points to 
the penetration of Greek culture throughout the Roman Empire, even as 
far as the Near East. 
C. Jesus is believed to have been a learned man. He knew the Hebrew 
testament and probably knew Greek and Latin, as well as Aramaic, the 
language of the people. 
D. At that time, the formula for the synagogue service was prayer, 
followed by a reading from the Old Testament, including law, 
Prophets, or Psalms; then, one person stood up to give a message. 
Traditionally, only Pharisees gave this message.  
E. The Pharisees were learned in the law. They explicated the Jewish 
laws, which stemmed from the Ten Commandments but had become so 
complex that no layperson could understand them. Jesus later said that 
the Ten Commandments were simple and could be summarized as 
“Love God and love your neighbor.” The Pharisees believed that their 
social identity was wrapped up with their knowledge of the law. They 
believed that if every Jewish person followed the letter of the Jewish 
law for one day, the Kingdom of God would be restored, Rome would 
be forced to leave, and Israel would become a kingdom. 
F. Jesus, who had no known academic credentials, preached his message 
in the temple. Unlike the Pharisees, Jesus taught as one who had 
authority. He did not make his message complicated, and his voice was 
powerful and mesmerizing. From the outset, Jesus put himself on a 
collision course with the Pharisees, the most influential members of the 
community. 
G. After delivering his message, Jesus went to Peter’s home, where he 
healed Peter’s mother-in-law. 
H. The next morning, a crowd was waiting for Jesus. Peter found Jesus 
sitting outside and informed him that people were waiting to see him. 
Jesus said, “Then let us go back, for that is why I have come out.” 
1. According to the Gospel of Mark, before Jesus arrived in Galilee, 
he spent time in the Wilderness, where there was a Jewish 
monastic community.  
2. The Essenes, according to Josephus, cut themselves off from the 
world, lived in monastic conditions, practiced baptism, and spent 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
28 
their days waiting for the coming of the Kingdom of God. They 
believed that it would come about by copying the word of God. 
The Dead Sea Scrolls come from this community.  
3. Jesus may have been part of that community. He was baptized in 
the River Jordan by John, where God announced to Jesus alone, 
“You are my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased.” That was 
God’s call to Jesus. 
4. Jesus then had to decide whether to stay in the monastic 
community to prepare for the coming of the Kingdom of God or to 
go out and teach the message about the Kingdom of God. 
5. Because he decided to go out, he became a prophet, like Moses, 
Muhammad, and Socrates. The public mission of Jesus began at 
Galilee. 
I. 
Jesus was addressed as a teacher, a rabbi. He taught a message that is 
simple and ambiguous at the same time: “The Kingdom of God is at 
hand. This is the critical moment. Repent and believe in the good news 
of the Gospel.” Jesus traveled on a teaching mission that lasted not 
more than a year, spreading this simple doctrine and performing 
miracles. 
V. Scholars of the 19th and 20th centuries spent much time rationalizing and 
attempting to explain the miracles of Jesus. 
A. These miracles cannot be removed or explained away. They are 
fundamental to the message as perceived by the audience of Jesus. As 
people of the 21st century believe in science, people then believed in 
magic. Although contemporary people may not accept that such 
miracles occurred, the age in which Jesus lived believed in miracles. 
The miracles have a progressive character, from curing Peter’s mother-
in-law of a fever to bringing a girl back from the dead. 
B. The miracles prompted people to deal with the question of God and 
whether he was speaking through this prophet or whether Jesus was a 
false prophet. In the narrative of the Gospel of Mark, these miracles are 
essential to authenticate the message of Jesus. 
VI. At the time of Jesus, many false prophets had appeared who were seeking 
to drive out the Romans. It was a time of much social unrest. The people of 
Judaea resented Roman taxation and the fact that the Romans sent garrisons 
to Jerusalem at Passover. The Jews felt a sense of national degradation at 
the hands of the Romans. 
VII.  Jesus, an unknown man who lacked academic credentials as a Pharisee, 
appeared and was able to cure people. 
A. The Pharisees began to keep an eye on Jesus; he was perceived to be a 
dangerous troublemaker who claimed to be a prophet. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
29 
B. Jesus did not try to conciliate the Pharisees and, in fact, went out of his 
way to antagonize them. 
1. The disciples of Jesus did not perform the ritual ablutions 
prescribed by the Pharisees before eating. 
2. Jesus told the Pharisees that what defiles a person is not what goes 
into them but what comes out of them, specifically, lies and 
hypocrisy. He told the Pharisees that they were rotten inside. 
C. The message of Jesus was easy to misinterpret, which the Pharisees 
did. 
1. They thought that Jesus was preaching social revolution, that 
riches should be taken from wealthy people and given to the poor. 
2. When Jesus stated, “The critical moment is at hand,” the Pharisees 
interpreted it to mean a crisis, that is, a moment that would never 
come again. They thought that he was saying that now was the 
time to strike. 
3. “The Kingdom of God is at hand” could be interpreted to mean 
that the Romans should be overthrown and the kingdom of Israel 
reestablished. 
4. “Repent” could be interpreted to mean that everything should be 
changed and the existing order should be overthrown. 
5. “Believe in the Gospel” might mean that Jesus was teaching a new 
gospel in conflict with the “good news” of Roman propaganda, 
that is, that the emperor was the savior of mankind. Jesus’s Gospel 
meant the overthrow of Rome. 
D. Jesus was labeled a revolutionary and an enemy of Rome.  
E. Although Jesus knew that his position was dangerous, he traveled to 
Jerusalem, the center of Judaism, during Passover, the most sacred time 
of the Jewish year, when all Jews celebrate the end of their bondage in 
Egypt and when all Jews—even the most pro-Roman among them—
hoped that Rome might be driven out and Israel restored to greatness. 
F. Although the Romans generally showed respect for Jewish 
sensibilities, they sent a garrison to Jerusalem at Passover to prevent an 
uprising. Pontius Pilate, the governor of Judaea, was nervous about the 
emperor Tiberius, who was suspicious, paranoid, and obsessed with 
treason. Tiberius did not allow his governors to tolerate traitors. 
G. After arriving at the Temple, Jesus drove out the moneychangers. 
H. Jesus had become dangerous and had to be destroyed but could not be 
arrested. 
1. The Sanhedrin, a council of 71 Jewish elders who governed 
Judaea, decided to remove Jesus from the support of his followers.  
2. To test Jesus, a Pharisee asked him whether he believed that the 
people should pay taxes. Jesus asked the Pharisee to show him one 
of his coins. The coin of the Pharisee had an image of Caesar. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
30 
Jesus said, “Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar’s and 
unto God the things that are God’s.” 
I. 
The Sanhedrin had absolute control over the internal affairs of Judaea. 
Jesus was arrested and tried before the court of the Sanhedrin. 
Caiaphas, the high priest, asked Jesus whether he was the Messiah. 
Jesus answered, “Yes, and you will see the son of God coming, seated 
at the right hand of God, the father.” The Sanhedrin wished to sentence 
Jesus to death, but only the governor was allowed to impose a death 
sentence. 
J. Pontius Pilate recognized that the Jews had turned Jesus over to him 
out of envy. Because a person was considered guilty until proven 
innocent under Roman law, Jesus had to at least say that he was not 
guilty of the crimes, but he did not do so. Blasphemy, however, was 
not a crime under Roman law. The Sanhedrin alleged that Jesus had 
called himself king of the Jews, which was indeed a crime, because 
there could be only one king of the Roman Empire and that king was 
Tiberius. Jesus refused to deny that he was king of the Jews. 
K. A member of the Sanhedrin said that if Jesus was not found guilty, they 
would refer the case to Caesar, against Pilate’s wishes. Pilate still 
wanted to let Jesus go and gave the people a chance to choose which 
prisoner would be pardoned. Because Jesus had called the people to 
individual redemption rather than giving a fiery call to overthrow the 
Romans, they were no longer interested in his message. The crowd 
requested that Barabbas be pardoned, and Jesus was led to his 
execution. 
L. In the Gospel of Mark, none of the disciples was present at the 
crucifixion of Jesus. A Roman officer in charge of the crucifixion 
stated that he had never seen a man die with such courage. The Roman 
officer was the first person to say, “Truly, this man is the son of God.” 
M. With that statement, the message of the prophet began to reach out to 
the Gentile world. 
N. Only those who study Roman history in detail know anything about 
Tiberius, but Jesus Christ transformed the lives of millions in worlds 
the ancient Romans never knew existed. The words of the prophet 
Jesus echo down the corridors of time. 
 
Essential Reading: 
Gospel of Mark. 
 
Supplementary Reading: 
Schweitzer, The Quest for the Historical Jesus. 
Wright and Fuller, Book of the Acts of God, pp. 215–285. 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
31 
Questions to Consider: 
1. How do you interpret the admonition of Jesus “to render unto Caesar, the 
things that are Caesar’s and unto the Lord the things that are the Lord’s”? 
2. How could the message of Jesus, as we find it in Mark, be interpreted as a 
call for social revolution? 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
32 
Lecture Seven 
 
Koran 
 
Scope: The sacred book of the Koran holds for Muslims the same place that 
the words of Jesus do for Christians. The words of the book itself are 
the revelation of God to humankind. Muhammad is the prophet chosen 
by God to make this revelation known to the world. From a firsthand 
point of view, different from Exodus and the Gospels, the Koran 
provides us with insight into the mind of a prophet who made history 
and changed millions of lives. The message of the Koran is an 
uncompromising one of absolute monotheism, focused on the ideal of 
God as truth, mercy, and power; demanding complete submission and 
ethical conduct; and rewarding the faithful and punishing those who 
reject his revelation. 
 
Outline 
I. 
This lecture explores two questions: Who was Muhammad, the prophet of 
the one and only God? What is the Koran, this revelation from God that 
transformed history? 
II. Muhammad was born in Arabia in 570 A.D. to a respected family.  
A.  For his first 40 years, he lived a quiet life. He had been left an orphan, 
was raised by an uncle, married a wealthy widow, and took part in the 
caravan trade. 
B. Muhammad listened and learned about Christianity and Judaism while 
sitting around campfires in distant parts of Arabia. 
C. At the age of 40, he stepped forward to proclaim that God had chosen 
him as the messenger of a belief that there was only one God, a God 
who demanded ethical righteousness. This was a God of individual 
salvation who demanded that each person make a decision to follow 
the truth of God or the lie of Satan. Those who chose to follow the 
truth of God would find themselves in paradise, but those who 
followed the lie of Satan would burn in eternal fire. 
III. The spread of Islam was not just a spiritual event but a historical, political, 
and military event that changed the history of the world. 
IV. Arabia in 570 A.D. was caught between the two great powers of its day. 
A. Persia had been revitalized under a monotheistic religion that 
proclaimed that God was one. Ahura Mazda was the god of truth, in 
constant war against the lie. This religion required an ethical 
commitment, and it was a religion of individual salvation. Its prophet 
was Zarathustra. Adherents believed that a person who followed truth, 
believed in Ahura Mazda, and lived a life of righteousness would never 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
33 
perish but would enjoy eternal life in paradise. Those who chose the 
lie, however, would fall into the fiery pit. 
B. The other power was the Roman Empire, the empire of Christianity, 
which believed in one God who assumed three persons: the Father, the 
Son, and the Holy Ghost. This religion of ethical righteousness 
demanded that believers accept God through Christ. The religion 
promised salvation and paradise to those who believed and lived a life 
of righteousness and eternal damnation to those who refused to believe. 
C. Rome and Persia were declining and focused on warfare against each 
other. 
V. Arabia itself, never occupied by Romans but within Rome’s sphere of 
influence, was divided into a number of tribes, some of which were 
centered on oases and others, wanderers in the desert. Arabia of the 6th 
century was a society in change and turmoil. 
A. Its economy had grown rapidly. 
B. Political, social, and religious ideas came from as far away as China 
and Britain through the caravan trade. 
C. Arabia had a distinctive culture. 
D. The literature of Arabia included poetry written in beautiful Arabic. 
Some poetry glorified valor in war, and some was love poetry. Arabia 
also had a literature of prophesy, consisting of oracular comments that 
were short, pithy, and ambiguous.  
E. The religion of Arabia was based on animistic ideas. In Mecca, it was 
believed that the Great Black Stone had fallen from heaven and that it 
embodied the power of the gods. People believed in demons that could 
take possession of them. Various forms of Christianity and Judaism 
also existed in Mecca, with Christians divided into opposing sects. 
VI. Muhammad learned about the prophets of Judaism and about Jesus.  
A. Jesus, he believed, was a prophet who had been put to death unjustly; 
because Jesus was divine, he had never really died but was taken into 
heaven and had been a messenger from God. 
B. Muhammad respected Christianity as it should be in its purified form, 
with Christ bringing the message of the one God to the whole world. 
C. Muhammad respected Judaism for its message of only one God. 
D. Muhammad believed that both these religions had been led astray. He 
believed that God was much simpler than the current practitioners of 
Judaism and Christianity would allow. 
VII.  At the age of 40, Muhammad experienced his first revelation from God. 
A. Muhammad believed that the archangel Gabriel had appeared to him 
and said that Muhammad was to be a messenger from God and that 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
34 
God would proclaim his oneness and his demand for righteousness 
through Muhammad. 
B. Muhammad explained to Gabriel that he was an illiterate caravan 
driver and asked why anyone would listen to him. 
C. Gabriel answered that God had chosen Muhammad. Thus began the 
revelation of the Koran.  
D. The role of the Koran is not like the role of the New Testament. It 
resembles Jesus in that the Koran itself is the revelation of God. Its 
words are absolutely sacred. 
VIII. After three years of silence, God spoke again to Muhammad and would do 
so again and again over the years. 
A. The simple message that Muhammad had received and was to proclaim 
was the following: God is the only god, and Muhammad is his prophet. 
God is great, powerful, all-compassionate, all-knowing, and all-seeing. 
He has created the universe and demands righteous behavior from 
everyone and calls upon everyone to accept this message. 
B. Muhammad first revealed his message to family members, including 
his wife, who believed him and believed that God was speaking to him. 
C. Muhammad spoke to larger groups in Mecca. 
D. He met with resistance because he threatened vested interests. 
1. Some of Mecca’s wealth came from those who were making 
pilgrimages to the Black Stone. 
2. The teachings of Muhammad threatened established ideas, 
including the tribal idea, which indicated that a person’s first 
loyalty is to the tribe. Muhammad said that a person’s first loyalty 
was to God. 
3. People also questioned what gave Muhammad the right to 
proclaim a new god. 
E. Muhammad found the mission that God had imposed on him so 
difficult and trying that, in 622, he fled from Mecca to Medina, which 
welcomed him as an arbiter in its own internal struggles. 
1. Muhammad came to realize that God demanded that he spread this 
faith even if he was opposed by military might. He began to weld 
the people of Medina into an army motivated by the belief that 
God had chosen them to spread his word. 
2. By 630, Muhammad had conquered Mecca partly by negotiations, 
and his message and political power began to spread throughout 
much of Arabia. 
F. By the time of Muhammad’s death in 632, he had created a political 
structure and military force that carried the banner of Islam and 
worship of one God. The religion ultimately spread through Spain into 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
35 
the Pyrenees to France, to Egypt, Syria, Jerusalem, and into Asia Minor 
and Persia.  
1. These conquests were not made by force alone; many converted to 
Islam not from terror but because they believed that the message of 
Muhammad was the truth.  
2. Muhammad became a military and political leader, a successful 
prophet in his own day. 
IX. The basic message of Muhammad and the Koran is a simple statement: 
“There is no god but God and Muhammad is his prophet.” 
A. The language in the Koran is believed to be so pure that it cannot be 
translated. The Arabic language in it is considered to be the word of 
God. All that a person needs to know is contained in the Koran.  
B. The Koran is divided into chapters, but its organization is difficult for 
the Western mind to understand. The order is not chronological. 
Muhammad received these revelations, dictated them, and they were 
thrown into a large chest. When they were arranged, the arrangement 
was in backward order chronologically. 
X. The Koran contains answers to every issue raised by the great themes 
discussed in this course. 
A. There is only one God. Muhammad believed that Christians tried to 
modify the simple message of Jesus to create three gods. To 
Muhammad, Christians were polytheists.  
B. The world is divided into good and evil. Muhammad taught that 
absolute good and absolute evil exist and that absolute good is at war 
with absolute evil.  
1. The duty of those who submit to God is to spread that message, by 
the sword if necessary.  
2. If the infidels accept the message in peace or leave believers in 
peace, they can be tolerated; however, if they take up arms against 
believers, the believers must wage war. 
3. Those who die fighting for the faith of Muhammad will go to 
paradise. To fight for faith and, if necessary, die for it is one of the 
highest callings. 
C. Islam believes that God has decreed everything from the beginning of 
time. Nothing happens that does not come from God. God will not 
overburden any soul, because he gives the true believer courage to deal 
with whatever he sends. The meaning of life is found in total 
submission to the will of God. Islam means “total submission.” 
D. The duty of every Muslim is to spread the faith and to be a good 
person. In the Koran, Muhammad indicates that there are five righteous 
actions that every Muslim must take. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
36 
1. The first of these actions is to say with absolute meaning, “I 
believe that there is no god but God and Muhammad is his 
prophet.” 
2. The next step is to give alms. Muhammad praises those who help 
the poor. 
3. A Muslim must pray five times a day—in the morning, at noon, in 
the middle of the afternoon, when the sun begins to set, and in the 
dark of night. 
4. A Muslim must fast during Ramadan, the holy month when God 
first made himself known to Muhammad. Muslims fast from 
sunrise to sunset to show their submission to God. 
5. Muslims should make a pilgrimage to Mecca if possible. The 
Black Stone is proof that God existed from the beginning of time.  
E. Muhammad believed that Abraham, Noah, Isaiah, and Jesus were 
Muslims because all submitted themselves to the will of God and 
preached the existence of one God. 
F. Islam answers the question: What is nature? Nature is the handiwork of 
God. God has created all that exists.  
G. Moses brought the message that man should not make graven images, 
because God is all-powerful and all-knowing and cannot be confined 
by the images of mankind. The Koran is the only sacred image that 
mankind needs. It is the image and the revelation of God. 
XI. Each one of the prophets studied in this course spoke forth and told the 
truth. A prophet is one who speaks forth. 
A. Jesus, Muhammad, Moses, and Socrates were at first unwilling 
prophets. 
B. All four prophets had a simple message. 
1. Muhammad stated that there was no god but God. 
2. Jesus said, “The time is at hand; repent; believe in the Kingdom of 
God.” 
3.  Socrates said that people should believe that they have a 
conscience, believe that there is absolute truth, and believe that the 
soul is immortal. 
4. Moses believed that God had said to him, “I am the Lord thy God, 
who led thee out of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. You will 
have no other gods before me.” 
C. All four prophets demanded righteous behavior. 
1. Socrates spent his entire life trying to make people understand 
what good is. 
2. Muhammad demanded that people lead righteous lives. 
3. Moses brought the Ten Commandments. 
4. The message of Jesus reduced the Commandments to two: Love 
God and love your neighbor. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
37 
D. All four of these prophets were deemed dangerous in their time, 
because they attacked the established order.  
1. In fact, two of them—Jesus and Socrates—were executed because 
of their uncompromising stand for the truth. 
2. According to Machiavelli, Moses and Muhammad triumphed 
because they each had an army behind them. 
E. The message of each of these prophets changed the world by being 
institutionalized. 
1. The message of Muhammad became the religion of Islam. 
2. Jesus turned the religion of the Jews into one that the Gentiles 
could understand. 
3. Plato transformed the message of Socrates to follow the truth into 
a philosophy. 
F. All four prophets presented the same powerful message: Be true to 
yourself and search for your soul.  
 
Essential Reading: 
Koran. 
 
Supplementary Reading: 
Carrithers et al., Founders of Faiths. 
Esposito, Oxford History of Islam. 
Watt, Companion to the Qur’an. 
 
Questions to Consider: 
1. Compare Muhammad and Moses as prophets, commanders, and lawgivers. 
2. We have said that Muhammad does not permit a separation of church and 
state. What issues do you think this raises for democracy in Islamic 
countries? 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
38 
Lecture Eight 
 
Gilgamesh 
 
Scope: According to the Koran, “everything that happens to us is destined by 
God.” The question of fate or destiny is at the core of the earliest 
literary work to come down to us, the Sumerian epic of Gilgamesh, 
composed in the 3rd millennium B.C. in what is now Iraq. Like the 
heroes of the Iliad, Gilgamesh is faced with the inevitable fate of all 
humans, death. He goes in search of eternal life and learns that he must 
die, but what matters is how he lives, what he achieves during his life, 
and the reputation that he leaves behind him. The story of Gilgamesh 
became a formative element in the early literature of the Middle East, 
leaving its echoes in the Old Testament story of the flood and, 
centuries later, shaping the image of Alexander the Great. Of all the 
literature that has come down from the early civilizations of Egypt and 
the Middle East, the epic of Gilgamesh speaks most directly to us 
today. 
 
Outline 
I. 
The previous lecture explored the world of the Koran and saw the figure of 
Muhammad as a great prophet, whose revelation of the Koran, given by 
God, truly transformed history. 
A. The central theme of the Koran is God—who God is and what he 
demands of us. 
B. The Koran is written in noble language. Muslims believe that the 
Arabic of the Koran represents the perfection of language. Only one 
authorized translation of the Koran exists; it was created under the 
Ottoman Empire. 
C. The Koran is universal: it is studied and recited throughout the world 
of Islam. It is able to speak across many nations and cultures.  
II. Westerners are concerned because the Koran provides an entire social and 
legal framework for Muslim society; however, Western society is the oddity 
because it separates the world of the divine and sacred from the world of 
the secular.  
A. Most of the great books show a belief that the divine is truly of the 
world of humans. 
B. The great civilizations of the past—including those of India, China, 
Greece, Rome, Mesopotamia, and Egypt—believed that there was no 
dichotomy between the sacred and the secular. In those cultures, there 
could be no separation between church and state. 
III. Gilgamesh is an epic poem that also reflects no separation between the 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
39 
sacred and the secular. 
A. Gilgamesh deals with the second of the themes for this course, the 
question of fate, a question that has consumed the minds of thoughtful 
individuals ever since the first days of civilization. 
B. The prophet Muhammad indicates that everything that befalls people 
has been destined by God. This message is also central to the 
Meditations of Marcus Aurelius. 
IV. Civilization was born in Egypt and in Mesopotamia. Around 3000 B.C., 
both areas experienced an astonishing burst of anonymous creativity.  
A. These early civilizations were characterized by systems of writing, 
complex government structures, and monumental architecture. Both the 
Tower of Babel and the pyramids represented monuments to the belief 
that no separation existed between the sacred and the secular. 
B. Mesopotamia, the land of two rivers, is today’s Iraq. Civilization there 
blossomed in the form of independent cities, including Uruk and Ur.  
C. A complex governmental structure evolved to regulate the irrigation of 
the land through the two rivers. Irrigation released the population of 
Mesopotamia (as well as that of the Nile Valley) from the vagaries of 
the weather. The large cities were able to feed themselves. 
D. This growth and harnessing of technology in the 3rd century B.C. came 
about through absolute government control.  
1. The people of the Nile Valley accepted the belief that the pharaoh 
was god on earth and built pyramids to celebrate his eternity, the 
idea that the pharaoh would live forever.  
2. The Mesopotamian city-states along the Tigris and Euphrates 
rivers were also based on the absolute power of the kingship. The 
king ruled because God had chosen him and placed him on the 
throne. Even the names of the rulers reflected this status. 
V. The epic of Gilgamesh is the first known epic poem. Its theme is fate, and it 
asks the following questions.  
A. What is our fate? 
B. Why do we die? 
C. Why can’t we live forever? 
VI. The epic of Gilgamesh has had several forms. 
A. Civilization in Mesopotamia came into being with the Sumerians. 
1. The language of the Sumerian civilization was not related to the 
Semitic tongues. 
2. Early in the Sumerian culture, the people related tales of the figure 
of Gilgamesh, the man of joy and the man of woe. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
40 
3. Gilgamesh was a real historical figure, who lived around 2600 B.C. 
and had been king of Uruk. This powerful king was credited with 
building the walls that surrounded the city of Uruk. These walls 
were a symbol of his ability to organize labor and a symbol of the 
constant warfare in the towns of Mesopotamia. 
B. Around 2100 B.C., a longer poem about Gilgamesh was written.  
1. Almost from the beginning, this epic of Gilgamesh was written 
down; it was not part of oral composition. 
2. The poem was written in the language of Babylonia, Akkadian, 
which was a Semitic language. 
C. Around the end of the 2nd millennium B.C., a final, elaborate version of 
the epic of Gilgamesh appears. 
1. The name associated with this poem is Shin-eqi-unninni, who is 
the first known great poet.  
2. This poem was extensively copied, and examples of it were found 
in clay tablets of Ashurbanipal, the king of Assyria. 
3. The Assyrians had come to rule Mesopotamia and pushed their 
rule to the Mediterranean Sea. They dominated Egypt for a time. 
4. These stories about Gilgamesh attracted the interest of an educated 
audience. Oral tales of Gilgamesh also continued. 
VII.  The epic of Gilgamesh—a real historical figure who became the subject of 
mighty legends—is the story of how Gilgamesh looked into the abyss; in 
other words, how he came to realize that each person must die and that no 
one can escape that fate. It is the story of the quest of Gilgamesh for eternal 
life. 
A. The story begins in the city of Uruk, where Gilgamesh is ruler. He 
flaunts his power and is mighty and vigorous, celebrating his 
achievements. 
B. The world of Gilgamesh is a polytheistic one; the gods were human 
and accessible, like the gods of Homer. These gods intervened directly 
in the world of humans through oracles and dreams. Dreams were a 
way that the gods told humans what they were to do. The gods chose 
who would rule, set up codes of law, and made certain that there was 
no separation between the world of the divine and the world of 
humans. 
C. Gilgamesh was two-thirds divine; his mother was a goddess, and his 
father was part divine, as well. 
D. Gilgamesh abuses his power. The people believe that the behavior of 
Gilgamesh is out of control, and they appeal to the divinities for 
assistance. 
E. The gods create Enkidu, a wild and uncivilized man who knows 
nothing of civilization and lives in the world of nature. Enkidu is 
finally civilized by a temple prostitute. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
41 
F. After a trial of strength, Enkidu and Gilgamesh become friends and set 
off on a series of adventures to make names for themselves so that 
people will remember Gilgamesh forever. 
G. Together, Enkidu and Gilgamesh conquer and kill the fierce monster 
Khumbaba. 
H. Gilgamesh rejects the love of the goddess Ishtar. Enkidu and 
Gilgamesh conquer a ferocious bull, a symbol of chaos, which had 
been sent to avenge this insult to the goddess.  
I. 
Enkidu then sickens and dies. Gilgamesh becomes distraught and 
overwhelmed by his understanding that he, too, must die at some point. 
J. Gilgamesh sets out to discover how he can conquer death. He discovers 
that one man, Ut-Napishtim, is immortal and decides to ask him the 
secret of immortality. 
1.  To find Ut-Napishtim, Gilgamesh travels through the dark 
mountains, past the scorpion monster, and finally, crosses the sea 
of death. 
2. Ut-Napishtim explains that the gods had decided to destroy the 
human race and had instructed him to build an ark with two of 
every creature. These creatures and the family of Ut-Napishtim 
were the only beings who survived a mighty flood. The gods had 
granted Ut-Napishtim eternal life as a reward for his suffering. 
3. Ut-Napishtim tells Gilgamesh that he can become immortal if he is 
able to avoid sleeping. Gilgamesh immediately falls asleep. After 
he awakens, Ut-Napishtim tells him that he can live forever if he 
can bring the plant of immortality up from the bottom of the sea. 
Gilgamesh finds the plant, but a snake eats it. Gilgamesh then 
realizes that he will die. 
K. Gilgamesh returns to Uruk and surveys the walls around the city. He 
says, “What I have done is good.” He then lives the rest of his life 
knowing that he will die and that all that matters is his reputation and 
the achievements that he leaves behind. 
 
Essential Reading: 
Gilgamesh. 
 
Supplementary Reading: 
Jacobsen and Frankfort, The Intellectual Adventures of Ancient Man.  
Hallo and Simpson, History of the Ancient Near East. 
Kramer, History Begins at Sumer. 
 
Questions to Consider: 
1. Are you engaged or put off by the fairy-tale quality of Gilgamesh? 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
42 
2. What significance do you see in the parallels between Gilgamesh and the 
Old Testament?  
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
43 
Lecture Nine 
 
Beowulf 
 
Scope: Gilgamesh proclaims a heroic ideal: We are fated to die, but in the 
meantime, let us strive to be as great as possible. This same message is 
the theme of the first great work of English literature, the 8th-century 
Anglo-Saxon epic Beowulf. The story of Beowulf, like that of 
Gilgamesh, is the tale of a mighty warrior who goes in search of 
adventure and fame. In the guise of monsters, Beowulf encounters the 
eternal struggle of good against evil. All humans must die. That is fate. 
But Beowulf accepts this challenge, and in war and sacrifice, he finds 
the reward of enduring fame and glory. Beowulf takes his place 
alongside Achilles and Gilgamesh as the paradigm of the epic hero. 
 
Outline 
I. 
In this course, Gilgamesh is the first work dealing with the theme of fate 
and how people deal with the fact that each person must die.  
A. Gilgamesh deals with the search for eternal life and gives a message 
that each person must live as best he or she can and leave behind a 
reputation for greatness. 
B. Gilgamesh has the three previously mentioned characteristics of a great 
work: it has a great theme, it is written in noble language, and it speaks 
across the ages. 
C. A fourth characteristic shared by many of the great works in this course 
is that they are works that summarize the values of a civilization at its 
apex. Gilgamesh summarizes the civilization of Mesopotamia, its 
values, and its belief in a divine world that interacts with the world of 
humans. 
II. Beowulf, the first great work of English literature, is one of the greatest 
epics ever composed. This heroic epic summarizes the heroic values of the 
Anglo-Saxon world. Beowulf tells of an age in which the chief values were 
bravery in war, courage, and honorthe reputation for bravery and courage. 
III. The Beowulf story was created by a warrior society.  
A. Seagoing pirates from what is now northern Germany, Denmark, and 
Sweden attacked Roman Britain as early as the 3rd century A.D. 
B. By the end of the 5th century, these raids were no longer plundering 
attacks but actual conquests. 
C. By the 7th century, the leading tribes—the Angles, the Saxons, and the 
Jutes—had conquered Roman Britain and driven the inhabitants to the 
west, where they became the Welsh.  

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
44 
1. Roman Britannia became England, or “the land of the Angles.” 
2. The conquerors brought their Germanic language, Anglo-Saxon, 
which eventually developed into the English language. 
3. England was divided into warring kingdoms, including North 
Umbria and Mercia, but these kingdoms gradually adopted 
Christianity. By the 8th century, the fierce war code of the Anglo-
Saxons had been somewhat softened by Christianity.  
IV. Beowulf brings readers back to the values of the pagan world, tempered 
only slightly by references to God. 
A. The kings of the Anglo-Saxons were chosen mostly for their abilities in 
war. The king was the first among equals.  
B. The Anglo-Saxons believed that dying with a sword in hand was the 
best way to die. Such an end would transport an individual to heaven. 
C. For entertainment, the king would gather with his wife and retainers to 
listen to a minstrel. The songs of these minstrels used elaborate poetic 
language, which was filled with alliteration and metaphors. These 
songs celebrated the old days and the lineage and exploits of the king 
and mighty warriors. 
V. Beowulf was one of these epic poems. It has come down to us possibly 
because it was the best. 
A. Composed around 800, Beowulf rests on historical fact.  
B. A Latin chronicle indicates that Beowulf participated in a raid on the 
coast of northern Germany in 521. Beowulf was a warrior at the court 
of Higelac, who had led a raid into the land of the Frisians. He was 
returning with his plunder when he was attacked by Franks. Higelac 
was killed in battle, and Beowulf swam to safety carrying his standard. 
C. The poem begins and ends with the deaths and funerals of mighty 
warriors.  
1. The funeral of King Scyld Scefing opens the poem. A ship burial 
discovered in 1939 at Sutton Hoo in England provides additional 
evidence of the veracity of aspects of Beowulf. 
2. The kingship of Scyld Scefing passes down to Hrothgar, able and 
brave, who ruled over the Danes from his great hall Heorot. 
3. Digressions from the main tale deal with themes of danger, death 
and trouble. The poet believes that, while God plays some role in 
these matters, real control over trouble rests with the individual 
and the manner in which he or she deals with it. Pride leads to 
trouble, and Hrothgar is proud. 
4. Like the world of Gilgamesh and the world of the Odyssey, the 
world of Beowulf is filled with monsters. These beings, half-
human and half-beast, have enormous powers and are evil. The 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
45 
world of Beowulf is filled with evil, which is a tangible force that 
comes from nowhere and brings destruction. 
5. Hrothgar’s kingdom is invaded by Grendel, an evil monster who 
eats 30 men each night in Heorot.  
6. In a digression, the poet explains that Grendel, like all monsters, is 
a descendent of Cain, who slew Abel. 
7. Hrothgar grows older and weaker, and a melancholy darkness 
settles over the land. 
8. In a hand-to-hand struggle, Beowulf a young and notable warrior 
of the tribe of the Geats, overcomes and mortally wounds Grendel. 
9. Grendel’s mother then wreaks havoc in Heorot, and Beowulf 
pursues her to the dark lake where she resides and kills her. 
10. Beowulf, who has achieved fame and fortune, returns to the land 
of the Geats and becomes king. He rules in peace and prosperity 
for many years. 
11. When Beowulf is an old man, a dragon terrorizes the kingdom of 
the Geats. This dragon—another symbol of evil—has been 
aroused by the plundering of a treasure trove that it guards. 
12. Beowulf, with a single faithful retainer, Wiglaf, confronts and 
slays the dragon, but in doing so is mortally wounded. 
13. He knows that he will die, but that his fame will live on. 
14. The poem ends with the funeral of Beowulf, the celebration of his 
greatness, and the threat of disaster for his people now that the 
mighty warrior is dead. 
D. While Beowulf lived, he faced evil every time it appeared; he stood up 
for what was good and true and gave his life in defense of it. These 
were values of the heroic age embodied in Beowulf. 
E. Sweno’s stone, dating from around 750, in Scotland, commemorates a 
mighty warrior who was similar to Beowulf. These were real men in a 
real world, where honor, courage, and glory mattered. 
 
Essential Reading: 
Beowulf. 
 
Supplementary Reading: 
Chadwick, The Heroic Age. 
Salway and Blair, Roman and Anglo-Saxon Britain. 
 
Questions to Consider: 
1. Compare the “heroic” view of life as we find it in Gilgamesh, The Iliad, and 
Beowulf. 
2. What similarities in themes and treatment do you see between Beowulf and 
Lord of the Rings? Do you consider Lord of the Rings a great book? 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
46 
 
Lecture Ten 
 
Book of Job 
 
Scope: The divine plays little role in Gilgamesh and Beowulf. The heroes must 
work out their own destiny in a world in which humans are alone. But 
another great tradition makes the question of fate central to the 
question of the nature of God. If God is good, why does evil exists? 
Why do bad things happen to good people? The Book of Job is the 
most enduring attempt to answer that question. The author of Job took 
a widespread Middle Eastern folklore motif and transformed it into a 
dramatic and touching story of human suffering. In the hands of this 
unknown literary genius, that story became the means for a profound 
disquisition on the ultimate mystery of God and the frailty of any 
human attempt to understand the divine.  
 
Outline 
I. 
Beowulf, as we have seen, was an exploration of fate. In the world of 
Beowulf and in the epic of Gilgamesh, poets asked why people must die and 
whether there is a way to avoid death. After accepting that all people must 
die, the poets explore how people should live. The heroic image of Beowulf 
lives and dies, leaving behind the greatest of reputations. 
II. The Book of Job raises questions of fate, as well as questions of good and 
evil. 
A. It is one of the most beautiful works ever composed. 
B. It is also a profound exploration of why bad things happen to good 
people. It explores the questions of absolute good and absolute evil. In 
addition, it asks what we deserve if we live our lives as well as we can 
and evil still happens to us. 
III. The Book of Job is classified as wisdom literature.  
A. Wisdom literature had its roots in the ancient Near East.  
B. Wisdom literature includes such works as Ecclesiastes and Proverbs, as 
well as Egyptian works that give practical wisdom. 
C. The Book of Job goes beyond everything in ancient Near Eastern 
literature but Gilgamesh in its exploration of good and evil. 
IV. Job is the story of a righteous man.  
A. Job is a wealthy man with 10 children. He is respected in his 
community. He does good works and has avoided evil his entire life. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
47 
B. The God in the Book of Job is puzzling and almost non-Hebraic. God 
is in heaven meeting with the sons of heaven. Satan, the personification 
of evil, who does not appear often in the Old Testament, is found here 
as a clever manipulator. God boasts about what a good man Job is. 
C. Satan manipulates God to test Job by sending him terrible evils. First, 
his flocks are destroyed and his children are killed. Job’s response is to 
bless God and say, “The Lord giveth and the Lord taketh away.” 
D. God next turns Job over to the devil to further test him. Job suffers 
horrible bodily afflictions. Even his wife turns on him and suggests that 
he “curse God and die.” 
E. Four friends come to comfort him.  
1. These four friends are not Hebrew, which gives the story an air of 
universality.  
2. An element of Schadenfreude—enjoyment of the troubles of 
others—can be seen in their attempts to comfort him. These 
friends make themselves feel good by seeing how miserable Job is.  
3. The friends indicate that Job must have done something to deserve 
these problems, because God would not punish a righteous person. 
They state that Job must be guilty and should accept what he is 
given by God. 
F. Job laments his fate in moving, magnificent verse. Job begins to 
transform. He speaks to God directly and asks God to explain why he 
is suffering. Job knows that he is not guilty and demands an 
explanation. 
G. Finally, God appears to Job out of a whirlwind. 
1. God does not offer an explanation to Job or justify his actions.  
2. Instead, God proclaims his own power as the only explanation 
needed. God asks, “Where were you when I created the 
foundations of the world?” He tells Job that it is not for him to 
question God, because God is all-powerful. 
3. Job bows his head before God. 
4. God then saves Job. He reproves the friends of Job and tells Job 
that he will give him more than he ever had if Job offers sacrifices 
so that God will forgive his friends. 
H. Job lived a long life and had more children and even greater wealth. 
V. The remarkable story of Job raises the question of evil in our own day. Job 
showed willingness to give a speech of conscience and demand that God 
answer him. Contemporary people are unwilling to consider evil an 
absolute reality. 
A. The 20th century has all but removed Satan from serious discussion. 
Hitler and Stalin were 20th-century embodiments of absolute evil. 
Hitler was able to convince the people of Germany of the righteousness 
of his cause. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
48 
1. The Book of Job raises the question of why the concentration 
camps of Hitler and the labor camps of Stalin existed. Their 
victims committed no crimes. 
2. Good people throughout the world should have denounced these 
evils. Yet, people in Germany and the Soviet Union believed that 
their governments would not take actions that were unjustified.  
3. In the 20th century, an entire nation, Germany, was organized to 
carry out this killing. The people involved believed that they were 
carrying out their duty. Evil is more than just an abstraction; it is 
something that dwells in each individual. It existed in the evil of 
Hitler and the evil of justifying and acquiescing to it. 
B. Job represents the individual caught up in evil through no fault of his 
own. Dietrich Bonhoeffer found the Book of Job to be a powerful 
statement. With the whole weight of the system coming down on a 
person, the only resistance and contradiction to evil comes from a 
person of conscience. 
1. The Book of Job is also about the idea of conscience. The Old 
Testament is a statement of the development and evolution of the 
idea that everyone has a conscience. 
2. A glimmering of the concept of conscience appears in ancient 
Egypt during the age of the pyramids, around 2500 B.C. The 
Egyptians believed that after death, a person is brought before the 
gods of the underworld to answer specific questions. These 
answers were put on one side of a scale; on the other side was a 
feather, a symbol of truth. Only a person who spoke the truth 
would merit eternal life. Punishment existed for liars and for those 
who had carried out evil actions. Thus began the idea of 
conscience and the idea that consequences for the actions of an 
individual can extend through eternity. 
VI. In the Hebrew Bible, during the days of David and Solomon, an age of 
prosperity and grandeur, prophets arose. 
A. A prophet is someone who speaks the truth. Such prophets as Isaiah 
and Jeremiah said that all prosperity was meaningless without justice 
for all. They called on the people of Israel to put aside their search for 
political power and prosperity and look into their own hearts. 
B. The prophets said that there can be no separation between private and 
public morality. A ruler’s private life will have strong consequences for 
the public life of the nation. 
1. A private indiscretion—such as David’s taking another man’s 
wife, then arranging the man’s death—brought civil war and the 
rebellion of Absalom to the people of Israel. 
2. The theme of separation between public and private morality is 
still with us today. Like the concept of evil, this notion has been 
marginalized.  

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
49 
VII.  Job teaches several lessons. 
A. Evil is a reality. In the face of evil—whether confronting oneself or 
someone else—we must not justify the evil but stand up to it and 
demand an accounting. 
B. A set of universal values exists. The comforters of Job come from a 
variety of far-off regions to show that these values are in demand 
everywhere. Indeed, these values are touchstones of absolute goodness, 
because if absolute evil exists, absolute good must also exist. These 
values include the following: 
1. Justice: Job demands justice. He believes that the Golden Rule is 
important. 
2. Courage: As in the Iliad and Gilgamesh, courage is a fundamental 
human value in the Book of Job. Courage is the willingness to 
stand up and say what is just and true. 
3. Moderation: Despite all his suffering, Job remains moderate. 
Moderation consists of knowing when justice has been 
transformed into simple legality and when courage has been 
replaced by brutality. 
4. Wisdom: Wisdom is the knowledge to recognize what justice, 
courage, and moderation are. The Book of Job does not seek to 
impart erudite learning but instead gives wisdom to apply these 
values to daily life. Wisdom is not necessarily a happy concept. In 
the Oresteia, as in the Book of Job, wisdom comes only through 
suffering.  
5. These values do not necessarily make a happy world, but they help 
make a world in which we stand forth and make a statement. 
VIII. How do we read the Bible? 
A. Translations always put someone between the reader and the author. 
B. The King James Version of the Bible represents an eloquent translation 
of the magnificent language and poetry of Job and the Psalms. 
1. The King James Version of the Bible is one of two great 
achievements that came from a committee (the other being the 
U.S. Constitution).  
2. King James wanted the translation to be as free of doctrinal 
statements as possible. 
3. The committee that created the translation knew Greek and 
Hebrew and was working during the age of Shakespeare, an era 
when the English language had reached perfection in flexibility 
and eloquence. 
4. The modern obsession with improvements has resulted in new and 
modern—but inferior—translations. These translations are inferior 
in their accuracy, as well as their beauty. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
50 
5. The King James Version of the Bible is written in language that 
ennobles the soul. 
 
Essential Reading: 
Book of Job. 
 
Supplementary Reading: 
Kallen, Book of Job as Greek Tragedy. 
Wright and Fuller, The Book of the Acts of God, pp. 190–205. 
 
Questions to Consider: 
1. Do you find the resolution of Job to be satisfactory? 
2. Have the late 20th and early 21st centuries produced their own equivalents to 
wisdom literature? 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
51 
Lecture Eleven 
 
Aeschylus, Oresteia 
 
Scope: The question of fate stood at the core of the most characteristic and 
enduring cultural statement of history’s first democracy, Athens of the 
5th century B.C. Greek tragedy was developed at Athens to encourage 
public reflection on the most profound moral questions. Tragedy spoke 
to the belief that all political actions have moral consequences. Tragedy 
tell us that there is no separation between private and public morality. 
Tragedy comes about through sin, the sin of hybris. Hybris is 
outrageous arrogance, the abuse of power over the innocent. Hybris is 
punished by the gods. The Oresteia of Aeschylus ranks with the 
Oedipus of Sophocles as the greatest of these tragedies. The Oresteia is 
a trilogy, consisting of three plays: Agamemnon, Libation-Bearers, and 
Eumenides. The story of murder, revenge, duty, and divine intervention 
raises in stark form the dilemma of free will. Far from being 
automatons in the grip of a remorseless destiny, the characters in the 
Oresteia are possessed of free will. They make choices and they take 
actions that lead to disaster, both for themselves and for others. The 
purpose of Aeschylus in the Oresteia is to give us the wisdom to make 
the right choices and take the right action. 
 
Outline 
I. 
The previous lecture discussed the Book of Job, which was composed 
around 500 B.C. in its present form. The Book of Job explored several 
themes. 
A. It explored the questions of fate and of good and evil.  
B. It asked whether things that happen to people can be called absolutely 
good or absolutely evil or whether good and evil are a matter of 
circumstances. 
C. It also asked about the existence of a connection between public 
morality and private morality. 
II. For the Greeks, as well as for the Hebrews, public and private morality and 
the questions of good and evil and fate lay at the foundation of some of the 
most creative literary works ever produced. 
III. Aeschylus lived from 525 B.C. to 456 B.C., at approximately the same time 
that the Book of Job was composed. His Oresteia was produced in 458 B.C. 
The Oresteia is one of the most profound statements of what is good and 
what is evil and is a magnificent example of Athenian drama. It is also a 
characteristic cultural statement of the Athenian democracy. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
52 
IV. The Athenian society was the first democracy in history. 
A. It was based on the ideal of the greatest good for the greatest number of 
citizens. 
B. The Athenian democracy featured a free-market economy and 
protections for the rights of individual citizens that are similar to the 
values of the American democracy. 
C. The Athenians developed a forum for the public discussion of 
fundamental values, asking such questions as whether a set of values 
exists that must guide people. 
D. Central to the question of whether a fundamental set of values exists 
was the question of whether the individual has free will or whether 
everything is fated to happen to the individual, who has no power to 
change it. 
1. For Aeschylus, this question was at the heart of the question of 
good and evil and how an individual should live his or her life.  
2. Muhammad indicates that everything that befalls people is 
destined by God. Aeschylus believed that the question was not that 
simple. If free will does not exist, then it becomes difficult to take 
responsibility for one’s actions. 
E. In Athens, great playwrights composed their works in competition. For 
Athenians, attendance at dramatic festivals was a civic duty. 
F. Aeschylus, as an Athenian citizen, was proud of his role as a warrior 
who had fought at Marathon. He was also a poet of remarkable 
sensitivity.  
V. The Oresteia, or “plays about Orestes,” were the supreme statement of the 
art of Aeschylus. They represent the only example from the classical world 
of a set of three plays performed at the same time. 
VI. The three plays of the Oresteia are Agamemnon, Libation Bearers, and 
Eumenides. 
A. Agamemnon opens at the end of the Trojan War. 
1. At the beginning of the war, Agamemnon, the commander-in-chief 
of the Greek forces, had offered his daughter Iphigenia as a 
sacrifice to the gods so that his fleet could sail to Troy. 
2. Atreus had been the king of Mycenae and Argos and was the 
father of Agamemnon. In an act of vengeance for his brother’s 
seduction of his wife, Atreus had murdered all but one of the 
children of his brother and tricked his brother into eating their 
flesh. The response of Atreus to the seduction of his wife lacked 
moderation and was an act of hybris.  
3. After 10 years of battle, the victorious Agamemnon returns home 
with his mistress, Cassandra, the prophetess. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
53 
4. The surviving son has become the lover of Clytemnestra. He and 
Clytemnestra have ruled over Mycenae and Argos, and 
Clytemnestra greets her unsuspecting husband as a loving wife. 
5. In vengeance for the murder of her daughter, Clytemnestra and her 
lover murder Agamemnon and Cassandra. Clytemnestra says that 
avenging the death of her daughter is not murder; it is execution. 
6. The play ends with Clytemnestra and her lover proclaiming that 
they will rule on in Argos and Mycenae. 
B. The Libation Bearers deals with Electra and Orestes, the daughter and 
son of Clytemnestra and Agamemnon. 
1. Electra has grown up in the palace, knowing that her mother and 
her mother’s lover have gone free and unpunished for killing 
Agamemnon. Electra prays for help at her father’s tomb. 
2. Orestes, who had been sent into exile, returns. The god Apollo, 
through his oracle at Delphi, had ordered Orestes to avenge the 
death of his father by killing his mother. Orestes goes to the palace 
and tells his mother that he is a stranger bringing back the news 
that Orestes is dead. Orestes then kills his mother and her lover. 
3. The death of Agamemnon has been avenged, but Orestes is 
pursued by the Furies. These Furies are ancient divinities, whose 
task is to punish those who shed the blood of their kin.  
4. Orestes has committed hybris, outrageous arrogance, by thinking 
that he was wise when he was not and assuming that what Apollo 
said was right. 
5. At the end of Libation Bearers, Argos and Mycenae are again in 
turmoil; Electra is alone; and Orestes, who has been driven insane, 
is wandering through Greece. 
6. This work is called Libation Bearers because Clytemnestra and her 
lover are the funeral offering, offered up to the ghost of 
Agamemnon. 
C. The third work in the trilogy is Eumenides, or “the blessed ones.” 
1. At the play’s beginning, Orestes is asleep at the temple of the god 
Apollo at Delphi. The Furies lie outside the temple boundaries. 
2. Orestes awakens and asks Apollo for an end to his suffering. 
Apollo says that Orestes must go to Athens and stand trial before 
an Athenian jury. If the jury clears him, the Furies will leave him 
alone. Apollo will serve as his attorney. 
3. At his trial, Orestes says that he executed his mother because 
Apollo told him to do so. The Furies, as his prosecutors, say that 
killing his mother was still a wrong act. 
4. Everyone had been caught in a web of duty. Agamemnon was 
duty-bound to offer Iphigenia as a sacrifice; Clytemnestra was 
bound by duty to avenge the death of her daughter; Orestes was 
bound by duty to avenge the death of his father; and the Furies 
were duty-bound to avenge the death of Clytemnestra. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
54 
5. Apollo, as the attorney of Orestes, says that Orestes did not 
actually murder his parent, because only the father is a parent. A 
father is fully responsible for the seed, and the mother merely 
provides a house for it until birth. 
6. Athena, who sprang from the head of her father, indicates that she 
will always be on the side of the men against women and that 
Orestes is free of blood-guilt. 
7. The troubles of Orestes are over, and he is liberated.  
8. Because the Furies are outraged, Athena suggests that they now be 
called Eumenides, or “blessed ones,” and that they will be revered 
and honored by the Athenians. 
VII.  The Oresteia explores several questions. 
A. Can public and private morality be separated? Is Agamemnon’s murder 
of his daughter a private act or a public act? Part of Agamemnon’s 
policy had been to sail to Troy, a public act, but to do so, he sacrificed 
his daughter, a private act. Aeschylus indicates that public and private 
morality cannot be separated. What a leader does in private is part of 
the same character in public. 
B. Is murder ever justified? After all, war is murder on a large scale.  
C. Do absolute good and absolute evil exist? In the Oresteia, the 
distinctions between good and evil are blurred. The circumstances had 
perhaps made it permissible for Agamemnon to kill Iphigenia, for 
Clytemnestra to kill Agamemnon, and for Orestes to kill Clytemnestra. 
D. Did any of the characters have to commit these murders? For 
Aeschylus, the profound issue was fate and whether these people were 
fated to carry out these actions. He finds that the characters made their 
decisions as deliberate choices. 
VIII. The tragedy of the Greek play is that people put themselves in these 
situations. The gods may make wrong actions tempting, but individuals are 
free to refuse orders, even those of the divinities. The cycle of love and 
vengeance in the Oresteia continues because people gain wisdom only 
through suffering. 
 
Essential Reading: 
Aeschylus, Oresteia.  
 
Supplementary Reading: 
W. C. Greene, Moira: Fate, Good and Evil in Greek Thought. 
Hogan, A Commentary on the Complete Greek Tragedies, vol. I, Aeschylus, pp. 
1–187. 
 
Questions to Consider: 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
55 
1. Had you been on the jury at Athens, how would you have voted in the case 
of Orestes? 
2. Do you think that the glory Agamemnon won for conquering Troy was 
worth the life of his daughter? 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
56 
Lecture Twelve 
 
Euripides, Bacchae 
 
Scope: For the great Athenian tragedians of the 5th century, hybris grew out of 
moral blindness. Such moral blindness (ate) was the negation of 
wisdom. Moral blindness led men and women to commit acts of hybris 
that led to ruin. But it was only at the cost of much suffering that men 
and women gained wisdom. In tragedy, it is frequently those who are 
most sure of their wisdom who suffer a tragic fall. Pentheus in the 
Bacchae of Euripides exemplifies those who believe themselves wise 
but are, in fact, fatally ignorant. His refusal to recognize the power of a 
new god, Dionysos, destroys himself and those he loves. Euripides uses 
this tragic tale to present a profound statement of the Greek concepts of 
divine power, hybris, and good and evil. A comparison of these themes 
in Job, the Oresteia, and the Bacchae affords rich insight into the 
contrasting and complementary character of the genius and legacy of 
the two most creative and influential traditions in European 
civilization, the Hebrew and the Greek. 
 
Outline 
I. 
The previous lecture discussed the Oresteia by Aeschylus. 
A. It represents the one surviving example of a Greek trilogy, three plays 
that were presented together as part of one day-long performance 
during the 5th century B.C. 
B. It explores the question of fate. Are we fated to carry out our actions in 
life, or do we have free will?  
C. The lesson of the Oresteia is that people make choices and are 
responsible for the consequences that follow. 
II. This same theme is found in the one of the most profound of the Athenian 
tragedies, the Bacchae, by Euripides. 
A. Like the Oresteia, the Bacchae asks whether absolute values, absolute 
good, and absolute truth exist, or whether such concepts as good and 
truth depend on circumstances and perceptions. 
B. It also deals with questions of the existence of God and the nature of 
divinity. 
III. Euripides is a characteristic example of the intellectual fervor of Athenian 
democracy of the 5th century B.C. 
A. This democracy was the first government that was based on the ideal of 
the greatest good for the greatest number of citizens. Citizens of 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
57 
Athens had the freedom to live as they chose. They enjoyed a tolerant 
lifestyle, and individual rights were protected by law. 
B. Athenian drama, the tragedy, was the cultural statement of the 
Athenian democracy. It was the public forum that every Athenian 
citizen attended and in which questions with profound moral 
consequences were debated. 
C. Athenians believed that all political decisions had a moral dimension. 
D. Citizenship in Athens depended on being able to serve in the Athenian 
army. Because only males could serve in the army, only males could be 
citizens. 
E. Each spring, the Athenians held a dramatic festival in honor of the god 
Dionysos. This festival was held in a magnificent theater. A typical 
play included three actors and a chorus. The chorus represented 
traditional, conventional wisdom. The usual theme of these plays was 
moderation. 
F. Athenian democracy unleashed a cultural creativity that has been 
unparalleled until our own day. The freedom of the Athenians sparked 
a questioning of all values. The first history was written in 5th-century 
Athens, and scientific medicine began there. 
G. Sophists educated young Athenians. They taught their pupils the arts of 
oratory and persuasion and to think critically, that is, to question 
values. These sophists believed that circumstances determine our 
perceptions of events and our perceptions of the divine world. 
IV. In his plays, Euripides questioned traditional perceptions of right and 
wrong, normal and abnormal, excess and moderation. In the Bacchae, his 
last play, he also asked what makes a god and how we know what a god is. 
A. Euripides wrote the Bacchae in 406 B.C. in Pella, in Macedonia. 
B. The play was produced in Athens by his son. 
C. The play was the last of the great Athenian tragedies, the last product 
of the golden age of Athenian tragedy, which lasted from the time of 
the Battle of Marathon to the defeat of Athens by Sparta, the same 
period as the golden age of Greek democracy. 
V. The Bacchae takes place in the city of Thebes. 
A. Dionysos, who appears in the form of a handsome stranger, a mortal 
man, addresses the audience and explains his background. He is the son 
of Zeus and a mortal woman, Semele, the daughter of Cadmus. Hera, 
the wife of Zeus, outraged at the god’s infidelity, had the child 
destroyed. Zeus brought his son back to life and hid the baby from 
Hera in his thigh. Dionysos explains that he has returned from his 
travels to India and Persia to bring his worship to Greece, to his 
hometown of Thebes. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
58 
B. The women of Thebes have already flocked to his religion because it is 
a religion of joy; its adherents drink wine, feast, and engage in 
promiscuous sex. 
C. Dionysos wants to test his home city and the wisdom of its ruler, 
Pentheus. Dionysos wants to see whether Pentheus will recognize him 
for the god that he is. 
1. Pentheus is the young king of Thebes. His grandfather, Cadmus, 
has abdicated power but still lives.  
2. The name Pentheus means “man of sorrows.” 
D. The mystique and fervor of the religion of Dionysos have swept 
through the city. Even old men, including Cadmus and Teresias, the 
blind soothsayer, have joined this cult. 
E. Pentheus views this wild new religion as a threat to public order. He 
refuses to recognize the existence of the god Dionysos and regards the 
stranger, who is actually Dionysos in disguise, as a manipulative 
charlatan who is leading the women astray to seduce them. 
F. The stranger warns Pentheus, a mortal, of the danger of questioning 
what the gods are and what the gods want. Pentheus attempts to 
imprison the stranger. The stranger then suggests that Pentheus should 
see these rites to learn about Dionysos. He suggests that Pentheus 
perch in the top of a pine tree to better observe them. 
G. The next scene occurs in the palace. A messenger tells Cadmus that the 
Bacchae, the women celebrating the rites of Dionysos, thought that 
Pentheus was a mountain lion and shook the tree in which he had been 
perched. They then tore Pentheus to pieces. 
H. Cadmus finds the pieces of Pentheus so that he can arrange his burial. 
I. 
Dionysos next appears in his majesty and says that no one should ever 
doubt that he is a god. The Thebans, because of their hostility to 
Dionysos, will be punished. Cadmus will wander the world in pain lest 
anyone doubt that Dionysos is a god. 
J. The last words of the chorus are “Let no mortal think that he is so wise 
that he can discern what god is, for the divine comes in many forms 
and wise is that man who allows his eyes to see the truth.” 
K. Pentheus has been shown to be a man of sorrows, who in his hybris, 
believing that he knew what was divine, brought destruction on himself 
and all of Thebes. 
VI. The Bacchae embodies the deeper meaning of Greek tragedy. 
A. The Bacchae had a political purpose. Greek tragedies allowed 
Athenians to debate fundamental questions. Placing these dramas in the 
distant mythological past teaches that these questions are universal and 
eternal and that each generation must deal with them. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
59 
B. Euripides wrote some profoundly political plays. Trojan Women, for 
example, which is often seen as a pacifist play, is the story of a patriot 
determined that Athens should carry out a preemptive strike against 
Sicily.  
C. At the end of the life of Euripides, Athens was on the verge of absolute 
defeat. Euripides asks the viewers of the Bacchae to deal with 
questions more profound than politics. The fundamental question in 
this play is the question of what a god is and whether a mortal has the 
wisdom to determine whether a being is divine. 
D. These performances were part of a religious festival in honor of 
Dionysos.  
1. As previously mentioned, Dionysos was the son of Zeus by a 
mortal woman. He suffers and is brought back to life by his father. 
2. Dionysos is the god of wine. Wine grapes grow on vines, which 
are severely pruned in winter. The vines come back to life in the 
spring, the time of year when these plays are performed. This 
eternal recurrence is an annual miracle. In addition, the grapes are 
crushed and give their “blood” to make wine.  
3. Wine is a life-giving fluid, but the use of wine as a drink reinforces 
the concept of moderation. A little wine is good, but too much 
causes madness, like that of the Bacchae, who tore Pentheus to 
pieces. 
E. One of the most sacred and ancient rituals of Athens was the annual 
festival at Eleusis. During this festival, Athenians went as a civic body 
to offer up sacrifices and prayers to the goddess Demeter and her 
daughter Persephone, the symbol of the death of crops in winter and 
their return in spring. Joined with worship of Demeter and Persephone 
was worship of Dionysos.  
1. If a person partook of the sacred meal in honor of Dionysos and 
Demeter, proclaimed his belief in their power, and underwent a 
sacred baptism to wash himself from his old life, the Athenians 
believed that he would never die but would have eternal life. 
2. The Bacchae is the story of a god with a mortal mother. The god 
who suffered, died and came back to life, can give individuals 
everlasting life and the wisdom to understand divine power. 
VII.  The ultimate purpose of a Greek play, such as the Bacchae or the Oresteia, 
was to give the individual the wisdom by which to live his life. 
A. Aeschylus taught that the individual can gain wisdom only through 
suffering. 
B. Athenian dramas often give the individual a chance to learn from the 
suffering of someone else. The Bacchae allows viewers to learn several 
lessons by vicariously suffering the pain of Pentheus. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
60 
1. People are not wise enough to know everything about the divine, 
and divine power comes in many forms. 
2. A person is not fated to make mistakes; mistakes are made because 
of the individual’s own moral blindness. 
3. The ultimate message of the Oresteia and the Bacchae,  like that of 
every Greek drama, is “Sing, sorrow, sing; but good will come out 
at the end.” 
 
Essential Reading: 
Euripides, Bacchae. 
 
Supplementary Reading: 
Dodds, The Greeks and the Irrational. 
Nietzsche, The Birth of Tragedy. 
 
Questions to Consider: 
1. In reading the Oresteia and the Bacchae, do you believe that Orestes and 
Pentheus make their own choices by free will or are they the playthings of 
fate? Has reading these tragedies changed your view about fate and free 
will? 
2. Do you see similarities between the cult and myth of Dionysos and 
Christianity? What do you think these similarities mean? 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
61 
Timeline 
 
B.C. 
 
3000 ................................................Birth of civilization in the Near East and 
Egypt 
2500 ................................................Pyramids of Giza in Egypt 
2500 ................................................Indus Valley civilization in India 
2000 ................................................Stonehenge  
1760 ................................................Shang Dynasty in China, first historical 
dynasty, with writing and bronze artworks 
1500 ................................................Aryan invasion of India 
1295–1225 ......................................Ramses II, pharaoh of Egypt; historical 
context for the Exodus 
1250 ................................................Trojan War 
1027–56 ..........................................Zhou Dynasty in China, political context for 
Confucius (551–479) 
1000 ................................................Beginning of Sanskrit literature 
563–483 ..........................................Buddha 
550–531 ..........................................Persian Empire rules the Middle East  
490–404 ..........................................Golden age of Athenian democracy 
336–323 ..........................................Alexander the Great 
218–146 ..........................................Rise of the Roman Empire 
48–31 ..............................................Julius Caesar and Augustus establish 
monarchy in the Roman Empire 
A.D. 
31 B.C.–180 A.D...............................Golden age of the Roman Empire 
6 ......................................................Birth of Jesus 
312 ..................................................Conversion of the Roman emperor 
Constantine to Christianity, which became 
the official religion of the Roman Empire 
476 ..................................................Fall of the Roman Empire in Western 
Europe 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
62 
800 ..................................................Charlemagne establishes what became the 
Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation 
1066 ................................................Norman Conquest of England 
1194–1500 ......................................Gothic art and architecture dominate Europe 
1215 ................................................Magna Carta 
1304–1527 ......................................Renaissance 
1517–1648 ......................................Reformation 
1558–1603 ......................................Queen Elizabeth I of England 
1648–1789 ......................................Age of the Enlightenment 
1775–1789 ......................................American Revolution and Constitution, 
“The Founding” 
1789–1815 ......................................French Revolution and Napoleon 
1860–1914 ......................................Golden age of the British Empire 
1861–1865 ......................................American Civil War 
1914–1918 ......................................World War I 
1929–1953 ......................................Joseph Stalin rules the Soviet Union 
1933–1945 ......................................Adolf Hitler rules Germany 
1945– ............................................. Scientific and technological revolution 
1990– .............................................United States as the world’s only 
superpower 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
63 
Glossary 
 
Akkad: The geographical term to describe the northern portion of ancient 
Mesopotamia. The Akkadians and their descendants, the Babylonians, spoke a 
Semitic language and were much indebted culturally to the neighboring 
Sumerians. 
Aryan: A term derived from the Sanskrit word for “noble.” Aryan was much 
used in the 19th and first half of the 20th centuries to describe the Indo-European 
invaders of India, who conquered the peoples of the Indus Valley civilization 
and developed the literature and culture of classical India. The term was 
misused by the Nazis but still retains its value as a collective designation for use 
in discussing the early history of India. 
Asia Minor: Classical term to describe the area now known as Turkey. 
Birth of civilization: Rise of complex political structures, writing, monumental 
architecture, and use of metal. These advances occurred simultaneously in 
Egypt and Mesopotamia. 
City-state: A term to describe a sovereign political unit based on a walled city 
and surrounding territory. City-state is frequently used to describe the political 
units of early Mesopotamia, Greece and Italy, Phoenicia, and medieval and 
Renaissance Italy.  
Classical antiquity: The Greek and Roman world from roughly 800 B.C. 
(Homer) to 476 A.D. (fall of the Roman Empire in Western Europe). 
Classics: Conventional term for the writings of classical antiquity, now used in 
general to describe great books from all periods and cultures. 
Communism: An ideology maintaining that society should be constituted so 
that the means of production and subsistence are held in common and labor is 
organized for the common benefit of all. This ideal was maintained by Plato. 
However, as a modern political system, communism has been marked by the 
creation of the totalitarian state and party apparatus to subordinate all aspects of 
the individual, the society, and the economy to the control of the state. 
Determinism: The antithesis of free will, determinism argues that humans have 
no control over decisions, actions, and events, which are the inevitable 
consequences of forces independent of the human will. 
Enlightenment: Term to describe the epoch in European history from 1648 
(Descartes and the end of the Wars of Religion) to 1789 (the French 
Revolution). The age of the Enlightenment was marked intellectually by faith in 
reason and progress and admiration for the legacy of classical antiquity. 
Founders (Founding Fathers): Collective term for the American statesmen who 
signed the Declaration of Independence, waged the Revolutionary War, and 
established the Constitution. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
64 
Free will: The idea that humans make their own choices, unconstrained by 
necessity or external circumstances. 
Gentile: A non-Jew. 
Gestapo: Geheime Staatspolizei, the secret state police of Nazi Germany. 
Ideology: A complex set of ideas and values that unifies a community, directs 
its actions, and validates its decision making. For example, democracy is the 
ideology of the United States. 
Indo-European: A linguistic term to describe a number of related languages, 
ranging geographically from India to North and South America. These include 
Sanskrit and the derived languages of India (such as Hindi); Persian; Greek and 
Latin; the Romance languages, such as French and Spanish, derived from Latin; 
the Germanic languages, including English; the Slavic languages, including 
Russian; and the Celtic languages, including Irish. The original home of the 
Indo-European speakers seems to have been in southern Russia, from which 
they migrated east and west, beginning around 2200 B.C. 
Law (Jewish): The complex code of laws and regulations, based on the Ten 
Commandments and elaborated in the first five books of the Old Testament (the 
Pentateuch) and later Jewish tradition. 
Marxism: An ideology based on the ideas of Karl Marx (1818–1893) and 
Friedrich Engels (1820–1895) and the intellectual foundation of modern 
communism. 
Mesopotamia: “Land between the rivers.” A geographical term used 
historically to identify the region, now largely in Iraq, between the Tigris and 
Euphrates Rivers. Location of early civilizations of Sumer, Akkad, and 
Babylonia. 
Middle Ages (medieval period): The period in European history between the 
fall of the Roman Empire in Western Europe (476) and the fall of the Roman 
Empire in the East at Constantinople in 1453. 
National Socialism (Nazism): The ideology of Germany under Adolf Hitler, 
based on racism, nationalism, and socialism and espousing a totalitarian state in 
which the individual and all aspects of life were absolutely subordinate to the 
state.  
Pharisee: Member of an influential Jewish group in Judaea at the time of Jesus. 
The Pharisees were trained in the Jewish law and insisted on a strict 
interpretation of that law. Their role in society might be compared to that of 
professors in our own day. 
Renaissance: The beginning of the modern age, marked by the Renaissance 
(“rebirth”) of interest in classical antiquity. As is true of most historical 
designations, such as Middle Ages, it is difficult to define precisely the 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
65 
chronological limits of the Renaissance. It began in Italy, then spread to 
Northern Europe. Defensible dates are from the career of the Italian poet and 
lover of antiquity Petrarch (1304–1374) to Martin Luther and the beginning of 
the Protestant Reformation (1517).  
Roman Empire: The Roman world from 48 B.C.–476 A.D. Used in this way, the 
term Roman Empire describes the political system of monarchy established by 
Julius Caesar and his successors to rule over territory ultimately stretching from 
Britain to Iraq. However, starting in 246 B.C., long before Caesar, the Roman 
Republic began to conquer an overseas empire. Thus, historians commonly, if 
confusingly, speak of the Roman Republic ruling the Roman Empire. The 
Roman people permitted Caesar and his successors, especially Augustus, to 
transform Rome from a republic into a monarchy in order to continue to rule 
this overseas empire. 
Roman Republic: Rome from 509–48 B.C., marked by political liberty and a 
balanced constitution. 
Sadducees: Members of an influential group in Judaea at the time of Jesus. 
Sadducees tended to be wealthy and insisted on the Temple as the focus of 
Jewish religion. 
Semitic: Linguistic and cultural term used to describe certain related languages 
and cultures of the Middle East in antiquity and the modern world, including 
Babylonian, Hebrew, Phoenician, Syriac, and Arabic. 
Socialism: A term that first appears in English in 1832 to describe an ideology 
opposing laissez-faire economics in favor of some form of communal ownership 
of productive assets. 
Soviet Union (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics): The political entity that in 
1922 replaced the Russian Empire. In 1991, this communist state fragmented 
into numerous nations, including the Russian Federation. 
Sumer: A nation composed of a number of city-sates in ancient Mesopotamia, 
speaking the same language and sharing the same culture. The Sumerians 
influenced greatly the later history of the Middle East. The Sumerian language 
seems to be unrelated to any other known language. 
Third Reich: Name given by Hitler to Germany under National Socialism 
(1933–1945). 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
66 
Biographical Notes 
 
Aristotle: Greek philosopher (386–32 B.C.). Not an Athenian by birth, Aristotle 
spent much of his life teaching in Athens. He was the pupil of Plato and founded 
his own university in Athens, the Lyceum. Far more than Plato, Aristotle 
focused on empirical studies, including natural science and history. He was 
perhaps the most profound mind of classical Greece as Plato was the most 
intellectual and Socrates the noblest. He was the tutor of Alexander the Great. 
Aristotle was the most influential intellectual figure in both the European and 
the Islamic Middle Ages. His Poetics is the first book on literary criticism to 
come down to us from classical antiquity. It provides us with a working 
definition of a great book as one that has a beneficent moral impact on its 
audience. 
Augustus Caesar: Roman statesman (63 B.C.–14 A.D.). Born Gaius Octavius, he 
was the great-nephew and adopted son of Julius Caesar. Modern historians 
generally refer to him as Octavian during his early political career and rise to 
power (44–27 B.C.), from his adopted name of Gaius Julius Caesar Octavianus. 
Building on his relationship with the popular Julius Caesar, Octavian, at the age 
of 19, raised an army on his own initiative. With extraordinary political skills, 
he achieved absolute mastery over the Roman world, winning a decisive victory 
over Marc Antony and Cleopatra at Actium in 31 B.C. He then carried out a 
series of political, military, social, and economic reforms that successfully 
transformed Rome from a republic into a monarchy and inaugurated two 
centuries of peace and prosperity throughout the Roman world. In 27 B.C., he 
marked the inauguration of the new order by adopting the name Augustus, 
which means “messiah.” Augustus is rightly regarded as the greatest statesman 
in history, the model of the good Roman emperor. He was celebrated by Vergil 
in the Aeneid, and during his reign, Jesus was born. He is discussed at length in 
The Teaching Company course Famous Romans (Lectures Fourteen–Sixteen). 
Brown, John: American opponent of slavery and terrorist (1800–1859). Born in 
Connecticut and Puritan in background, Brown was a failure in business. 
Deeply convinced of the immorality of slavery and profoundly influenced by the 
Bible, he took his sons to Kansas and Nebraska in 1854 in a violent effort to 
oppose the supporters of slavery. On October 16, 1859, funded by respected 
New England abolitionists, Brown, along with his sons, formed a small group 
that seized the federal arsenal at Harpers Ferry. The goal, which failed, was to 
start a slave rebellion. Brown was captured, tried, and hanged for treason. 
Cato, Marcus Porcius the Younger: Roman statesman and opponent of Julius 
Caesar (95–46 B.C.). Far more than Brutus, Cato was the noblest Roman. He 
loved liberty, which he defined as the political freedom of the balanced 
constitution of the Roman Republic. He saw Caesar as the preeminent threat to 
that liberty. Thus, Cato opposed Caesar at every step of the rise to power. 
Ultimately, Cato chose civil war rather than allow Caesar to become despot. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
67 
Defeated in that war, Cato chose suicide rather than accept the clemency of 
Caesar. In The Divine Comedy, Dante paid tribute to his own love of political 
liberty by placing Cato as the guardian of the gates of Purgatory. Cato is 
discussed at length in Famous Romans (Lecture Twelve). 
Gladstone, William Ewart: British statesman (1809–1898). Gladstone was 
four times prime minister of Britain during the golden age of the British Empire 
(1868–1874, 1880–1885, 1886, 1892–1894). He embodied the ideals of the 
Liberal Party. He believed in free trade and a broad franchise of voters. He 
believed in democracy, and he believed that democracy was only viable if 
ordinary citizens were educated and had economic opportunity. It was the role 
of the government to provide education and economic opportunity. Gladstone 
believed that the British Empire was a great force for good, but he was opposed 
to wars of aggression. He was much influenced by Lord Acton in his views of 
history and served as a model for Winston Churchill. For us, in addition, 
Gladstone is a model for how a statesman shaped his life and values around the 
lessons of the great books. Gladstone believed that all we need to know about 
ethics can be learned from Homer, and he himself wrote scholarly volumes on 
Homer and the historical context of the Iliad and Odyssey.  
Hammurabi: Babylonian king (1728–1686 B.C.). Hammurabi is one of the most 
important figures in the early history of the Middle East. His reign marked the 
high point of Babylonian civilization and political power. He ruled over an 
extensive empire, including modern-day Iraq and parts of Iran and Turkey. 
Babylonian civilization reached new levels in astronomy and literature. The 
government was marked by a well-trained bureaucracy. Hammurabi issued a 
major code of laws that influenced the subsequent legal systems of the ancient 
Middle East, including the Old Testament. He is important both for our 
understanding of the historical background of the Ten Commandments and for 
the transmission of the Gilgamesh epic. 
Hitler, Adolf: German dictator (1889–1945). Born an ethnic German in the 
Austro-Hungarian Empire, Adolf Hitler was a failed artist who discovered the 
meaning of his life in World War I. Determined to lead Germany back to 
greatness after the defeat of 1918, Hitler became leader of the National Socialist 
Party. He transformed a fringe political group into the dominant force in the 
chaotic democratic politics of Germany in the 1920s and early 1930s, the 
Weimar Republic. In jail, he wrote Mein Kampf, which stated clearly his 
determination to destroy the Jewish people of Europe and to begin another 
world war. He became chancellor of Germany in 1933 by legal means. He 
moved swiftly to establish a totalitarian system as complete and as evil as that of 
Stalin. True to his promise, he led the world into World War II. That war, as 
Winston Churchill said, would never have happened except for Hitler. In the 
name of his crackpot ideas of racism and nationalism, Hitler ordered the murder 
of more than 6 million people in concentration camps. The total number of 
people who died as a result of Hitler’s war and policies is estimated at 50 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
68 
million. He committed suicide in the last days of World War II, leaving his 
nation and Europe in ruins. 
Julius Caesar: Roman statesman (100–44 B.C.). Julius Caesar is one of the most 
influential figures in world history and one of the most gifted individuals in 
history. Beginning his career as a rather shady politician, he grew into a figure 
who transformed history. A military genius, Caesar conquered Gaul (France), 
successfully invaded Britain, and defeated his rival Pompey, reputed to be the 
best general of the age. Caesar used this military success and the loyalty of the 
army to establish himself as dictator of the Roman Empire. He understood that a 
republic could no longer rule this empire and that the Roman people wanted 
authoritarian rule. He described his victories in Gaul and in the civil war against 
Pompey in Commentaries, which became the model for history and Latin prose. 
Such generals as Napoleon, Robert E. Lee, and George Patton have paid tribute 
to the military brilliance of Caesar. Caesar undertook a series of economic, 
political, and social reforms at Rome and in the provinces of the Roman Empire, 
which laid the foundation for the next 2,000 years of European history and 
civilization. Jealousy of Caesar and his own lack of patience led to Caesar’s 
assassination by a conspiracy of 63 senators, headed by Brutus and Cassius. 
Among the great books we study, Vergil’s Aeneid, Dante’s The Divine Comedy, 
and Shakespeare’s Julius Caesar all pay him tribute. 
King, Martin Luther, Jr.: American civil rights leader (1929–1968). A 
minister and son of a minister, King was a man of profound faith and courage. 
He stood up against a corrupt social and political system in the American South, 
which denied to U.S. citizens their constitutional rights on the basis of race. 
King led nonviolent resistance to segregation that resulted in major legislation 
and the collapse of segregation. His political and social views evolved into a 
strong resistance to the American war in Vietnam and an increasing focus on 
economic reform. His assassination in 1968 remains a mystery. King was 
profoundly influenced in his beliefs by the Bible, Thoreau, and Gandhi, as well 
as a number of great books, which he quoted in his profoundly moving Letter 
from a Birmingham Jail (discussed in A History of Freedom [Lecture Thirty-
Five]). 
Lenin, Vladimir: Soviet Russian revolutionary and dictator (1870–1924). Lenin 
was a convinced follower of Karl Marx who instituted one of the most brutal 
tyrannies in history in order to transform the Russian Empire into a Marxist 
state. Lenin came from a middle-class background and was well educated. His 
plots against the tsarist regime forced him into exile. By the agency of the 
German government, he returned to Russia in 1917 at a critical moment in the 
beginning of the revolution. Lenin had a powerful intellect and an utterly 
ruthless drive for power. He masterminded the Bolshevik seizure of power and 
victory in the civil war. He crushed all opposition and established the main 
features of the communist dictatorship in the Soviet Union, including the use of 
terror as a state policy and the concentration camps. In addition to his political 
leadership, Lenin also made fundamental contributions to Marxist theory, and 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
69 
subsequent generations of communists all over the world have called their 
ideology Marxism-Leninism. 
Marx, Karl: Economic thinker and intellectual founder of communism (1818–
1883). Marx was one of the most influential figures of the 20th century. Born in 
Germany, he was educated in philosophy and the classics. He developed an all-
encompassing philosophy based on economic determinism. He believed that 
ideas were the product of economic conditions. He was a political activist who 
sought to drive the workers to revolution through such publications as The 
Communist Manifesto, written with his close collaborator Friedrich Engels. 
Marx spent his last years in London, writing his massive work Das Kapital. 
Marx is important to us to show the different lessons that can be drawn from a 
study of the great books. He is also one of the preeminent examples to 
contradict his own view. Marx shows that history is indeed made by ideas, as 
the long and unfortunate history of the Soviet Union, communist China, and 
other communist regimes has shown. 
Sophocles: Athenian writer of tragedies (496–406 B.C.). Along with Aeschylus 
and Euripides, Sophocles was one of the three greatest playwrights of the 
golden age of Athenian tragedy. Aristotle considered his Oedipus the King to be 
the perfect tragedy. He is discussed at length in A History of Freedom (Lecture 
Four) and Famous Greeks (Lecture Fourteen). 
Stalin, Joseph: Dictator of the Soviet Union (1879–1953). Born a Georgian in 
the Caucasus, Stalin’s birth name was Iosif Dzhugashvili. He took the name 
Stalin during his early career as a political activist for Marxism and the 
overthrow of the regime of the tsar in Russia. Stalin means “man of steel,” and 
Stalin was one of the hardest and most ruthless figures in history. A protégé of 
Lenin, he played an important role in the Russian Revolution and the civil war 
of 1917–1924. After Lenin’s death, Stalin secured by brute force and cunning 
absolute mastery of the Soviet Union. From 1929–1953, he ruled by terror the 
most complete despotism the world has ever seen. Some 20 million of his own 
citizens died in his concentration camps. Despite this terror, he was genuinely 
loved by millions of Russians and was hailed as the savior of his country for the 
victory over Germany in World War II. Stalin is the model for Big Brother in 
George Orwell’s 1984. Stalin is discussed in A History of Freedom (Lecture 
Thirty-Four). 
Thucydides: Athenian historian (died c. 400 B.C.). Thucydides was an admirer 
of Pericles. During the Peloponnesian War, he was exiled by his fellow 
Athenian citizens for his failure on a military assignment. This left him with an 
abiding hatred of democracy but gave him the time and opportunity to write his 
monumental History of the Peloponnesian War. This is one of the most 
influential works of history ever written. The Founders of the United States 
regarded Thucydides as a guide for political decision making in the new 
republic. Thucydides and his history are discussed at length in Famous Greeks 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
70 
(Lecture Fifteen). He is important in this course as our source for the Funeral 
Oration of Pericles. 
Tolkien, John Robert Reuel: British author (1892–1973). J. R. R. Tolkien was 
the creator of a fantasy world based on the ideals and values of the Anglo-Saxon 
and Scandinavian heroic age of the early Middle Ages. He was a scholar of 
medieval English literature and a specialist on Beowulf. He was professor at 
Oxford University from 1925–1959. But he is remembered and important for his 
novels, above all The Lord of the Rings, which continues to grow in popularity 
and has been the source of one of the most successful and critically acclaimed 
series of films in movie history. 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
71 
Bibliography 
 
Note: The Essential Readings focus on the books we are discussing. I have 
recommended editions that are available and offer guides to further reading on 
the book and the author. I have recommended as Supplementary Reading books 
that put our works into a broader context or that I find especially useful in 
understanding the text. This means that on several occasions, I recommend 
books and essays that are older and more traditional simply because I think they 
will be more useful than the most recent scholarship on our book and author. 
Essential Reading 
Aeschylus. Oresteia. R. Lattimore, trans. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1953, numerous reprints. The best translation of this compelling tragedy. 
———. Prometheus Bound, The Suppliants, Seven against Thebes, The 
Persians. P. Vellacott, trans. Baltimore: Penguin, 1961, numerous reprints. A 
convenient and good translation. 
Aristotle. Poetics. W. Fyfe and W. Roberts, trans. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press, 1932, numerous reprints. A good translation and valuable for 
its inclusion of other classical works on literary criticism. 
Beowulf. S. Heaney, trans. New York: Farrar, Strauss, and Girard, 2000. A 
brilliant translation by a highly regarded modern poet. 
Bhagavad Gita. J. Mascaro, trans. London: Penguin, 2003. An accurate and 
sensitive translation. 
Bible. I prefer the majesty of the King James Version. Of the modern revised 
versions, the best, for translation and notes, is the New Revised Standard 
Version of the New Oxford Annotated Bible, New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1991.  
Bonhoeffer, Dietrich. Letters and Papers from Prison. New York: Simon and 
Schuster, 1997. A moving testimony to the courage under trial of a remarkable 
intellectual and man of action. 
Churchill, Winston S. My Early Life. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1996. A 
recent and in-print edition of Churchill’s autobiography, written in 1930, when 
the British political world and the press thought he was finished.  
———. Painting as a Pastime. Delray Beach: Levenger Press, 2003. 
Churchill’s masterly essay on how to stay young, giving unique insights into the 
paintings of Churchill, which themselves give unique insight into Churchill the 
statesman. 
———. The Second World War. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1986. A 
masterpiece of historical writing, filled with the lessons of history for our own 
day.  

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
72 
Cicero, Marcus Tullius. On Duties (De Officiis). W. Miller, trans. Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1913, numerous revisions. By far the best 
translation, in print, of this fundamental work on education and morality.  
Confucius. The Analects. D. C. Lau, trans. New York: Penguin, 1979. The best 
translation into English, with a valuable introduction. 
Dante. The Divine Comedy. R. Sinclair, trans. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1961. Of the many English translations, I prefer that of Sinclair for 
accuracy and for the clarity of its notes. . 
Euripides. Bacchae. P. Vellacott, trans. Baltimore: Penguin, 1972, numerous 
reprints. A convenient translation of this last tragedy of Euripides. 
Fears, J. Rufus. Selected Writings of Lord Acton, vol. I, Essays in the History of 
Liberty. Indianapolis: LibertyClassics, 1985. Part of a three-volume edition, the 
most complete collection of the writings, published and unpublished, of this 
seminal figure in the liberal tradition and in the great books tradition. 
Gandhi, Mahatma. An Autobiography: The Story of My Experiments with the 
Truth. Boston: Beacon, 1993. A recent edition of the autobiography of a great 
and original man of action and thought. The biography is as idiosyncratic—I use 
the word in a most positive sense—as was Gandhi himself. 
Gibbon, E. The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire. New York: Random 
House, 2000. This complete edition in three volumes is to be preferred to the 
various abridged versions in print. 
Gilgamesh. B. Foster and D. Frayne, trans. New York: Norton, 2001. A good. 
recent translation, with useful supplementary material. 
Goethe, Johann Wolgang von. Faust: A Tragedy. W. Arndt, trans. New York: 
Norton, 2000. A convenient edition and translation, with useful supplementary 
material. 
Homer. Iliad. R. Lattimore, trans. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1951, 
numerous reprints. This has rightly been called “the finest translation of Homer 
ever made into the English language.” 
Koran. The best translation is that of A. J. Arberry, The Koran Interpreted. New 
York: Simon and Schuster, 1996. 
Lincoln, Abraham. Speeches and Writings. New York: Library of America, 
1974. The fullest collection of Lincoln’s words and, of course, containing the 
Gettysburg Address (vol. II, p. 536). 
Machiavelli, Nicolo. The Prince. New York: Penguin, 2003. A convenient 
translation of this fundamental work in the great books tradition. 
Malory, Thomas. Morte d’Arthur. New York: Norton, 2003. An excellent 
edition, with useful supplementary material, of this work, celebrating the central 
medieval values of loyalty, chivalry, love, and religion. 
Marcus Aurelius. Meditations. M. Staniforth, trans. Baltimore: Penguin Books, 
1964. A good, convenient translation of this enduring guide to how to live your 
life with Stoic courage. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
73 
Mill, John Stuart. On Liberty. New York: Penguin, 1974. One of the seminal 
books on the history of liberty. 
Orwell, George. 1984. New York: Penguin, 2003. The masterpiece of insight 
into the mentality of totalitarianism. 
Plato. Euthyphro, Apology, Crito, Phaedo, and Phaedrus. Harold North Fowler, 
trans. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1990. A good translation of 
the dialogues focusing on the trial and death of Socrates. 
———.  Republic. D. Lee, trans. New York: Penguin, 2003. A convenient and 
accessible translation of this book, which we have called the embodiment of the 
values and ideals of classical Greece. 
Remarque, Erich Maria. All Quiet on the Western Front. A. W. Wheen, trans. 
New York: Spark, 2003. The brilliant novel of World War I that is a powerful 
indictment of the folly of modern wars. 
Shakespeare, William. The Complete Works. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1986. This is a superb complete edition. 
———. Julius Caesar. New York: Penguin, 2000. A convenient edition with 
good notes, part of the Penguin Shakespeare Series. 
———. Othello, the Moor of Venice. New York: Simon and Schuster, 2004. An 
excellent edition of the single play, valuable for its explanatory notes. Part of the 
Folger Shakespeare Series, from the famous library in Washington, D.C. 
Solzhenitsyn, Aleksandr. The Gulag Archipelago, 1918–1956: An Experiment 
in Literary Investigation. New York: Harper and Row, 1974–1978. The massive 
indictment of Soviet communism by the Noble Prize-winner and survivor of the 
labor camps of Stalin. 
Thoreau, Henry David. Walden and On Civil Disobedience. New York: 
Penguin, 2004. A convenient edition of these classic works by one of America’s 
most original thinkers. 
Thucydides. The History of the Peloponnesian War. Rex Warner, trans. New 
York: Penguin, 1954, numerous reprints. The monumental work of history; 
contains the Funeral Oration of Pericles. 
Vergil. Aeneid. R. Fitzgerald, trans. New York: Knopf, 1990. The best 
translation into English, done by a noteworthy American poet. More than other 
versions in print, Fitzgerald’s edition has a feel for the poetry of the Aeneid. 
Supplementary Reading 
Achtemeier, P. “Mark, Gospel of.” In The Anchor Bible Dictionary, D. 
Freedman, ed., vol. IV, pp. 541–557. New York: Doubleday, 1992. A useful 
introduction to contemporary views on the composition and context of the 
Gospel of Mark. 
Adler, Mortimer. How to Think About the Great Ideas: From the Great Books of 
Western Civilization. Chicago: Open Court, 2000. A traditional defense of the 
great books. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
74 
Andrewes, A. The Greek Tyrants. New York: Harper and Row, 1963, numerous 
reprints. The best study of tyranny among the Greeks and of the intellectual and 
political context in which the audience of Aeschylus responded to Prometheus 
Bound. 
Barker, E. Greek Political Thought: Plato and His Predecessors. London: 
Methuen, 1960. This remains the best introduction to Plato for the general 
reader. 
Barth, K. The Word of God and the Word of Man. New York: Harper, 1957. An 
extremely influential and provocative approach to reading and understanding 
the Bible. 
Bethge, E. Dietrich Bonhoeffer: Man of Vision, Man of Character. New York: 
Harper and Row, 1970. The best biography of Bonhoeffer, by a close friend and 
confident.  
Brooke, Rubert. Rupert Brooke and Wilfred Owen: Selected Poems. New York: 
Sterling, 2003. Poets of World War I who help us understand the impact of All 
Quiet on the Western Front. 
Brown, J. Gandhi: Prisoner of Hope. New Haven: Yale, 1991. A standard and 
good biography of Gandhi. 
Burckhardt, Jacob. The Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy. New York: 
Random House, 2002. A masterly interpretative study of the age of Machiavelli 
by a true humanist, a work that might well be called a great book itself. 
Carrithers, M. “Hinduism.” In Cambridge Encyclopedia of India, F. Robinson, 
ed., pp. 333–339. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982. A good 
orientation for the general reader on the Hindu religion, so vital for 
understanding the Bhagavad Gita. 
Carrithers, M., M. Cook, H. Carpenter, and R. Dawson. Founders of Faith: The 
Buddha, Confucius, Jesus, and Muhammad. New York: Oxford, 1990. Recent 
accounts of these four central figures in the great books tradition and in the 
history of ideas. 
Chadwick, H. Munro. The Heroic Age. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1912, numerous reprints. A classic study of the values of Beowulf and the 
Iliad. 
Champakalakshmi, R., et al. “History to Independence.” In Cambridge 
Encyclopedia of India, F. Robinson, ed., pp. 68–85. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1982. A good introduction to the history of early India and the 
context of the Bhagavad Gita. 
Conquest, Robert. Stalin: Breaker of Nations. New York: Viking, 1991. The 
best biography of Stalin in English. 
Coomaraswamy, A. Hinduism and Buddhism. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood 
Press, 1971, rep. New Delhi: Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts, 1999. 
A sensitive and compelling interpretation by a distinguished scholar. Very 
important for understanding the Bhagavad Gita and its message. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
75 
Crenshaw, J. “Job, Book of.” In The Anchor Bible Dictionary, D. Freedman, 
ed., vol. IV, pp. 858–868. New York: Doubleday, 1992. A good introduction to 
recent scholarly views on the Book of Job. 
Dill, S. Roman Society from Nero to Marcus Aurelius. London: Macmillan, 
1904, numerous reprints, including New York: Meridian Books, 1964. This is 
by far the best book written on the intellectual history of the Roman Empire of 
Marcus Aurelius. It remains a classic. 
Dodds, E. R. The Greeks and the Irrational. Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1951, numerous reprints. Remains a highly influential treatment of the 
broader context of the ideas presented in the Bacchae of Euripides. 
Eliot, T. S. On Poetry and Poets. New York: Faber and Faber, 1985. A 
collection of essays by the most famous 20th-century poet in English and a major 
literary critic, well-versed in the classics. It contains his essay on “What Makes 
a Classic,” celebrating the Aeneid as the greatest European poem. 
Esposito, J. The Oxford History of Islam. New York: Oxford University Press, 
1999. A good, current reference work for understanding the Koran, Muhammad, 
and Islam. 
Everitt, A. Cicero: The Life and Times of Rome’s Greatest Politician. New 
York: Random House, 2003. A recent, popular biography, sympathetic to 
Cicero. 
Fadiman, Clifton. The New Lifetime Reading Plan. New York: HarperCollins, 
1997. A traditional defense of the great books.  
Fears, J. Rufus. “Antiquity: The Model of Rome.” In An Uncertain Legacy: 
Essays in Pursuit of Liberty, Edward McClean, ed., pp. 1–38. Wilmington: 
Intercollegiate Studies Institute, 1997. This places Vergil’s ideas in the Aeneid 
into the political context of the age of Augustus. 
———. “The Roman Experience.” In Preparing America’s Foreign Policy for 
the 21st Century, David Boren and Edward Perkins, eds., pp. 369–372. Norman: 
University of Oklahoma Press, 1999. The lessons of the Roman superpower for 
the American superpower. 
———. Selected Writings of Lord Acton, vol. I, Essays in the History of 
Liberty. Indianapolis: LibertyClassics, 1985. 
———. Selected Writings of Lord Acton, vol. II, Essays in the Study and 
Writing of History. Indianapolis: LibertyClassics, 1985.  
———. Selected Writings of Lord Acton, vol. III, Essays in Religion, Politics, 
and Morality. Indianapolis: LibertyClassics, 1985. This three-volume edition is 
the most complete collection of the writing of this fundamental figure in the 
great books tradition, including much unpublished material. 
Frankfort, H., et al., Before Philosophy: The Intellectual Adventures of Ancient 
Man. Baltimore: Penguin, 1964, numerous reprints. A classic study on 
speculative thought in the ancient Near East and Egypt, of great value for 
understanding Gilgamesh.  

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
76 
Gibbon, Edward. Memoirs of My Life and Writings. New York: Columbia, 
1998. One of the best autobiographies in the English language, carefully crafted 
to present a public image of Gibbon. 
Greene, W. Moira: Fate, Good and Evil in Greek Thought. New York: Harper 
and Row, 1963. Originally published in 1944, this remains the best treatment of 
these ideas so fundamental to understanding Greek tragedy. 
Hallo, W., and W. Simpson. The Ancient Near East: A History. Fort Worth: 
Harcourt Brace, 1998. The best short history of the ancient Near East and the 
historical context of Gilgamesh. 
Hogan, J. A Commentary on the Complete Greek Tragedies, vol. I, Aeschylus. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984. Helpful for understanding some of 
the more difficult passages in the Oresteia and Prometheus Bound. 
 
Horne, A. The Price of Glory: Verdun 1916 Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1978. 
Vivid account of the battle that epitomized for many the folly of World War I. 
Huizinga, Johan. The Waning of the Middle Ages. Mineola: Dover, 1998. A 
brilliant discussion of the values that lay at the heart of the Morte d’Arthur. A 
classic of historiography. 
Kallen, H. The Book of Job as a Greek Tragedy. New York: Hill and Wang, 
1959. Originally published in 1918, this is a provocative comparison of Job and 
Greek tragedy. Few have accepted its thesis, but the book encourages thought 
about how we compare great books. 
Kitcher, K. “Exodus, The.” In The Anchor Bible Dictionary, D. Freedman, ed., 
vol. II, pp. 700–708. New York: Doubleday, 1992. A good introduction to 
recent scholarly views on the historical context of the Book of Exodus. 
Kramer, N. History Begins at Sumer. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1959. An 
engaging discussion of Sumerian civilization and the historical context of 
Gilgamesh. 
Lewis, R. W. B. Dante: A Life. New York: Viking, 2001. A recent biography of 
the great poet. 
Manchester, William.  The Last Lion: Winston Spencer Churchill; Visions of 
Glory 1874-1932. Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1983. 
———. The Last Lion: Winston Spencer Churchill; Alone 1932-1940. Boston: 
Little, Brown and Company, 1988. These two volumes are a magisterial, albeit 
incomplete, biography of Churchill. 
Matthews, John. King Arthur, Dark Age Warrior, Mythic King. New York: 
Random House, 2003. A recent study of the historical background of the legend 
of King Arthur. 
Mill, John Stuart.  Autobiography of John Stuart Mill. New York: New 
American Library, 1964. Mill’s account of his intellectual development. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
77 
Murray, G. Aeschylus: The Creator of Tragedy. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1940. 
A penetrating study of the tragedies of Aeschylus by a great humanist. Far more 
valuable to the general reader than most contemporary scholarship on 
Aeschylus, which is written for specialists. 
Nietzsche, F. The Birth of Tragedy and Other Writings. R. Geuss and R. Speirs, 
trans.  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999.  In this early work of the 
philosopher Nietzsche, written while he was still a professor of classics, the idea 
of the “rational” Greeks was exploded. Such a challenge to conventional 
scholarly ideas destroyed Nietzsche’s academic career, but his essay laid the 
foundation for much of 20th-century interpretation of Greek tragedy.  
Orwell, George. Animal Farm. New York: Penguin, 2003. Orwell’s satire on 
communism in action, valuable for the light its throws on his views in 1984. 
———. Homage to Catalonia. San Diego: Harcourt, 1969. Orwell’s account of 
his experiences in fighting on the socialist (Loyalist) side during the Spanish 
Civil War, giving us valuable insight into the ideals that motivated many of 
Orwell’s generation in Britain.  
Platt, Michael. Rome and the Romans According to Shakespeare. Lanham, Md.: 
University Press of America, 1983. The best scholarly study of Shakespeare’s 
use of the lessons of Roman history but no longer in print. 
Plutarch. The Lives of the Noble Grecians and Romans. New York: Modern 
Library, 1992. This complete edition of Plutarch’s Lives is much preferable to 
various editions of individual lives, which wrench them from the literary context 
of the work as a whole. Plutarch is invaluable for understanding Shakespeare’s 
Julius Caesar. Plutarch himself is a great author, who served as the basis for 
The Teaching Company courses Famous Greeks and Famous Romans. 
Rohde, E. The Cult of Souls and Belief in Immortality among the Greeks. New 
York: Harper and Row, 1966. The classic account of the intellectual and 
religious context of Plato’s Phaedo. 
Rose, H. J. Religion in Greece and Rome. New York: Harper, 1959. Remains 
the best introduction to Greek religion for the general reader. 
Rutherford, R. The Meditations of Marcus Aurelius. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
1989. The best recent scholarly interpretative study. 
Salway, P., and J. Blair. Roman and Anglo-Saxon Britain. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1992. A good brief introduction to the historical context of 
Beowulf. 
Sarna, N. “Exodus, Book of.” In The Anchor Bible Dictionary, D. Freedman, 
ed., vol. II, pp. 689–700. New York: Doubleday, 1992. A good introduction to 
modern scholarly views on the composition and content of the Book of Exodus. 
Sassoon, Siegfried. War Poems of Siegfried Sassoon. Mineola: Dover, 2004. A 
favorite poet and friend of Winston Churchill and one who gives us insight into 
the impact of All Quiet on the Western Front. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
78 
Schoeck, H. Envy: A Theory of Social Behaviour. New York: Harcourt, Brace 
and World, 1969. A sociological study of this key element in human nature, 
portrayed with such brilliance by Shakespeare in Othello. 
Schweitzer, A. The Quest for the Historical Jesus. New York: Macmillan, 1910, 
rep. 1968. A remarkable scholarly book that transformed the life of its author, 
who became a humanitarian compared by many to Jesus. 
Sharpe. L. The Cambridge Companion to Goethe. New York: Cambridge, 2002. 
A compendium of material to help in understanding Faust. 
Solzhenitsyn, Aleksandr. One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich. New York: 
Dutton, 1963. Solzhenitsyn’s first book, a fictional but gripping account of life 
in a Stalinist labor camp. 
Spivack, B. Shakespeare and the Allegory of Evil. New York: Columbia 
University Press, 1958. A scholarly study of this central aspect of Othello. 
Taylor, H. O. The Medieval Mind. London: Macmillan, 1914, numerous 
reprints. This remains the most readable account of the intellectual context of 
The Divine Comedy. 
Thoreau, Henry David. Political Writings. New York, Cambridge, 1996. This 
edition contains Thoreau’s essay on John Brown, giving a very different view—
at first sight—of Thoreau’s ideals. 
Tolstoy, Leo. What Is Art? L. Volokhonsky, trans. New York: Penguin, 1996. 
The author of War and Peace writes one of the most stimulating books on the 
meaning of art and the beautiful. 
Watt, W. Montgomery. Companion to the Qur’an. London: Allen and Unwin, 
1967. A good reference guide to the Koran by a distinguished scholar. 
Weston, Jessie L. From Ritual to Romance. Princeton, 1993. A brilliant 
interpretation of the legend of King Arthur. A classic work of literary and 
anthropological interpretation that influenced T. S. Eliot in The Wasteland.  
Willcock, M. A Companion to the Iliad: Based on the Translation by Richmond 
Lattimore. Chicago: University of Chicago, 1976. Very useful for understanding 
the numerous mythological and other references that can make the Iliad difficult 
to access for modern readers. 
Wills, Garry. Lincoln at Gettysburg: The Words That Remade America. New 
York: Simon and Schuster, 1993. A well-reviewed and detailed study of the 
Gettysburg Address. 
Wright, G., and R. Fuller. The Book of the Acts of God. Garden City, N.Y.: 
Doubleday, 1960. A traditional and clear introduction to the historical and 
theological aspects of the Bible by two distinguished scholars, Wright, a biblical 
archaeologist, and Fuller, a New Testament theologian. 
Wyatt-Brown, B. The Shaping of Southern Culture: Honor, Grace, and War, 
1760s–1890s. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2001. An 
excellent discussion of the ideal of honor as a real force in human behavior, 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
79 
affording us a valuable comparative insight into the role of honor in 
Shakespeare. 
Yao, X., ed. The Encyclopedia of Confucianism. New York: Routledge/Curzon, 
2003. Authoritative articles on all aspects of the teaching and influence of 
Confucius. 
Zimmern. Alfred. The Greek Commonwealth. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1911, numerous subsequent editions and reprints. A highly sympathetic account 
of the Athenian democracy and Pericles, written by a scholar and a man of 
affairs.  
 
 


 
 
Books That Have Made 
History:  
Books That Can Change 
Your Life 
Part II 
 
J. Rufus Fears, Ph.D. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE TEACHING COMPANY ® 


 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
i 
J. Rufus Fears, Ph.D. 
David Ross Boyd Professor of Classics, University of Oklahoma 
 
J. Rufus Fears is David Ross Boyd Professor of Classics at the University of 
Oklahoma, where he also holds the G. T. and Libby Blankenship Chair in the 
History of Liberty. He rose from Assistant Professor to Professor of History at 
Indiana University. From 1986 to 1990, he was Professor of Classics and 
Chairman of the Department of Classical Studies at Boston University. 
Professor Fears holds a Ph.D. from Harvard University. He has been a Danforth 
Fellow, a Woodrow Wilson Fellow, and a Harvard Prize Fellow. He has been a 
Fellow of the American Academy in Rome, a Guggenheim Fellow, and twice a 
Fellow of the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation. His research has been 
supported by grants from the American Philosophical Society, the American 
Council of Learned Societies, the National Endowment for the Humanities, the 
Kerr Foundation, and the Zarrow Foundation. He was chosen as Indiana 
University’s first Distinguished Faculty Research Lecturer. He is listed in Who’s 
Who in America and Who’s Who in the World. 
Professor Fears is the author of more than one hundred articles, reviews and 
historical plaques on Greek and Roman history, the history of liberty, and the 
lessons of history for our own day. His books and monographs include Princeps 
A Diis Electus: The Divine Election of the Emperor as a Political Concept at 
Rome, The Cult of Jupiter and Roman Imperial Ideology, The Theology of 
Victory at Rome, and The Cult of Virtues and Roman Imperial Ideology and 
Selected Writings of Lord Acton. He has also lectured widely in the United 
States and Europe, and his scholarly work has been translated into German and 
Italian. He is very active in speaking to broader audiences, and his comments on 
the lessons of history for today have appeared on television and been carried in 
newspapers and journals throughout the United States and abroad.  Each year, 
he leads study trips to historical sites in the United States and Europe. 
On 21 occasions, Dr. Fears has received awards for outstanding teaching. In 
1996, 1999, and again in 2000, students chose him as the University of 
Oklahoma Professor of the Year. In 2003, he received the Excellence in 
Teaching Award from the Great Plains Region of the University Continuing 
Education Association. In 2005 he was named the national winner of the 
Excellence in Teaching Award from the University Continuing Education 
Association. The Senior Citizens Great Books Course, which he teaches at the 
University of Oklahoma, was cited prominently in this National Excellence in 
Teaching Award. 
Books That Have Made History: Books That Can Change Your Life is the fifth 
course Professor Fears has produced with The Teaching Company. His other 
courses include Famous Greeks, Famous Romans, A History of Freedom, and 
Churchill. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
ii 
Table of Contents 
 
Books That Have Made History: 
Books That Can Change Your Life 
Part II 
 
Professor Biography ........................................................................................... i 
Course Scope...................................................................................................... 1 
Lecture Thirteen 
Plato, Phaedo............................................................ 4 
Lecture Fourteen 
Dante, The Divine Comedy ....................................... 8 
Lecture Fifteen  
Shakespeare, Othello, the Moor of Venice.............. 13 
Lecture Sixteen  
Aeschylus, Prometheus Bound ............................... 17 
Lecture Seventeen 
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, The Gulag Archipelago... 21 
Lecture Eighteen 
Shakespeare, Julius Caesar .................................... 26 
Lecture Nineteen 
George Orwell, 1984............................................... 31 
Lecture Twenty  
Vergil, Aeneid ......................................................... 36 
Lecture Twenty-One 
Pericles, Oration; Lincoln, Gettysburg Address ..... 41 
Lecture Twenty-Two 
Remarque, All Quiet on the Western Front............. 47 
Lecture Twenty-Three 
Confucius, The Analects ......................................... 51 
Lecture Twenty-Four 
Machiavelli, The Prince.......................................... 56 
Timeline ............................................................................................................ 60 
Glossary ............................................................................................................ 62 
Biographical Notes........................................................................................... 65 
Bibliography..................................................................................................... 70 
 
 
 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
1 
• 
• 
• 
Books That Have Made History: 
Books That Can Change Your Life 
 
Scope: 
This course, Books That Have Made History: Books That Can Change Your 
Life, is a companion to my earlier Teaching Company courses: A History of 
Freedom, Famous Greeks, Famous Romans, and Winston Churchill. Like these 
courses, Books That Have Made History rests upon the conviction that history is 
made by great individuals, great events, and great ideas. This course explores 
these great ideas through a discussion of some of the most seminal writings in 
history, books that have shaped the minds of great individuals and events of 
historic magnitude. 
Our earlier courses, A History of Freedom, Famous Greeks, Famous Romans, 
and Winston Churchill, have all discussed some of the great books that have 
made history. In those contexts, we have studied such works as the Apology of 
Socrates, Oedipus the King, the Iliad, the Odyssey, the Aeneid, and the 
magisterial histories of Herodotus, Thucydides, Polybius, Gibbon, and 
Churchill. We will return to some of these treasured books from entirely new 
perspectives, but for the most part, we will strike off on new paths with new 
books.   
The books we will discuss range in time from the 3rd millennium B.C. to the 20th 
century. Our geographical scope will carry us from Mesopotamia and China to 
Europe and America. It is the ideas that are important, and our course will be 
organized thematically around eternal questions that endure throughout history 
and that every thoughtful person must seek to answer. Either by conscious 
choice or by omission, nations, groups, organizations, and corporations, as well 
individuals, answer these questions: 
Question 1: God. Does God or do gods exist? What is the nature of the 
divine?  Does God or do the gods care about humans and their actions?  
This is the first question with which every thoughtful person must come to 
grips. The other questions and some of the answers will flow from it. 
Question 2: Fate. What is fate? Do events, great and small, happen because 
they are predetermined by divine will or simply by chance and random 
occurrence? Do humans have free will? Do you determine your life, or is it 
already predetermined? Are you free to choose, or has your DNA already 
made the choice for you?  
Question 3: Good and evil. What do we mean by good and evil? Are there 
consequences for our actions, whether freely chosen or predetermined?  If 
there are consequences for our actions, does this mean that there are 
standards by which to judge these actions? Who or what determines those 
standards? Are those standards enduring for all time? Or are there no 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
2 
• 
absolute standards? Do circumstances determine what is right and wrong at 
any particular moment and for any particular individual, group, or nation? 
Does evil exist? Can we speak of evil as a real force that affects events and 
lives? 
Question 4: How should we live? Our answers or failures to answer or even 
to ask these questions have consequences. They determine how we, 
individuals, groups, nations, live our lives. They give us the values or 
absence of values to determine how we act toward others. Our great books 
course examines our actions under the following eternal human conditions, 
emotions, and challenges: 
– 
The meaning of life 
– 
Truth 
– 
Duty and responsibility 
– 
Law, government, and social justice 
– 
Love, jealousy, and hate 
– 
Courage, honor, and ambition 
– 
Beauty 
– 
Nature 
– 
History and the past 
– 
Education. 
These themes will provide the context in which we discuss the books that have 
made history and books that can change our lives. It is the hallmark of a great 
book that it may offer us insights into many of these conditions and emotions. 
Thus, the same great book may be brought into our exploration of several of 
these themes. 
We have repeatedly used the term great book. What do we mean by a great 
book? Can we even speak of great books? 
The answer is yes. Great book is an unfashionable, even controversial term 
today, because it implies value judgments. As a society, we do not wish to make 
value judgments. Judgmental is an expression of reproach. However, great 
books are great precisely because they challenge us to make value judgments. 
A great book has the following three essential qualities: 
• 
Great theme. A great book is concerned with themes and issues of enduring 
importance. 
• 
Noble language. Great books are written in noble language, language that 
elevates the soul and ennobles the mind. It is not the specific language, say 
Latin or English, that is noble. Any language can be used in such way that it 
conveys ideas and emotions powerfully and memorably. 
• 
Universality. A great book is “a possession for all time” (Thucydides). It 
speaks across the ages, reaching the hearts and minds of men and women 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
3 
far removed in time and space from the era and circumstances in which it 
was composed.  Thus, a great book summarizes the enduring values and 
ideas of a great age and gives them as a legacy to generations to come. 
For us, in this course, what ultimately makes a great book is its ability to speak 
to you as an individual. You can read a great book many times, and each time, 
you read it with new eyes. At each stage of your life, you will find new 
messages to address new concerns.  A great book gives you the personal 
wisdom to be better, better as an individual and better as the citizen of a free 
nation, empowered with the awesome responsibility of self-government.  
Ultimately, great books are an education for freedom. 
 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
4 
Lecture Thirteen 
 
Plato, Phaedo 
 
Scope: For Homer and the great writers of Athenian tragedy, the consequences 
of our actions were realized on this earth. The soul had only a shadowy 
existence in the afterlife. But 5th-century Greece saw the development 
of a more profound concept of the immortality of the soul. For 
Socrates, the belief in the immortality of the soul was the ultimate 
question. Plato portrays its centrality to the mission of Socrates in the 
Phaedo. In this dialogue, with death imminent, Socrates spends his last 
hours pursuing with his students the question of whether the soul lives 
forever. For Socrates, only the immortality of the soul gives a cause to 
accept consequences for our actions. The immortality of the soul alone 
is the ultimate proof of absolute values, including truth, justice, and 
beauty. Yet after a life of searching for truth through logic and reason, 
Socrates comes to the final acceptance that the immortality of the soul 
cannot be proven; it can only be accepted as a matter of faith. But “fair 
is the prize” of that acceptance. Plato shaped all of philosophical 
tradition, and the Phaedo may well rank as his most influential 
dialogue and the supreme legacy of Socrates. 
 
Outline 
I. 
This course explores great literary works in hopes that readers can apply the 
themes of these works to their own lives. These themes deal with questions 
that every thoughtful individual must consider—either by conscious choice 
or by neglect.  
A. Such questions include the following: 
1. Is there a God? 
2. Is God responsible for all that happens? 
3. Is there a basic order to life, or is it random chance? 
4. What is the nature of good, and what is the nature of evil? 
5. Do absolute standards of good and evil exist? 
6. Do choices to do good or evil have consequences? 
7. If good and evil are not absolutes, are they determined by 
circumstances or are they words without meaning? 
B. Plato’s Phaedo and the Divine Comedy serve as a bridge to the next 
theme—applying these lessons to one’s own life. 
1. Both of these great works were written by noble and just men. 
2. Each of these works summarizes a civilization at its apex. For 
Plato, it is the civilization of classical Athens, and for Dante, it is 
the civilization of the Catholic Middle Ages. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
5 
3. Both authors suffered terrible wrongs. Dante died in exile, having 
been convicted of malfeasance and corruption in office and under 
a death penalty for not standing trial. Socrates, the subject of 
Plato’s Phaedo, received the death penalty after being convicted of 
corruption and treason. 
II. Socrates was the greatest teacher in history.  
A. His trial, in 399 B.C. was a product of the war between Athens and 
Sparta.  
B. Plato’s Apology is a record of the speech that Socrates gave before the 
Athenian jury in his trial for corrupting youth and believing in new and 
different divinities rather than in the gods of Athens. Socrates did not 
excuse himself but spoke the truth. His Apology was a profound 
statement of the idea of freedom of conscience.  
C. In Plato’s Phaedo, Socrates presents his conviction that the soul is 
immortal and that belief in the immortal soul can give an individual 
guidance for life. 
D. Socrates, like Jesus, never wrote a book. His student, Plato, left a series 
of dialogues in which Plato pays the highest tribute to his teacher by 
putting his ideas into the mouth of Socrates, thereby implying that 
without Socrates, Plato the intellectual would not have existed.  
E. It has been said that all of philosophy has been a series of footnotes to 
Plato and that Socrates was his intellectual father. 
F. Socrates was a true philosopher, a seeker after truth and a lover of 
wisdom. He asked such questions as: What is justice? What is piety? 
What is God? What is good government? This questioning brought 
Socrates into conflict with the citizens of Athens. The Athenians 
wanted to eliminate Socrates because he forced them to think about 
these issues. 
III. The Phaedo is a dialogue that takes place on the day that Socrates will carry 
out his own execution by drinking a glass of hemlock. 
A. Phaedo is a non-Athenian who is one of the students of Socrates. At the 
beginning of the dialogue, the jailer gives Socrates instructions, and 
Socrates asks for someone to take his wife, Xanthippe, home.  
B. The students of Socrates ask him why he has recently been writing a 
hymn to Apollo and verse versions of Aesop’s fables. He indicates that 
in his dreams, the muses had told him to make music and poetry. When 
he attempted to write poetry, he realized that his search for truth was 
his way of making poetry. In obtaining this wisdom, he learned that his 
search for truth was what he should have been doing all along and that 
he had done what he was meant to do. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
6 
C. Crito, a student of Socrates, then asks why Socrates appears happy in 
his present situation. After all, Socrates has been condemned to death. 
Socrates states that he is happy because he has lived his whole life 
wanting to die and preparing to die. He believes that a person who 
spends his life searching for truth and wisdom is doing nothing but 
preparing to die. Death is the moment when the soul is liberated from 
the trials of the body, and the soul of a person who has prepared for 
death will go to the bliss of union with God, which is cause for 
happiness. 
D. The students of Socrates next ask him why he did not kill himself. 
Socrates explains that suicide is not an option. A person is the slave of 
God and must prepare for the moment when God wants him to die. 
E. The students wonder how Socrates can say that the body is a prison 
that keeps the soul enmeshed. Socrates says that the cares and concerns 
of the body—such as hunger and fatigue—prevent an individual from 
pursuing truth and wisdom. The more a person can do to rid himself of 
his desires and bodily concerns, the purer his soul will become. 
F. Socrates is then asked to answer the following questions: How do you 
know that your soul will continue after death and that actions have 
consequences? How do you know whether your life, spent in the 
pursuit of wisdom, had meaning? 
1. Socrates replies that the immortality of the soul is the basis for 
everything and is attested by the existence of absolutes, such as 
absolute truth, justice, good, and beauty. Absolute beauty, for 
example, occurs in heaven, and it exists and is true even if every 
person on earth denies it. 
2. Socrates says that people are born understanding the concept of 
these absolutes; therefore, the absolutes can exist only if the soul 
existed before the body and if these ideas were imprinted on the 
mind in heaven. Thus, the soul existed before we were born and 
will exist after we pass away. 
G. The next question is: If the soul existed before you were born, how do 
you know that it will not die when you die? Socrates says that the soul 
is immortal because it gives one life. Absolute life must be the opposite 
of absolute death, and no absolute can admit its absolute opposite into 
it. Therefore, the soul must continue, and it must be imperishable. 
H. Socrates’s students indicate that they believe him but that they do not 
know whether he has persuaded them. Socrates states that he has come 
to understand that belief in this ultimate truth is just that—a belief. One 
cannot prove that the soul is immortal or that good or bad actions have 
consequences; one must make a leap of faith to believe it. He says, “If 
you do, fair is the prize and great is the hope, and it is in that hope that 
I can go happily to my death.” 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
7 
I. 
Finally, the students ask Socrates what he believes the afterlife will be 
like. Socrates, who had been convicted by the Athenians of blasphemy, 
believed that each person had a god inside himself—a daemon, that is, 
a “good spirit” or conscience. That conscience accompanies the soul to 
the underworld. The soul of a person who has lived in pursuit of truth 
goes with his conscience to the underworld. The daemon of a person 
who has lived an evil life must drag that person’s soul down. When a 
person reaches the underworld, his soul will be judged by God.  
1. Those who have done evil deeds are thrown into a deep, fiery pit.  
2. Those who have done bad deeds in a moment of anger or 
desperation are thrown into a great lake, where they float around 
until their victims, who stand on the banks, forgive them.  
3. Those who have not done anything evil but who have not purified 
their souls will flit around until they are reborn as other creatures. 
4. Those souls who have spent their lives purifying themselves in the 
pursuit of wisdom are free forever, and they go to heaven and are 
joined with God and know only happiness and bliss and purity. 
J. Thus, Socrates believes in consequences for good and bad actions and 
knows that God cares about good and evil. All people make their 
choices and will pay for them. 
K. The jailer makes his presence known, and Socrates says that the jailer 
has been good to him. The jailer then prepares the poison. After 
drinking the poison and beginning to feel its effects, Socrates says that 
Crito should offer a rooster to Aesculapius, the god of healing and 
health, for healing him of earthly cares and the desires of his body. 
Thus, with his last breath, Socrates indicts the Athenian democracy that 
put him to death and shows a more profound belief in the gods than 
those who had accused him. 
L. Socrates dies and Phaedo says, “That was the end of that man who of 
all the men of our day was the best, the most just, the finest man who 
ever lived.” 
 
Essential Reading: 
Plato, Phaedo. 
 
Supplementary Reading: 
Plato, Euthyphro, Apology, and Crito. 
 
Questions to Consider: 
1. What parallels do you see between the Bhagavad Gita and the Phaedo? 
2. Do you believe that morality depends on a belief in absolute values or in an 
afterlife? 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
8 
Lecture Fourteen 
 
Dante, The Divine Comedy 
 
Scope: Dante’s Divine Comedy is the most compelling and magisterial 
proclamation of the immortality of the soul and the belief that our 
actions have eternal consequences. The Divine Comedy is the supreme 
summary of the thought of medieval Europe. It ranks with the Aeneid 
of Vergil as one of the most influential epic poems ever composed. If 
this were not enough, in this great poem, Dante shaped the Italian 
language as it is still spoken today. In three parts, Inferno, Purgatory, 
and Paradise, Dante goes in search of wisdom. He finds ultimate truth 
in revelation. But his search must begin in the underworld and with a 
new birth. Reason and the lessons of history can take him only so far in 
his pursuit of true liberation. The final step can be achieved only 
through the miraculous gift of divine love.  
 
Outline 
I. 
Several works discussed previously in this course have dealt with the 
immortality of the soul. 
A. The immortality of the soul was discussed in Plato’s Phaedo, which 
was concerned with the last hours of the life of Socrates. The friends 
and students of Socrates judged him to be the best, the wisest, and the 
most just man of his time; however, he was executed by the Athenian 
democracy on charges of corruption and treason. During the life of 
Socrates, his goal was to search for truth, which led to his belief in the 
immortality of the soul. 
B. The Bhagavad Gita was written in approximately 500 B.C., more than 
100 years before Plato’s Phaedo was written. According to this work, 
the goal of a wise man, that is, a seeker after truth, is to free the soul 
from the body to be joined in eternal bliss with God. 
C. The concept of the eternal soul is also developed in other works we 
have examined. 
1. In Homer, after death, the soul descends into the underworld, 
where it leads a miserable existence. As Achilles says to Odysseus, 
“Better to be a slave in the world above than to be the king of the 
underworld.” 
2. In the Old Testament, the immortality of the soul is of no 
consequence; life on earth is what matters.  
3. By the 6th century B.C., the concept of the eternal soul had been 
transformed. In the Bacchae, the souls of those who believe in 
Dionysus never die but live on in eternal bliss.  

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
9 
4. In Phaedo, Socrates agrees with the worshippers of Bacchus, or 
Dionysus, that few are chosen to receive immortal life. For the 
Bacchae, belief in God brings immortality and salvation. For 
Socrates, one’s own purification, that is, the gaining of wisdom, is 
necessary. 
5. After the time of Alexander the Great, belief in the immortality of 
the soul became more important in the Greek and Roman world.  
6. By 19 B.C., Vergil describes an underworld where the souls of the 
just go to join God and the souls of evildoers are punished.  
7. By the 2nd century A.D., concern for the salvation of the soul was 
paramount, together with a concern that the soul be joined with the 
body in the afterlife. In the 1st century A.D., bodies of the deceased 
were burned; by the 2nd century, they were buried.  
8. In 312 A.D., the Emperor Constantine, fearing for his immortal 
soul, converted to Christianity and imposed that religion on the 
Holy Roman Empire. Christianity rests on the belief of the 
immortality of the soul.  
9. The concept of the immortality of the soul was the foundation of 
Christianity in the Middle Ages. 
II. This belief in the immortality of the soul gave rise to one of the greatest 
works of the Middle Ages and one of the greatest works ever composed, 
The Divine Comedy of Dante. 
A. The work has a monumental theme—the soul. Life is a comedy 
because—for those who believe—life ultimately has the happy ending 
of salvation. 
 
B. The Divine Comedy is written in pure and eloquent Italian, an 
innovation for its day, when great works were usually written in Latin. 
Dante believed that to speak to the soul, he must use the vernacular. 
C. The Divine Comedy speaks across the ages.  
III. Dante Alighieri, “a Florentine by birth but not by character,” was born in 
1265. Florence was a free nation, a city-state in Italy with its own popular 
government. The era in which Dante lived was one of intellectual ferment, 
and the city of Florence was embroiled in the political struggles of Italy. 
A. Dante participated in politics and held positions of authority in the 
Florentine government. 
B. In 1302, Dante fell victim to one of the bitter factional struggles in 
Florence. His political enemies convicted him on false charges of 
malfeasance in office. He was condemned to exile on pain of death if 
he returned to Florence. 
C. Dante created several works of genius during the years from 1302 to 
1321, while he wandered through Italy. 
1. He wrote a book on the Italian language. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
10 
2. He wrote On Monarchy, in which he stated that monarchy in the 
form of the Holy Roman Emperor was the salvation for Italy’s 
political problems and that monarchy came from God himself. The 
noblest institution of government had been the Roman Empire and 
its legacy was the German Holy Roman Empire. 
3. Dante hoped that The Divine Comedy, his poem of salvation, 
would gain eternal fame. 
D. Dante died in exile in 1321. 
IV. Dante said that The Divine Comedy was composed not as an allegory but as 
a practical guide to salvation. It is set during Easter week in 1300. 
A. In the “Inferno,” Dante begins his journey in the middle of his life, in 
the middle of the night, in the middle of a dark wood. He is lost. 
1. He sees a great mountain and understands that he must climb it to 
leave the wood.  
2. Three beasts appear, blocking his path: a leopard, a lion, and a 
wolf. During the Middle Ages, every aspect of nature was believed 
to bear the imprint of God, and every tree and animal had a 
symbolic meaning: the leopard represented pleasure, the lion 
represented ambition, and the wolf represented greed. 
3. Dante encounters Vergil, the great Latin poet, whom Dante viewed 
as a master. The Christian Church regarded Vergil as a noble 
pagan, chosen by God to foretell the coming of Christ.  
4. Vergil tells Dante that they can only escape from the darkness by 
descending first into the underworld. On the gates is a sign that 
reads: “Abandon hope, all ye who enter here.” 
5. At the outskirts of hell, Dante and Vergil encounter such noble 
pagans as Hector, Socrates, Plato, and Pythagoras. 
6. They enter the gateway to the place of pain and suffering and cross 
the river with Charon, the boatman. 
7. They descend through the circles of hell, passing those who 
committed the sins of lust and gluttony; those who committed 
violence against themselves, others, and God; those who practiced 
deceit and fraud; and those who betrayed clients, as well as 
traitors, those who betrayed their country. 
8. At the very deepest circle of hell is Satan, who is frozen in ice 
because that circle is the one that is most removed from the light of 
God. With Satan are the three arch-traitors: Judas, who betrayed 
Christ, and Brutus and Cassius, who betrayed Caesar. 
B. Still guided by Vergil, Dante climbs up toward Purgatory. 
1. Vergil and Dante encounter those who believed in Jesus but 
committed sins and died outside the Church or died in such sin that 
they must pass years removed from God. 
2. Step by step, Vergil and Dante climb upward through Purgatory. 
The Roman pagan Cato, who died for liberty, guards the entrance 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
11 
to Purgatory. Vergil tells Cato that Dante has come in search of 
liberty—the true freedom of salvation. 
3. At the top of Purgatory is the Garden of Eden. 
C. Vergil, a pagan, cannot guide Dante into heaven. Instead, Dante is 
escorted through heaven by three women. 
1. His first guide is Beatrice, whom Dante loved in purity. 
2. His second guide is St. Lucy, the patron saint of light itself. 
3. His third guide is the Virgin Mary. 
4. Although modern readers find the “Inferno” more interesting, for 
Dante, “Paradise” was more interesting. Reason can carry a person 
only so far; ultimately, divine love is necessary. 
5. At the climax of the journey, Mary asks God to let Dante see his 
glory. Dante cannot adequately describe the experience or even 
remember it in detail. 
V. The Divine Comedy is a poem about love. Its fundamental text is John 3:16: 
“For God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten son that 
whosoever believeth in Him shall not perish but shall have everlasting life.” 
A. This love, as attested by the Virgin Mary, was the foundation of 
medieval Christianity. 
B. In Gothic cathedrals, the soul was to soar upward toward union with 
God, like Dante’s pilgrimage upward to unite with God. Many 
cathedrals are dedicated to the Virgin Mary, because Mary, in her love, 
carries one ultimately to an understanding of Jesus and God. 
VI. Dante emerged from his experience to bring back the message of the love 
of God. This work is a deeply religious one, written by a man who had 
suffered profoundly and who knew that he had been wronged. Out of his 
misery, he produced The Divine Comedy, a work of profound inspiration, 
philosophical depth, and unsurpassed beauty in its language. Although 
Dante simply called this work the Commedia, it has been known ever since 
his time as The Divine Comedy. 
 
Essential Reading: 
Dante, The Divine Comedy. 
 
Supplementary Reading: 
Taylor, The Medieval Mind. 
Lewis, Dante: A Life. 
 
Questions to Consider: 
1. Compare for yourself the messages of The Divine Comedy and the 
Bhagavad Gita. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
12 
2. Dante gave his stated purpose in writing The Divine Comedy to be practical: 
to lead those who are living a life of unhappiness to live a life of blessed 
joy. Do you believe he succeeded? 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
13 
Lecture Fifteen 
 
Shakespeare, Othello, the Moor of Venice 
 
Scope: The ancient Greeks and Romans did not have a figure comparable to 
Satan or the devil. To them, evil came in the form of human actions. In 
Renaissance England, this same idea was portrayed magnificently in 
Othello. The tragedy was written in 1604, at the height of 
Shakespeare’s creative powers. The play is set against the backdrop of 
Venice as a world power. Othello, a North African Muslim converted 
to Christianity, is a general of the Venetian Republic. He achieves his 
ambitions, both in public and private life, in his appointment to lead the 
armies of Venice against the Ottoman Turks and in marrying the 
beautiful Desdemona. Their lives and the lives of others are destroyed 
by the jealousy and false ambition of Iago, a petty and spiteful man but 
capable of great evil. 
 
Outline 
I. 
The Divine Comedy is a work of profound philosophical and religious 
meaning.  
A. It is a commedia because life is ultimately a comedy in that it can end 
in salvation and eternal bliss. 
B. The goal of The Divine Comedy is to lead the reader to the wisdom that 
recognizes the love of God, which moves the entire universe and, at the 
same time, can care for each person as an individual. 
C. Dante is a member of a select company of authors. 
1. Of the Greeks, Homer was the outstanding genius against whose 
works all others are measured. 
2. Vergil was the outstanding genius for the Romans. Dante chose 
Vergil as a guide because of the grandeur of his poetry.  
3. Goethe is the outstanding genius for the Germans. 
4. In the English-speaking world, William Shakespeare is our Dante, 
our Goethe, our Homer, and our Vergil. Shakespeare was a master 
of tragedy, a master of comedy, and a master of historical plays. 
II. Shakespeare lived in an age of religious fervor and grandeur in England. 
A. Queen Elizabeth I was the ruler of Renaissance England, which was 
expanding across the world and beginning to establish settlements in 
the New World. 
B. This age was an era of heroic events, for example, the defeat of the 
Spanish Armada in 1588.  

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
14 
C. It was a time of great leaders throughout the known world, including 
Queen Elizabeth I, Ivan the Terrible, and Sulayman the Magnificent of 
the Ottoman Empire. 
D. But this was also an era was of religious intolerance; it was an age of 
great wars of religion.  
III. Shakespeare’s plays do not reflect the religious fervor of the era. In 
Shakespeare, the human element is paramount. 
IV. The definitive cultural feature of the Athenian democracy had been Greek 
tragedy. In the Elizabethan age, the definitive cultural statement is found in 
the plays of Shakespearecomedies, tragedies, and histories. 
V. In Othello, produced in 1604, Shakespeare takes a story that had appeared 
in a hackneyed version and transforms it into a masterpiece. 
A. The primary setting for Othello, the Moor of Venice, is Venice.  
1. Venice was a world power during the 16th century and a dominant 
power in the Middle East. Its territory included parts of Asia 
Minor and Turkey, ports of northern Italy, part of Greece, and 
such islands as Cyprus.  
2. This seagoing republic was governed by an oligarchy of senators, 
with an elected leader, the doge. 
3. Venice was a beautiful and wealthy city. 
B. The themes of Othello are intrigue, jealousy, ambition, and love, rather 
than God, religion, and the immortality of the soul. 
C. The central character of the play, Othello, is a Moor, an outsider in 
Venice, who grew up in northern Africa. He has made his way in life 
as a professional soldier. He has converted to Christianity and has 
proved himself indispensable to Venice as a general who leads his 
armies to victory. He hopes to become totally absorbed into this 
society. He is also in love with Desdemona, the daughter of a senator.  
D. The play opens in Venice, with Iago and Roderigo.  
1. Iago is a manipulator. Othello cannot grasp how evil Iago is. 
2. In the first scene, Iago describes his hatred of Othello, who had 
appointed Cassio as second-in-command, a post that Iago wanted.  
3. Roderigo confesses his love for Desdemona. Iago tells Roderigo 
that he will help him win Desdemona. 
4. Desdemona’s father is unaware of her relationship with Othello; 
Iago and Roderigo inform him that she and Othello are lovers. 
5. Othello assures Desdemona’s father that he and Desdemona will 
marry. He says that he will not stand in their way, but he warns 
Othello that Desdemona has deceived him and may deceive 
Othello, thereby planting the seeds of jealousy in Othello’s mind. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
15 
6. Othello has now achieved the height of his ambition: he has won 
the hand of Desdemona and has been placed in command of the 
Venetian forces in Cyprus for war against the Ottoman Turks. 
E. The remainder of the play takes place in Cyprus. 
1. Iago assures Roderigo that he will win Desdemona. To achieve 
this, they must make Othello jealous. Cassio will be the foil for 
this plot. Iago will make Othello believe that Desdemona loves 
Cassio and is being unfaithful. 
2. Iago flatters Cassio and encourages him to become drunk. Cassio 
then wounds a nobleman in a fight, which angers Othello.  
3. Iago suggests that Cassio ask Desdemona to appeal to Othello on 
his behalf, which Cassio does.  
4. Desdemona agrees to intercede for Cassio and a now suspicious 
Othello sees Cassio kissing Desdemona’s hand in gratitude.  
5. Iago asks his dutiful wife, Emilia, to obtain Desdemona’s 
handkerchief, a treasured gift from Othello.  
7. Desdemona accidentally drops the handkerchief; Emilia takes it, 
and Iago plants it in Cassio’s room. 
8. Desdemona asks Othello to consider restoring Cassio’s position, 
increasing Othello’s jealousy.  
9. Cassio finds Desdemona’s handkerchief and gives it to Bianca, a 
courtesan. When Iago and Othello notice Bianca carrying the 
handkerchief, she tells them that Cassio gave it to her. 
10. Othello, driven mad by jealousy, accuses Desdemona of infidelity 
and strangles her. 
11. The senators arrive, and the truth is revealed.  
12. Iago is led off to torture, and Othello kills himself. 
VI. No God is working behind the scenes in Othello. Shakespeare’s play deals 
with real human nature and real human figures. 
A. Othello speaks across the ages. Moral blindness still grips and 
motivates nations and individuals. 
B. Humanity is prey to deception, power, jealousy, ambition and 
manipulation. That is the tragedy of Shakespeare. In Shakespeare, we 
see humans continually making the same mistakes, unable to learn 
from them.  
 
Essential Reading:  
Shakespeare, Othello. 
 
Supplementary Reading: 
Schoek, Envy: A Theory of Social Behaviour. 
Spivack, Shakespeare and the Allegory of Evil. 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
16 
Questions to Consider: 
1. Do you believe that Othello could have avoided his fate? 
2. In light of Othello, how might you reconsider aspects of your life that have 
been marred by false ambition? 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
17 
Lecture Sixteen 
 
Aeschylus, Prometheus Bound 
 
Scope: Shakespeare, the greatest English writer of tragedy, shows us in 
Othello the tragic fall of rather ordinary people, people who, with a 
change of costume, we might meet in our professional lives today. 
Aeschylus, like the other great Greek tragedians, believes that we gain 
wisdom from those who suffered on a titanic stage. Prometheus is the 
great rebel, who in defiance of the will of Zeus, has brought noble 
benefits to the human race. Prometheus is the eternal symbol of those 
who fight evil in a just cause. Prometheus accepts the terrible 
consequences of his actions. Zeus has violence and power on his side. 
But Prometheus has knowledge and courage. In the end, he will win, 
and it will be Zeus who gains wisdom from the suffering of this rebel.  
 
Outline 
I. 
The previous lecture explored the tragic vision of Shakespeare’s Othello. 
A. The grand theme of Othello is power and jealousy, but above all, love 
as the motivating force of human action. History has been made by 
men and women undertaking tremendous tasks for the sake of love. 
Love propelled Othello to kill his wife. Love—that is, the love of 
power—propelled Iago to poison the minds of Roderigo and Othello. 
B. Othello is written in noble language. The language of Shakespeare is 
elevated but powerful. It even influences the speech of those who have 
not read Shakespeare’s works.  
C. The works of Shakespeare are universal. His works have been 
translated into almost every language, and they still speak to us today. 
II. Greek tragedy was the characteristic cultural statement of the Athenian 
democracy. 
A. The age of Greek playwrights—Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides 
—is concurrent with the Athenian democracy of the 5th century B.C. 
and its grand period of empire. 
B. Athenian society was based on democracy, the liberty to live life as one 
chose, and the political involvement of ordinary citizens. 
C. Athenians sought to educate themselves for freedom with drama. 
Attending drama was a civic duty for which a stipend was given.  
1. Athenian tragedy provided a public forum for considering 
profound questions of politics.  
2. The Athenian tragedies dealt with contemporary events but were 
set in the mythical past to show that these issues were eternal and 
that they reverberated through history.  

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
18 
D. Aristotle wrote The Poetics in the latter part of the 4th century B.C.; 
however, it reflects his thoughts regarding the great poets of the 
previous century—Sophocles, Aeschylus, and Euripides. In it, Aristotle 
provided a definition of tragedy: A tragedy is an imitation of an action 
that is complete, of great magnitude, and noble.  The tragedy is 
performed, not narrated. It must be performed in verse with music, and 
performances must include scenic effects.   
E. Tragedy in the Greek drama happens to grand figures—Prometheus, 
Oedipus, or Agamemnon. The lesson  here is that if a great figure can 
experience such a reversal of fortune, it is even more likely to happen 
to an ordinary person. Tragedy is about a reversal of fortune, a fall. 
F. Action, not character, causes the tragedy to occur; character is how one 
endures the tragedy. Tragedy is caused by an action taken of one’s own 
will. Neither fate nor the gods force a person to take action. The action 
that brings about tragedy is well-intentioned, but with disastrous results 
that cause the ruin of the actor and, frequently, of the innocent. 
G. Greek drama was designed to arouse feelings of fear and pity, resulting 
in catharsis.  
III. Prometheus Bound is about power and the abuse of power (tyranny).  
A. In the 6th century, Athens had been ruled by tyrants. These tyrants, 
Pisistratus and Hippias, were overthrown; Athenians had no wish to be 
ruled by dictators.  
B. Winston Churchill defined a tyrant as a person who believes that his 
own comfort, ideas, and policies are worth the sacrifice of millions. 
IV. Prometheus Bound was produced in 458 B.C., when Athens had just 
undergone a tremendous political transformation. 
A. Athens had been a democracy, based on a balance of power: the 
supreme court of Athens could overturn decisions made by the 
assembly of the Athenian people. 
B. In 461 B.C., Pericles made a tremendous change to the Athenian 
constitution. The supreme court was stripped of its powers to review 
legislation, and the rule of the majority was no longer checked.  
C. Pericles was also instrumental in changing foreign policy which had 
been based on a coalition with Sparta; however, under Pericles, Athens 
sought to challenge Sparta to become the only major power in Greece. 
D. Cimon, who had helped Athens gain its empire, had supported and 
fostered the balanced constitution and the coalition with Sparta. The 
Athenians ostracized Cimon, that is, they voted to send him into exile.  
E. In Prometheus Bound, Aeschylus represents this new political situation 
in Athens and warns the Athenians that the majority can be just as 
tyrannical as one man.  

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
19 
V. Aeschylus set Prometheus Bound in the mythological past, shortly after 
Zeus had come to power. 
A. Zeus had overthrown his father, Cronus, to become king of the gods, 
just as Cronus had overthrown his own father, Ouranus, to gain power. 
1. The children of Zeus—including Hera, Athena, Apollo, Hermes, 
and Hephaestus—assisted Zeus in this war. 
2. The Titans, a race of giants, fought against the power of Zeus.  
3. Prometheus had aided Zeus against his fellow Titans.  
4. The Titans were punished for resisting Zeus. 
B. At first Zeus, the new tyrant, honored Prometheus, but then realized 
that if Prometheus had turned against the Titans, he might just as easily 
turn against Zeus. Zeus believed that Prometheus had to be watched.  
C. Zeus believed that his own ideas were worth the sacrifice of millions of 
innocents and decided to destroy the human race. 
D. Prometheus intervened and saved humanity by giving to humans the 
arts and sciences that enabled them to cultivate the divine and protect 
themselves. He gave the human race everything that made people 
reasoning creatures. He taught people how to grow crops, write, 
understand the divine, read the signs of oracles, make sacrifices, sail, 
and domesticate wild animals. 
VI. The play opens with Zeus carrying out the punishment of Prometheus. 
A. The name Prometheus means “foresight.” Prometheus could see what 
was going to happen, making him an even more tragic figure. 
B. Zeus punishes Prometheus by crucifixion.  
1. Zeus, like many tyrants, does not do the dirty work himself. The 
personification of the god Power and the god Hephaestus, the god 
of fire, nail Prometheus to the mountain. 
2. Hephaestus represents one type of character who serves a tyrant. 
He apologizes to the victim for his cruelty but completes his 
gruesome task. 
3. Power represents a second type of character who assists tyrants. 
Power is convinced that Prometheus deserves his punishment and 
encourages Hephaestus to carry it out.  
C. Prometheus refuses to apologize to Zeus because he did nothing 
wrong. 
D. The chorus pities Prometheus and asks him to give in. Prometheus 
refuses because he knows that he is right and that tyranny is wrong. 
E. The cow Io is introduced, also a victim of Zeus’s tyranny. Io had been 
a maiden with whom Zeus enjoyed a dalliance. Zeus—like all tyrants—
is a coward. He is afraid of his wife, Hera, who turned Io into a cow 
followed by stinging horseflies. Prometheus, with his foreknowledge, 
understands that the suffering of Io will last many years. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
20 
F. Prometheus knows that Hercules will be born of the descendants of Io 
and will one day help Prometheus. Prometheus tells the chorus to weep 
not for him but for Zeus, who may not always be king. Prometheus 
says that he knows who will overthrow Zeus. Zeus hears about 
Prometheus’s claim and sends Hermes, the messenger god, to extract 
information from Prometheus. Hermes tells Prometheus that the person 
with power defines right. 
G. Hermes asks Prometheus to tell him who will overthrow Zeus. Even 
with the threat of more terrible tortures, Prometheus refuses to betray 
the name. 
H. The play ends with thunder and lightning offstage and with Prometheus 
shrieking his defiance to Zeus. 
VII.  The play depicts the power of a tyrant able to inflict suffering on a colossal 
scale. 
A. In his book 1984, George Orwell defined power as “the ability to inflict 
pain and humiliation.” This definition was as true in 5th-century Athens 
as it was in Nazi Germany or under Stalin in Russia. 
B. Nothing is more terrible than simple unrelenting pain, and nothing is 
more devastating to the spirit than humiliation. Prometheus, who had 
been honored by Zeus, is crucified and subject to constant pain because 
he insists on his belief in what is right. 
C. Prometheus Bound is a powerful statement of the right to resist 
tyranny, as well as the duty to do so. Prometheus Bound was read in 
prewar Germany as part of the classical education. That generation did 
not seem to learn the lesson that “just following orders” is not an 
excuse for acquiescing to tyranny.  
 
Essential Reading: 
Aeschylus, Prometheus Bound. 
 
Supplementary Reading: 
Hogan, A Commentary on the Complete Greek Tragedies, vol. I, Aeschylus, pp. 
274–365. 
Murray, Aeschylus: The Creator of Tragedy. 
Andrewes, The Greek Tyrants. 
 
Questions to Consider: 
1. Is there anything to be said on the side of Zeus? After all, the first duty of a 
government is to protect itself and to prevent civil war. 
2. Is Prometheus a hero or just a hardhead? Are most heroes hardheads? After 
all, more than one American politician has been successful by following the 
adage: “to get along, go along.”

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
21 
Lecture Seventeen 
 
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, The Gulag Archipelago 
 
Scope: The 20th century was eager to dismiss the idea of the reality of evil, 
reducing the devil to a comic figure. Yet to the thoughtful individual, 
Adolf Hitler and Joseph Stalin seem the most compelling proof for the 
existence of absolute evil. Solzhenitsyn’s book is a massive indictment 
of the evil of Joseph Stalin and of the Communist system. Far more 
than that, Solzhenitsyn portrays with chilling insight the role of 
ordinary people in carrying out this evil. Very small individuals, intent 
on their own petty self-interest, do the evil. It is they who are the 
policeman and bureaucrats who enable the evil to flourish. No less 
chilling is Solzhenitsyn’s portrait of the human weakness that passively 
allows the evil to work its way: small people hoping that, if they do 
nothing to resist, the evil will pass them by and destroy their neighbors. 
The Gulag Archipelago played a significant role in unmasking the lies 
on which the Soviet system rested and in creating that moral revulsion 
among Soviet citizens that led ultimately to its collapse. 
 
Outline 
I. 
The great books in this course have explored serious themes with which 
every thoughtful individual must deal: 
A. God: Do we believe in the gods? Do the gods care about humans? Do 
they intervene in human affairs? Do they set a course for people’s 
lives? 
B. Fate: Is what happens to people a product of divine order or the 
random clashing of atoms? Marcus Aurelius says that the individual 
must decide—either order or atoms. 
C. Good and evil: Do absolute standards exist by which we can judge 
action? 
D. After making these decisions, we must ask how we should live our 
lives and what the meaning of our lives is. 
II. We next explore questions of duty and responsibility. This discussion began 
with Prometheus Bound, in which Prometheus decided that it was his duty 
to oppose the order of Zeus and the destruction of mankind.  
A. How do we know what our duty is, and how do we decide what is 
right? Does the modern age even permit a true concept of conscience? 
Are modern society and the modern state so powerful that they destroy 
any concept of conscience?  
B. Aleksandr Isayevich Solzhenitsyn catalogued the attempt of the state to 
destroy the idea of conscience in The Gulag Archipelago.  

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
22 
III. In February 1945, Solzhenitsyn was a captain in the Soviet Army. He had 
been made a captain because of extraordinary bravery in the field. 
A. He received what appeared to be a routine request to report to 
headquarters, where he was arrested.  
B. Agents refused to tell him why he had been arrested, although his 
colonel conceded “You have a friend, I believe, on the Ukrainian 
front,” a small act of conscience in an effort to stand up to Stalin’s 
destructive machinery of state. 
C. Solzhenitsyn was incarcerated and interrogated. The case against him 
had already been decided. If he did not provide evidence of his guilt, 
government agents would fabricate it. He underwent physical and 
mental pain before finally signing a document. In a society in which 
there is no real justice, legality is everything. 
D. Solzhenitsyn was sentenced to eight years in a labor camp.  
IV. Perhaps as many as 20 million individuals died in Soviet labor camps as 
part of a systematic policy of rule by terror. 
A. In The Gulag Archipelago, Solzhenitsyn documents the fact that this 
terror was not the random aberration of one man, Stalin, but went back 
to the beginning of Communism and the Bolshevik Revolution.  
B. Lenin spoke of the need to rule by terror to eliminate anyone who 
represented a possible danger. One goal of this policy was to arrest 
people at random and, thereby, terrify others into submission. 
C. The entire system was weighted against those who were arrested. The 
interrogators, the judges, and the agents of arrest—all believed they 
were doing their patriotic duty.  
V. Solzhenitsyn wondered whether it was fate or God that saved him from 
death in the labor camps. 
A. Solzhenitsyn had wanted to study the classics. He had not been allowed 
to do so and instead studied mathematics. 
B. After six months of hard labor, he was moved to a camp engaged in 
scientific research, where he worked on mathematical calculations. 
C. When his eight-year sentence was over, he was sentenced in absentia to 
exile in Kazakhstan.  
D. He decided not to remain silent, as so many former prisoners had done. 
He believed it was his duty to ensure that those who had suffered 
would not be forgotten. 
E. He wrote in secret while teaching math and chemistry in a local high 
school. The result was One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich, a 
poignant and penetrating account of life in the labor camps; he sent the 
manuscript to a publisher.  

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
23 
F. In the early 1960s, the Soviet government had begun to foster the 
image of a Soviet society that was moving away from Stalinism. 
1. In 1956, Khrushchev had made a secret speech savagely attacking 
Stalin’s abuse of power. The speech was made public in 1962. 
2. A literary work documenting the terror of Stalin was deemed 
useful and One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich came out with 
the full approval of the Communist Party and the writers’ union. 
VI. Solzhenitsyn was given a chance to become a member of the Party and 
write what he was told. When he refused, his writings were confiscated, and 
he was expelled from the writers’ union. He continued writing and 
documenting the terror.  
A. The Gulag Archipelago is based on 227 testimonies and portrays what 
Solzhenitsyn called “the history of our sewage system.” 
1. In The Gulag Archipelago, Solzhenitsyn described the 
interrogations and the brutality of guards who did not want the 
truth but a confession. He described how this system had started 
under Lenin and was fundamental to socialism, which must rule by 
terror because it denies a basic human right, the right to property.  
2. Solzhenitsyn smuggled The Gulag Archipelago out of the country 
and gave a “secret” interview to the New York Times about the 
persecution he was experiencing. 
B. He was not allowed to go to Sweden to accept the Nobel Prize in 1970. 
VII.  Solzhenitsyn was stripped of his Soviet citizenship and exiled. He first 
went to Switzerland, then to Vermont, where he lived on a farm and 
continued to write. 
A. In the West it was believed that because he was anti-Soviet, he would 
embrace democracy and capitalism.  
B. As he moved further from the oppressive and soul-destroying 
experience of the Soviet Union, he found a new sense of identity. 
C. He began to understand that Russia was an autonomous, 1,000-year-
old culture that Communism had tried to destroy because it represented 
eternal values.  
1. Communism rests on the belief that because there is no God, there 
is no absolute right and wrong. 
2. The Communists had to destroy the old Russian culture because it 
rested on belief in a politicized God. Under the czars, God was the 
ruler of Russia, and the czar was accountable only to God. God 
would judge the czar on the basis of absolute right and wrong. 
3. Solzhenitsyn became convinced that in this old Russian concept of 
God lay his own spiritual redemption and salvation.  
D. In 1978, Solzhenitsyn was invited to Harvard to receive an honorary 
degree and give a commencement address. Instead of offering a few 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
24 
platitudes, he gave a thoughtful indictment of Western democracy, not 
as an enemy, but as a friend with a different vantage point. 
1. He said that the colonial empires built by Western powers were 
fragile and left behind nothing but problems. The West had not 
learned and still believed that it was a model for the world. The 
West wanted to turn all the nations of the world into model 
capitalistic, liberal democracies. He believed that the spread of 
capitalism merely continued that imperial march. 
2. Solzhenitsyn believed that the West shows contempt for justice. In 
the West, what is right legally, not necessarily what is just, is what 
matters. The United States has become a nation of suers and 
countersuers and is interested only in legalities. 
3. Members of the press destroy a reputation by basing stories on 
unnamed sources and scurrilous rumors. The press is held 
unaccountable in the name of journalistic freedom. Thus, freedom 
of the press has become a form of government by terror. 
4. Capitalism can become all-destroying. Spiritual concerns have 
been replaced by the desire to make more money and spend it on 
useless things. Money guides society. Money has been embraced 
as a positive good because society has become utterly materialistic 
and has marginalized God. 
5. God is without meaning in the lives of ordinary individuals and the 
values by which they live their lives. 
VIII. Following the collapse of Communism, Solzhenitsyn returned to Russia.  
A. Solzhenitsyn is now largely ignored both in Russia and in the West. 
B. Solzhenitsyn was paid an ironic compliment in the form of a literary 
prize in his name, an attempt to institutionalize this voice of conscience 
and duty, who like Socrates, spoke out from prison to give us the truth.  
 
Essential Reading: 
Solzhenitsyn, The Gulag Archipelago, vols. I and II. 
 
Supplementary Reading: 
Solzhenitsyn, The Gulag Archipelago, vol. III. 
———, One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich. 
Conquest, Stalin: Breaker of Nations. 
 
Questions to Consider: 
1. Do you believe that the terror of the labor camps was an aberration or the 
natural outcome of Communism? Or, more chilling, does it reflect a 
fundamental character of human nature? 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
25 
2. Winston Churchill defined a tyrant as one who believed his own ideas and 
gratification to be worth the lives of millions. How does Stalin fit that 
definition? 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
26 
Lecture Eighteen 
 
Shakespeare, Julius Caesar 
 
Scope: Like Othello, Julius Caesar was written at the height of Shakespeare’s 
creative talents. Its theme is honor and duty, the duty of a man to resist 
evil by violence and murder if necessary. To Brutus, Caesar is evil. He 
is the most dangerous type of tyrant. He is not personally cruel. He 
does not rob or torture his enemies. In fact, he treats them with 
clemency. Caesar is evil because he is destroying the political liberty of 
the Roman people. But Shakespeare understands human nature far too 
well to make this tragedy into a simple morality play. The motives of 
all the conspirators, including Brutus, are complex and cloudy. The 
consequence of their assassination of Caesar is not the restoration of 
liberty but further death and destruction for their country and the 
emergence of a new tyrant. 
 
Outline 
I. 
The previous lecture explored Solzhenitsyn’s The Gulag Archipelago, one 
of the most powerful works of the 20th century. It is the work of a writer of 
enormous conscience, duty, and responsibility, who—despite terror and his 
experiences of prison, labor camp, and torture—believed that it was his 
duty to speak out to ensure that those who suffered in Stalin’s labor camps 
would have a voice. The Gulag Archipelago is a work of honor. 
A. Honor, duty, and responsibility are central to the way we live our lives 
if we wish to live them as thoughtful individuals. 
B. We can define honor, duty, and responsibility, but defining how people 
can live these values is hard.  
1. We all think that we know what our duty is, but in practice, the 
concept is complicated. Is duty what our company tells us to do, 
what our profession tells us to do, or what our own conscience 
tells us to do?  
2. People have a responsibility to speak the truth, but we also have a 
responsibility to family, to country, and to the organizations we 
work for. 
3. Honor is a term used constantly today, but it is an ideal that has no 
effective meaning in contemporary society. Honor is a sense of 
right and wrong, as well as a reputation for integrity and bravery 
and for doing what must be done. Others must believe that an 
individual has honor, and the individual must also believe that he 
or she is a person of honor. It is a part of one’s identity. 
II. Honor is the central theme of Julius Caesar. It was first produced in an age 
that took the concept of honor seriously. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
27 
A. Shakespeare was a master of human reality. He did not present people 
as ideals but portrayed their true behavior and motivations. In Othello, 
the motivating forces are jealousy and love, but in Julius Caesar, they 
are honor, duty, courage, and ambition. 
B. Julius Caesar was first produced in 1599.  
1. The play marked the end of Shakespeare’s concern with English 
history and the beginning of the plays based on Plutarch’s Lives of 
the Noble Greeks and Romans, which was one of the most 
influential works ever composed. 
2. Although Shakespeare based Julius Caesar on Plutarch’s Lives, he 
added qualities to the story to turn it into a monumental statement 
of values that remain with us today. 
III. Julius Caesar was a man of genius. 
A. Julius Caesar composed works of history, his Commentaries, to 
describe his victories in Gaul; these are the finest examples of Latin 
prose ever written. 
B. He was a military genius who did not begin to command until he was 
39 years old and then never lost a battle. 
C. He was a statesman who envisioned Rome not as a narrow republic, 
ruling an empire for its own gratification, but as a world state, ruling 
from Britain to Iraq and from the Sahara to the North Sea. Every 
inhabitant of this empire enjoyed personal liberty, the freedom to live 
as they chose, and the freedom to pursue their own occupations. 
D. Julius Caesar was a world historical force and, as such, cannot be 
judged by the values of ordinary lives. He believed that Gaul had to be 
invaded because the demands of empire justified it. 
E. Some saw Caesar differently—as a man of cunning and deceit, a petty 
politician who would do anything to achieve his ambition of 
dictatorship. He would even destroy Roman liberties and the 
constitution that was based on a balance between the Roman assembly 
of ordinary people and the majesty of the senate.  
IV. The play opens in Rome on February 15 in 44 B.C., one month before the 
Ides of March. Shakespeare has telescoped the chronology of actual events 
throughout the play. 
A. At the beginning of the play, crowds in the streets are celebrating 
Caesar’s victories over Pompey. The tribunes of the people are 
outraged by the crowds now saluting Caesar. They point out the 
fickleness of the crowd.  
1. Shakespeare was not in favor of democracy; he did not believe that 
ordinary people had the sense, good will, or values to govern 
themselves.  

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
28 
2. Democracy, as embodied in these foul-mouthed, ordinary people, 
has been the ruin of Rome, because this kind of uneducated mob 
will welcome any dictator who fills their pockets and stomachs and 
entertains them. 
B. The play opens during a critical time in the political life of Rome; it is 
the day of the Lupercalia, an ancient ritual that could be traced to 
Rome’s founding. At the conclusion of the Lupercalia, before the 
assembled people of Rome, Caesar has arranged that Marc Antony will 
offer him the crown and he will become king for life, as well as 
dictator; Caesar’s sense of honor demands that he become king. 
C. Marcus Junius Brutus is standing outside the sacred area of the 
celebration and has fallen into conversation with Cassius.  
1. Cassius is lean and hungry, a dangerous man from an ordinary 
Roman aristocratic family. 
2. Brutus traces his ancestry back to Lucius Junius Brutus, who drove 
out the last king of Rome and established the free republic. 
3. The idea of kingship was hateful to the people of Rome. Lucius 
Junius Brutus had established the consulship, which placed limits 
on executive power.  
4. Brutus had fought on the side of Pompey and against Caesar at the 
Battle of Pharsalus in 48 B.C.  
5. Caesar spared the life of Brutus, as well as that of Cassius, and 
they each held the office of praetor. 
6. Rather than loving Caesar for his clemency, these men secretly 
hate him. They believe that Caesar had dishonored them by saving 
their lives.  
D. Hearing cheering from the crowd, Brutus says he fears that the people 
“would make Caesar king.”  
E. Brutus also says that he loves “the name of honour” more than he fears 
death. Cassius appears jealous of Caesar and makes honor the theme of 
a speech to Brutus in an effort to enlist Brutus in a conspiracy to 
assassinate Caesar. 
F. Portia, the wife of Brutus, often reminds Brutus that her father, Marcus 
Porcius Cato, committed suicide rather than give up honor and liberty. 
G. After further thought and encouragement, Brutus becomes the head of 
a conspiracy of 63 senators, who came together because of their 
confidence in Brutus. Brutus is the one man that the people will accept 
as having participated in the conspiracy only out of a sense of duty. 
H. A soothsayer has told Caesar to beware the Ideas of March. Caesar, 
however, is arrogant, convinced that he is too great to be brought 
down. He does not trust thin, dangerous, thinking men, like Cassius.  
I. 
When some senators ask Caesar to accompany them to the Senate on 
the Ides of March, Caesar is at first not willing to leave his house. He 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
29 
has promised his wife, Calpurnia, that he would stay home because she 
dreamed that he would be struck down. The senators tell Caesar that he 
will be offered the crown, and he eagerly accompanies them. 
J. Caesar is struck down by the conspirators. 
1. The people are not prepared for freedom and liberty. 
2. The conspirators come up with a new plan. They turn to Marc 
Antony and agree to a reconciliation. They decide that Marc 
Antony will celebrate Caesar in a funeral oration. 
K. In the forum, Brutus justifies the action of the conspirators by saying 
that he loved Caesar but loved duty and honor more. 
L. Marc Antony gives a powerful oration, in which he manipulates the 
crowd. He turns Brutus’s concept of honor around, for can any 
conspiracy can be honorable? 
M. The people turn against the conspirators, who are forced to flee from 
Rome. 
V. The conspirators flee to Greece. The armies of Brutus and Cassius, 
defending the liberty of the Roman people, must take up arms against Marc 
Antony and Octavius, the 19-year-old great-nephew and adopted son of 
Julius Caesar, who will later be known as Augustus. 
A. Caesar’s ghost continues to motivate the action and warns Brutus that 
they will meet again at Philippi. 
B. Cassius and Brutus have a falling out, but they reconcile. Cassius urges 
that they delay, but Brutus suggests that they seize the moment.  
C. Brutus and Cassius are defeated at Philippi and commit suicide. 
D. Of Brutus, Marc Antony says, “this was the noblest Roman of them 
all… and the elements So mix’d in him that Nature might stand up And 
say… ‘This was a man!’” Brutus was indeed a man—a man who 
possessed the virtues and flaws of most men. He was a man who 
disguised, even to himself, his true motives of envy, jealousy, and 
ambition. 
VI. For Shakespeare, honor is but a device that men use, and duty and 
responsibility are slogans that cloak the eternal lust for power and ambition.  
 
Essential Reading: 
Shakespeare, Julius Caesar. 
 
Supplementary Reading: 
Plutarch, Lives of Caesar, Brutus, and Antony. 
Wyatt-Brown, The Shaping of Southern Culture. 
 
Questions to Consider: 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
30 
1. How would you define honor? Do you believe that honor is a viable 
concept in today’s world? 
2. With what character in the play do you most identify? 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
31 
Lecture Nineteen 
 
George Orwell, 1984 
 
Scope: Prometheus and Brutus show us individuals who can make a stand 
against evil .In his novel 1984, George Orwell raises the pertinent and 
disturbing question of whether any individual can resist the modern 
power of the state. The Oceania of Big Brother is the embodiment of 
the idea that the individual exists to serve the state. Indeed, the 
individual has no meaning. The state or the party controls all aspects of 
human existence, all thought, all language, all action. In a brilliantly 
engaging and disturbing fashion, Orwell illuminates the logical 
consequences of a series of books that have made history: Adam 
Smith’s The Wealth of Nations, Georg Wilhelm Friedich Hegel’s 
Philosophy of History, Karl Marx’s Das Kapital, and Adolf Hitler’s 
Mein Kampf. All of these subordinate the individual to anonymous 
social and economic forces. Orwell puts the human face of evil to these 
doctrines of totalitarianism. His central character, Winston Smith, 
demonstrates the absolute helplessness of the individual in the face of 
the modern state.  
 
Outline 
I. 
George Orwell’s 1984 continues our discussion of the themes of duty and 
responsibility and how we live our lives with a sense of honor and a sense 
of conscience that require us to speak out about what we know to be our 
duty and to do what is honorable.  
A. In Julius Caesar, honor is seen as a mask that enables people to pursue 
their own ambitions, motivated by jealousy and envy.  
B. George Orwell’s 1984 is a fictional work of frightening reality that 
describes a world similar to the one that Solzhenitsyn later discussed in 
The Gulag Archipelago. It raises the question of whether honor, duty, 
and responsibility are possible in our own day for the individual who 
finds himself under the control of the modern totalitarian state. 
II. George Orwell was the pen name of Eric Blair, who was born in 1903 and 
educated at Eton. 
A. Orwell served briefly in the police force in Burma, part of the British 
colonial civil service. This experience left him with a lasting distaste 
and contempt for the jobs of bureaucrats. He believed that bureaucrats 
were forced to put aside their conscience and honor to do their duty. 
B. Orwell fought in the Spanish Civil war on the side of the Communist 
forces, or Loyalists, against the Fascists. This experience left Orwell 
with a deep suspicion about the intentions of communism. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
32 
III. The novel 1984 was published in 1948.  
A. In the book, Orwell portrayed the new age under a totalitarian regime. 
B. Stalin is the basis for Orwell’s depiction of Big Brother. Throughout 
1984’s city of London, and across the continent of Oceania, Big 
Brother is watching. He is a handsome, middle-aged man with a heavy 
black moustache. The phrase “Big Brother is watching” is not itself 
terrifying, but Big Brother cannot be escaped. 
IV. The novel opens at noontime on a windy April day in 1984. 
A. The events of Dante’s Divine Comedy take place during Easter Week, 
and Greek tragedies were produced in the spring, the time of rebirth 
and redemption. Beginning the narrative in April suggests that Winston 
Smith, the central character, is making an attempt to renew his life and 
redeem himself.  
B. The first name of Winston Smith reminds the reader of Winston 
Churchill—a man of duty, responsibility, and honor—who rallied the 
British people to stand and fight totalitarianism. The last name Smith, 
the most common name in the English language, transforms Winston 
into Everyman, taking a stand for what is right, but that task is not easy 
in the world of 1984. 
C. In 1984, the earth is divided into three great powers: Oceania, where 
the story takes place, consists of Britain and North and South America; 
the other powers are Eurasia (Russia) and Eastasia (China). In Oceania, 
the government tightly controls all sources of information, so the 
people of Oceania do not truly know what is going on in Eurasia or 
Eastasia. Information is not lacking, however; the people of Oceania 
are constantly flooded with news.  
D. Winston Smith is one of the small cogs that helps make the system 
work. He works in the Ministry of Truth, which is one of four great 
government apparatuses of Oceania. 
1. The Ministry of Truth is devoted to lies. 
2. The Ministry of Peace is devoted to war. 
3. The Ministry of Plenty is devoted to consciously contrived 
poverty. 
4. The Ministry of Love is devoted to torture and hate. 
E. In the world of 1984, language is controlled and speech is constantly 
being revised to reflect the political currents. What the Party wants said 
must be said in language that is approved. 
F. Thought is also controlled. The thought police are the most dreaded 
instruments of control. They operate from the Ministry of Love. 
G. Winston Smith’s job at the Ministry of Truth is to fabricate history, 
because one slogan of the Party is that he who controls the present 
controls the past and he who controls the past controls the future. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
33 
Those in power can rewrite history and, thereby, control the 
perceptions of future generations. 
H. In 1984 in Oceania, there is no truth. Truth is whatever the Party says it 
is. God has been officially banished, as in the Soviet Union. There is 
also no absolute good or evil. 
I. 
Winston can vaguely remember a time when London was not a 
boarded-up, poverty-stricken city and that there may have been a time 
when there was no Oceania. He remembers that he once had a mother, 
but she disappeared. With great difficulty, he can reflect and 
reconstruct what life was like before the Party. 
V. Winston has decided to make a stand for conscience on this April day. 
A. He goes to his tiny apartment on his lunch hour, takes a swig of 
Victory gin, and conceals what he is doing from the telescreen, which 
is a device that constantly broadcasts information and watches each 
individual.  
1. He takes out an old-fashion notebook and pen, which he has 
bought in the proletariat part of London. 
2. Although the Party is allegedly governing in the best interests of 
the proletariat, it does not really care about the masses; the 
proletariat has been reduced to almost a savage level. 
3. Winston writes, “Down with Big Brother” and finds that the act of 
writing this statement gives him a real sense of freedom. 
B. Winston returns to his task at the Ministry of Truth and to the set of 
conscious lies that dominate the life of every inhabitant of Oceania.  
C. In Oceania, people are told that ignorance is strength, war is peace, and 
slavery is freedom. The people must be willing to accept these 
paradoxes. To survive in the Oceania of 1984, one must practice and be 
convinced of doublethink, the ability to hold in one’s mind two 
completely contradictory ideas and believe them both sincerely. 
D. During the mandatory hate sessions, Winston has glimpsed a woman 
named Julia. He fancies that she is not as absorbed during these 
sessions as the others are. 
E. He has also noticed a heavy-set senior Party official named O’Brien. 
During a hate session, someone has whispered to him, “We will meet 
again in a place where there is no darkness.” That person sounded like 
O’Brien. 
F. Winston decides to take Julia into his confidence, and the two begin a 
relationship. 
G. Winston is invited to O’Brien’s home. He has already started to 
convince himself that O’Brien is an honorable man. He is told of a 
conspiracy against the Party that consists of people like Winston 
throughout Oceania who seek to overthrow the government. O’Brien 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
34 
asks Winston if he is willing to swear that he would do anything to 
overthrow the Party, and Winston states that he is. 
VI. To continue their relationship, Julia and Winston rent a small apartment in 
the proletariat part of London, where they make love and talk about 
freedom. 
A. Winston reads to Julia a disturbing book that O’Brien has given him. It 
indicates that the Party is really about control, describes how to get and 
maintain power, and shows that warfare is a way of creating constant 
poverty. Winston learns that the entire social fabric is a lie. 
B. One evening, Winston notices that the clock on the wall shows one 
time, but the shadows outside indicate a later time. A voice says, “Stay 
where you are. Here comes a lantern to light you to bed. Here comes a 
chopper to chop off your head.” The thought police then break in to the 
apartment. 
C. Winston realizes, just as Solzhenitsyn understood, that nothing is more 
awful than physical pain. 
D. Winston and Julia are taken to the Ministry of Love, where O’Brien 
interrogates and tortures Winston until he believes that 2 + 2 = 5 if the 
Party says it does. Power is the ability to inflict pain and humiliation on 
another. Winston, the man of honor and courage, understands what the 
individual can do in the face of such overwhelming power—nothing. 
E. Under torture Winston betrays Julia and suggests that she be tortured. 
F. Winston is released and receives a new job with a higher salary than 
his previous job and few duties. He spends much time in the Chestnut 
Tree Cafe, where a song is often played: “Under the spreading chestnut 
tree, I sold you and you sold me.” 
G. Winston knows that at some time he will be rearrested, tried, and 
executed by the Party just to show that it can be done. At the end of the 
novel, he goes out to join the crowds in the street who are celebrating 
Oceania’s victory over Eurasia.  
 
Essential Reading: 
Orwell, 1984. 
 
Supplementary Reading: 
Orwell, Animal Farm. 
———, Homage to Catalonia. 
 
Questions to Consider: 
1. Compare the Newspeak of 1984 with changes in the English language 
brought about by political currents of the last decades. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
35 
2. We see how easily the Oceania and Party of 1984 compare with the Russia 
of Stalin. Do you see any comparison with America of 2005? 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
36 
Lecture Twenty 
 
Vergil, Aeneid 
 
Scope: In the course Famous Romans, we examined the Aeneid as a source of 
the history and ideas of the age of the Emperor Augustus. We turn to it 
now both as a work of literature and as a powerful and influential 
statement of the necessity of war in a just cause. In its theme, noble 
language, and universality, the Aeneid is the embodiment of the ideal 
of a great book. It is an epic about the moral value of duty. Its theme is 
civic virtue, the willingness of an individual to subordinate his own 
interest to the good of the community as a whole. Aeneas is pius 
because he chooses to serve his nation, and in that service, he fulfills 
his divine destiny. That service forces him into war—a civil war—a 
war he does not want. But through the leadership of Aeneas, his nation 
is reborn, and he achieves immortality.  
 
Outline 
I. 
The previous three lectures have examined the concepts of duty, 
responsibility, and honor and their role in the way we lead our lives. In the 
20th century, Solzhenitsyn and Orwell portray the individual as having little 
ability to live his or her life in terms of duty, honor, and responsibility.  
A. In 1984, the individual counts for nothing. Whatever feelings of 
conscience an individual has can be destroyed by brainwashing. The 
state can replace feelings of conscience with whatever it wants.  
B. Solzhenitsyn says that God was what saved him among all those who 
perished without mention or remembrance in the Gulag Archipelago.  
C. All Quiet on the Western Front, 1984, and The Gulag Archipelago all 
deal with the desolation of war and its effects on the soul; these books 
also deal with labor camps and totalitarianism and their effects on the 
soul. 
D. The 20th century was the greatest democratic age in history, but it 
included two of the most despotic regimes in history—Hitler’s Third 
Reich and Stalin’s Soviet Union, as well as the most destructive wars 
in history, World Wars I and II. 
II. Vergil’s Aeneid tells about another age of civil war, destruction, and 
widespread hopelessness from which the entire world was saved by one 
man who did his duty. That man was Gaius Julius Caesar Octavianus, 
known to the world as Augustus. 
A. In the Famous Romans course, the Aeneid was examined briefly for 
what it told of the policies of Augustus. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
37 
B. The Aeneid was written by Vergil, the greatest poet of his day, who 
was born in 70 B.C. and came of age in the turmoil that preceded and 
followed the death of Julius Caesar. He had witnessed the Roman 
world brought to political and economic ruin by self-satisfied 
politicians who sought only their own best interests.  
C. Shakespeare’s Julius Caesar ends with the deaths of Caesar, Brutus, 
and Cassius. Shakespeare’s audience would have been aware that these 
deaths had led to a new round of civil war. 
D. In 31 B.C., with his victory over his former friend and colleague Marc 
Antony, Augustus triumphed.  
E. Augustus was the greatest statesman in history. Out of a ruined world, 
he constructed a new order that guaranteed individual liberties and 
brought peace and prosperity to the Roman world. He began two 
centuries of unparalleled prosperity, peace, intellectual creativity, and 
social mobility through a carefully disguised dictatorship. All 
instruments of constitutional government remained in place, but all real 
sources of power—political, military, and economic—were vested in 
Augustus and his successors. 
F. Augustus urged Vergil to write an epic poem that would celebrate the 
founding of Rome and would portray in allegorical form the struggles 
that Augustus had undergone in his efforts to bring peace and 
prosperity to Rome. The Augustus of Rome is found in the person of 
Aeneas. 
1. Vergil died before completing the Aeneid. He had urged a friend to 
burn it, but the friend and Augustus had the work published.  
2. Vergil drew on the work of Homer in writing the Aeneid. 
However, because the Western Europeans of the Middle Ages did 
not read Greek, Vergil was seen as the grand master. In fact, in 
The Divine Comedy, Dante calls Vergil his “great master,” and 
Vergil leads Dante through the Inferno and Purgatory. 
3. Christians regarded Vergil as a “noble pagan” who had foretold 
the coming of Christ. 
III. The Aeneid made literary history. 
A. The book has two grand themes: The first is the founding of Rome, and 
the second is the theme of duty and the requirement that the individual 
do his duty no matter what the cost. 
B. The poetic language of Vergil is unsurpassed. 
C. Answering the question of whether the Aeneid speaks across the ages is 
difficult. It is a hard poem to read because it is filled with mythological 
and historical references. The work possesses a quiet calm rather than 
the carnage and excitement of the Iliad. Some might be put off by the 
character of Aeneas himself, who introduces himself with the words “I 
am dutiful Aeneas.” 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
38 
D. Some contemporary classical scholars try to suppress the real meaning 
of the Aeneid as a statement of propaganda for Augustus and a 
celebration of absolute rule under a good, kind, and dutiful leader.  
IV. Aeneas led his followers from the ruin of Troy to found a new Rome, just 
as Augustus had led the Roman people through war and suffering to found 
a new order. 
A. Aeneas is a man of duty.  
1. In 1984, O’Brien was also a man of duty. He believed that he was 
carrying out his duty by torturing Winston. 
2. Readers might wonder what separates the man of conscience who 
is carrying out his duty from the SS colonel carrying out his duty. 
Vergil would say that it is the moral compass—the belief in 
absolute right and wrong, drawn from a belief in God. 
B. The Aeneid is a deeply religious work. This poem takes seriously a 
belief in God and the divine mission given by God to a man and to a 
nation. 
C. At the beginning of the first book of the Aeneid, Aeneas is driven by 
fate.  
1. Troy has fallen, Aeneas has lost his wife, and he has lost his 
nation. He is set adrift with a small remnant of the population of 
Troy. They are pursued by Juno, the wife of Jupiter.  
2. Juno is devoted to the city of Carthage and wants Carthage to rule 
the world. She realizes that if Aeneas is successful and carries out 
his task, Rome will eventually overcome and destroy Carthage. 
3. To prevent Aeneas and his followers from reaching Italy and 
founding a new Rome, she sends a storm to blow Aeneas and his 
men off course. They are washed up on the shore of North Africa. 
4. The queen of Carthage, Dido, takes Aeneas in and comforts him.  
5. Dido asks Aeneas to describe the Trojan War and the capture of 
Troy. Aeneas talks of the Trojan people, who believed that victory 
was theirs and that the Greeks had sailed away after 10 years of 
war. The Trojans then brought into their city the wooden horse that 
they believed was a gift from the gods. At night, the Greeks came 
out of the horse and destroyed the city. Aeneas recognized that he 
had a duty to the last of the Trojans to take them away from that 
destruction. They sailed and wandered, as Aeneas sought a place 
of refuge where he could start a new Troy. 
6. At the end of his tale, Dido is overcome by love for Aeneas, and 
they become lovers. 
D. Aeneas avoids the temptation to stay in Carthage and rule as the 
consort of Dido, because that is not the will of the gods. Jupiter has 
told Venus, the mother of Aeneas, who fears that Aeneas will be killed 
and that Rome will not be founded, that the book of fate promises 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
39 
empire without end for the Romans. Aeneas will found the city and 
from it will one day come the savior of the world, Augustus. 
1. The messenger of the gods asks Aeneas why he is delaying and 
instructs him to leave Carthage.  
2. Aeneas tries to avoid a confrontation with Dido. Dido, however, 
finds out he is leaving and tries to stop him. Aeneas leaves with 
the Trojans, and Dido, in despair, takes her own life. 
E. Aeneas and his men sail on and ultimately land in Italy, on the shore of 
Cumae, the oldest Greek colony on the mainland of Italy. 
1. Aeneas visits the cave of the Sibyl to ask when the suffering will 
end. She says that he must first go to the underworld itself; only 
there will he find the way to Rome. She will lead him, and the 
Golden Bough will open the gates. She warns Aeneas that the way 
down is easy, but the return trip is more difficult. 
2. Aeneas and the Sibyl descend to the River Styx, where the 
boatman Charon refuses to take them across because Aeneas is 
alive. When they show Charon the Golden Bough, he ferries them 
across. 
3. Aeneas sees Dido among the shadows of those who died for love, 
but she refuses to talk to him. Another section of the underworld 
contains a fire-filled area for those who committed sins so terrible 
that they can never be redeemed. In a lovely field, Aeneas sees 
souls waiting to return to the upper world. 
4. Aeneas meets his father, Anchises, who shows Aeneas where 
following his duty will lead him and what will result from his 
piety, his sense of honor, obligation, duty, and courage, embodied 
in the Roman notion of pietas. 
5. Anchises tells Aeneas that everything in the universe comes from 
God—the divine spirit, the divine soul, and divine reason mingled 
together. The divine spirit and mind of God have given to every 
creature a spark of the divine that is the soul and laid on each 
creature the obligation to live with justice. The soul is divine; 
however, the body encases it and weighs it down.  
6. Anchises tells Aeneas that at death, all people will be judged in the 
underworld for their actions. Those who have led pure lives join 
the stars and never again have a body; others, lesser sinners, must 
pay the appointed penalty for what they have done, then return for 
another life. Before returning to their next lives, they drink from 
the River of Forgetfulness so that they will not remember their 
previous lives. 
7. Anchises then shows Aeneas what God has for destined for him—
a long line of men representing the glory of Rome, including his 
son, who will found a great city; Romulus, who will found Rome; 
and Roman warriors, such as Scipio, who will defeat Carthage. 
The line culminates with Augustus, who will bring peace to the 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
40 
world and extend the borders of the Roman Empire to the frontiers 
of the world. 
8. Aeneas now understands the will of the gods and that his sense of 
duty is right because it rests on the will of the gods. 
9. Aeneas goes from the underworld, recognizing that his mission is 
not to reestablish Troy but to create a new and mighty nation.  
F. That knowledge gives him the courage to wage war again. The 
seemingly unnecessary war in Italy is brought about by the jealousy 
and evil will of those who would thwart the destiny of Rome. Through 
the final part of the Aeneid, Aeneas leads his men into battle until 
victory is his. 
G. Aeneas’s last victory occurs when he overcomes the source of the war 
and rebellion, the mighty Etruscan warlord Turnus, who represents the 
final resistance to the will of the gods. As Aeneas overcomes Turnus, 
Turnus begs for his life, but Aeneas understands that he must kill 
Turnus. At the end of the Aeneid, the soul of Turnus squeals its way 
down to the underworld. 
 
Essential Reading: 
Vergil, Aeneid. 
 
Supplementary Reading: 
Eliot, “What Makes a Classic,” in On Poetry and Poets. 
Fears, “Antiquity: The Model of Rome.” 
 
Questions to Consider: 
1. Do you think that patriotism is an expression of piety? 
2. Vergil states that it was the mission of Greece to create great woks of art 
and literature. He tells the Romans it is their mission to “war down the 
haughty and raise up the proud.” What would Vergil say is the historical 
mission of Americans? 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
41 
Lecture Twenty-One 
 
Pericles, Oration; Lincoln, Gettysburg Address 
 
Scope: Vergil raises the question, so vital in our own day, of how we respond 
to evil. Do we fight evil, or do we tamely submit? If we choose to fight 
evil, do we use the weapons of evil, such as force, to win our fight? 
War is the ultimate conflict resolution. Patriotism is one of the most 
enduring of human values. In many ages and many great books, we are 
told that to die for one’s country is the noblest deed. That question is as 
alive today as it was in history’s first democracy, Athens of the 5th 
century B.C., or in the America of Abraham Lincoln. Two great 
democratic statesmen, Pericles and Lincoln, used the occasion of a 
public funeral for the war dead to proclaim that democracy is an 
absolute good. Nations that are based on government of the people, by 
the people, and for the people must be preserved. To die in that cause is 
the noblest of deaths. Separated by almost 2,500 years, these two 
funeral orations represent the most profound statements of the 
necessity of just wars. 
 
Outline 
I. 
The Aeneid, a magnificent work of Latin poetry, has influenced each 
succeeding generation of European literature.  
A. The Aeneid is a statement of the Roman ideal of the mission of the 
Roman nation: to lead the world to a new era of peace and prosperity 
and to unite the world under Roman rule. According to Vergil, the 
mission of the Greeks was to create art and science, whereas the 
mission of Rome was to conquer the arrogant and lift up the weak. 
B. The Aeneid is also a philosophic statement of duty, which is a theme 
that all must consider. 
1. What is our duty? 
2. How do we perform it? 
3. Are we called to a special mission in life, or do we drift aimlessly? 
C. Finally, the Aeneid is a poem about war. 
1. Aeneas was a warrior and statesman.  
2. The poem starts with the consequences of the Trojan War and the 
destruction of Troy. It concludes with a war that Aeneas and the 
Trojans did not want, that was forced on the Trojans in Italy. As a 
result of that war, Italy was united and a new Rome was founded.  
3. In answer to the question of whether wars solve anything, Vergil 
would say that war enabled Rome to be founded. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
42 
II. War has been a constant in human history. 
A. The earliest written historical document comes from ancient Egypt. It is 
a cosmetic palette, created around 3000 B.C., that depicts the wars of 
King Narmer to unify Egypt. 
B. The generations that fought World War I and World War II believed 
that they were fighting the war to end all wars. 
C. It is often the duty of a great statesman to lead a nation into war, just as 
it is the duty of that nation’s citizens to fight the war.  
D. The thinking person must ask whether it is more important to fight for 
one’s country or to take a stand and say that war is wrong and that no 
war is right or justified. 
E. War is not a question of democracy or dictatorships. The 20th century 
was the most democratic age in history, but it was the one that was 
most filled with war. Great democratic statesmen have led their nations 
to war in the belief that a greater good would be served. 
III. This lecture focuses on two such statesmen: Pericles, of democratic Athens 
in the 5th century B.C., and Abraham Lincoln, during the American Civil 
War. 
A. Both Pericles and Lincoln possessed the four qualities that distinguish 
a statesman from a mere politician. 
1. Both had a bedrock of principles, that is, a solid foundation of 
beliefs that did not change. A statesman does not transform 
principles to satisfy public opinion polls. Both Lincoln and 
Pericles based their principles on democracy, that is, a government 
of the people, by the people, and for the people. 
2. Each man possessed a moral compass that guided him through life. 
Each had a sense of absolute right and absolute wrong.  
3. Lincoln and Pericles each had a vision of his nation as a model for 
the world and the best hope for humankind. 
4. Both had the ability to build a consensus to achieve that vision. 
They were master orators who used the spoken word to rally their 
countrymen and to lead them to understand why war was 
necessary. 
B. Both Pericles and Lincoln led their nations into great civil wars. The 
war between Athens and Sparta from 431 to 404 B.C. was a civil war. 
The Athenians and the Spartans spoke the same language, worshipped 
the same gods, and had for some time been allied. Similarly, the two 
sides during the American Civil War had come to see themselves as 
different but spoke the same language, read the same books, and 
prayed to the same God—and both expected victory from God. 
C. Both Pericles and Lincoln sought these wars.  

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
43 
1. Pericles believed that Greece could not remain divided between 
the democracy of Athens and the narrowly based republican liberty 
of Sparta. He believed that the Greek world needed to be united 
under Athenian democracy. 
2. As soon as the South gave Lincoln justification for the war, he 
embarked on his mission to end slavery and mobilized 75,000 
volunteers to march on Richmond. The American Civil War ended 
slavery and determined that Americans are, first and foremost, 
citizens of the United States rather than citizens of their own 
states. 
IV. For both Lincoln and Pericles, a funeral oration provided the occasion to 
present their visions of the nation and to explain why the wars were 
necessary. 
V. Pericles gave his Funeral Oration in 430 B.C., during the first winter of the 
war. The bodies of those who had died during the war between Athens and 
Sparta were returned to Athens and brought to the cemetery for a public 
ceremony. 
A. Pericles was chosen as speaker because of his superior intellect and 
because he was the democratically elected leader of a free people. 
B. During his speech, he stated that most people who had given similar 
speeches had spoken as though they were honoring the men who died. 
Pericles said that the Athenians could not honor these men; the dead 
had honored Athens by what they had done. 
C. Instead of honoring those who had died, Pericles wished to speak about 
the nation for which they had died. 
1. That nation was a democracy that was based on the ideal of the 
greatest good for the greatest number of people. It was a tolerant 
nation that allowed people to live as they chose as long as they 
didn’t harm others; it was a nation that obeyed its laws and desired 
its citizens to be well-rounded.  
2. Pericles said that the citizens who were being buried possessed 
great patriotism and knew that the noblest thing they could do was 
to die for their country. They put aside their goals and aspirations 
so that their nation might be sustained and serve as a model to the 
world. 
3. Pericles stated that those who were being buried had left a 
challenge for those who remained: Those left behind had to take 
up the struggle, to prove themselves worthy of those who had died, 
and to see the war through to a successful conclusion so that the 
Athenian democracy would not perish. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
44 
VI. Lincoln gave the Gettysburg Address at the dedication of a national 
cemetery on November, 19, 1863. 
A. The idea for the national cemetery came in the aftermath of a battle 
fought from July 1–3, 1863. In September of that year, Governor 
Curtin of Pennsylvania rode through the battlefield and was outraged 
that Union soldiers who had died for their country were still rotting in 
the fields. He appealed to the governors of other states to accord the 
soldiers a proper burial, and money was raised for the cemetery. 
B. One of the governors thought that the president of the United States 
should give a speech; however, others believed that he was too 
controversial, was not a good speaker, and would just make a few 
inappropriate remarks. Instead, Edward Everett was the main speaker. 
C. In his remarks, Lincoln told his countrymen what the war was about. 
1. Lincoln invokes the Bible in the phrase “Fourscore and seven 
years ago” at the beginning of the speech. 
2. Lincoln reminds his audience of the birth of a unique nation: “our 
fathers brought forth on this continent, a new nation, conceived in 
Liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created 
equal.” Bringing forth is the second metaphor that Lincoln uses in 
this speech; conceiving and bringing forth a nation, just like 
conceiving and bringing forth a child, is a difficult process. This 
new nation is unique specifically because it was “conceived in 
Liberty” and dedicated to equality.  
3. “Now we are engaged in a great civil war, testing whether that 
nation, or any nation so conceived and so dedicated, can long 
endure.” A proposition is something that remains to be proved. A 
question remains: Would this nation survive? The United States 
was less than 100 years old; its future was uncertain. The country 
was at war because others would destroy its founding principle of 
equality. 
4. “We are met on a great battlefield of that war.” Lincoln repeats the 
word great because it is the only word that will work.  
5. “We have come to dedicate a portion of that field, as a final resting 
place for those who here gave their lives that that nation might 
live.” In two sentences, Lincoln has explained what the war was 
about and why it was being fought—so that the nation might be 
sustained. In none of the more recent wars, including Iraq and 
Vietnam, have people been told so succinctly the reason for the 
war. Lincoln faced the more difficult task of explaining why 
Americans were killing their fellow Americans. He also invoked 
the spirit of Christianity in asserting that these men, like Christ, 
died so that others might live. 
6. “It is altogether fitting and proper that we should do this. But, in a 
larger sense, we can not dedicate—we can not consecrate—we can 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
45 
not hallow—this ground. The brave men, living and dead, who 
struggled here, have consecrated it, far above our poor power to 
add or detract.” Dedicate, consecrate, and hallow are religious 
words. These men have made this ground sacred in dying for their 
country. 
7. “The world will little note, nor long remember what we say here, 
but it can never forget what they did here.” When Americans cease 
to be touched by walking on the hallowed ground of Gettysburg, 
the ideals of those who fought will be but shadows. 
8. “It is for us the living, rather, to be dedicated here to the 
unfinished work which they who fought here have thus far so 
nobly advanced.” Like Pericles, Lincoln shifts back to the present: 
The living must take up the challenge. 
9.  “It is rather for us to be here dedicated to the great task remaining 
before us… that we here highly resolve that these dead shall not 
have died in vain—that this nation, under God, shall have a new 
birth of freedom and that government of the people, by the people, 
for the people, shall not perish from the earth.” Although the 
Declaration of Independence mentions or invokes God four times, 
the Constitution does not refer to God. Further, it condones 
slavery. Lincoln is stating that the Constitution had a flaw. The 
United States must have a new birth of freedom, and it must be 
under the will of God, who created all men equal. 
10. Although Lincoln used the word liberty at the beginning of the 
speech, he used the word freedom toward the end. The term liberty 
refers to political liberty; Lincoln is saying that the United States is 
about true freedom of the entire human race. 
11. Lincoln’s largely Christian audience would have understood that 
“shall not perish from the earth” echoes John 3:16, which states: 
“For God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten son 
that whosoever believeth in him shall not perish but shall have 
eternal life.” Lincoln has again transformed each of these soldiers 
into Christ, an individual who suffered and died so that the nation 
might live on. 
D. Lincoln was not an ostentatiously religious man, but he believed—and 
became more convinced as the war went on—that he had been called to 
this duty, to end the great sin of slavery. 
VII.  Both Pericles, in his long Funeral Oration, and Lincoln, in his brilliant 
two-minute address, made a statement that the noblest thing that any person 
can do is to die for his or her country. Both the Athenians and the soldiers 
of the Civil War were propelled by that conviction. 
 
Essential Reading: 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
46 
Pericles, Funeral Oration, in Thucydides, History of the Peloponnesian War, 
Book II, chapters 34–56. 
Lincoln, Gettysburg Address, in Speeches and Writings. 
 
Supplementary Reading: 
Wills, Lincoln at Gettysburg. 
Zimmern, The Greek Commonwealth. 
 
Questions to Consider: 
1. Why do you think that Lincoln’s speech is openly religious and Pericles 
makes no reference to the gods? Do you see a meaning for today in 
Lincoln’s statement that the new nation must be founded “under God”? 
2. Can you relate the words of Pericles and Lincoln to the soldiers who have 
fought in America’s recent wars, the Gulf War, Afghanistan, and Iraq? 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
47 
Lecture Twenty-Two 
 
Remarque, All Quiet on the Western Front 
 
Scope: It can be argued that politicians and poets know nothing of war. Only 
the combat soldier understands the horror of war. Erich Maria 
Remarque was such a solider, in the Kaiser’s army in World War I. His 
novel was intended simply as a testament to “a generation destroyed by 
the war, even those of us who escaped its bullets.” Published in 1928, 
All Quiet on the Western Front is a powerful novel filled with 
characters we care about and written in a forceful, compact German 
style, reminiscent of a German Hemingway. It is the best novel about 
war ever written. It portrayed the terrible anonymity of modern war and 
influenced a generation of European youth, who in England swore 
“never again to fight for king and country.” All Quiet on the Western 
Front gave voice to those feelings that nothing was worth another war; 
paving the way for the appeasement policies in both Britain and France 
that, in fact, made another and even more horrible war inevitable.  
 
Outline 
I. 
The previous lecture examined the concept of duty. The two works used to 
exemplify this concept were the Funeral Oration of Pericles, delivered at 
the time of the civil war between Athens and Sparta in 430 B.C., and the 
Gettysburg Address, which Abraham Lincoln delivered on November 19, 
1863, during the Civil War in the United States. 
A. Both Pericles and Lincoln told their fellow citizens that their supreme 
duty was to die for their country.  
B. This question of duty is one of utmost importance. Is dying for one’s 
country the noblest thing that a person can do? 
1. The generation that grew up in the years before 1914 was taught 
that dying for one’s country was indeed noble. Boys were 
educated to be patriots and were told of the glory of war. Men 
marched off in August 1914 eager to have a chance to fight for 
their country. They worried that the war would be too short for 
them to see action. 
2. After four wars of World War I, many of those who survived were 
convinced that the most foolish thing one could do was to die for 
his country.  
II. The message of Im Westen, nichts Neues, or All Quiet on the Western 
Front, is that war is a great fraud perpetrated against ordinary people by 
incompetent leaders. This is the greatest novel about war ever written. Erich 
Maria Remarque, a veteran of World War I, published the work in 1928. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
48 
A. All Quiet on the Western Front tells the story of war and its costs 
through the eyes of an ordinary soldier, Paul Bäumer. 
B. In the preface, Remarque says that All Quiet on the Western Front is 
neither an indictment nor a confession. It intends simply to tell the 
story of a generation that was destroyed by war.  
C. The story begins in 1916 in the middle of the action, when Paul 
Bäumer has been in the German military for two years. Paul is happy. 
His company had 150 men, but their numbers had been reduced in 
battle to 80. Because rations for 150 men had been ordered, however, 
the survivors have enough to eat.  
1. The soldiers agree that they do not hate anyone in France and that 
they are fighting because their diplomats and politicians could not 
think of any other way to settle their differences.  
2. Paul and the men reminisce about their enlistment. Until the war 
started, Paul had been a schoolboy. Kantorek, his professor of 
classics and literature, had told the students in August 1914 that 
they were the iron youth of Germany and that their country was 
calling them. He exhorted Paul, as class leader, to enlist, and one 
by one, the students are killed in battle. Kemmerich [sic; should 
read “Joseph Behm”], a boy who initially did not want to enlist, 
was the first one killed. 
3. Paul and his companions go to visit their wounded comrades in a 
hospital tent. They see one man who is worried about his boots but 
does not know that he has lost his leg.  
4. Paul realizes that his life has been reduced to the contentment of a 
full belly and enough cigarettes to get through a day. What he 
learned in school was irrelevant: He was not taught useful skills, 
such as how to light a cigarette in the wind or keep his wits during 
bombardment. 
D. Paul returns to the front and is subsequently involved in a battle in a 
cemetery.  
1. He jumps into a bomb crater with a Frenchman, whom he stabs 
and mortally wounds. The bombardment continues all night and 
into the next day. Paul realizes that the Frenchman is human, too, 
and feels sympathy for him. The Frenchman dies. After the 
bombardment ends, Paul, shaken, returns to the German lines. 
2. Paul says that he is going to write to the Frenchman’s family to tell 
them how sorry he is. He is told to wait until the next day, when he 
will have forgotten about the episode.  
3. Paul realizes that war turns men into thugs. His Sunday school 
lessons have no relevance in his world: To “do unto others” is to 
kill them. A soldier’s objective is to kill as many people as 
possible and to steal so that he can survive.  

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
49 
4. The horror of war is found not only in shells but in gas attacks. 
These attacks show the scientific mind at work. Great nations have 
turned their scientists and engineers to building weapons. 
E. Paul goes home on leave in 1917.  
1. His mother has cancer but cooks a special meal of potato pancakes 
and jam. This meal reminds him of the things he has lost. 
2. His father proudly takes him to a pub, where his father’s friends 
ask him to tell them what the action is like at the front. When Paul 
explains that the Germans are outnumbered five to one since the 
American entry into the war and that a big push would be futile, he 
is accused of being a defeatist.  
3. Professor Kantorek shows up and asks Paul to encourage his 
students to enlist and to tell them what the front is like. Paul tells 
the students that soldiers mainly try not to get killed. Kantorek 
asks him to tell them about the brilliant boys who went with him, 
and Paul explains that only 4 of the original 15 remain. The 
professor says that their deaths were glorious because they died for 
their country, but Paul sees through this hypocrisy. 
F. Paul returns to the front. 
1. Paul wishes he had not gone home. He has come to the realization 
that the whole tradition of culture is meaningless if it allows war. 
He realizes that he is dead inside.  
2. Paul and an older comrade, Katczinsky (Kat), go on a foraging 
expedition and are involved in some shooting. Kat’s leg seems to 
be broken, and Paul must carry Kat on his back to the hospital tent.  
Paul recognizes that he shares far deeper experiences with Kat 
than with his father. He asks Kat to stay in contact with him after 
they return home. They see a plane in the sky, the plane drops one 
bomb, and a fragment hits and kills Kat. 
G. The unit is now filled with young boys, and they only seem to know 
how to get killed. The war has degenerated into one meaningless, futile 
assault after another. It is now summer 1918, and the war is dragging 
on. 
H. In November 1918, there are clear indications that the war is coming to 
an end, that an armistice will be signed, and that Paul has lived through 
the experience.  
1. Near the end of the book are several asterisks. Under the asterisks, 
the text reads that Paul was found dead, with a smile on his face, 
as if he was glad that the end had come. 
2. Paul was found on a day so quiet that the news from the front was 
only one line: “Im Westen, nichts Neues.” Paul Bäumer was just 
one more of 11 million dead.  

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
50 
III. Im Westen, nichts Neues encapsulated the feelings of many who fought in 
World War I. 
A. The British poet Wilfred Owen’s work cries out to his  readers that it is 
not sweet and fitting to die for one’s country. Owen died on November 
4, 1918, seven days before the armistice.  
B. World War I was a war with a purpose. It put an end, for a brief period, 
to Germany’s desire to dominate Europe.  
C. Some men, including the American poet Alan Seeger, were stoic about 
the war.  
1. Seeger, a Harvard graduate living in France, joined the French 
Foreign Legion so that he could fight in the war. 
2. Seeger was killed on July 4, 1916. His poem “I Have a 
Rendezvous with Death” states that he “shall not fail that 
rendezvous.” 
IV. After World War I, many people at all levels of government believed that 
no war was worth its cost. 
A. One German infantryman named Adolf Hitler, however, did not 
believe that the war was a great mistake; he saw it as the greatest 
moment of his life.  
B. Because English and French politicians were too weak and because the 
public believed that the war was a terrible mistake, the world found 
itself 30 years later in a more destructive war that would cause the 
deaths of 50 million people. 
 
Essential Reading: 
Remarque, All Quiet on the Western Front. 
 
Supplementary Reading: 
Brooke, Rupert Brooke and Wilfred Owen: Selected Poems. 
Sassoon, War Poems of Siegfried Sassoon. 
Horne, Verdun.  
 
Questions to Consider: 
1. Do you think that World War I was a senseless slaughter? 
2. Do you think that Vietnam exercised a similar influence on the baby boom 
generation in America? 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
51 
Lecture Twenty-Three 
 
Confucius, The Analects 
 
Scope: Few intellectual figures in history have so influenced a civilization as 
Confucius. For more than two millennia, the wisdom of this teacher 
guided the intellectual, political, and ethical life of China. Like 
Socrates, he was a teacher who sought to educate the whole of his 
students, based on the ideal that each student is an individual, with 
individual needs and abilities, and that the purpose of education is to 
make us better, better as individuals and as citizens. The teachings of 
Confucius were as revolutionary in 5th-century China as were those of 
Socrates in 5th-century Greece. For Confucius, the whole of an ethical 
life can be summarized by “doing unto others as you would have them 
do unto you.” True education is the development of the individual’s 
conscience. The highest calling is to be true to your conscience, to your 
true moral nature, which is good. In government, the logical deduction 
is that rulers must be educated and must govern for the benefit of their 
fellow citizens rather than for their own pleasure. 
 
Outline 
I. 
The previous lecture discussed the antiwar novel All Quiet on the Western 
Front by Erich Maria Remarque and explored the work for its depiction of 
the theme of duty. The generation of World War I had been taught that their 
duty was to fight for their country and that the noblest thing they could do 
was to die for their country. 
A. The Great War called that idea into question. 
B. World War I was not a useless war. According to Winston Churchill, 
however, the tragedy of World War I was that its lessons were thrown 
away and that a generation came out of that war unwilling to resist 
aggression when it appeared again.  
C. Churchill called World War II the unnecessary war because people 
failed to recognize that stopping aggression when it first appears is less 
costly than waiting until after it has grown. 
D. In All Quiet on the Western Front, Remarque was merely saying what 
almost everyone believed and wanted to believe. 
E. The Nazis despised Remarque, and he was forced to leave Germany. 
He went to Hollywood, where he became a scriptwriter and married the 
actress Paulette Goddard. He eventually moved to Switzerland. 
II. From the question of duty in war, these lectures turn to duty in government, 
how the individual should behave toward the government, and how 
government should behave toward the individual. Good government acts on 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
52 
behalf of its subjects, and its paramount concern should be the well-being 
of its subjects. 
III. This lecture discusses the third of the great teachers in history, Confucius. 
A. A central theme of this lecture is duty, how Confucius described it, and 
how he taught it to his students. A second theme is education, the 
process by which people learn their duties, and the role of a great 
teacher in that instruction. 
B. Confucius was born in 552 B.C. in the principality of Lu in China.  
1. Confucius came from a distinguished family.  
2. Civilization—characterized by writing, the use of metal, the 
building of monumental structures, and complex government 
organizations—did not develop in China until around 1700 B.C. By 
the time of Confucius, in the 6th century B.C., the emperor was 
essentially a puppet. China was divided into states that owed 
loyalty to the emperor but were actually governed by aristocrats.  
3. At first, Confucius was a civil servant and chief of police in Lu. 
4. Confucius was either dismissed from the civil service or went into 
voluntary exile. 
5. His regard for formalities and rituals was fundamental to his 
teachings. 
6. He spent years traveling from one principality to another, giving 
advice and being honored for his wisdom. His advice was seldom 
taken, and he was not given another position of authority. 
7. In his last years, he retired to the principality of Lu, where he died 
in 479 B.C., leaving his mark as a teacher. 
IV. As a teacher, Confucius has had tremendous influence. He shaped the 
civilization of China from his time until the 20th century.  
A. His sayings, teachings, and the works that he believed should be 
studied were fundamental to the educational system and the entire 
governmental structure. 
B. Civil servants at all levels studied his sayings and had to pass an 
examination that was based on his teachings. 
C. For any great teacher, however, life is not about a series of events that 
happen outside but about the teacher’s intellectual and spiritual 
development.  
D. At one time, Confucius had 3,000 students. His inner circle of disciples 
has passed on what we now know about him. Like Socrates and Jesus, 
he never wrote a book. His students gathered his wisdom into a 
collection of sayings. 
E. Confucius taught the importance of study and the way of moral 
instruction; he also taught his followers to be steadfast and to tell the 
truth. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
53 
V. Confucius believed that morality had to be founded in works of antiquity.  
A. For Confucius, cutting oneself off from the past was leaving oneself 
without roots. Like a tree, a person without roots will topple over.  
B. Confucius studied history and played a role in putting together and 
editing a historical chronicle. 
VI. Confucius culled the poetry of China for 300 odes that he believed were 
crucial.  
A. These odes were always sung. Confucius believed that music and the 
words of poetry put to music were essential to creating harmony in the 
soul. Confucius shared with Socrates the belief that the soul must be in 
harmony and that music was the outward expression of that harmony.  
B. At first, the odes might seem unrelated to moral instruction; however, 
when properly interpreted, these seemingly meaningless messages told 
the truth. 
C. For a whole Chinese civilization, these odes offered a means of 
speaking the truth. Odes were often used to convey a political or 
individual message.  
D. No person could begin on the path to wisdom without knowing the 
odes, poetry that speaks to the soul. 
E. The message of the odes is rooted in concrete knowledge of the past. 
VII.  Confucius believed in the importance of carrying out ancient rituals, for 
example, offering sacrifices and wearing certain kinds of clothes on specific 
occasions. He also believed that rituals must change to accommodate to 
new circumstances.  
A. Confucius saw such civility as being important, but harmony was far 
more important. Carrying out certain formalities is a way to preserve 
the harmony around us. 
B. Harmony derives from everyone knowing his or her place and knowing 
what is expected of him or her. 
C. When asked why he did not return to government service, Confucius 
replied that by being a good father or a good son, he was doing the 
most he could do for his government.  
VIII. The followers of Confucius were expected to follow the Dao—the way 
that is the truth. Confucius spent his life in pursuit of the truth. Confucius 
divided his life into a series of stages. 
A. At the age of 15, he began his studies. 
B. At the age of 30, he took his stand. By this he meant that he decided to 
devote his life to the search for truth. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
54 
C. At the age of 40, all his doubts were put aside, that is, he began to 
understand the way and knew that he must follow it. 
D. At 50, Confucius understood what heaven had decreed for him. 
1. Heaven had decreed that his proper place and destiny was to teach. 
2. It is noteworthy that according to his students, Confucius never 
talked about the gods. The divine plays almost no role in his 
teachings; he believed that people can find their way without 
invoking the gods.  
E. At 60, his “ears were properly attuned.” At this age, he knew what he 
should be doing. 
F. At 70, he was conscious that he was treading the path of truth. 
IX. The way of truth is the way of benevolence. 
A. For Confucius, the Golden Rule is the path of benevolence, the way of 
truth and harmony in the world. 
B. The path of good is marked in our character by wisdom, courage, and 
justice.  
1. Justice is doing unto others what you would have them do unto 
you. 
2. Courage is steadfastness in truth and doing what needs to be done, 
unafraid of any consequences. 
3. Wisdom—the ultimate goal of the teacher and seeker of truth—is 
knowing what needs to be done. 
4. Moderation joins justice, courage, and wisdom together to ensure 
that they work in harmony. 
X. It is possible to compare the three great teachers—Confucius, Socrates, and 
Jesus—who have been discussed in this course. 
A. The virtues encouraged by Confucius are those that Socrates also 
extolled. Both men devoted their lives to teaching others the path of 
virtue.  
B. Both Confucius and Socrates were philosophers who labeled 
themselves as searchers after truth. They both saw the search for 
wisdom as the way to truth. Jesus, who was recognized in his own day 
as a teacher, also engaged in this search for wisdom as the way to truth. 
C. The word education comes from a Latin root meaning “to lead out 
from.” Jesus, Socrates, and Confucius wanted to bring out from their 
students, or disciples, the truth that was already there but had been 
hidden by the falsity of the world. They sought to reroute the individual 
from wandering aimlessly through life to following the true path. 
D. None of the three great teachers wrote a book because each was a true 
searcher after truth and knew that the search is a lifelong pursuit. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
55 
E. Jesus, Socrates, and Confucius were united in their messages. They 
believed that the true teacher is a moral guide and that the true purpose 
of education is to make the individual a better person. Confucius saw 
goodness in those who practiced truth and benevolence and treated 
others as they would wish to be treated; in doing so, these would be 
good citizens.  
F. All three teachers believed that separating private morality from one’s 
duty as a citizen is impossible. A good, moral individual would also be 
a good, moral citizen. 
G. The three teachers also shared the notion of redemption. They believed 
that people can make many mistakes in life, but those who stay on the 
path will, in the end, be justified. They were willing to admit 
contradictions and give every individual a chance to change and learn. 
Both teachers and students must be willing to grow intellectually. For 
Confucius, the real key to life was encapsulated in his stages of 
learning. 
H. All three teachers carried their messages into the world. 
I. 
All three understood their own limits. They did not impart expertise but 
helped their students come up with their own ideas. 
J. Jesus, Socrates, and Confucius were willing to give their lives for truth. 
When threatened with assassination, Confucius said that the would-be 
assassin could kill him but could not take away that truth that was in 
him. 
K. The lives of these three teachers were their messages, and their lives 
epitomized the truth to which they wished to lead others. 
 
Essential Reading: 
Confucius, The Analects. 
 
Supplementary Reading: 
Yao, Encyclopedia of Confucianism. 
Carrithers et al., Founders of Faiths. 
 
Questions to Consider: 
1. Confucius taught that a harmony must exist between our personal actions, 
our family life, and our government. Do you agree? 
2. Do you think our politicians have or even should have the qualities that 
Confucius sought in a “good, benevolent” person and that were his 
qualifications for leadership? 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
56 
Lecture Twenty-Four 
 
Machiavelli, The Prince 
 
Scope: Confucius taught the art of government as it should be. Machiavelli 
taught government as it is in fact. Written in 1513, The Prince might be 
called the handbook of modern politics and foreign policy. It is as 
applicable today as it was in the age of such Renaissance tyrants as 
Cesare Borgia, and it is as useful to corporate CEOs as it is to 
politicians. Machiavelli is concerned with power, how to get and how 
to keep it. Power is everything. It is the possession of power that 
matters, not using power for any good purpose. The ruler governs for 
his own benefit, not for the benefit of those he rules. His subjects are 
but sheep to be sheared or threats to be eliminated. Crassly spoken, 
ethics consists of one maxim: “Do others in before they do you in.” For 
Machiavelli, his lessons are irrefutable, based on the examples of 
history. His historical examples are chosen to show that the most 
successful tyrants are frequently men of mediocre ability, who focus on 
power and are utterly ruthless in its pursuit. The lesson was not lost on 
Stalin or Hitler. 
 
Outline 
I. 
The previous lecture examined The Analects of Confucius. This collection 
of sayings expressed Confucius’s belief that people must follow the path of 
truth. The lecture explored this work in terms of the theme of duty and how 
we live our lives, with specific regard to the significance this has for our 
ideals of government and justice. The lecture also compared Confucius with 
two other great teachers, Jesus and Socrates. 
II. This lecture continues our theme of government and justice. It discusses 
one of the most influential figures in history, Machiavelli, and his great 
work, Il Principe.  
A. Il Principe is generally translated as “The Prince,” but a better 
translation would be “The Leader.” 
B. Machiavelli’s “il principe” is a leader, and the book is about power. 
III. Socrates was influential because he laid the foundation for the intellectual 
framework that we call the ideal of the university; Jesus laid the foundation 
for Christianity, and Confucius laid the framework for the civilization of 
China. Machiavelli did not transform people’s thinking—he described 
people as they were. The lessons of Machiavelli are written throughout 
history. 
A. Machiavelli believed that power is what people want and that people 
will do anything to obtain it. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
57 
B. Machiavelli would say that the teachings of Socrates, Jesus, and 
Confucius are fine intellectually, but people do not actually behave that 
way. He would rewrite the Golden Rule as: “Do others in before they 
do you in.” He believed that in the real world, an individual must live 
by the clear rules of power. 
C. Hitler said that The Prince was the most influential work he had ever 
read and that he often turned to it for guidance. 
IV. Machiavelli was born in Florence in 1469 and died in 1527.  
A. Machiavelli lived during the time of the Renaissance in Italy. Florence 
was a free republic that valued its autonomy, liberty, and democratic 
form of government. 
B. Machiavelli came from a family of some distinction. He received a 
good education, which focused on Latin classics. He came to believe 
that history could be used as a tool to understand the present. 
C. Machiavelli entered bureaucratic service and rose rapidly, becoming a 
trusted agent of the republic of Florence. He went on diplomatic 
missions and traveled widely. 
D. He was known for writing clear reports on his diplomatic activities, 
and in these reports, he mastered the Italian language. Although erudite 
books were commonly written in Latin in the 15th century, Machiavelli 
understood that the Italian language was a powerful vehicle. 
E. Machiavelli sharpened his understanding of how politics works, how 
politicians operate, and what matters to them. 
F. In 1512, a sudden change occurred in the politics of Florence. The 
mercenary armies of Pope Julius II conquered Florence, the Florentine 
government was forced to give up its republican constitution, and the 
de’Medici family was reinstated in a dictatorship. 
G. Machiavelli was falsely accused of malfeasance, convicted of these 
trumped up charges, removed from political affairs, and banished to his 
small family farm, where he returned to studying. He began a 
“dialogue” with the men of the past and, from them, learned the truth 
about power and politics. He also wrote and completed a set of 
commentaries on Livy. 
H. In The Prince, a small book, Machiavelli distilled all the lessons from 
his studies. He dedicated the work to the de’Medici family in hopes of 
being given a position in the new government; however, The Prince 
was too dangerous and told the truth too openly. 
V. The theme of The Prince is power—how to get it and how to keep it. An 
individual can learn how to obtain and maintain power through the lessons 
of history—both immediate history and the histories of Greece and Rome. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
58 
A. The first decision that the individual must make is whether he really 
wants power, because a person who does not truly desire power should 
stay out of that arena. Those who seek power must be willing to do 
whatever is necessary to obtain it. 
B. Those who seek power must understand what they want power over, 
the vehicles for exercising power, and the steps to maintaining power. 
C. In this step-by-step instruction book for being a dictator, an important 
step is knowing what one wants to be a dictator of. A dictatorship, by 
its character, must be a monarchy, ruled by one person. The three types 
of monarchies are hereditary monarchies; mixed monarchies, in which 
the monarch expands an existing hereditary monarchy; and newly won 
monarchies that the monarch rules by himself as an innovator. 
1. A hereditary monarchy is the easiest kind to rule. The would-be 
dictator should not introduce innovations, because they cause 
trouble. Change is an implicit criticism of what has gone before. 
Further, people do not really want innovation. 
2. A mixed monarchy can evolve from merger or expansion. The 
monarch must avoid innovation in the existing territory but move 
ruthlessly to remove any possible danger in the new regions that 
have been conquered. This leader must be a shrewd judge of 
character to determine which people will truly support him and 
reward those who do so. All opponents must be removed early in 
the rule. People must be well treated or destroyed. 
3. New monarchies are rare. Historical examples include those 
established by Moses, who created the people of Israel, and by 
Cyrus, who created the nation of Persia. The leader of this 
monarchy must be a warrior. A peace-loving ruler who attempts 
reform will get into trouble.  
D. The person who wants to rule must have an army. A professional army 
is not loyal; its soldiers serve only for money, and the leaders are 
interested in protecting their investment, that is, their men. A militia of 
citizen solders will provide an army that is loyal to the ruler. 
VI. Machiavelli also describes the rules for maintaining power. 
A. The dictator does not want power so that he can do good things. He 
wants power for its own sake. 
B. The leader must possess several characteristics. 
1. He must be cunning, not wise. For the leader, understanding 
people and how they behave is worth all the lessons and 
philosophy in the world. The leader is not searching for ultimate 
truth; he is searching for what works. 
2. The leader must be stingy. Machiavelli believed that if Caesar had 
truly been a good leader, he would have killed all who had 
opposed him at Pharsalus. Machiavelli believed that Caesar was 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
59 
too lavish in gifts to the Roman people. The generous leader will 
ruin himself financially and will be unable to procure the means to 
maintain power. Power is about force and the money to buy that 
force and sustain it. 
3. The leader must be cruel. Being hated and feared is better than 
being loved. People will not come to the aid of a loved leader 
unless it is convenient for them. If they fear the leader, they will 
come to his aid. The only way to make people fearful is by cruelty.  
4. The ability to lie is a key to success. The leader should never keep 
a promise unless it is convenient. He should say whatever is 
expedient at the moment, then do as he pleases. 
C. The selection of immediate supporters is also important. They must be 
capable, loyal, and under the leader’s control. The followers must be 
flatterers, but the leader must be able to judge this flattery. Anyone 
who contradicts the leader in public or gives a frank opinion in public 
must be removed. 
D. In giving examples, Machiavelli focuses on mediocrities.  
1. Septimius Severus was emperor of Rome from 193 to 211 A.D. He 
was a man of mediocre ability, but he rose to power in Rome, held 
that power for 18 years, passed it to his son, and died in his old 
age. He accomplished this feat by recognizing his limitations and 
by practicing the qualities that Machiavelli cites. Septimius 
Severus was stingy, deceitful, cruel, and able to sniff out a threat. 
2. Perhaps the most successful practitioner of the precepts of 
Machiavelli in the 20th century was Stalin. Stalin transformed his 
country into an atomic power and led it to victory in World War II, 
using cruelty and shrewdness. Trotsky, an opponent of Stalin, said, 
“Joseph Stalin is a mediocrity, but he is not a nonentity.”  
 
Essential Reading: 
Machiavelli, The Prince. 
 
Supplementary Reading: 
Burckhardt, The Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy. 
Fears, Selected Writings of Lord Acton, vol. II, pp. 479–494. 
 
Questions to Consider: 
1. Do you find it curious that the most successful book on politics was written 
by a failed politician? Can we say of Machiavelli that those who can do and 
those who can’t teach? 
2. Do you agree with Confucius or Machiavelli about the goal of government? 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
60 
Timeline 
 
B.C. 
 
3000 ................................................Birth of civilization in the Near East and 
Egypt 
2500 ................................................Pyramids of Giza in Egypt 
2500 ................................................Indus Valley civilization in India 
2000 ................................................Stonehenge  
1760 ................................................Shang Dynasty in China, first historical 
dynasty, with writing and bronze artworks 
1500 ................................................Aryan invasion of India 
1295–1225 ......................................Ramses II, pharaoh of Egypt; historical 
context for the Exodus 
1250 ................................................Trojan War 
1027–56 ..........................................Zhou Dynasty in China, political context for 
Confucius (551–479) 
1000 ................................................Beginning of Sanskrit literature 
563–483 ..........................................Buddha 
550–531 ..........................................Persian Empire rules the Middle East  
490–404 ..........................................Golden age of Athenian democracy 
336–323 ..........................................Alexander the Great 
218–146 ..........................................Rise of the Roman Empire 
48–31 ..............................................Julius Caesar and Augustus establish 
monarchy in the Roman Empire 
A.D. 
31 B.C.–180 A.D...............................Golden age of the Roman Empire 
6 ......................................................Birth of Jesus 
312 ..................................................Conversion of the Roman emperor 
Constantine to Christianity, which became 
the official religion of the Roman Empire 
476 ..................................................Fall of the Roman Empire in Western 
Europe 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
61 
800 ..................................................Charlemagne establishes what became the 
Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation 
1066 ................................................Norman Conquest of England 
1194–1500 ......................................Gothic art and architecture dominate Europe 
1215 ................................................Magna Carta 
1304–1527 ......................................Renaissance 
1517–1648 ......................................Reformation 
1558–1603 ......................................Queen Elizabeth of England 
1648–1789 ......................................Age of the Enlightenment 
1775–1789 ......................................American Revolution and Constitution, 
“The Founding” 
1789–1815 ......................................French Revolution and Napoleon 
1860–1914 ......................................Golden age of the British Empire 
1861–1865 ......................................American Civil War 
1914–1918 ......................................World War I 
1929–1953 ......................................Joseph Stalin rules the Soviet Union 
1933–1945 ......................................Adolf Hitler rules Germany 
1945– ............................................. Scientific and technological revolution 
1990– .............................................United States as the world’s only 
superpower 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
62 
Glossary 
 
Akkad: The geographical term to describe the northern portion of ancient 
Mesopotamia. The Akkadians and their descendants, the Babylonians, spoke a 
Semitic language and were much indebted culturally to the neighboring 
Sumerians. 
Aryan: A term derived from the Sanskrit word for “noble.” Aryan was much 
used in the 19th and first half of the 20th centuries to describe the Indo-European 
invaders of India, who conquered the peoples of the Indus Valley civilization 
and developed the literature and culture of classical India. The term was 
misused by the Nazis but still retains its value as a collective designation for use 
in discussing the early history of India. 
Asia Minor: Classical term to describe the area now known as Turkey. 
Birth of civilization: Rise of complex political structures, writing, monumental 
architecture, and use of metal. These advances occurred simultaneously in 
Egypt and Mesopotamia. 
City-state: A term to describe a sovereign political unit based on a walled city 
and surrounding territory. City-state is frequently used to describe the political 
units of early Mesopotamia, Greece and Italy, Phoenicia, and medieval and 
Renaissance Italy.  
Classical antiquity: The Greek and Roman world from roughly 800 B.C. 
(Homer) to 476 A.D. (fall of the Roman Empire in Western Europe). 
Classics: Conventional term for the writings of classical antiquity, now used in 
general to describe great books from all periods and cultures. 
Communism: An ideology maintaining that society should be constituted so 
that the means of production and subsistence are held in common and labor is 
organized for the common benefit of all. This ideal was maintained by Plato. 
However, as a modern political system, communism has been marked by the 
creation of the totalitarian state and party apparatus to subordinate all aspects of 
the individual, the society, and the economy to the control of the state. 
Determinism: The antithesis of free will, determinism argues that humans have 
no control over decisions, actions, and events, which are the inevitable 
consequences of forces independent of the human will. 
Enlightenment: Term to describe the epoch in European history from 1648 
(Descartes and the end of the Wars of Religion) to 1789 (the French 
Revolution). The age of the Enlightenment was marked intellectually by faith in 
reason and progress and admiration for the legacy of classical antiquity. 
Founders (Founding Fathers): Collective term for the American statesmen who 
signed the Declaration of Independence, waged the Revolutionary War, and 
established the Constitution. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
63 
Free will: The idea that humans make their own choices, unconstrained by 
necessity or external circumstances. 
Gentile: A non-Jew. 
Gestapo: Geheime Staatspolizei, the secret state police of Nazi Germany. 
Ideology: A complex set of ideas and values that unifies a community, directs 
its actions, and validates its decision making. For example, democracy is the 
ideology of the United States. 
Indo-European: A linguistic term to describe a number of related languages, 
ranging geographically from India to North and South America. These include 
Sanskrit and the derived languages of India (such as Hindi); Persian; Greek and 
Latin; the Romance languages, such as French and Spanish, derived from Latin; 
the Germanic languages, including English; the Slavic languages, including 
Russian; and the Celtic languages, including Irish. The original home of the 
Indo-European speakers seems to have been in southern Russia, from which 
they migrated east and west, beginning around 2200 B.C. 
Law (Jewish): The complex code of laws and regulations, based on the Ten 
Commandments and elaborated in the first five books of the Old Testament (the 
Pentateuch) and later Jewish tradition. 
Marxism: An ideology based on the ideas of Karl Marx (1818–1893) and 
Friedrich Engels (1820–1895) and the intellectual foundation of modern 
communism. 
Mesopotamia: “Land between the rivers.” A geographical term used 
historically to identify the region, now largely in Iraq, between the Tigris and 
Euphrates Rivers. Location of early civilizations of Sumer, Akkad, and 
Babylonia. 
Middle Ages (medieval period): The period in European history between the 
fall of the Roman Empire in Western Europe (476) and the fall of the Roman 
Empire in the East at Constantinople in 1453. 
National Socialism (Nazism): The ideology of Germany under Adolf Hitler, 
based on racism, nationalism, and socialism and espousing a totalitarian state in 
which the individual and all aspects of life were absolutely subordinate to the 
state.  
Pharisee: Member of an influential Jewish group in Judaea at the time of Jesus. 
The Pharisees were trained in the Jewish law and insisted on a strict 
interpretation of that law. Their role in society might be compared to that of 
professors in our own day. 
Renaissance: The beginning of the modern age, marked by the Renaissance 
(“rebirth”) of interest in classical antiquity. As is true of most historical 
designations, such as Middle Ages, it is difficult to define precisely the 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
64 
chronological limits of the Renaissance. It began in Italy, then spread to 
Northern Europe. Defensible dates are from the career of the Italian poet and 
lover of antiquity Petrarch (1304–1374) to Martin Luther and the beginning of 
the Protestant Reformation (1517).  
Roman Empire: The Roman world from 48 B.C.–476 A.D. Used in this way, the 
term Roman Empire describes the political system of monarchy established by 
Julius Caesar and his successors to rule over territory ultimately stretching from 
Britain to Iraq. However, starting in 246 B.C., long before Caesar, the Roman 
Republic began to conquer an overseas empire. Thus, historians commonly, if 
confusingly, speak of the Roman Republic ruling the Roman Empire. The 
Roman people permitted Caesar and his successors, especially Augustus, to 
transform Rome from a republic into a monarchy in order to continue to rule 
this overseas empire. 
Roman Republic: Rome from 509–48 B.C., marked by political liberty and a 
balanced constitution. 
Sadducees: Members of an influential group in Judaea at the time of Jesus. 
Sadducees tended to be wealthy and insisted on the Temple as the focus of 
Jewish religion. 
Semitic: Linguistic and cultural term used to describe certain related languages 
and cultures of the Middle East in antiquity and the modern world, including 
Babylonian, Hebrew, Phoenician, Syriac, and Arabic. 
Socialism: A term that first appears in English in 1832 to describe an ideology 
opposing laissez-faire economics in favor of some form of communal ownership 
of productive assets. 
Soviet Union (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics): The political entity that in 
1922 replaced the Russian Empire. In 1991, this communist state fragmented 
into numerous nations, including the Russian Federation. 
Sumer: A nation composed of a number of city-sates in ancient Mesopotamia, 
speaking the same language and sharing the same culture. The Sumerians 
influenced greatly the later history of the Middle East. The Sumerian language 
seems to be unrelated to any other known language. 
Third Reich: Name given by Hitler to Germany under National Socialism 
(1933–1945). 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
65 
Biographical Notes 
 
Aristotle: Greek philosopher (386–32 B.C.). Not an Athenian by birth, Aristotle 
spent much of his life teaching in Athens. He was the pupil of Plato and founded 
his own university in Athens, the Lyceum. Far more than Plato, Aristotle 
focused on empirical studies, including natural science and history. He was 
perhaps the most profound mind of classical Greece as Plato was the most 
intellectual and Socrates the noblest. He was the tutor of Alexander the Great. 
Aristotle was the most influential intellectual figure in both the European and 
the Islamic Middle Ages. His Poetics is the first book on literary criticism to 
come down to us from classical antiquity. It provides us with a working 
definition of a great book as one that has a beneficent moral impact on its 
audience. 
Augustus Caesar: Roman statesman (63 B.C.–14 A.D.). Born Gaius Octavius, he 
was the great-nephew and adopted son of Julius Caesar. Modern historians 
generally refer to him as Octavian during his early political career and rise to 
power (44–27 B.C.), from his adopted name of Gaius Julius Caesar Octavianus. 
Building on his relationship with the popular Julius Caesar, Octavian, at the age 
of 19, raised an army on his own initiative. With extraordinary political skills, 
he achieved absolute mastery over the Roman world, winning a decisive victory 
over Marc Antony and Cleopatra at Actium in 31 B.C. He then carried out a 
series of political, military, social, and economic reforms that successfully 
transformed Rome from a republic into a monarchy and inaugurated two 
centuries of peace and prosperity throughout the Roman world. In 27 B.C., he 
marked the inauguration of the new order by adopting the name Augustus, 
which means “messiah.” Augustus is rightly regarded as the greatest statesman 
in history, the model of the good Roman emperor. He was celebrated by Vergil 
in the Aeneid, and during his reign, Jesus was born. He is discussed at length in 
The Teaching Company course Famous Romans (Lectures Fourteen–Sixteen). 
Brown, John: American opponent of slavery and terrorist (1800–1859). Born in 
Connecticut and Puritan in background, Brown was a failure in business. 
Deeply convinced of the immorality of slavery and profoundly influenced by the 
Bible, he took his sons to Kansas and Nebraska in 1845 in a violent effort to 
oppose the supporters of slavery. On October 16, 1859, funded by respected 
New England abolitionists, Brown, along with his sons, formed a small group 
that seized the federal arsenal at Harpers Ferry. The goal, which failed, was to 
start a slave rebellion. Brown was captured, tried, and hanged for treason. 
Cato, Marcus Porcius the Younger: Roman statesman and opponent of Julius 
Caesar (95–46 B.C.). Far more than Brutus, Cato was the noblest Roman. He 
loved liberty, which he defined as the political freedom of the balanced 
constitution of the Roman Republic. He saw Caesar as the preeminent threat to 
that liberty. Thus, Cato opposed Caesar at every step of the rise to power. 
Ultimately, Cato chose civil war rather than allow Caesar to become despot. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
66 
Defeated in that war, Cato chose suicide rather than accept the clemency of 
Caesar. In The Divine Comedy, Dante paid tribute to his own love of political 
liberty by placing Cato as the guardian of the gates of Purgatory. Cato is 
discussed at length in Famous Romans (Lecture Twelve). 
Gladstone, William Ewart: British statesman (1809–1898). Gladstone was 
four times prime minister of Britain during the golden age of the British Empire 
(1868–1874, 1880–1885, 1886, 1892–1894). He embodied the ideals of the 
Liberal Party. He believed in free trade and a broad franchise of voters. He 
believed in democracy, and he believed that democracy was only viable if 
ordinary citizens were educated and had economic opportunity. It was the role 
of the government to provide education and economic opportunity. Gladstone 
believed that the British Empire was a great force for good, but he was opposed 
to wars of aggression. He was much influenced by Lord Acton in his views of 
history and served as a model for Winston Churchill. For us, in addition, 
Gladstone is a model for how a statesman shaped his life and values around the 
lessons of the great books. Gladstone believed that all we need to know about 
ethics can be learned from Homer, and he himself wrote scholarly volumes on 
Homer and the historical context of the Iliad and Odyssey.  
Hammurabi: Babylonian king (1728–1686 B.C.). Hammurabi is one of the most 
important figures in the early history of the Middle East. His reign marked the 
high point of Babylonian civilization and political power. He ruled over an 
extensive empire, including modern-day Iraq and parts of Iran and Turkey. 
Babylonian civilization reached new levels in astronomy and literature. The 
government was marked by a well-trained bureaucracy. Hammurabi issued a 
major code of laws that influenced the subsequent legal systems of the ancient 
Middle East, including the Old Testament. He is important both for our 
understanding of the historical background of the Ten Commandments and for 
the transmission of the Gilgamesh epic. 
Hitler, Adolf: German dictator (1889–1945). Born an ethnic German in the 
Austro-Hungarian Empire, Adolf Hitler was a failed artist who discovered the 
meaning of his life in World War I. Determined to lead Germany back to 
greatness after the defeat of 1918, Hitler became leader of the National Socialist 
Party. He transformed a fringe political group into the dominant force in the 
chaotic democratic politics of Germany in the 1920s and early 1930s, the 
Weimar Republic. In jail, he wrote Mein Kampf, which stated clearly his 
determination to destroy the Jewish people of Europe and to begin another 
world war. He became chancellor of Germany in 1933 by legal means. He 
moved swiftly to establish a totalitarian system as complete and as evil as that of 
Stalin. True to his promise, he led the world into World War II. That war, as 
Winston Churchill said, would never have happened except for Hitler. In the 
name of his crackpot ideas of racism and nationalism, Hitler ordered the murder 
of more than 6 million people in concentration camps. The total number of 
people who died as a result of Hitler’s war and policies is estimated at 50 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
67 
million. He committed suicide in the last days of World War II, leaving his 
nation and Europe in ruins. 
Julius Caesar: Roman statesman (100–44 B.C.). Julius Caesar is one of the most 
influential figures in world history and one of the most gifted individuals in 
history. Beginning his career as a rather shady politician, he grew into a figure 
who transformed history. A military genius, Caesar conquered Gaul (France), 
successfully invaded Britain, and defeated his rival Pompey, reputed to be the 
best general of the age. Caesar used this military success and the loyalty of the 
army to establish himself as dictator of the Roman Empire. He understood that a 
republic could no longer rule this empire and that the Roman people wanted 
authoritarian rule. He described his victories in Gaul and in the civil war against 
Pompey in Commentaries, which became the model for history and Latin prose. 
Such generals as Napoleon, Robert E. Lee, and George Patton have paid tribute 
to the military brilliance of Caesar. Caesar undertook a series of economic, 
political, and social reforms at Rome and in the provinces of the Roman Empire, 
which laid the foundation for the next 2,000 years of European history and 
civilization. Jealousy of Caesar and his own lack of patience led to Caesar’s 
assassination by a conspiracy of 63 senators, headed by Brutus and Cassius. 
Among the great books we study, Vergil’s Aeneid, Dante’s The Divine Comedy, 
and Shakespeare’s Julius Caesar all pay him tribute. 
King, Martin Luther, Jr.: American civil rights leader (1929–1968). A 
minister and son of a minister, King was a man of profound faith and courage. 
He stood up against a corrupt social and political system in the American South, 
which denied to U.S. citizens their constitutional rights on the basis of race. 
King led nonviolent resistance to segregation that resulted in major legislation 
and the collapse of segregation. His political and social views evolved into a 
strong resistance to the American war in Vietnam and an increasing focus on 
economic reform. His assassination in 1968 remains a mystery. King was 
profoundly influenced in his beliefs by the Bible, Thoreau, and Gandhi, as well 
as a number of great books, which he quoted in his profoundly moving Letter 
from a Birmingham Jail (discussed in A History of Freedom [Lecture Thirty-
Five]). 
Lenin, Vladimir: Soviet Russian revolutionary and dictator (1870–1924). Lenin 
was a convinced follower of Karl Marx who instituted one of the most brutal 
tyrannies in history in order to transform the Russian Empire into a Marxist 
state. Lenin came from a middle-class background and was well educated. His 
plots against the tsarist regime forced him into exile. By the agency of the 
German government, he returned to Russia in 1917 at a critical moment in the 
beginning of the revolution. Lenin had a powerful intellect and an utterly 
ruthless drive for power. He masterminded the Bolshevik seizure of power and 
victory in the civil war. He crushed all opposition and established the main 
features of the communist dictatorship in the Soviet Union, including the use of 
terror as a state policy and the concentration camps. In addition to his political 
leadership, Lenin also made fundamental contributions to Marxist theory, and 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
68 
subsequent generations of communists all over the world have called their 
ideology Marxism-Leninism. 
Marx, Karl: Economic thinker and intellectual founder of communism (1818–
1883). Marx was one of the most influential figures of the 20th century. Born in 
Germany, he was educated in philosophy and the classics. He developed an all-
encompassing philosophy based on economic determinism. He believed that 
ideas were the product of economic conditions. He was a political activist who 
sought to drive the workers to revolution through such publications as The 
Communist Manifesto, written with his close collaborator Friedrich Engels. 
Marx spent his last years in London, writing his massive work Das Kapital. 
Marx is important to us to show the different lessons that can be drawn from a 
study of the great books. He is also one of the preeminent examples to 
contradict his own view. Marx shows that history is indeed made by ideas, as 
the long and unfortunate history of the Soviet Union, communist China, and 
other communist regimes has shown. 
Sophocles: Athenian writer of tragedies (496–406 B.C.). Along with Aeschylus 
and Euripides, Sophocles was one of the three greatest playwrights of the 
golden age of Athenian tragedy. Aristotle considered his Oedipus the King to be 
the perfect tragedy. He is discussed at length in A History of Freedom (Lecture 
Four) and Famous Greeks (Lecture Fourteen). 
Stalin, Joseph: Dictator of the Soviet Union (1879–1953). Born a Georgian in 
the Caucasus, Stalin’s birth name was Iosif Dzhugashvili. He took the name 
Stalin during his early career as a political activist for Marxism and the 
overthrow of the regime of the tsar in Russia. Stalin means “man of steel,” and 
Stalin was one of the hardest and most ruthless figures in history. A protégé of 
Lenin, he played an important role in the Russian Revolution and the civil war 
of 1917–1924. After Lenin’s death, Stalin secured by brute force and cunning 
absolute mastery of the Soviet Union. From 1929–1953, he ruled by terror the 
most complete despotism the world has ever seen. Some 20 million of his own 
citizens died in his concentration camps. Despite this terror, he was genuinely 
loved by millions of Russians and was hailed as the savior of his country for the 
victory over Germany in World War II. Stalin is the model for Big Brother in 
George Orwell’s 1984. Stalin is discussed in A History of Freedom (Lecture 
Thirty-Four). 
Thucydides: Athenian historian (died c. 400 B.C.). Thucydides was an admirer 
of Pericles. During the Peloponnesian War, he was exiled by his fellow 
Athenian citizens for his failure on a military assignment. This left him with an 
abiding hatred of democracy but gave him the time and opportunity to write his 
monumental History of the Peloponnesian War. This is one of the most 
influential works of history ever written. The Founders of the United States 
regarded Thucydides as a guide for political decision making in the new 
republic. Thucydides and his history are discussed at length in Famous Greeks 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
69 
(Lecture Fifteen). He is important in this course as our source for the Funeral 
Oration of Pericles. 
Tolkien, John Robert Reuel: British author (1892–1973). J. R. R. Tolkien was 
the creator of a fantasy world based on the ideals and values of the Anglo-Saxon 
and Scandinavian heroic age of the early Middle Ages. He was a scholar of 
medieval English literature and a specialist on Beowulf. He was professor at 
Oxford University from 1925–1959. But he is remembered and important for his 
novels, above all The Lord of the Rings, which continues to grow in popularity 
and has been the source of one of the most successful and critically acclaimed 
series of films in movie history. 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
70 
Bibliography 
 
Note: The Essential Readings focus on the books we are discussing. I have 
recommended editions that are available and offer guides to further reading on 
the book and the author. I have recommended as Supplementary Reading books 
that put our works into a broader context or that I find especially useful in 
understanding the text. This means that on several occasions, I recommend 
books and essays that are older and more traditional simply because I think they 
will be more useful than the most recent scholarship on our book and author. 
Essential Reading 
Aeschylus. Oresteia. R. Lattimore, trans. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1953, numerous reprints. The best translation of this compelling tragedy. 
———. Prometheus Bound, The Suppliants, Seven against Thebes, The 
Persians. P. Vellacott, trans. Baltimore: Penguin, 1961, numerous reprints. A 
convenient and good translation. 
Aristotle. Poetics. W. Fyfe and W. Roberts, trans. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press, 1932, numerous reprints. A good translation and valuable for 
its inclusion of other classical works on literary criticism. 
Beowulf. S. Heaney, trans. New York: Farrar, Strauss, and Girard, 2000. A 
brilliant translation by a highly regarded modern poet. 
Bhagavad Gita. J. Mascaro, trans. London: Penguin, 2003. An accurate and 
sensitive translation. 
Bible. I prefer the majesty of the King James Version. Of the modern revised 
versions, the best, for translation and notes, is the New Revised Standard 
Version of the New Oxford Annotated Bible, New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1991.  
Bonhoeffer, Dietrich. Letters and Papers from Prison. New York: Simon and 
Schuster, 1997. A moving testimony to the courage under trial of a remarkable 
intellectual and man of action. 
Churchill, Winston S. My Early Life. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1996. A 
recent and in-print edition of Churchill’s autobiography, written in 1930, when 
the British political world and the press thought he was finished.  
———. Painting as a Pastime. Delray Beach: Levenger Press, 2003. 
Churchill’s masterly essay on how to stay young, giving unique insights into the 
paintings of Churchill, which themselves give unique insight into Churchill the 
statesman. 
———. The Second World War. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1986. A 
masterpiece of historical writing, filled with the lessons of history for our own 
day.  

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
71 
Cicero, Marcus Tullius. On Duties (De Officiis). W. Miller, trans. Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1913, numerous revisions. By far the best 
translation, in print, of this fundamental work on education and morality.  
Confucius. The Analects. D. C. Lau, trans. New York: Penguin, 1979. The best 
translation into English, with a valuable introduction. 
Dante. The Divine Comedy. R. Sinclair, trans. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1961. Of the many English translations, I prefer that of Sinclair for 
accuracy and for the clarity of its notes. . 
Euripides. Bacchae. P. Vellacott, trans. Baltimore: Penguin, 1972, numerous 
reprints. A convenient translation of this last tragedy of Euripides. 
Fears, J. Rufus. Selected Writings of Lord Acton, vol. I, Essays in the History of 
Liberty. Indianapolis: LibertyClassics, 1985. Part of a three-volume edition, the 
most complete collection of the writings, published and unpublished, of this 
seminal figure in the liberal tradition and in the great books tradition. 
Gandhi, Mahatma. An Autobiography: The Story of My Experiments with the 
Truth. Boston: Beacon, 1993. A recent edition of the autobiography of a great 
and original man of action and thought. The biography is as idiosyncratic—I use 
the word in a most positive sense—as was Gandhi himself. 
Gibbon, E. The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire. New York: Random 
House, 2000. This complete edition in three volumes is to be preferred to the 
various abridged versions in print. 
Gilgamesh. B. Foster and D. Frayne, trans. New York: Norton, 2001. A good. 
recent translation, with useful supplementary material. 
Goethe, Johann Wolgang von. Faust: A Tragedy. W. Arndt, trans. New York: 
Norton, 2000. A convenient edition and translation, with useful supplementary 
material. 
Homer. Iliad. R. Lattimore, trans. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1951, 
numerous reprints. This has rightly been called “the finest translation of Homer 
ever made into the English language.” 
Koran. The best translation is that of A. J. Arberry, The Koran Interpreted. New 
York: Simon and Schuster, 1996. 
Lincoln, Abraham. Speeches and Writings. New York: Library of America, 
1974. The fullest collection of Lincoln’s words and, of course, containing the 
Gettysburg Address (vol. II, p. 536). 
Machiavelli, Nicolo. The Prince. New York: Penguin, 2003. A convenient 
translation of this fundamental work in the great books tradition. 
Malory, Thomas. Morte d’Arthur. New York: Norton, 2003. An excellent 
edition, with useful supplementary material, of this work, celebrating the central 
medieval values of loyalty, chivalry, love, and religion. 
Marcus Aurelius. Meditations. M. Staniforth, trans. Baltimore: Penguin Books, 
1964. A good, convenient translation of this enduring guide to how to live your 
life with Stoic courage. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
72 
Mill, John Stuart. On Liberty. New York: Penguin, 1974. One of the seminal 
books on the history of liberty. 
Orwell, George. 1984. New York: Penguin, 2003. The masterpiece of insight 
into the mentality of totalitarianism. 
Plato. Euthyphro, Apology, Crito, Phaedo, and Phaedrus. Harold North Fowler, 
trans. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1990. A good translation of 
the dialogues focusing on the trial and death of Socrates. 
———.  Republic. D. Lee, trans. New York: Penguin, 2003. A convenient and 
accessible translation of this book, which we have called the embodiment of the 
values and ideals of classical Greece. 
Remarque, Erich Maria. All Quiet on the Western Front. A. W. Wheen, trans. 
New York: Spark, 2003. The brilliant novel of World War I that is a powerful 
indictment of the folly of modern wars. 
Shakespeare, William. The Complete Works. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1986. This is a superb complete edition. 
———. Julius Caesar. New York: Penguin, 2000. A convenient edition with 
good notes, part of the Penguin Shakespeare Series. 
———. Othello, the Moor of Venice. New York: Simon and Schuster, 2004. An 
excellent edition of the single play, valuable for its explanatory notes. Part of the 
Folger Shakespeare Series, from the famous library in Washington, D.C. 
Solzhenitsyn, Aleksandr. The Gulag Archipelago, 1918–1956: An Experiment 
in Literary Investigation. New York: Harper and Row, 1974–1978. The massive 
indictment of Soviet communism by the Noble Prize-winner and survivor of the 
labor camps of Stalin. 
Thoreau, Henry David. Walden and On Civil Disobedience. New York: 
Penguin, 2004. A convenient edition of these classic works by one of America’s 
most original thinkers. 
Thucydides. The History of the Peloponnesian War. Rex Warner, trans. New 
York: Penguin, 1954, numerous reprints. The monumental work of history; 
contains the Funeral Oration of Pericles. 
Vergil. Aeneid. R. Fitzgerald, trans. New York: Knopf, 1990. The best 
translation into English, done by a noteworthy American poet. More than other 
versions in print, Fitzgerald’s edition has a feel for the poetry of the Aeneid. 
Supplementary Reading 
Achtemeier, P. “Mark, Gospel of.” In The Anchor Bible Dictionary, D. 
Freedman, ed., vol. IV, pp. 541–557. New York: Doubleday, 1992. A useful 
introduction to contemporary views on the composition and context of the 
Gospel of Mark. 
Adler, Mortimer. How to Think About the Great Ideas: From the Great Books of 
Western Civilization. Chicago: Open Court, 2000. A traditional defense of the 
great books. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
73 
Andrewes, A. The Greek Tyrants. New York: Harper and Row, 1963, numerous 
reprints. The best study of tyranny among the Greeks and of the intellectual and 
political context in which the audience of Aeschylus responded to Prometheus 
Bound. 
Barker, E. Greek Political Thought: Plato and His Predecessors. London: 
Methuen, 1960. This remains the best introduction to Plato for the general 
reader. 
Barth, K. The Word of God and the Word of Man. New York: Harper, 1957. An 
extremely influential and provocative approach to reading and understanding 
the Bible. 
Bethge, E. Dietrich Bonhoeffer: Man of Vision, Man of Character. New York: 
Harper and Row, 1970. The best biography of Bonhoeffer, by a close friend and 
confident.  
Brooke, Rubert. Rupert Brooke and Wilfred Owen: Selected Poems. New York: 
Sterling, 2003. Poets of World War I who help us understand the impact of All 
Quiet on the Western Front. 
Brown, J. Gandhi: Prisoner of Hope. New Haven: Yale, 1991. A standard and 
good biography of Gandhi. 
Burckhardt, Jacob. The Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy. New York: 
Random House, 2002. A masterly interpretative study of the age of Machiavelli 
by a true humanist, a work that might well be called a great book itself. 
Carrithers, M. “Hinduism.” In Cambridge Encyclopedia of India, F. Robinson, 
ed., pp. 333–339. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982. A good 
orientation for the general reader on the Hindu religion, so vital for 
understanding the Bhagavad Gita. 
Carrithers, M., M. Cook, H. Carpenter, and R. Dawson. Founders of Faith: The 
Buddha, Confucius, Jesus, and Muhammad. New York: Oxford, 1990. Recent 
accounts of these four central figures in the great books tradition and in the 
history of ideas. 
Chadwick, H. Munro. The Heroic Age. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1912, numerous reprints. A classic study of the values of Beowulf and the 
Iliad. 
Champakalakshmi, R., et al. “History to Independence.” In Cambridge 
Encyclopedia of India, F. Robinson, ed., pp. 68–85. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1982. A good introduction to the history of early India and the 
context of the Bhagavad Gita. 
Conquest, Robert. Stalin: Breaker of Nations. New York: Viking, 1991. The 
best biography of Stalin in English. 
Coomaraswamy, A. Hinduism and Buddhism. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood 
Press, 1971, rep. New Delhi: Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts, 1999. 
A sensitive and compelling interpretation by a distinguished scholar. Very 
important for understanding the Bhagavad Gita and its message. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
74 
Crenshaw, J. “Job, Book of.” In The Anchor Bible Dictionary, D. Freedman, 
ed., vol. IV, pp. 858–868. New York: Doubleday, 1992. A good introduction to 
recent scholarly views on the Book of Job. 
Dill, S. Roman Society from Nero to Marcus Aurelius. London: Macmillan, 
1904, numerous reprints, including New York: Meridian Books, 1964. This is 
by far the best book written on the intellectual history of the Roman Empire of 
Marcus Aurelius. It remains a classic. 
Dodds, E. R. The Greeks and the Irrational. Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1951, numerous reprints. Remains a highly influential treatment of the 
broader context of the ideas presented in the Bacchae of Euripides. 
Eliot, T. S. On Poetry and Poets. New York: Faber and Faber, 1985. A 
collection of essays by the most famous 20th-century poet in English and a major 
literary critic, well-versed in the classics. It contains his essay on “What Makes 
a Classic,” celebrating the Aeneid as the greatest European poem. 
Esposito, J. The Oxford History of Islam. New York: Oxford University Press, 
1999. A good, current reference work for understanding the Koran, Muhammad, 
and Islam. 
Everitt, A. Cicero: The Life and Times of Rome’s Greatest Politician. New 
York: Random House, 2003. A recent, popular biography, sympathetic to 
Cicero. 
Fadiman, Clifton. The New Lifetime Reading Plan. New York: HarperCollins, 
1997. A traditional defense of the great books.  
Fears, J. Rufus. “Antiquity: The Model of Rome.” In An Uncertain Legacy: 
Essays in Pursuit of Liberty, Edward McClean, ed., pp. 1–38. Wilmington: 
Intercollegiate Studies Institute, 1997. This places Vergil’s ideas in the Aeneid 
into the political context of the age of Augustus. 
———. “The Roman Experience.” In Preparing America’s Foreign Policy for 
the 21st Century, David Boren and Edward Perkins, eds., pp. 369–372. Norman: 
University of Oklahoma Press, 1999. The lessons of the Roman superpower for 
the American superpower. 
———. Selected Writings of Lord Acton, vol. I, Essays in the History of 
Liberty. Indianapolis: LibertyClassics, 1985. 
———. Selected Writings of Lord Acton, vol. II, Essays in the Study and 
Writing of History. Indianapolis: LibertyClassics, 1985.  
———. Selected Writings of Lord Acton, vol. III, Essays in Religion, Politics, 
and Morality. Indianapolis: LibertyClassics, 1985. This three-volume edition is 
the most complete collection of the writing of this fundamental figure in the 
great books tradition, including much unpublished material. 
Frankfort, H., et al., Before Philosophy: The Intellectual Adventures of Ancient 
Man. Baltimore: Penguin, 1964, numerous reprints. A classic study on 
speculative thought in the ancient Near East and Egypt, of great value for 
understanding Gilgamesh.  

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
75 
Gibbon, Edward. Memoirs of My Life and Writings. New York: Columbia, 
1998. One of the best autobiographies in the English language, carefully crafted 
to present a public image of Gibbon. 
Greene, W. Moira: Fate, Good and Evil in Greek Thought. New York: Harper 
and Row, 1963. Originally published in 1944, this remains the best treatment of 
these ideas so fundamental to understanding Greek tragedy. 
Hallo, W., and W. Simpson. The Ancient Near East: A History. Fort Worth: 
Harcourt Brace, 1998. The best short history of the ancient Near East and the 
historical context of Gilgamesh. 
Hogan, J. A Commentary on the Complete Greek Tragedies, vol. I, Aeschylus. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984. Helpful for understanding some of 
the more difficult passages in the Oresteia and Prometheus Bound. 
 
Horne, A. The Price of Glory: Verdun 1916. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1978. 
Vivid account of the battle that for many epitomized the folly of World War I. 
Huizinga, Johan. The Waning of the Middle Ages. Mineola: Dover, 1998. A 
brilliant discussion of the values that lay at the heart of the Morte d’Arthur. A 
classic of historiography. 
Kallen, H. The Book of Job as a Greek Tragedy. New York: Hill and Wang, 
1959. Originally published in 1918, this is a provocative comparison of Job and 
Greek tragedy. Few have accepted its thesis, but the book encourages thought 
about how we compare great books. 
Kitcher, K. “Exodus, The.” In The Anchor Bible Dictionary, D. Freedman, ed., 
vol. II, pp. 700–708. New York: Doubleday, 1992. A good introduction to 
recent scholarly views on the historical context of the Book of Exodus. 
Kramer, N. History Begins at Sumer. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1959. An 
engaging discussion of Sumerian civilization and the historical context of 
Gilgamesh. 
Lewis, R. W. B. Dante: A Life. New York: Viking, 2001. A recent biography of 
the great poet. 
 
Manchester, William. The Last Lion: Winston Spencer Churchill; Visions of 
Glory 1874-1932. Boston:  Little, Brown and Company, 1983. 
 
_________________. The Last Lion: Winston Spencer  Churchill; Alone 1932-
1940. Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1988. These two volumes are a 
magisterial, albeit incomplete, biography of Churchill. 
Matthews, John. King Arthur, Dark Age Warrior, Mythic King. New York: 
Random House, 2003. A recent study of the historical background of the legend 
of King Arthur. 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
76 
Mill, John Stuart. The Autobiography of John Stuart Mill.  New York: New 
American Library, 1964.Mill’s account of his intellectual development.  
Murray, G. Aeschylus: The Creator of Tragedy. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1940. 
A penetrating study of the tragedies of Aeschylus by a great humanist. Far more 
valuable to the general reader than most contemporary scholarship on 
Aeschylus, which is written for specialists. 
Nietzsche, F. The Birth of Tragedy and Other Writings. R. Geuss and R. Speirs, 
trans.  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,  1999. In this early work of the 
philosopher Nietzsche, written while he was still a professor of classics, the idea 
of the “rational” Greeks was exploded. Such a challenge to conventional 
scholarly ideas destroyed Nietzsche’s academic career, but his essay laid the 
foundation for much of 20th-century interpretation of Greek tragedy.  
Orwell, George. Animal Farm. New York: Penguin, 2003. Orwell’s satire on 
communism in action, valuable for the light its throws on his views in 1984. 
———. Homage to Catalonia. San Diego: Harcourt, 1969. Orwell’s account of 
his experiences in fighting on the socialist (Loyalist) side during the Spanish 
Civil War, giving us valuable insight into the ideals that motivated many of 
Orwell’s generation in Britain.  
Platt, Michael. Rome and the Romans According to Shakespeare. Lanham, Md.: 
University Press of America, 1983. The best scholarly study of Shakespeare’s 
use of the lessons of Roman history but no longer in print. 
Plutarch. The Lives of the Noble Grecians and Romans. New York: Modern 
Library, 1992. This complete edition of Plutarch’s Lives is much preferable to 
various editions of individual lives, which wrench them from the literary context 
of the work as a whole. Plutarch is invaluable for understanding Shakespeare’s 
Julius Caesar. Plutarch himself is a great author, who served as the basis for 
The Teaching Company courses Famous Greeks and Famous Romans. 
Rohde, E. The Cult of Souls and Belief in Immortality among the Greeks. New 
York: Harper and Row, 1966. The classic account of the intellectual and 
religious context of Plato’s Phaedo. 
Rose, H. J. Religion in Greece and Rome. New York: Harper, 1959. Remains 
the best introduction to Greek religion for the general reader. 
Rutherford, R. The Meditations of Marcus Aurelius. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
1989. The best recent scholarly interpretative study. 
Salway, P., and J. Blair. Roman and Anglo-Saxon Britain. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1992. A good brief introduction to the historical context of 
Beowulf. 
Sarna, N. “Exodus, Book of.” In The Anchor Bible Dictionary, D. Freedman, 
ed., vol. II, pp. 689–700. New York: Doubleday, 1992. A good introduction to 
modern scholarly views on the composition and content of the Book of Exodus. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
77 
Sassoon, Siegfried. War Poems of Siegfried Sassoon. Mineola: Dover, 2004. A 
favorite poet and friend of Winston Churchill and one who gives us insight into 
the impact of All Quiet on the Western Front. 
Schoeck, H. Envy: A Theory of Social Behaviour. New York: Harcourt, Brace 
and World, 1969. A sociological study of this key element in human nature, 
portrayed with such brilliance by Shakespeare in Othello. 
Schweitzer, A. The Quest for the Historical Jesus. New York: Macmillan, 1910, 
rep. 1968. A remarkable scholarly book that transformed the life of its author, 
who became a humanitarian compared by many to Jesus. 
Sharpe. L. The Cambridge Companion to Goethe. New York: Cambridge, 2002. 
A compendium of material to help in understanding Faust. 
Solzhenitsyn, Aleksandr. One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich. New York: 
Dutton, 1963. Solzhenitsyn’s first book, a fictional but gripping account of life 
in a Stalinist labor camp. 
Spivack, B. Shakespeare and the Allegory of Evil. New York: Columbia 
University Press, 1958. A scholarly study of this central aspect of Othello. 
Taylor, H. O. The Medieval Mind. London: Macmillan, 1914, numerous 
reprints. This remains the most readable account of the intellectual context of 
The Divine Comedy. 
Thoreau, Henry David. Political Writings. New York, Cambridge, 1996. This 
edition contains Thoreau’s essay on John Brown, giving a very different view—
at first sight—of Thoreau’s ideals. 
Tolstoy, Leo. What Is Art? L. Volokhonsky, trans. New York: Penguin, 1996. 
The author of War and Peace writes one of the most stimulating books on the 
meaning of art and the beautiful. 
Watt, W. Montgomery. Companion to the Qur’an. London: Allen and Unwin, 
1967. A good reference guide to the Koran by a distinguished scholar. 
Weston, Jessie L. From Ritual to Romance. Princeton, 1993. A brilliant 
interpretation of the legend of King Arthur. A classic work of literary and 
anthropological interpretation that influenced T. S. Eliot in The Wasteland.  
Willcock, M. A Companion to the Iliad: Based on the Translation by Richmond 
Lattimore. Chicago: University of Chicago, 1976. Very useful for understanding 
the numerous mythological and other references that can make the Iliad difficult 
to access for modern readers. 
Wills, Garry. Lincoln at Gettysburg: The Words That Remade America. New 
York: Simon and Schuster, 1993. A well-reviewed and detailed study of the 
Gettysburg Address. 
Wright, G., and R. Fuller. The Book of the Acts of God. Garden City, N.Y.: 
Doubleday, 1960. A traditional and clear introduction to the historical and 
theological aspects of the Bible by two distinguished scholars, Wright, a biblical 
archaeologist, and Fuller, a New Testament theologian. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
78 
Wyatt-Brown, B. The Shaping of Southern Culture: Honor, Grace, and War, 
1760s–1890s. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2001. An 
excellent discussion of the ideal of honor as a real force in human behavior, 
affording us a valuable comparative insight into the role of honor in 
Shakespeare. 
Yao, X., ed. The Encyclopedia of Confucianism. New York: Routledge/Curzon, 
2003. Authoritative articles on all aspects of the teaching and influence of 
Confucius. 
Zimmern. Alfred. The Greek Commonwealth. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1911, numerous subsequent editions and reprints. A highly sympathetic account 
of the Athenian democracy and Pericles, written by a scholar and a man of 
affairs.  
 
 

 
 
Books That Have Made 
History:  
Books That Can Change 
Your Life 
Part III 
 
J. Rufus Fears, Ph.D. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE TEACHING COMPANY ® 


 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
i 
J. Rufus Fears, Ph.D. 
David Ross Boyd Professor of Classics, University of Oklahoma 
 
J. Rufus Fears is David Ross Boyd Professor of Classics at the University of 
Oklahoma, where he also holds the G. T. and Libby Blankenship Chair in the 
History of Liberty. He rose from Assistant Professor to Professor of History at 
Indiana University. From 1986 to 1990, he was Professor of Classics and 
Chairman of the Department of Classical Studies at Boston University. 
Professor Fears holds a Ph.D. from Harvard University. He has been a Danforth 
Fellow, a Woodrow Wilson Fellow, and a Harvard Prize Fellow. He has been a 
Fellow of the American Academy in Rome, a Guggenheim Fellow, and twice a 
Fellow of the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation. His research has been 
supported by grants from the American Philosophical Society, the American 
Council of Learned Societies, the National Endowment for the Humanities, the 
Kerr Foundation, and the Zarrow Foundation. He was chosen as Indiana 
University’s first Distinguished Faculty Research Lecturer. He is listed in Who’s 
Who in America and Who’s Who in the World. 
Professor Fears is the author of more than one hundred articles, reviews, and 
historical plaques on Greek and Roman history, the history of liberty, and the 
lessons of history for our own day. His books and monographs include Princeps 
A Diis Electus: The Divine Election of the Emperor as a Political Concept at 
Rome, The Cult of Jupiter and Roman Imperial Ideology, The Theology of 
Victory at Rome, The Cult of Virtues and Roman Imperial Ideology, and 
Selected Writings of Lord Acton. He has also lectured widely in the United 
States and Europe, and his scholarly work has been translated into German and 
Italian. He is very active in speaking to broader audiences, and his comments on 
the lessons of history for today have appeared on television and been carried in 
newspapers and journals throughout the United States and abroad. Each year he 
leads study trips to historical sites in the United States and Europe.  
On 21 occasions, Dr. Fears has received awards for outstanding teaching. In 
1996, 1999, and again in 2000, students chose him as the University of 
Oklahoma Professor of the Year. In 2003 he received the Excellence in 
Teaching Award from the Great Plains Region of the University Continuing 
Education Association.  In 2005 he was named the national winner of the 
Excellence in Teaching Award from the University Continuing Education 
Association. His Senior Citizen Great Books Course, which he teaches at the 
University of Oklahoma, was cited prominently in this National Excellence in 
Teaching Award. 
Books That Have Made History—Books That Can Change Your Life is the fifth 
course Professor Fears has produced with The Teaching Company. His other 
courses include Famous Greeks, Famous Romans, A History of Freedom, and 
Churchill. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
ii 
Table of Contents 
 
Books That Have Made History: 
Books That Can Change Your Life 
Part III 
 
Professor Biography ........................................................................................... i 
Course Scope...................................................................................................... 1 
Lecture Twenty-Five 
Plato, Republic.......................................................... 4 
Lecture Twenty-Six 
John Stuart Mill, On Liberty ..................................... 8 
Lecture Twenty-Seven 
Sir Thomas Malory, Morte d’Arthur....................... 13 
Lecture Twenty-Eight 
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Faust, Part 1 .......... 18 
Lecture Twenty-Nine 
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Faust, Part 2 .......... 22 
Lecture Thirty  
Henry David Thoreau, Walden ............................... 27 
Lecture Thirty-One 
Gibbon, Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire .... 32 
Lecture Thirty-Two 
Lord Acton, The History of Freedom ..................... 37 
Lecture Thirty-Three 
Cicero, On Moral Duties (De Officiis).................... 43 
Lecture Thirty-Four 
Gandhi, An Autobiography ..................................... 47 
Lecture Thirty-Five 
Churchill, My Early Life, Painting as a Pastime, 
 
 
The Second World War........................................... 52 
Lecture Thirty-Six 
Lessons from the Great Books................................ 56 
Timeline ............................................................................................................ 62 
Glossary ............................................................................................................ 64 
Biographical Notes........................................................................................... 67 
Bibliography..................................................................................................... 72 
 
 
 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
1 
• 
• 
• 
Books That Have Made History: 
Books That Can Change Your Life 
 
Scope: 
This course, Books That Have Made History: Books That Can Change Your 
Life, is a companion to my earlier Teaching Company courses: A History of 
Freedom, Famous Greeks, Famous Romans, and Winston Churchill. Like these 
courses, Books That Have Made History rests upon the conviction that history is 
made by great individuals, great events, and great ideas. This course explores 
these great ideas through a discussion of some of the most seminal writings in 
history, books that have shaped the minds of great individuals and events of 
historic magnitude. 
Our earlier courses, A History of Freedom, Famous Greeks, Famous Romans, 
and Winston Churchill, have all discussed some of the great books that have 
made history. In those contexts, we have studied such works as the Apology of 
Socrates, Oedipus the King, the Iliad, the Odyssey, the Aeneid, and the 
magisterial histories of Herodotus, Thucydides, Polybius, Gibbon, and 
Churchill. We will return to some of these treasured books from entirely new 
perspectives, but for the most part, we will strike off on new paths with new 
books.   
The books we will discuss range in time from the 3rd millennium B.C. to the 20th 
century. Our geographical scope will carry us from Mesopotamia and China to 
Europe and America. It is the ideas that are important, and our course will be 
organized thematically around eternal questions that endure throughout history 
and that every thoughtful person must seek to answer. Either by conscious 
choice or by omission, nations, groups, organizations, and corporations, as well 
individuals, answer these questions: 
Question 1: God. Does God or do gods exist? What is the nature of the 
divine? Does God or do the gods care about humans and their actions? This 
is the first question with which every thoughtful person must come to grips. 
The other questions and some of the answers will flow from it. 
Question 2: Fate. What is fate? Do events, great and small, happen because 
they are predetermined by divine will or simply by chance and random 
occurrence? Do humans have free will? Do you determine your life, or is it 
already predetermined? Are you free to choose, or has your DNA already 
made the choice for you?  
Question 3: Good and evil. What do we mean by good and evil? Are there 
consequences for our actions, whether freely chosen or predetermined? If 
there are consequences for our actions, does this mean that there are 
standards by which to judge these actions? Who or what determines those 
standards? Are those standards enduring for all time? Or are there no 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
2 
• 
absolute standards? Do circumstances determine what is right and wrong at 
any particular moment and for any particular individual, group, or nation? 
Does evil exist? Can we speak of evil as a real force that affects events and 
lives? 
Question 4: How should we live? Our answers or failures to answer or even 
to ask these questions have consequences. They determine how we, 
individuals, groups, nations, live our lives. They give us the values or 
absence of values to determine how we act toward others. Our great books 
course examines our actions under the following eternal human conditions, 
emotions, and challenges: 
– 
The meaning of life 
– 
Truth 
– 
Duty and responsibility 
– 
Law, government, and social justice 
– 
Love, jealousy, and hate 
– 
Courage, honor, and ambition 
– 
Beauty 
– 
Nature 
– 
History and the past 
– 
Education. 
These themes will provide the context in which we discuss the books that have 
made history and books that can change our lives. It is the hallmark of a great 
book that it may offer us insights into many of these conditions and emotions. 
Thus, the same great book may be brought into our exploration of several of 
these themes. 
We have repeatedly used the term great book. What do we mean by a great 
book? Can we even speak of great books? 
The answer is yes. Great book is an unfashionable, even controversial term 
today, because it implies value judgments. As a society, we do not wish to make 
value judgments. Judgmental is an expression of reproach. However, great 
books are great precisely because they challenge us to make value judgments. 
A great book has the following three essential qualities: 
• 
Great theme. A great book is concerned with themes and issues of enduring 
importance. 
• 
Noble language. Great books are written in noble language, language that 
elevates the soul and ennobles the mind. It is not the specific language, say 
Latin or English, that is noble. Any language can be used in such way that it 
conveys ideas and emotions powerfully and memorably. 
• 
Universality. A great book is “a possession for all time” (Thucydides). It 
speaks across the ages, reaching the hearts and minds of men and women 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
3 
far removed in time and space from the era and circumstances in which it 
was composed.  Thus, a great book summarizes the enduring values and 
ideas of a great age and gives them as a legacy to generations to come. 
For us, in this course, what ultimately makes a great book is its ability to speak 
to you as an individual. You can read a great book many times, and each time, 
you read it with new eyes. At each stage of your life, you will find new 
messages to address new concerns.  A great book gives you the personal 
wisdom to be better, better as an individual and better as the citizen of a free 
nation, empowered with the awesome responsibility of self-government.  
Ultimately, great books are an education for freedom. 
 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
4 
Lecture Twenty-Five 
 
Plato, Republic 
 
Scope: Plato’s Republic might be called the greatest book on politics, on 
education, and on justice ever written. As the Divine Comedy embodies 
the values of the Middle Ages and the Aeneid embodies the ideals and 
values of Rome, the Republic embodies the ideals and values of 
classical Greece. In the dialogue, Socrates raises a supreme question 
for us in this course: What makes a person happy? To prove that only a 
just person and, thus, a good person is happy, Socrates leads us to 
explore the meaning of justice, what sort of political organization can 
achieve justice, and how we can educate citizens for justice. These 
questions are as relevant for our democracy as for the democracy of 
Athens. 
 
Outline 
I. 
This lecture continues the theme of government and justice, especially the 
moral values that are essential to a good government. The model of 
Socrates, who insisted that terms be defined, can guide us through the great 
books. What do we really mean about the nobility of dying for one’s 
country? How can nobility be defined?  
A. Socrates, through Plato, would say that nobility is related to justice and 
to defining the concept of justice. Justice is one of a number of 
essential qualities, or virtues, that every individual should have. 
Socrates explored these qualities in his discussion of the immortal soul 
in the Phaedo. 
B. These qualities are found in a variety of cultures and are reflected in 
such diverse literature as the Bhagavad Gita and in Confucius. 
C. These qualities include wisdom, justice, courage, and moderation. 
1. Courage is, of course, essential for those who go to war. 
2. An individual must have the wisdom to understand the difference 
between courage exercised in a just war and courage exercised in 
an unjust war. Without the wisdom to understand that a nation is 
fighting for justice, courage is nothing more than brutality. 
3. Moderation links the virtues. When any quality—even courage—is 
carried too far, it becomes unjust. 
4. Courage, moderation, and wisdom—working together—produce 
true justice. That is the theme of Plato’s Republic. 
II. Plato’s Republic, which is a magisterial discussion of what makes a good 
state, was probably composed during the 380s B.C. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
5 
A. Plato was a pupil of Socrates and paid his teacher the greatest of 
compliments by putting all his own ideas into the mouth of Socrates, 
thereby indicating that none of his thinking would have existed without 
Socrates. 
B. Although Plato is called a philosopher, he was an intellectual. 
Philosophers, such as Confucius and Socrates, live their wisdom; 
intellectuals talk about ideas and try, from time to time, to put them 
into action.  
1. Plato, for example, went to Sicily and tried to help educate the 
young tyrant Dionysius. This attempt was a failure. 
2. Plato’s contribution, in addition to his writings, was to create in 
Athens a university where lectures were held and young people 
were trained. Through this university, the ideas of Socrates were 
institutionalized. 
C. Alfred North Whitehead said, “All philosophy is but a series of 
footnotes to Plato.” 
III. The greatest of Plato’s works is the Republic. 
A. Like The Divine Comedy, Plato’s Republic is a difficult book to read. 
B. Like The Divine Comedy, it summarizes the values of a civilization at 
its apex. That civilization is the world of the polis, the city-state of 
classical Greece. 
IV. Plato’s Republic is concerned with how to create a constitution that ensures 
justice for all citizens. Plato puts this discussion into the form of dialogues. 
A. When the Republic begins, Socrates is returning from a religious 
festival in honor of the goddess Artemis. He stops to visit his friend 
Cephalus, who wonders about the afterlife, whether he has an immortal 
soul, what will happen to his soul, and whether good and bad behavior 
will have consequences. The two then begin to discuss justice. 
B. The discussion starts with the conventional definition of justice, that is, 
rewarding friends and punishing enemies. Socrates, in the dialogues of 
Plato, often begins with a statement that everyone can accept. 
C. Socrates then asks how a just man can do unjust things, even to his 
enemies. Socrates shows that the original definition is wrong. No good 
man would do harm to another. 
D. One of the participants in the dialogue is Thrasymachus, a Sophist. 
1. The true Sophist in Athens educated their students to argue either 
side of an issue. 
2. To argue either side of a case successfully, an individual must be 
believe that the position is true. Therefore, the Sophist does not 
believe in absolute values. 
3. For the Sophist, unlike for Socrates, truth is whatever is expedient 
at the moment. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
6 
E. Thrasymachus argues that justice is power. Justice is what the powerful 
can get away with, and laws are what the powerful put in place to serve 
their own interests; thus, no such quality as justice can exist. 
1. This idea was accepted in Athens. Athenian foreign policy during 
the war with Sparta rested on the belief that might makes right. 
2. For example, in 416 B.C., Athens had demanded that the neutral 
nation of Melos join the Athenian coalition. When Melos refused, 
Athens launched a preemptive attack, captured it, put its men to 
death, and sold its women and children into slavery. Athenians 
justified the destruction of Melos by claiming that Athens had 
power and that Melos could choose to join Athens and live or 
resist and die. When Melos appealed to the Athenian idea of 
justice, the Athenians said that justice did not exist. 
F. Socrates attempts to help Thrasymachus understand that if justice is 
whatever the strong can do, unjust acts will make weaker people hate 
them. Eventually, the weaker groups will band together and overthrow 
those in power. Therefore, it is expedient for those in positions of 
power to act justly. 
G. Socrates says that to define justice, the idea should be examined in a 
larger unit, such as the state, or polis.  
1. Machiavelli was the first to use the term “state” (il stato) in its 
modern sense as a political unit separate from the people. 
2. As a true democracy, the Athenian government cannot be 
separated from the idea of the people. 
H. Socrates said that the city is a collection of individuals, each of whom 
has certain qualities that reflect absolute values. In the transcendent 
world, absolute wisdom, courage, and moderation exist. These 
qualities, working together, will create true justice.  
I. 
Socrates next asks how to bring these qualities together in the proper 
blend to make the polis just. 
1. Each person has a characteristic virtue, such as courage, 
moderation, or wisdom. 
2. A community in which every individual is able to exercise his or 
her characteristic virtue intelligently in the service of the polis will 
be a just polis that exists for the good of all. 
3. The state exists to serve the people, but the people must 
understand how the right kind of service is rendered. 
J. Education is the means to bring about morality and to achieve the ideal 
government. Children must be examined at the earliest possible age to 
determine the qualities that they possess. They can then be educated. 
True education brings forth and cultivates the appropriate virtue of 
each citizen, educating each to suitable work in life. 
1. The strongest quality that most people possess is moderation. 
Those who possess moderation will form the basis of a 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
7 
community. They should be taught reading and writing, and they 
must understand that they should do whatever they do best and not 
aspire to other roles. 
2. The people who are warriors at heart should be soldiers. They 
must be taught poetry to awaken the soul and gymnastics to train 
their bodies.  
3. A few people have the ability to lead. These guardians should have 
a long and elaborate education. Mathematics is an essential subject 
for these leaders, because they must keep their eyes fixed on 
absolute truth and justice. Numbers and geometry are ways to 
perfection. 
K. Thus, the ideal republic rests on absolute values: absolute truth and 
absolute right and wrong. Absolute wisdom and absolute ignorance 
exist, as do absolute justice and injustice, absolute courage and 
cowardice, absolute moderation and intemperance. 
L. Plato concludes his magnificent work on justice with the myth of Er, 
who could be Everyman.  
1. Er was killed in battle but was found alive 10 days later.  
2. He explained that his soul had left his body and gone to heaven, 
where he saw the afterlife and the souls of those who had done evil 
cast into the deepest pit, from which they would never be free. He 
saw others who could be redeemed. After paying their penalties, 
these souls came before the Fates, received a new life, drank from 
the River of Forgetfulness, and returned to this world. 
3. These souls made a choice through their free will about how to 
live their lives. 
4. Socrates ends his treatment of a just city with the belief in the 
immortality of the soul as the foundation of everything. 
 
Essential Reading: 
Plato, Republic. 
 
Supplementary Reading: 
Barker, Greek Political Thought. 
 
Questions to Consider: 
1. Why does Socrates end his treatment of the ideal government with  a 
discussion of the immortality of the soul? 
2. Would you want to live in Plato’s Republic? 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
8 
Lecture Twenty-Six 
 
John Stuart Mill, On Liberty 
 
Scope: Published in 1859, Mill’s On Liberty is the classic statement of the 
liberal ideal of democratic government and social justice. This is the 
philosophical statement of the ideas of government put into effect by 
the great British Prime Ministers William Gladstone and Winston 
Churchill. For Mill, government exists to serve the individual. 
Individual liberty is the end of government, not a means to an end. 
Liberty is defined as the freedom of the individual to live as he or she 
chooses, unrestrained by government regulations as long as no harm is 
done to others. For Mill, the essence of true freedom lies in the 
individual’s liberty, not in majority rule. Education, justice, economics 
must all be determined by how well they foster the freedom of the 
individual. Mill’s themes remain as vital today as they were a century 
and a half ago. It is the eternal question of how much government 
regulation is necessary to secure these individual rights and whether 
the individual or the majority is the best judge of what is right. 
 
Outline 
I. 
The previous lecture continued the discussion of the ideals of government 
and justice and what is it means to be a good citizen or, in the words of 
Socrates, a just citizen. In Plato’s Republic, Socrates defines the idea of 
justice to the individual in the framework of the larger concept of the state. 
II. Much in Plato worried 19th-century thinkers, including John Stuart Mill. 
A. To people like Mill, Plato was disturbing because he reduced the 
ordinary citizen to the subjugation of the state; the state, in turn, might 
mislead the ordinary citizen in the name of a higher good that was 
determined by only a few people.  
B. As a student of Socrates, Plato understood the role of irony. Socrates 
frequently used irony to make people think. 
C. Sophists were guardians of the truth and had open minds. They 
sometimes challenged convention in the name of educating their 
students. However, the irony with which Socrates depicted Sophists led 
them to be discredited into the 19th century. 
1. Socrates’s students were so embittered by Socrates’s death that 
they portrayed Athenian democracy as the worst possible form of 
government. 
2. Plato traces the degeneration of the ideal state into an Athenian-
type democracy, in which each individual is free to live as he 
chooses without any restraint. In judging this depiction of 
democracy run amok, we must consider Socrates’s use of irony. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
9 
D. The benefits of Athenian democracy were first recognized in the 19th 
century by British Liberals such as John Stuart Mill. Mill would argue 
that Athens was the first government to be based on the ideal of the 
greatest good for the greatest number and that it was a model form of 
government because of its concern for individual freedom.  
III. On Liberty, published in 1859, was one of the culminating points in the life 
of a great intellectual. 
A. The father of John Stuart Mill, James Mill, was closely associated with 
Jeremy Bentham and the Utilitarian movement. 
1. Utilitarianism sought to reform politics in England, to increase the 
number of English voters, and to create a democracy that rested on 
the rights of the individual. 
2. Utilitarians believed that the purpose of government was to 
achieve the greatest good for the greatest number of citizens; a 
government should be of, by, and for the people. 
3. Utilitarians believed that the test for any quality, virtue, or ethical 
principle was how well it worked, its usefulness. 
B. James Mill wanted his son to be an intellectual who followed his 
father’s philosophical ideas, and put his ideas into practice by 
becoming a civil servant. 
C. John Stuart Mill described his education in his Autobiography, the 
story of his intellectual progress—both his failures and his success. 
1. In his Autobiography, Mill says that we should keep growing 
intellectually throughout our lives.  
2. By the time Mill was 3 years old, according to his Autobiography, 
he could read Greek. 
3. By the age of eight, he had read much classical literature and 
helped his father by summarizing his father’s writing. He believed 
that one of the best ways to shape the mind was to summarize. 
4. By the time he was in his teens, Mill was actively helping his 
father write. 
5. At the age of 20, Mill suffered a complete nervous breakdown, 
which he later saw as a failure of will. A mundane book gave him 
the insight to understand what was going on and set him back on 
the track that he wanted to follow. 
D. Mill turned political reformer. He worked in the civil service and 
became one of the leading intellectual lights of 19th-century England. 
1. He wrote works on logic and on political economy. 
2. He married Harriet Taylor, who was his true intellectual 
companion and who assisted him in his writings.  
IV. In On Liberty, Mill defines liberty as the belief that every individual should 
be free to live his life untrammeled by other constraints, as long as he does 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
10 
not harm anyone else. The state has a right to interfere with an individual’s 
life only when that individual is doing concrete harm to someone else.  
A. This idea is the traditional concept of liberty. 
B. Mill built on this concept an idea of a state and the relationship 
between the state and the individual. Mill believed that the individual is 
above the state and that the state exists to serve the individual. 
1. Confucius, in contrast, believed that the government and its leaders 
should exercise benevolence toward ordinary people and that the 
state should play an important role in elevating ordinary people to 
morality. Confucius believed that few people were capable of 
being leaders and that they should be educated for that leadership 
role. The state should tax people in a fair fashion, and people were 
to live their lives under the beneficent rule of the state. 
2. Machiavelli believed that people existed to serve the state and the 
leader. The qualities of leadership that Machiavelli described were 
necessary for the peace and prosperity of a nation. According to 
Machiavelli, the main goal of the leader should not be to help 
people but to maintain his power. In maintaining power, the leader 
would give the people reasonably prosperous lives. Machiavelli 
also believed that only a few people were qualified to be leaders. 
3. In Plato’s Republic, ordinary citizens possess the quality of 
moderation. Only a well trained few are capable of leadership. 
4. Mill disagreed with all these ideas. He believed that the state 
should be as uninvolved in the lives of citizens as possible. 
C. Mill believed that absolute freedom should rest on absolute freedom of 
thought and discussion. There must be complete freedom of the press, 
along with complete and unrestricted freedom of speech. 
D. Mill believed that although words have the power to cause harm, state 
regulation can create far more serious problems. Regulation cannot be 
based on what a community believes to be appropriate or inappropriate. 
Mill cites the examples of Socrates and Jesus, who were put to death 
because they outraged public opinion.  Although Socrates and Jesus 
went against public opinion, their beliefs did not harm people. Mill 
believed the individual should be free to expound ideas. The state 
could punish a crime, but not the idea that motivated the crime. 
V. Many of Mill’s ideas have relevance today. 
A. Mill believed that society must be willing to tolerate eccentricity as 
long as it does not harm others. Mill asks where governmental 
intervention will stop after it begins. 
B. He believed that governmental involvement in education presented a 
great danger to a free society. All education, he believed, should be 
private and should be the responsibility of the parents.  

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
11 
1. He believed that the only purpose of compulsory education by the 
state was to train citizens to do the bidding of the state: State 
education will not develop a conscience in its citizens and will 
remove conscience and values imparted by parents. 
2. Although Mill did not support compulsory education, he believed 
that all people should read and write and that parents might be 
required to teach reading, writing, mathematics and certain facts. 
3. According to Mill, government involvement in education means 
that the state will impose its values, perhaps in the form of national 
educational standards that ensure that every student knows the 
same things. By controlling educational credentials, the state 
effectively controls all aspects of education. 
C. Mill opposed state regulation of drinking. A state mechanism to limit 
the drinking age had the potential for expansion. Mill believed that the 
state’s ultimate aim is control, and any implement to achieve that 
control could create a police state. 
D. Mill believed that taxes are dangerous. Taxes establish a mechanism 
that enables the state to control private life. 
E. Mill believed that true liberal democracy will limit the role of 
government as far as possible. It will intervene to protect an individual 
who is being physically harmed and will have courts to ensure justice 
for those who are harmed, but giving the state the ability to intervene in 
the life of individual citizens is dangerous.  
F. For the same reason Mill believed that allowing government to 
intervene in health matters is dangerous 
G. Mill would argue that the reason we accept state intervention in our 
lives has to do with compulsory education which is designed to 
produce dutiful citizens. The state does not educate people in some 
noble, abstract, and eternal ideal of justice but in the name of 
government convenience. 
H. Mill was opposed to Machiavelli and Plato in his defense of the right of 
the individual to live exactly as he chooses—in defense of what 
contemporary Americans view as the ideal today. 
VI. On Liberty is a work of compelling intensity, which speaks across the ages. 
 
Essential Reading: 
Mill, On Liberty. 
 
Supplementary Reading: 
Mill, Autobiography. 
 
Questions to Consider: 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
12 
1. How does Mill’s On Liberty fit into your definitions of liberal and 
conservative? 
2. How do you think Mill would respond to some of our current debates, for 
example, on a national health care or abortion? 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
13 
I. 
The lecture on John Stuart Mill concluded our discussion of the theme of 
government, justice, and the duty of a citizen toward that government. 
Lecture Twenty-Seven 
 
Sir Thomas Malory, Morte d’Arthur 
 
Scope: The totalitarian society of 1984 denies human love. Yet love, along 
with religion, may be the deepest wellspring of human feeling and the 
inspiration of its noblest literature and art. This was certainly true of 
medieval Europe. In both secular and religious life, love was elevated 
into a cult. Religious and carnal love, history and myth came together 
in the literary cycle of King Arthur and the search for the Holy Grail. 
King Arthur and his Knights of the Round Table, the love of Lancelot 
and Guinevere, and Sir Galahad and the Grail brought together the 
themes of chivalry, courtly love, and religious mysticism. Thomas 
Malory’s Morte d’Arthur captures the passion, consequences, and 
contradictions of romantic and spiritual love. One of the first great 
works of English prose, it summarizes the civilization of medieval 
chivalry in its ideal form. The Morte d’Arthur has inspired poets as 
diverse as Alfred, Lord Tennyson and T. S. Eliot. 
 
Outline 
A. Our discussions of the role of government have ranged from the 
classical China of Confucius to the Renaissance Italy of Machiavelli, 
the England of John Stuart Mill, and the Athenian democracy of 
Plato’s Republic. 
B. The lectures have described a fundamental dichotomy in how great 
books and great thinkers have approached the question of whether the 
individual exists to serve the state or whether the state exists to serve 
the individual. Profound minds are on both sides of the question. 
1. In the Republic, Plato says that the state exists to serve the 
individual, to make the individual just, but that the state must 
exercise control to achieve its aim. 
2. These lectures have tested whether a set of values exists to 
determine the character of a citizen who serves the state or is 
served by the state. Both Confucius and Socrates spoke of 
fundamental values of wisdom, justice, moderation, and courage. 
John Stuart Mill presented a radical defense of the freedom of the 
individual and absolute refusal to accept any form of control. 
C. We now turn to what is perhaps the most radical of individual 
decisions. We leave the harsh strains of war and politics and move to 
the softer side of human nature, to the theme of love. Although Lord 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
14 
Acton asserted that religion and liberty were the causes for the greatest 
and worst acts in history, we might argue that love is really the cause. 
II. Sir Thomas Malory’s Morte d’Arthur, or “The Death of Arthur,” 
summarizes the values of the Middle Ages. 
A. Malory was an English knight who served with distinction in the 
Hundred Years’ War with France and was elected to Parliament.  
B. In 1459, he and a group of fellow knights beat up and robbed some 
monks.  
C. Malory was sentenced to jail, where he died in 1471.  
D. Malory used his time in jail to come to grips with the question of love 
and to write Morte d’Arthur. 
III. Morte d’Arthur meets the definition of a great book. 
A. The theme, love, works on two levels; it deals with love and with the 
distinction between lust and true spiritual love. 
B. The work is written in noble language. It is the first long work of prose 
fiction in the English language.  
C. The story is a universal one. Each generation has new movies, new 
novels, and new comic books about King Arthur. 
D. Morte d’Arthur summarizes a culture—the world of the Middle 
Ages—at its apex. 
1. Dante’s Divine Comedy, also written during the Middle Ages, 
focuses on love, but in the Divine Comedy, God’s love, which will 
redeem Dante, is the true theme. 
2. For medieval society at the spiritual level, Christianity was the 
great religion of love. Gothic cathedrals, as previously mentioned, 
are a symbol of this idea of divine love. Malory composed Morte 
d’Arthur at the height of the Gothic era. 
IV. King Arthur embodied the values of the Middle Ages, an era of great 
religious faith and marked by a code of chivalry and feudalism. 
A. The notions of trust and obligation were strong. Honor defined 
relations between people. Honor was a complex concept in which one 
had to have a reputation and a commitment to integrity and courage. 
B. This age was an era of courtly love. The object of love was frequently 
someone that the lover could not have; she was worshipped from afar. 
This ideal gives a sacred character to the courtly love of the Middle 
Ages. However, in reality, there was much seduction and infidelity. 
Carnal love plays a role in the story of King Arthur. 
C. King Arthur was a hero who came to epitomize England of the 15th 
century. In the story, he is a king who ruled the British Isles and 
became the emperor of Europe as well. In these tales, King Arthur and 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
15 
the Knights of the Round Table brought an age of justice and glory to 
England. This golden age was symbolized by the palace at Camelot.  
D. The story of King Arthur spread throughout Europe. Malory borrowed 
heavily from French works in his story of the death of King Arthur. 
V.  King Arthur actually existed. 
A. Arturus was a war leader in Britain in the dark days following the 
collapse of Roman rule, around 500 A.D. 
B. The Romano-Celtic population of Britain was being driven to the west 
by the Anglo-Saxons. 
C. For a brief period, the Roman Britains rallied and stopped the tide of 
the Anglo-Saxons in a series of battles. 
D. Arthur won a mighty battle over the Angles and Saxons at Mount 
Badon. 
E. A group of tales about King Arthur was kept alive by Celtic-speaking 
peoples. These legends began in Wales. Around King Arthur clustered 
a series of marvelous figures, including the magician Merlin, and 
wondrous events, including the story of the Holy Grail, an embodiment 
of salvation, which had been brought to England by Joseph of 
Arimathea. 
VI. In Morte d’Arthur, Malory developed the story of the King Arthur of 
legend. 
A. King Arthur is the son of Uther Pendragon, a mighty ruler over the 
western part of the British Isles. He becomes infatuated with Igraine, 
the wife of the Duke of Tintagel. Merlin arranges for Uther Pendragon 
to assume the form of the duke of Tintagel and to be transported to the 
duke’s castle. The duke is killed in battle, and Igraine marries Uther 
Pendragon. Their son is King Arthur, who is accepted as legitimate. 
Uther Pendragon dies.  
B. Arthur rides to an assembly in London. Word has gone out that the 
next king will be the man who can draw a great sword from a stone. 
Only the young Arthur can do so. The nobles agree that Arthur should 
be the king of England. 
C. A strange woman in a lake gives the sword Excalibur to Arthur. With 
that sword and his innate goodness, Arthur unifies Britain and the 
whole of Europe into one kingdom, with himself as emperor.  
VII.  Knights come to serve King Arthur at his capital city at Winchester, or 
Camelot. The knights sit at a round table because everyone is equal. King 
Arthur weds Guinevere. The knights serve the cause of good. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
16 
A. The greatest of all the knights is Lancelot, who is brave, courteous, and 
bold. His only flaw is that he loves Queen Guinevere—and she loves 
him. Lancelot stays unwed to remain pure. 
B. On a journey, Lancelot arrives at the castle of King Pelleas, who says 
that he is a cousin of Joseph of Arimathea, the man who brought the 
Holy Grail to England. King Pelleas asks Lancelot to sleep with his 
daughter Elaine so that he will sire a son who will be the perfect 
knight. When Lancelot refuses, Pelleas changes his daughter’s 
appearance so that she looks like Guinevere. Lancelot sleeps with 
Elaine and sires Galahad. 
C. Galahad truly is the perfect knight. He is raised by nuns, who 
eventually lead him to Camelot. He comes to the round table and 
moves to the one seat that has never been filled, the Siege Perilous. 
That seat had been designated for the person that God chose to find the 
Holy Grail. Anyone else who attempts to fill that seat will be struck 
dead immediately, but when Galahad sits in it, a chalice appears. 
D. The knights decide that a young boy should not seek the Holy Grail by 
himself, and the entire Round Table sets off. Arthur is distraught. He 
believes that many of these men of honor, courage, and faith will die 
on this lonely journey. 
E. After many months of travel, Lancelot comes to a tiny chapel in a far-
off place and sees once again the vision of the chalice in his sleep. 
Lancelot’s carnal love for Guinevere will prevent him from ever 
possessing the Holy Grail. 
F. Galahad has remained pure, and with his friends Sir Perceval and Sir 
Bors, he continues his quest to find the Holy Grail. When they find it, 
they travel to Sarras, the city from which Joseph of Arimathea came, to 
return it. 
G. Content to have achieved this goal, Galahad dies peacefully. Perceval 
stays with him and joins him in death. Sir Bors, after performing many 
wondrous deeds against the infidels, makes his way back to tell Arthur 
and Lancelot of these events and about Galahad’s immediate ascension 
to heaven for his goodness. 
VIII. In Camelot, as King Arthur foresaw, all is coming to ruin. Lancelot and 
Guinevere have been overcome by lust, and their affair is an open secret in 
the court. Arthur shuts his ear to these rumors. 
A. Close advisers, such as Sir Modred, tell Arthur that he must show the 
world whether Guinevere is innocent or adulterous. Modred tells 
Arthur to test Lancelot by arranging a hunting trip. When Lancelot 
returns to Guinevere at nightfall, Arthur sees the truth. Guinevere and 
Lancelot go to Lancelot’s castle, the Joyous Gard. Arthur, who has 
been shamed, must wage war against Lancelot. Lancelot leaves Britain. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
17 
B. Arthur, without Lancelot, faces the forces of revolt led by Modred. In a 
great battle between the forces of good, led by Arthur, and the forces of 
evil and rebellion, both Arthur and Modred are slain. As he is dying, 
Arthur requests that a knight throw his sword into the lake. When 
Arthur is told that a woman’s hand reached up to take the sword, 
Arthur says that he can die. 
C. According to Malory, many people believed that Arthur was taken 
away by queens to islands in the west, where he awaits the time when 
Britain needs him and he will return. 
D. Lancelot and Guinevere regret all the misfortune their carnal love has 
caused. Guinevere becomes a nun and Lancelot, a monk, fasting and 
serving God until Lancelot learns that Guinevere has died. Lancelot 
can no longer eat or drink, and he wastes away and dies. He is buried 
by knights who fought beside him. 
IX. This story of love, the search for the Holy Grail, becomes a story of 
redemption. Sinners, such as Lancelot and Guinevere, bring destruction to 
those they love. But God can take away their sin so that they die in peace. 
Morte d’Arthur is a great love story and a great religious story. The book 
speaks to the values of the Middle Ages—an era remote from us in both 
time and spirituality.  
 
Essential Reading: 
Malory, Morte d’Arthur. 
 
Supplementary Reading: 
Huizinga, Waning of the Middle Ages. 
Weston, From Ritual to Romance. 
Matthews, King Arthur, Dark Age Warrior, Mythic King. 
 
Questions to Consider: 
1. In the Morte d’Arthur is love portrayed as a positive or negative force? Is 
the difference that of pure, divine love or carnal love? How would you 
distinguish the two? 
2. Do you regard love as one of the strongest forces motivating humans? Can 
you think of other instances, besides Marc Antony and the Duke of 
Windsor of public men or women who have thrown away everything for 
love? Does this have any relevance in your life?  

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
18 
Lecture Twenty-Eight 
 
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Faust, Part 1 
 
Scope: Goethe ranks with Shakespeare and Dante as one of the three supreme 
geniuses of European literature, comparable to Homer and Vergil from 
classical antiquity. Goethe’s genius was the most far ranging of all: 
poet, novelist, statesman, philosopher, and natural scientist. 
Throughout his long and highly productive creative life, Goethe 
grappled with the figure of Faust, the medieval searcher for wisdom 
who sold his soul to the devil. The first part of Faust was published in 
1808. In it, Dr. Faust appears like the Oedipus in Sophocles’s tragedy 
Oedipus the King. Faust is man intent upon knowledge at any cost. He 
will explore the whole of human experience, moving beyond all 
ordinary constraints of morality and religion. He will become like God, 
“knowing good and evil.” His tragic destruction of Gretchen is the 
triumph of supreme egotism over conscience. 
 
Outline 
I. 
Love—both spiritual and carnal—is the theme of Morte d’Arthur by 
Thomas Malory.  
A. Morte d’Arthur epitomizes the ideals of the Middle Ages. It was 
published after the death of Malory, in 1471. William Caxton, the first 
major figure in English publishing, was its editor. 
B. The theme of love is crucial to any discussion of great books and great 
themes. Love is a power that rules everyday affairs.  
1. Early Greek thinkers believed that the force of love brought the 
world into being. 
2. Dante concludes The Divine Comedy by referring to the love that 
moves the universe. 
3. In Morte d’Arthur, Lancelot allows his love for Guinevere to 
distract him from his great goal, seeking the Holy Grail. The work 
asks whether we sometimes pursue what is irrelevant and let slip 
our great missions in life. Morte d’Arthur also has a theme of 
redemption: Lancelot made mistakes but was redeemed, although 
England was destroyed and King Arthur’s Camelot was gone. 
4. Love is also a theme in Faust, by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe. 
II. Goethe, who lived from 1749 to 1832, is the genius of German literature. 
He is seen as the embodiment of the Age of Enlightenment, as well as the 
Romantic Age that followed it. 
A. Goethe was well educated and fluent in Greek and Latin. He showed 
the love of classics that was a hallmark of the Enlightenment. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
19 
B. Europeans of the 18th century believed that Europe was freeing itself 
from the shackles of the wars of religion and the Middle Ages. 
C. Enlightenment thinkers believed that the man was a rational creature, 
and reason was key to man’s advance. The idea of progress was the 
hallmark of the Enlightenment. 
D. The era was an age of enlightened despots, such as Maria Theresa of 
Austria. A well-intentioned absolute ruler, it was believed, could give 
his or her subjects the greatest benefits and ensure true freedom for 
individuals to live their lives as they chose. 
E. The spirit of the Enlightenment is embodied in the U.S. Constitution, 
which is a rational document and does not mention God. 
F. Many thinkers of the Enlightenment believed that God had made the 
world, but men and women made their own destinies. 
III. Goethe became the supreme representative of the Enlightenment. 
A. He was a notable and influential civil servant of the duke of Weimar. 
B. He was a scientist who conducted original research into the theory of 
color. 
C. He was traveler, who wrote his observations, for example, on Italy. 
D. He was also a poet of supreme lyrical ability, as well as a playwright.  
E. He was the most admired intellectual of his day, in an era that lionized 
intellectuals. 
IV. Throughout his life, Goethe grappled with the story of Dr. Faustus. 
A. Dr. Faustus was a real person who lived in Germany at the time of 
Martin Luther, probably between 1480 and 1540. 
B. Dr. Faustus had a reputation for not just wisdom but magical wisdom.  
C. A legend grew that he had sold his soul to the devil to acquire 
knowledge. 
D. He was portrayed in Punch-and-Judy–type shows that featured him in 
fights with the devil. These shows also dealt with the theme of 
ambition and the desire for knowledge.  
V. The first part of Goethe’s Faust, the subject of this lecture, was published in 
1808.  
A. Like the biblical Book of Job, Faust begins in heaven with God and the 
devil. The devil is an erudite man of the world who pays reverence to 
God. God tells the devil that he has given humanity free will, which 
enables people to make choices. The devil questions this freedom and 
gains God’s permission to take possession of Faust’s soul if he 
succeeds in tempting Faust.  

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
20 
B. In the next scene, we meet Faust, a professor of great repute, learned in 
theology, medicine, law, Greek, and Latin. He laments that all he has 
learned in his studies is that man knows nothing. He would give 
anything for true wisdom. 
C. Faust rejects the biblical concept “In the beginning was the word.” For 
him, the act, not the word, was the beginning.  
D. Faust decides that the only act that has meaning to him is suicide, but 
he defers his suicide when he hears the bells of Easter. 
E. The next day, Faust and Wagner, his research assistant, are out walking 
and encounter a poodle. When Faust and the poodle return to Faust’s 
study, the poodle transforms into a scholar. He announces that he is the 
devil and says that he can bring meaning to Faust’s life. 
F. Faust declares that he wants really to live. Instead of studying, he 
wants money and women. The devil makes the bargain for Faust’s soul 
in return for giving the professor everything that he wants; he has Faust 
sign a contract in blood. 
G. After a visit to a wine cellar, Faust wishes for true love with a woman 
who loves him in return. He has set his eye on Margaret, or Gretchen, a 
pure young woman. The devil encourages Faust to seduce Gretchen 
and plants jewels in her room. Gretchen keeps the jewels although she 
knows that she should not.  
H. The devil gives Faust a sleeping potion for Gretchen’s mother, to get 
her out of the way while Gretchen and Faust make love. Gretchen gives 
the sleeping potion to her mother, but the potion kills her. 
I. 
Gretchen’s brother returns, and the devil kills him. 
J. The devil advises Faust to abandon the pregnant Gretchen. 
K. While Faust and the devil are celebrating at a wild revel, Gretchen is 
imprisoned on charges of murdering her mother and the baby. 
L. Faust wants to return to Gretchen, but the devil insists that Faust is 
powerless to prevent her death and has no responsibility in the matter. 
M. Faust returns to Gretchen, who has become insane. The devil tells 
Faust that he is guilty as an accessory to the murder of Gretchen’s 
mother, baby, and brother. He reminds Faust of the contract and that 
Faust will die a sinner. Faust leaves with the devil and Gretchen is 
executed. 
 
Essential Reading: 
Goethe, Faust, Part I. 
 
Supplementary Reading: 
Sharpe, Cambridge Companion to Goethe. 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
21 
Questions to Consider: 
1. Would you sign a pact with the devil? 
2. Does Gretchen deserve any blame? 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
22 
Lecture Twenty-Nine 
 
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Faust, Part 2 
 
Scope: Goethe stood at the center of two great cultural currents of modern 
Europe: the classicism of the 18th century and the romanticism of the 
19th century. The second part of Faust, completed in 1831, explores the 
meaning of art for Goethe, the German nation, and his age. Can the art 
and literature of classical Greece provide the absolute model for 
Europe? Are the classical canons and forms absolute standards by 
which we measure our own cultural achievements? Is it the purpose of 
art to appeal to human reason? Or is it the purpose of art to appeal to 
our feelings and emotions, and must each new age and each people 
finds its own way, its own standards and criteria of beauty? The 
question of the role of beauty and cultural standards is one that every 
thoughtful person must decide on his or her own terms. We explore 
these themes against the backdrop of the moral growth and ultimate 
redemption of Dr. Faust. 
 
Outline 
I. 
As previously mentioned, the first part of Goethe’s Faust was published in 
1808, and the second part was published in 1831  
A. The poem is about both love, ambition, and wisdom. In the first part of 
Faust, the professor gave his soul to gain knowledge but lost wisdom 
in the process. The second part of the work shows how Faust reclaims 
wisdom. 
B. Faust is ultimately about redemption. To Goethe’s admirers, the 
conclusion of the work was a surprise, because they saw in Goethe a 
mind of the age of Enlightenment, unfettered by religion. 
II. Goethe lived from 1749 to 1832, a period that encompassed the 
Enlightenment, the French Revolution, the age of Napoleon, and the 
revolutions that shook Europe in 1830. 
A. Goethe was educated in the values of the Enlightenment. 
1. Chief among Enlightenment values was admiration for the 
classical cultures of Greece and Rome. People believed that the 
Greeks and Romans could be emulated but not surpassed; the 
models were the Iliad and the Aeneid. 
2. The Enlightenment was also an age of universality. Europeans 
believed that Europe was one unified culture and civilization. This 
culture moved across boundaries. France was seen as the great 
modern example of culture, and cultivated people, including 
Goethe, frequently wrote and spoke in French.  

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
23 
3. Thus, both the classical culture, with its models, and the 
contemporary world formed a unified cultural outlook.  
B. These attitudes of the Enlightenment were shattered by the French 
Revolution and Napoleon, both of which preached doctrines of liberty 
and equality but brought despotism. 
1. The Germans, Italians, and Spanish came to understand that they 
had unique cultures.  
2. The finest minds of the day, including Fichte and Hegel, put forth 
the belief that every civilization was unique and that each people, 
having defined itself as a nation, should develop its culture in its 
own way. This belief was strongest in Germany. 
C. With this new thinking came revulsion at some of the ideals of the 
Enlightenment, which had taught that men and women were creatures 
of reason. 
1. From the new perspective of romanticism, men and women were 
creatures of impulse; the irrational plays an important role in 
human life. People can try to suppress their emotions under a 
veneer of reason, but the emotions will break free. 
2. While the Enlightenment sought to control nature, romanticism 
celebrated nature as uncontrollable and saw it as a source of 
eternal renewal for humanity.  
3. The Enlightenment had celebrated classical Greece and Rome, but 
romanticism believed that the Middle Ages, when France and 
Germany had come into being, had been a time of true 
enlightenment.  
4. Christianity took on new meaning during the Romantic era. The 
life and the suffering of Jesus were idealized. Some people turned 
back to the Catholic Church as a repository of faith and wisdom. 
D. Goethe abserved and absorbed the ideas of both the Enlightenment and 
romanticism. He is unique and stands in neither age. 
III. The second part of Faust examines the issue of whether a unique set of 
values exists for each nation, and whether standards of absolute beauty 
exist forever, or each individual must judge beauty for himself. 
A. The second part of Faust opens in the wilds of nature in the spring. 
Faust, shattered by the death of Gretchen and his own abandonment of 
her, is with his comrade, the devil. At the opening of Part II of Faust, 
elves, the helpers of mankind, have pity on the man of sorrows, 
whether he is good or evil.  
1. In Part I, Faust draws back from suicide at Easter. It is no 
coincidence that Dante carries The Divine Comedy, his story of 
redemption, through Easter week. Orwell’s 1984 begins the story 
of Winston Smith in April. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
24 
2. The two parts of Faust are linked by spring and the renewal of the 
earth. At this time of year, the man of sorrows—both Christ and 
Everyman, whether he is good or evil—can be pitied and helped. 
3. Faust can renew himself, take charge of his life, and become 
responsible again. The devil asks him what he is doing, and Faust 
replies that he is gaining strength from nature. 
B. The devil tells Faust that they must make a living and suggests that 
they go to the court of the Holy Roman Emperor. 
1. Until 1806, when Napoleon abolished the Holy Roman Empire, 
the Holy Roman Emperors saw themselves as a direct continuation 
from the Emperor Augustus; their line had been renewed by the 
Emperor Charlemagne and had ruled over most of Europe. 
2. By the time that Faust was written, the Holy Roman Emperor was 
essentially a figurehead, who in theory, ruled over the 365 
independent principalities of Germany.  
3. In Faust, the Holy Roman Empire is a shadow of Rome and the 
ancient world and is testimony to how the modern world has 
allowed the shadow of antiquity to overwhelm and oppress it. 
Faust is a statement that contemporary people must break that tie 
and create something new. 
4. When Faust and the devil arrive at the court of the Holy Roman 
Emperor, the devil assumes the role of court fool. The emperor has 
no funds, and no one is taking the government seriously. 
5. The devil and Faust have an answer to this problem: Because the 
emperor owns everything under the ground, he can issue currency 
backed by theoretical buried treasure. As long as people accept the 
funds in transactions and as long as this method makes the 
economy work, it is valid. 
6. The emperor puts Faust in charge of court ceremonies. The court 
wants to see a reenactment of classical antiquity. Faust and the 
devil invoke classical antiquity and the court sees that the classical 
world is not ideal; Paris is not as handsome as he is reputed to be, 
nor is Helen as fair. 
C. Faust returns to his study. His former research assistant, Wagner, now 
a professor, has created artificial life in the form of Homunculus, a tiny 
man in a test tube. Another student informs Faust that his education did 
nothing for him and only real life has taught him anything. 
D. Homunculus goes with Faust and the devil to the Mediterranean to 
discover the roots of classical antiquity. 
1. The devil conjures up the mythological world and creates a wild 
night of revelry in classical antiquity. 
2. Homunculus explodes; the being created without love could 
neither survive nor experience real emotion. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
25 
3. Faust wants to possess power and the most beautiful woman who 
ever lived.  
4. Faust recreates a new kingdom in Sparta that is a blend of the 
medieval Germanic world of knights and the classical world. Faust 
weds Helen. Their child, Euphorion, is a blend of the world of 
Germany and the world of the classical past.  
5. Helen and Euphorion die because an artificial culture created from 
this blend of classical and romantic civilizations cannot survive. 
This is Goethe’s statement that each age and nation must set its 
own standards of beauty and establish its own way in art, 
literature, philosophy, and wisdom. 
6. Faust’s attempt to return to the classical past has failed. 
E. Faust returns to Germany and the Holy Roman Emperor. 
1. The imperial economy has collapsed, and the empire is about to be 
overrun. 
2. Faust, aided by the devil, creates a phantom army that drives out 
the enemy and saves the empire. 
3. As a reward, Faust wants a new kingdom, a land bordering on the 
sea, in which to create a new world. 
4. Faust rules over a vast domain. He has drained the sea and created 
new land. People labor on his behalf, but they enjoy peace and 
prosperity because he protects them. He feels that his life has been 
rewarded. He realizes that he wanted power to do good things. 
5. Faust hears a church bell and asks the devil to destroy the chapel 
where the bell is housed. The devil, with some henchmen, burns 
the chapel and kills the people who lived there. Faust realizes that 
his request has caused their deaths. 
6. The devil informs Faust that his death is approaching. Faust 
reminds the devil that his contract states that he can live until he 
says that everything is perfect, which he is unwilling to do, but he 
sees beauty in human striving. 
7. The devil claims Faust. 
8. A chorus from heaven is heard, and a shower of roses (a symbol of 
love) appears. Gretchen is praying to Mary for the salvation of 
Faust’s soul. 
9. Faust is saved, the devil loses his prey, and Faust ascends to 
heaven. 
10. The chorus sings, “It’s a mystery, we can never understand life; 
…all we can say is that the eternal feminine raises us to heaven.” 
 
Essential Reading: 
Goethe, Faust, Part II. 
 
Supplementary Reading: 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
26 
Sharpe, Cambridge Companion to Goethe. 
 
Questions to Consider: 
1. How do you interpret the religious ending of Faust? 
2. Can the character of Faust be taken in any sense as an allegory for each and 
every human life? 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
27 
Lecture Thirty 
 
Henry David Thoreau, Walden 
 
Scope: Every thoughtful person must come to terms with nature, with the 
natural world around us. Is nature a source of wonder and revitalization 
for the soul, or is nature the servant of humans to be conquered and 
exploited? Are we one with nature or above it? The classical vision 
brings nature under control, order out of chaos. The Romantic reveres 
nature, untrammeled and untouched. Thoreau, the most American of 
thinkers, is an unabashed Romantic. Walden is the journal of his 
recovery of self-meaning and independence by his return to nature. It 
began significantly on July 4, 1845. Thoreau studies the life of nature 
with intense sympathy. Out of this comes a deeper understanding of the 
meaning of his own life. Walden is a profoundly individual story. I 
have found my own way, Thoreau says to us. Now you must find your 
way. 
 
Outline 
I. 
The previous lecture completed the discussion of Goethe’s Faust, a 
magnificent epic poem in two parts. 
A. The theme of the first part of Faust was love, a romantic love that can 
destroy. Faust seduced and abandoned Gretchen, who caused the death 
of her mother and child. 
B. In the second part of Faust, the professor followed his ambition to its 
limits but was redeemed by divine love through the Virgin Mary and 
Gretchen herself, praying for him. 
II. This course has examined several epic poems: the Iliad, Gilgamesh, 
Beowulf, the Aeneid, and The Divine Comedy. The epic has been the vehicle 
for some of the noblest ideas in literature.  
A. Malory’s Morte d’Arthur is an epic; although it is not written in poetry, 
it deals with epic material in magisterial prose.  
B. Like The Divine Comedy, Faust, and the Aeneid, Morte d’Arthur is a 
story of redemption. Contemporary society does not allow people to 
forget their mistakes, nor does it seem to allow redemption, although 
the concept of redemption lies at the center of Christianity and Islam, 
and redemption is also central to the Bhagavad Gita. 
C. Epic poetry has been a source of great inspiration, as have 
philosophers, or searchers after truth, such as Socrates, Jesus, and 
Confucius. Socrates believed that epic poets were not philosophers, 
because they could convey great ideas but could not analyze them. 
III. Thoreau spoke out against conformity in the United States at a time when 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
28 
Americans thought they were moving forward to becoming the greatest 
nation in the world.  
A. Melville, a contemporary of Thoreau, said, “We are the bearers of the 
ark of liberty to the entire world.” 
B. The Declaration of Independence had enshrined the values of life, 
liberty, and the pursuit of happiness and had taken democracy to much 
of North America. The United States was becoming a leading industrial 
power, and Americans believed in progress and democracy. 
IV. Henry David Thoreau was an eccentric. 
A. Thoreau went to Harvard, where he studied Greek, Latin, and natural 
and moral philosophy. He taught for a while, but realized that as a 
teacher, he never had an opportunity to learn. He then tried writing, but 
no one wanted to publish his material. 
B. On July 4, 1845, when he was 28 years old, Thoreau celebrated his 
independence by going out to Walden Pond near Concord.  
C. Thoreau considered himself a transcendentalist, as were several of his 
friends in Concord, including Emerson and the Alcotts. To 
transcendentalists, ideas were most important. This belief was similar 
to Socrates’s belief that ideas shaped everythinga philosophy 
opposed to that of most Americans, who believed in practical, 
empirical information. 
D. Thoreau considered himself a mystic, that is, someone who is cut off 
from the factual reality of the world.  
V. Although Thoreau read and took seriously German philosophy, particularly 
Kant, and knew Plato, he wanted, above all, to think for himself.  
A. He wished to cut himself off, as much as possible, from contemporary 
life and give his eccentricity full rein. He was not a hermit, however; 
people visited him, and he was a genial host. 
B. Thoreau believed that material possessions are fetters that bind us.  
C. Thoreau recognized that if he was going to achieve fulfillment, that is, 
develop his inner self, or soul, he would have to be selfish. 
D. Thoreau found he needed little to live. He discovered that all that was 
necessary was some kind of covering and something to eat, which he 
could produce himself. Although he was not a skilled craftsman, he 
built a small cabin, and grew his own food.  
E. In so doing, he discovered how much fulfillment he could get from 
independence. His time was truly his own. The Bhagavad Gita, one of 
Thoreau’s favorite books, teaches that to do someone else’s work is 
slavery, but to do one’s own work is freedom.  

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
29 
F. Thoreau would sometimes spend an entire day baking bread and 
watching it in the oven—or watching the grass—and contemplating. 
He found himself in a world filled with information. He believed that 
some people turned information into knowledge, but almost no one 
took time to contemplate and turn knowledge into wisdom. 
VI. For contemporary Americans, Walden is a magnificent examination of 
nature. 
A. During the Enlightenment, people believed that they should control 
nature. During the Romantic age, people saw nature as an 
overwhelming force that gave renewal. People of the 21st century 
believe that nature should be controlled. Contemporary Americans 
isolate nature in national parks. 
1. Thoreau wanted to subordinate himself to nature so that he could 
understand it; the routine of life on Walden Pond, where he stayed 
for two years, held profound meaning for him. 
2. Thoreau was a self-trained natural philosopher who immersed 
himself in nature out of a belief that nature is sacred and that 
humanity is a part of it. 
B. Thoreau developed reservations about eating meat and fish. He found 
that he could obtain everything he needed to eat from his garden.  
C. Thoreau’s friends were concerned that he was not getting on with the 
work of his life, but he believed that learning to know himself was 
indeed the work of his life. 
D. When spring came to Walden Pond, Thoreau saw it as he had never 
seen it before. He saw the world coming alive. He found in the renewal 
of spring the same mystic sense of redemption of the great epic poets.  
1. In The Divine Comedy, Dante begins his journey to save his soul at 
Easter.  
2. Faust was rescued from suicide by spring and Easter.  
3. Spring was also the time of year when Athenians put on tragedies, 
which were focused on redeeming oneself through understanding 
suffering, and gaining wisdom from the lives of others. 
4. Thoreau believed that spring was a mystical time and that God, 
inside him, was renewing the world. 
5. Thoreau believed that God was more present in trees coming back 
to life than in cathedrals built by man. 
6. Thoreau announced that he forgave everyone. He believed that 
brooding over wrongs done to him allowed others to control him. 
7. He believed that in spring, the time of renewal, all debts should be 
forgiven. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
30 
VII.  Thoreau asked difficult questions that reveal his eccentricity.  
A. He asked, for example, how many letters are truly worth the postage. 
He wondered how many letters transform a person’s life and are good 
for the soul. His solution was to stop reading mail. 
B. Thoreau did not read newspapers. His friends were concerned that he 
was not being a responsible citizen and was not staying informed. 
Thoreau believed that newspapers contain a rehash of past events, with 
names and locations changed. By reading newspapers, people destroy 
their ability to commune with themselves. So many impurities enter the 
self from the outside world that the individual can never break free and 
loses forever the chance to save his soul. 
VIII. After two years, Thoreau left Walden Pond; he had other paths to follow.  
A. As individuals, we do not have to stay at the same thing or have the 
same ideals for all our lives. We should not be afraid to contradict 
ourselves. Thoreau stated that he had only started to explore himself 
and that he could continue to do so wherever he was. 
B. Thoreau believed that the beauty of nature could not be surpassed by a 
work of art in a museum. 
C. The Bhagavad Gita points out that the sun is the morning star and that 
every morning is new, allowing the individual to begin again. The idea 
that the sun is a morning star concludes Walden. 
IX. Thoreau believed that American democracy was not perfect. Slavery was a 
stain on all of America. Boston merchants, for example, depended too much 
on trade with the South to truly want to abolish slavery. The soul of the 
South was too corrupt to rid itself of slavery. 
A. Thoreau decided that he would not pay taxes to support a country that 
supported slavery. He believed that in a country with true freedom, 
people should have the freedom not to pay taxes. 
B. Thoreau greatly admired John Brown. His essay on Brown states that 
Brown was a man of conscience who had come to understand that 
slavery was a great wrong and could be abolished only through 
bloodshed and civil war. If you want to be a person of the world, 
Thoreau said, do it the way that John Brown did: Fight and die for 
something with true meaning—freedom. 
X. Thoreau’s legacy is to encourage people to love nature, because in nature, 
the individual can find a way to truth.  
 
Essential Reading: 
Thoreau, Walden. 
 
Supplementary Reading: 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
31 
Thoreau, Political Writings. 
 
Questions to Consider: 
1. Where might you find your own Walden? 
2. Contrary to Thoreau, it might be argued that all human progress is based on 
the conquest of nature. What do you think? We might start by asking what 
we mean by progress. That is what Thoreau challenges us to do. 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
32 
Lecture Thirty-One 
 
Gibbon, Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire 
 
Scope: If we are concerned with the meaning of our own lives, we must 
ponder deeply the meaning of history, for our personal lives are but a 
microcosm of the larger story of history. In these terms, we must 
address two primary questions: Do we study history simply to learn 
about past events, or do we learn history to apply its lessons to our own 
day? Second, is history nothing but a series of random encounters, 
leading nowhere, or is history a story that moves forward, even in fits 
and starts, toward a better world for the human race? Most academic 
historians today would scorn both questions. We take them very 
seriously. Edward Gibbon’s Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire is 
the greatest history written in the English language. In the Teaching 
Company course A History of Freedom, we explored Gibbon in the 
context of the ideas of freedom in the American Revolution. Here, we 
look at him and his history as a statement of “a philosophical 
historian,” who searches the past for laws to guide us in the future. 
 
Outline 
I. 
The previous two lectures, on the second part of Goethe’s Faust and on 
Thoreau’s Walden, explored the themes of the ideal of beauty and the ideal 
of nature. Do absolute standards for beauty exist? Can we say, as Socrates 
does, that in heaven, there exists perfection of beauty and that everything 
on earth is a reflection of it? Are there absolute standards, which are based 
on the ideal of beauty, by which we can judge works of art? Can we teach 
these ideal values to students? 
A. The democracy of Athens would have answered in the affirmative to 
these questions. The Athenians believed that Greek temples could 
achieve perfection. The Athenian democracy set out to build the 
Parthenon and make it perfection. 
B. The contemporary United States would answer in the negative to these 
questions. Americans do not believe in absolute standards. Americans 
accept ugliness that would have appalled an Athenian. 
C. Thoreau brings to our mind the concept of nature. For Thoreau, nature 
is the great source of renewal for the thoughtful individual. A truly 
thoughtful society should do all that is possible to preserve that beauty 
and engage itself with a natural rhythm that is part of that beauty. 
II. History, the past, is another topic that every thoughtful individual must 
consider. What is our relationship with the past, and does it have any 
meaning for us today? 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
33 
A. The Iliad is about preserving the past. It tells the Greeks of 800 B.C. 
about their great past and its warriors. 
B. Confucius believed that one of his most important tasks was to teach 
his students about antiquity. 
C. Our era is essentially ahistorical. Many historical works and 
biographies are published, but we lack a criterion for studying and 
relating ourselves to the past that the age of Enlightenment, the era of 
the founders of our country, called a philosophical view of history. In 
this view, history is a means of understanding the present and looking 
into the future. 
1. The founders of the United States were influenced by the past. 
When they wrote the Declaration of Independence and the 
Constitution, they studied classical antiquity for models of how 
republican and democratic governments had worked in the past. 
2. They believed that history was a tool and that no society was 
immune to the process of historical decay. They also believed that 
all nations would eventually pass away. 
D. The Romans of the 2nd century A.D. believed that Rome was eternal, as 
the emperors told them. For individuals in the Enlightenment—
including Goethe, the Founding Fathers, and Gibbon—the story of how 
and why the Roman Empire had passed away was of compelling 
importance. 
III. Edward Gibbon’s Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire is the most 
influential historical work written in English. 
A. It ranks—along with the works of Thucydides, Herodotus, Livy, and 
Tacitus—as one of the five greatest histories ever composed. 
B. The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire was published between 
1776 and 1789, the time of the Declaration of Independence, the War 
of Independence, and the Constitution of the United States. 
C. For part of the time between 1776 and 1789, Gibbon was a member of 
Parliament. He later said that his time in Parliament was a school of 
civic virtue and patriotism, the first qualities that a historian needs. 
IV. The Decline and Fall is a long, sad commentary on the history of a nation 
that gave up political liberty to become a superpower. 
A. Under the republican constitution that the Founding Fathers admired 
and Gibbon describes, Rome enjoyed a balance between the senate and 
the people, with a strong executive commander-in-chief. 
1. Rome rose from a tiny city-state to master of its world. 
2. By the 1st century B.C., Rome’s multicultural and diverse empire 
resulted in tremendous affluence.  

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
34 
3. This affluence corrupted every aspect of the republican political 
system; elections were openly bought and sold, and political 
factions were so strong that the Roman senate was gridlocked. 
4. Finally, the Roman people lost confidence in their government and 
in the republican way of life. They wanted peace and order. 
5. The Roman people gave up their political liberty and transferred 
all real power to a military dictator, their emperor. The first 
emperor was Julius Caesar, who was followed by the great 
statesman Augustus. Caesar and Augustus created a new order that 
brought peace and prosperity to their world. 
6. The Roman Empire reached its apex in the 2nd century A.D. It 
stretched from the North Sea to the Sahara and from Scotland to 
Iraq. The inhabitants were joined in common allegiance to Rome. 
B. Gibbon begins his story of the decline and fall of the Roman Empire in 
the 2nd century A.D., in the age of the Antonines. 
V. Gibbon was born in England to a family of wealth and standing. 
A. He went to Oxford for a short time but found it uninspiring. His 
conversion to Roman Catholicism while at Oxford led his father to 
send him to a private tutor, a minister, in Lausanne, Switzerland. There, 
Gibbon converted nominally to Protestantism, learned Greek and Latin, 
developed a love for history, and became fluent in French. 
B. He returned to England and served briefly in the Hampshire Militia. He 
believed that this experience was not insignificant for a historian of the 
Roman Empire, because he learned about military tactics.  
C. Gibbon then traveled in Europe. He had decided that he wanted to 
make a name for himself by writing a history and began to search for a 
theme. He became engrossed by the concept of liberty and considered 
writing about the Florentine republic or the cantons of Switzerland. 
D. In Rome in October 1764, sitting on the Capitoline Hill looking out 
over the Forum, which had become a cow pasture, Gibbon pondered 
the downfall of Rome. He decided that his topic would be the decline 
of the Roman Empire: why the grandeur of the empire “collapsed 
before barbarism and superstition and why Christian monks and 
German barbarians came to rule Rome.” 
E. He had a broad vision that the culture of the Roman Empire was as 
important as its political history. 
1. His treatments of the Middle East and Muhammad are superb and 
fair-minded. 
2. His treatment of Christianity as a historical phenomenon got him 
into trouble. 
F. The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire shows broad vision, a 
superb knowledge of sources, and magnificent use of the English 
language. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
35 
G. Gibbon’s work describes the death of the ancient world and the birth of 
modern Europe. The Franks, the Germanic tribes, and the Angles and 
Saxons had all taken the place of the Romans. After centuries, these 
new people “restored a manly spirit of freedom and laid the foundation 
for the progress of our own age.” 
H. Gibbon was convinced that history is a story of progress and that one 
of the greatest signs of progress was America. 
1. In Parliamentary debates about the American Revolution, Gibbon 
said nothing. 
2. Because Lord North offered Gibbon a sinecure to sit on the board 
of trade, Gibbon always voted on North’s side. 
3. In letters, however, Gibbon clearly indicated that England was 
making a grievous mistake. In the pages of his history, he made 
oblique comparisons between the fall of Rome and what he 
perceived to be the decline and fall of the British Empire. 
I. 
The first volume of The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire 
appeared in 1776, became a runaway bestseller, and was immediately 
recognized as a masterpiece. Gibbon became independently wealthy. 
J. When the government of Lord North collapsed, Gibbon retired to 
Lausanne, Switzerland, to write the final volumes of his work. 
K. Gibbon also wrote a charming autobiography, in which he said that as 
an individual reaches the end of life, he can take consolation in going 
to heaven, or in his children, or in knowing that he set out to do 
something great and did it. 
VI. Gibbon’s history still speaks to us today, because Gibbon saw eternal 
lessons in the fate of Rome. 
A. The Roman Empire was the only superpower in history until the United 
States. 
1. A superpower is defined as a nation that is absolutely dominant, 
militarily, politically, economically, and culturally.  
2. Like Rome, our culture is derivative. Greek culture provided the 
common cultural cement of the Roman Empire. European 
civilization provides this for the United States. 
B. Gibbon shows us that Rome collapsed because of its involvement in 
the Middle East and its failure to solve the problems there.  
1. In the 3rd century A.D., Iran experienced a tremendous revival of 
fundamentalist religion. 
2. Eight hundred years earlier, the prophet Zarathustra had 
proclaimed his religion centered on the Lord of Truth, who was in 
constant struggle with the lie. This religion was one of ethical 
righteousness in which a person would go to paradise if he chose 
the Lord of Truth, fought for the Lord of Truth with fire and 
sword, and spread his religion. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
36 
3. The Iranians swept into the borders of the Roman Empire, and 
Rome never recovered from the devastation of the 3rd century A.D. 
4. The Middle East had come to absorb all the attention of the 
Romans. Rome had been involved in nation-building for three 
centuries in the Middle East and had poured vast wealth into the 
region. However, it also kept large numbers of troops there, which 
alienated the population. 
5. The civil war, expenses, and loss of manpower were a constant 
drain on the Roman Empire. In addition, the Romans were 
distracted and underestimated the potential danger in Central 
Europe, including the growing power of Germanic barbarians 
along the Danube and the Rhine Rivers. In the 3rd century A.D., 
these northern barbarians crashed through the Roman frontiers. 
6. The failure of the Romans to solve the problems of the Middle 
East resulted in military, political, and economic.  
7. Roman politics was disrupted because the constant war with the 
Iranians led to the collapse of the ordered government of the 1st 
and 2nd centuries A.D. 
8. Rome emerged as a bureaucratic, totalitarian state that was 
incapable of solving the problems of the Middle East. 
9. Gibbon speaks with profound relevance to us in the 21st century. 
 
Essential Reading: 
Gibbon, The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire. 
 
Supplementary Reading: 
Gibbon, Memoirs of My Life and Writings. 
 
Questions to Consider: 
1. How would you say the American experience in the Middle East confirms 
or contradicts Gibbon’s view that similar circumstances will always 
produce similar events? 
2. In weighing objectively the impact of Christianity on the Roman Empire, 
Gibbon points out the deleterious effect on national unity of the orthodox 
Christian persecution of heretics. What, if anything, in the Christian 
religion justifies the persecution of heretics? 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
37 
Lecture Thirty-Two 
 
Lord Acton, The History of Freedom 
 
Scope: Lord Acton believed that history was the story of the march of liberty. 
It is a message of supreme importance to us today, citizens of a 
superpower, engaged in bringing democracy to the world. Acton never 
wrote his planned history of liberty. But in numerous essays and 
unpublished notes, he left behind a legacy of historical thought. Acton 
taught that thinking historically was more important than knowledge of 
historical facts. His was a “liberal” vision of history, as John Stuart 
Mill had a liberal vision of political thought and Winston Churchill, a 
liberal vision of political action. Acton was deeply religious. He 
defined liberty as “the reign of conscience.” True liberty would be 
achieved when every individual is  free to follow the dictates of his or 
her individual conscience. Classical antiquity, the Middle Ages, the 
Renaissance and Reformation, the age of Enlightenment, and our 
modern age have each contributed to the march of liberty. 
 
Outline 
I. 
The previous lecture began the discussion of the theme of history. Is the 
past meaningful? Does the past tell us anything about the present or the 
future? Is there a point to history, or is it a random collision of events?  
A. The question of whether history has a purpose lies behind the first 
known historical work composed. In his histories of the Persian war, 
Herodotus attempted to discover what was permanent behind all the 
passing empires. 
B. Gibbon also explored the reasons that empires passed away. He was a 
philosophical historian, one who sought laws of history, which 
would—like laws of science—apply forever. Gibbon also believed that 
the historian had a duty to pass moral judgment. 
C. Historians today dispute the claims of Gibbon. They do not believe that 
history is a guide to the present or the future, and they would say that 
the historian must be careful about passing historical judgments, 
because no universal set of values exists. This coincides with the ideas 
of Machiavelli, who says that nations are not bound by any moral 
strictures and that a nation exists only to serve itself. This view became 
the realpolitik of Europe in the 19th and 20th centuries. 
II. Lord Acton stood out boldly against the idea that morality can be separated 
from history.  
A. Acton is a great spokesperson for moral judgment in history, laws in 
history, and the idea that history has a grand theme. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
38 
B. Acton believed that the theme of the progress of history is liberty. In 
this belief, he agrees with the tradition of historians going back to 
Herodotus. 
III. Lord Acton had an unusual upbringing. 
A. He was born in 1834 to a distinguished family of English and 
continental aristocrats. Acton was a baronet, the lowest level of English 
nobility. 
B. Acton’s family was Roman Catholic, which in early 19th-century 
England still carried some liabilities, including ineligibility to attend 
Oxford or Cambridge. 
C. The grandfather of Lord Acton had lived most of his life in Europe and 
had served at the court of the king of Naples. 
D. Denied admission to Cambridge because of his Catholicism, Acton was 
sent by his family to study in Germany under the Catholic theologian 
and priest Johann Ignaz von Doellinger, who was a historian of the 
church. Acton, like Gibbon, never received a university degree. 
E. Under Doellinger, Acton developed a sense for 19th-century 
progressive history, which focused on the use of documents. 
IV. After his return to England, Acton sought to use his skills as a journalist to 
take an active role in the reform of the Catholic church, a movement in 
which Doellinger was involved. The purpose of this movement was to bring 
the Catholic Church into the 19th century.  
A. Although Acton was a devout Catholic who accepted the doctrine of 
the church, he believed that the church had to be brought into 
agreement with the liberal currents sweeping Europe. 
B. Acton believed that instead of supporting autocratic governments, the 
Catholic Church should support democratic governments and accept 
scientific thought. He saw no contradiction between the truth of God 
and the truth of science. 
C. At that time, the Catholic Church was becoming more reactionary, 
fearing the loss of political authority over the Papal States and the 
temporal power of the pope. 
D. Acton had already developed a central theme in his life, the idea of the 
educated conscience, which was the most important guarantee of 
individual freedom. He called liberty the reign of conscience and said 
that true freedom would exist in the world when every individual was 
free to exercise his or her conscience.  
E. Acton believed that papal infallibility stood in opposition to the idea of 
freedom of conscience, because people were not allowed to question 
the pope’s actions. Through his study of history, he learned that papal 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
39 
infallibility contradicted the teachings of the church. Church councils 
had historically played a powerful role in setting doctrine. 
F. Acton took an active part in the debate on papal infallibility, traveling 
to Rome when the ecumenical council was called to debate the 
question.  
G. Acton was absolutely defeated. He saw that high officials who had 
opposed the doctrine denied their consciences and went along with the 
majority. 
H. Acton was almost excommunicated. He remained a Roman Catholic 
but subsequently played no role in the church. He believed that the 
church had lost its chance to support progressive governments around 
the world. 
V. The second great disappointment for Lord Acton was the defeat of the 
Confederacy. 
A. Acton was one of the first people in England to recognize that the 
United States had a great political literature in the Federalist Papers, 
and he compared the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution 
to the writings of Plato. 
B. Acton wrote learned articles for the British government explaining 
what the American Constitution was about and why the idea of states’ 
rights was so important. 
1. At that time, the British believed that American democracy had the 
same flaws as the Athenian democracy and that it was a radical 
democracy with no check on the will of the people. 
2. Acton argued that states’ rights served as a balance in America and 
resulted in a check on a centralized, radical democracy.  
3. Acton believed that a radical democracy is imperialist abroad and 
despotic at home. In the Athenian democracy, the conscience of 
the individual was subordinated to the will of the majority. For 
Acton, the Athenian democracy was immoral and amoral.  
C. In 1861, the Civil War began in the United States. Although the British 
government did not approve of slavery, it favored the Confederacy and 
hoped that the defeat of the Union would lead to further dissolution of 
the United States. 
D. Acton wrote papers for Gladstone and the British government, 
delineating the issues of the Civil War. His research showed that the 
finest Confederates, including Robert E. Lee, were morally opposed to 
slavery and that Southern states would eventually end slavery. Acton 
saw a risk in the intervention of the federal government, which might 
destroy states’ rights on the pretense of ending slavery. 
E. With the defeat of the Confederacy at the Battle of Gettysburg, Acton 
again lost. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
40 
F. He believed that the United States had had a chance to become a 
beacon to the world but would instead become a despotic democracy 
without any regard for the rights of individuals, that it would control all 
aspects of the lives of its citizens, and that it would become fiscally 
irresponsible in its expansion. 
G. Acton admired Robert E. Lee. He wrote to Lee and asked him his 
feelings about the war. Lee replied that he had seen in states’ rights the 
only hope for avoiding the course of every democracy, including that 
of Athens. He believed that these democracies had destroyed the rights 
of the individual in the name of the majority. 
VI. The defeat of the Confederacy was also the defeat of the federal idea. Acton 
believed that federalism, not centralization, was the hope for a guardian of 
liberty.  
A. Acton saw that the United States was no longer a federal republic but a 
unified country. 
B. Federalism was also being discredited in Europe. Germany and Italy 
united, not as confederations of semiautonomous states, but as 
centralized nations. 
VII.  Since the time of his studies with Doellinger, Acton had planned to write a 
History of Liberty.  
A. This work would describe the history of liberty from its earliest days to 
the present. It would be based on the concept that ideas make history 
and that historical thinking is more important than historical 
knowledge.  
B. The History of Liberty would apply the lessons of history to Acton’s 
time. Acton believed that learning from the examples of the past was 
the greatest way to shape one’s conscience. Great events, individuals, 
and economic and social forces—all of these are shaped by ideas. He 
believed that the greatest of these ideas is liberty. 
C. Acton began to compile a library, which ultimately included 70,000 
volumes. 
D. He took notes on slips of paper, wrote down his own ideas,  penned 
aphorisms about liberty, corresponded with other historians, engaged in 
debates in English historical journals about such questions as moral 
judgment in history, and gave lectures based on his work. But he never 
actually wrote the book. 
E. Acton finally explained to two people why he never wrote this great 
work. 
1. To Mary Gladstone, he explained that no one agreed with him 
about what liberty truly is and about the importance of moral 
judgment.  

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
41 
2. To Doellinger, he indicated that Doellinger did not agree with his 
idea of moral judgment. Acton believed that there could be no 
separation between public morality and private morality. A 
statesman should be judged by the same moral code used to judge 
an ordinary citizen. Murder is murder, whether committed by the 
state or by a criminal. Acton said that much of history is the 
justification of the actions of such murderers as Alexander the 
Great.  
F.  Acton wrote to Bishop Creighton: “All power tends to corrupt and 
absolute power corrupts absolutely. Very few great men are good 
men.” 
G. Acton’s financial situation degenerated. Gladstone intervened, and 
Andrew Carnegie bought Acton’s library but allowed him to use it for 
the rest of his life. 
H. Acton was a man of great moral courage, fortitude, and purity. 
I. 
Acton’s History of Liberty was falsely derided as “the greatest book 
never written.” 
VIII. In fact, Acton’s ideas, as evidenced by his notes and occasional papers, 
still speak with compelling immediacy. 
A. Acton understood the dangers of nationalism and socialism. 
B. Acton was not a conservative, but his legacy has been usurped by 
conservatism. He believed that conservatism was about not educating 
the conscience. 
C. Acton admired Gladstone and his ideal of democratic liberty. He 
supported Gladstone’s idea of beginning a welfare state. Acton, 
Gladstone, and Churchill all believed that there must be basic welfare 
for all citizens if a democracy is to flourish. 
D. Acton believed that uncontrolled capitalism was a force of evil. For 
Acton, the idea of a free-market economy is a form of determinism, 
and he hated all forms of determinism. 
E. Acton believed that racism was evil because it denied the ability of 
conscience to redeem the individual.  
F. Nationalism, Acton thought, was a primitive idea that represented the 
worst kind of racism. He believed that nationalism, which most people 
thought to be progress, would lead to ethnic cleansing. 
G. According to Acton, socialism would help nationalism along. He saw 
socialism as determinism that reduces people to economic objects. The 
notion that ideas are products of economic and social forces destroys 
the conscience of mankind. 
H. Acton believed that dismissing the idea of federalism was wrong. 
Federalism was a way to bring various units together, while 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
42 
maintaining their uniqueness and resisting the soulless destructive 
power of a centralized, bureaucratic government. 
I. 
Acton distinguished between British liberals, such as Gladstone—who 
believed in God, conscience, and the individual—and liberals of the 
continent, such as Cavour, who believed not in the individual but in the 
state. These European liberals argued that the state should intervene in 
every aspect of human life.  
J. It is perhaps no coincidence that the National Socialist Party brought 
Europe to ruin, but federalism delivered Europe. 
K. In 1948 in Zurich, Winston Churchill said that Europe would rise from 
the ruins and that France and Germany would lead Europe into a 
federal nation, a United States of Europe. 
L. In his aphorisms, unpublished works, and essays, Acton left a 
compelling legacy of the importance of history, our duty to do what is 
right and just in the present, and a vision of how a better future can be 
created. 
 
Essential Reading: 
Fears, ed. Selected Writings of Lord Acton, vol. I, pp. ix–xxvii and 5–85; 216–
279; 409–458. 
 
Supplementary Reading: 
Fears, ed., Selected Writings of Lord Acton, vols. II and III. 
 
Questions to Consider: 
1. How do you reconcile the fact that Acton was both a great lover of liberty 
and a supporter of the Confederacy? 
2. Acton distinguished between the British liberal, who believed in limited 
government, and the continental liberal, who believed in big government. 
Gladstone, for Acton, represented the British ideal liberal. The Italian 
statesman Cavour represented the ideal continental liberal. Can the two 
ideals be reconciled? 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
43 
Lecture Thirty-Three 
 
Cicero, On Moral Duties (De Officiis) 
 
Scope: In the Teaching Company course Famous Romans, I called Cicero my 
favorite Roman. In this course, we rank him with Gandhi and Churchill 
as models of the whole person, a person shaped by the great books, a 
person of thought and action, who lived and died for his ideals. His 
book On Moral Duties is one of the most influential works on 
education ever written. It directly contradicts the view that might 
makes right. Cicero also contradicts what seems to be the lesson of the 
world. He tells us that, in spite of appearances, an immoral act can 
never be expedient.  
 
Outline 
I. 
The next three lectures discuss three men who wrote great books. Each of 
these men made history, and each of them lived a life that can serve as a 
model to us. Our theme is education and the path we can take to foster what 
is best for ourselves and others. 
II. In 44 B.C., on the Ides of March, Julius Caesar was assassinated. His 
assassins, Brutus and Cassius, as well as most of the conspirators, fled 
Rome. 
A. Rome was in the hands of Marc Antony, who was underestimated. 
Many considered him to be a drunkard and a gambler, but he had 
gathered all Caesar’s power. 
B. Much of the Roman senate was cowed by Antony’s ruthless exercise of 
power. 
C. One elderly man, who could have enjoyed a quiet retirement, spoke out 
for the free republic and for liberty, knowing that doing so might cost 
him his life. That man was Marcus Tullius Cicero.  
1. In a series of ringing orations, Cicero attacked the character, 
policy, and intentions of Marc Antony. These powerful orations 
are called the Philippics. 
2. Cicero’s attempt failed. Antony joined forces with Caesar’s 
nephew, who was later known as Augustus, and together, they 
eliminated all opposition. Cicero was included on the list of those 
proscribed and was struck dead in 43 B.C. 
D. In the last part of his life, beginning in 46 B.C., Cicero refused the high 
government position that Caesar offered him, opting for retirement. 
During his retirement, he embarked on a search for truth so that he 
could base his politics on what was morally good in his effort to 
preserve freedom in Rome. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
44 
III. In searching for truth, Cicero wrote De Officiis, or On Moral Duties, which 
Frederick the Great of Prussia called the best book on morality and ethics 
ever written. 
A. Cicero wrote De Officiis to educate his son, who was spending his 
“junior year abroad,” studying philosophy in Athens. At that time, 
philosophy was not an arid academic discipline. It was the crowning 
accomplishment of a general education. Students who could afford the 
expense went to Athens to study under one of the great philosophers. 
B. Cicero wrote De Officiis in the form of a letter to his son to enable the 
young man to learn from Cicero’s experience. 
IV. During Cicero’s career as an attorney, he demonstrated that a person could 
be successful and wealthy, as well as a man of integrity.  He took difficult 
and dangerous cases, defending the poor and those in political trouble. 
A. Cicero realized that the highest calling was public service. He set out to 
prove that he could be an honest and successful politician. 
B. He held high political office and was consul of Rome. 
C. In 63 B.C., a faction, led by Catiline, sought to destroy the constitution. 
Cicero took a firm stand, although others warned him that he was 
following a dangerous course. Cicero put the salvation of his country, 
its constitution, and its liberty before his own needs. He broke up the 
conspiracy and took responsibility for having the conspirators put to 
death. 
D. For a brief while, Cicero was exiled, but he was brought back. 
E. When Caesar triumphed, Cicero took a stand against Caesar. Cicero 
believed that Caesar had enormous ability but that he sought to destroy 
the liberty of Rome for the sake of his own ambition. 
V. Cicero tried all his life to follow the moral course. He believed that all 
morality was founded on the idea of natural law. 
A. Natural law is the belief that God exists and is revealed in the reason of 
nature. The entire universe is a place of reason, and the entire universe 
reveals the hand of God. 
B. Like Plato, Cicero believed that God had established a set of absolute 
values, including wisdom, justice, courage, and moderation. These 
values exist even if they are denied in everyday life. An individual can 
be good as well as successful. No dichotomy exists between morality 
and expediency. An immoral act, such as lying or cheating, can never 
be helpful. No separation exists between the private and public selves. 
The highest possible calling for an individual is public duty. 
C. Wisdom is found in knowing the truth, understanding absolute values, 
and knowing how to apply these values to one’s life.  

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
45 
1. At the beginning, the individual needs facts and information, but 
later in life, he can weave these facts into a broader set of 
knowledge.  
2. Knowledge is worthless unless it is used to find and apply in life 
what is good. In the search for wisdom, the individual must avoid 
becoming a pedant, studying the insignificant, or retiring from the 
world to become a scholar.  
3. Wisdom consists of knowing how to apply the good to life. 
D. Justice is the single most important quality that a person can possess. 
Each individual’s life should be guided by justice.  
1. Justice consists of never doing harm to anyone else—either to 
another’s person or property. The essence of justice is founded in 
respect for private property. 
2. One great fault is passive injustice, which is to stand by and allow 
another person to be wronged. Passive injustice occurs when we 
remain silent because of our own needs or through preoccupation.  
3. Justice can even be extended to those who have wronged someone 
else by avoiding excessive retribution. Except for those who have 
committed the most heinous crimes, such as parricide, even the 
guilty deserve an attorney’s best effort. 
4. Part of justice is generosity, but an individual should never give 
more than he or she can afford. We should not ruin ourselves by 
giving, and we should give with a sense that our generosity will 
truly help. 
5. Morality is built on keeping one’s word, or fides. The Romans 
believed that the empire was built on integrity. However, the 
individual must be practical. At times, keeping one’s word is 
wrong. 
E. Courage is essential to living a life of justice. An individual must have 
the courage to stand up for what is right. Wisdom is essential to 
courage. The individual must have the wisdom to know what he should 
defend. Bravery in the service of evil is savagery. 
F. Moderation is the fourth quality of goodness. Nothing should be 
pushed so far that it becomes a wrong. Moderation is a guide for living 
life and letting the individual know what is right. 
G. In selecting a career, an individual must know, in terms of moderation, 
his or her capabilities. 
1. Sometimes people enter an occupation because they inherit it, 
because of connections, or on a whim. Each person should step 
back and ask what career he or she is best suited for before making 
a decision. 
2. The highest calling is public service. Those who would pursue a 
career in public service must be certain they possess the qualities 
for leadership of the nation.  A good leader is not vindictive and 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
46 
does not enter public service for self-interest, self-aggrandizement, 
or partisanship. Public service should be a noble and pure 
undertaking. The public servant must always act with moderation. 
H. How do we put these theoretical underpinnings into practice? 
1. We must recognize that immoral acts are never expedient. 
2. The essence of justice is keeping one’s word. 
3. Active and passive injustice are both wrong. 
4. Cicero suggests as a model Marcus Atilius Regulus, a Roman 
senator who was taken prisoner by the Carthaginians. Regulus was 
sent back to Rome with a proposal for a prisoner exchange, but it 
was against Roman policy to release prisoners. Although Regulus 
was threatened with torture and death if he was unable to arrange 
the exchange, he urged the senate to vote against the Carthaginian 
terms. Regulus then returned to Carthage, where he was tortured to 
death. 
VI. The advice in De Officiis did not work for Cicero’s son, who was a 
drunkard, sold his services to Augustus, and lent his name to the new order 
of Augustus. Although Cicero’s son did not follow the advice given in De 
Officiis, Cicero left future generations this enduring statement of moral 
justice.  
 
Essential Reading: 
Cicero, On Moral Duties (On Moral Obligation or On Responsibility). 
 
Supplementary Reading: 
Everitt, Cicero: The Life and Times of Rome’s Greatest Politician. 
 
Questions to Consider: 
1. Contrast Machiavelli and Cicero in their concepts of success. Do you 
believe that there is never a dichotomy between morality and expediency? 
2. Can you give practical examples of Cicero’s view of the relationship 
between the cardinal virtues and, thus, all morality? 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
47 
Lecture Thirty-Four 
 
Gandhi, An Autobiography 
 
Scope: To many, including Winston Churchill, the British Empire was a great 
force for good. To an unprepossessing Indian lawyer, the British 
Empire, which saw itself as the bastion of liberty, was evil, for it rested 
on a lie. It denied to many of its subjects the very equality that was the 
essence of freedom. But no less evil for Mohandas Gandhi would be 
the use of force to overthrow it and gain independence for India. 
Drawing on the traditions of Indian thought and reading the Bhagavad 
Gita daily, Gandhi made his own path. Strong in the truth, he used 
moral power to bring a great power to its knees. His autobiography 
eschews many of the traditional elements in a life story. Gandhi 
focuses on his entire life as a search for truth, teaching us that there are 
many roads to wisdom and many ways to fight the battles of life. 
 
Outline 
I. 
The previous lecture discussed Cicero’s De Officiis, or On Moral Duties. 
A. The theme of De Officiis is that the basis of all morality and good 
actions is doing what is true and just and right; no dichotomy exists 
between doing what is good for oneself and doing what is right, 
because the individual can never profit from doing wrong. 
B. This great book changed history. Through the Middle Ages, the 
Renaissance, and the Enlightenment, Cicero was the most influential 
intellectual figure from Greece or Rome. De Officiis was held up as the 
epitome of what a pagan could achieve in ethical thought, and Cicero 
was regarded as a pagan Christian. 
C. Machiavelli wrote The Prince in an attempt to refute Cicero. 
Machiavelli wanted to show that it is often expedient to do evil. 
D. To his own generation, Cicero was considered a failure. He had 
defended the free republic and had been killed. The free republic was 
never restored, and Augustus established a military dictatorship that 
was far more efficient than Caesar had achieved. That new order 
brought peace and prosperity to a world that had been badly governed.  
E. Theodor Mommsen, the most influential Roman historian of the 
modern era, also viewed Cicero as a failure and a detriment to his 
country. He believed that Cicero had delayed the progress of the new 
order of Caesar and Augustus. He viewed Cicero’s writings as 
journalism of the worst sort, because they were not serious 
philosophical treatises; instead, they attempted to make philosophy 
comprehensible to ordinary people. 
F. Cicero was a success because he was true to himself. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
48 
G. The last three lectures in this course offer the following lessons: Be 
true to yourself, do what you know to be right, and never give up. 
II. In 1893, a 24-year-old barrister, Gandhi, was representing an Indian 
company in South Africa. Although he had a first-class train ticket, he was 
not allowed to remain in the first-class seating compartment and was 
thrown off the train. A stagecoach driver also refused to let him sit with the 
other passengers. This was Gandhi’s introduction to the morality of the 
British Empire and its legal system. 
A. The British raj was theoretically based on liberty and equality for all 
subjects. In reality, one standard of liberty and equality existed for 
white subjects and another standard existed for those of color. Even 
science, as taught in many universities, proclaimed the superiority of 
the white race. 
B. Gandhi decided to take on the scientific establishment, the legal 
system, and the power of the British Empire. Armed only with his 
belief in the truth and his concept of satyagraha, “steadfastness in 
truth,” Gandhi took on the empire and led his nation to independence. 
C. Gandhi’s life is an example of what one individual can achieve if he or 
she believes in the truth. 
III. The story of Gandhi’s life is captured in An Autobiography: The Story of 
My Experiments with the Truth. 
A. Gandhi’s autobiography was published in two installments, in 1925 
and 1927. It is written in Gujarati, an Indian language, because Gandhi 
believed that the culture of India was his culture. 
B. The subtitle of Gandhi’s autobiography conveys his understanding that 
we are always making our way toward the truth. 
C. Gandhi had a profound belief in God. He was greatly affected by the 
Bhagavad Gita and believed that God is truth, but more important, he 
believed that truth is God and should be worshipped. Truth is in God, 
and God will progressively reveal wisdom to the searcher for truth. 
D. In his Autobiography, Gandhi does not hesitate to point out his 
mistakes 
E. Gandhi was born in 1869. He begins his Autobiography by describing 
his family and the caste to which they belonged. Gandhi later struggled 
against the caste system of India. 
1. Gandhi’s formal schooling had little impact on him. He believed 
that the teacher should be the textbook, and the teacher and the 
teacher’s moral qualities should be what the student retains. 
2. At the age of 13, Gandhi was married to a younger girl. At age 35, 
Gandhi took a vow of celibacy and saw his wife as a creature of 
pure love. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
49 
3. After finishing high school and passing his examinations, it was 
decided that he should become an attorney. 
4. In England, Gandhi gradually began to understand how unique his 
native country was. He met English people who were interested in 
mystical religions and encouraged him to read the Bhagavad Gita 
in English, and it became a part of him. The Bhagavad Gita 
celebrates God as truth and teaches us to follow the path that God 
has laid out for us. It also says that doing the work of someone else 
is slavery, but doing the work of God is true liberation. The 
philosophy of the Bhagavad Gita began to shape Gandhi’s 
thinking. 
5. Gandhi passed his examinations at the age of 21. He found that 
becoming a barrister was easy. He had to attend 12 dinners, study 
outline notes, and pass the examinations. 
F. Gandhi returned to India, obtained a job, and left his wife at home 
while he went to South Africa. 
1. In South Africa, Gandhi realized that God was telling him not to 
be afraid, to stand up and recognize the injustice around him as 
injustice to God, and to put an end to injustice. 
2. Gandhi began to teach his fellow Indians that they should not let 
anyone treat them unjustly, that they should not harm anyone, that 
they should stand fast in the truth, and that they should struggle for 
their rights. 
3. Gandhi came to the idea of ahimsa, “nonviolence.” This was not a 
passive idea. Great moral courage is needed to be nonviolent. 
4. Gandhi began working with Indians in South Africa. He not only 
fought for their legal rights but also began a movement for 
education.  
G. First in South Africa, then in India, Gandhi opened commune schools 
and began to educate his students in ahimsa and satyagraha. 
1. The teachers in Gandhi’s schools were parents. Gandhi believed 
that parents should be the source of education for their children. 
2. At one point, an untouchable family came to the commune. The 
members of Gandhi’s ashram believed that the untouchables 
would pollute the commune’s well. Gandhi asked the meaning of 
his teachings, because he taught that all people were equal in the 
sight of God. Other commune members said that they believed in 
equality but did not want the untouchable family there. When 
Gandhi threatened to leave and return to practicing law, the 
members of the commune agreed to let the untouchables stay. 
IV. Gandhi then moved to an even larger sphere—he stood up to the British 
Empire itself. 
A. Gandhi had begun to understand that his God-given mission was to 
help establish an independent India in which Muslims, Hindus, and 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
50 
Christians could live together in unity. This nation would be an India 
for the Indians. 
B. Gandhi abandoned European clothes and wore simple Indian dress. He 
took up spinning.   
1. Indians had been required to buy cloth made in Britain. The cotton 
was grown in India, but it was shipped to England and made into 
cloth, then shipped back to India. Gandhi held mass 
demonstrations in which European-style clothes and cloth brought 
from England were burned.  
2. The spinning wheel became a symbol of liberation—the wheel of 
life and a sign of God, with no beginning and no end. 
C. The British had a monopoly on salt. Gandhi believed that the tax on 
salt was unjust; it supported oppression.  
1. Gandhi said that Indians should not pay the tax on salt; they could 
obtain salt by marching to the sea. 
2. The English could beat the Indians but could not stop them. 
Gandhi, also called the Mahatma, or “great-souled one,” taught his 
followers to do nothing violent but to keep coming back. 
D. World opinion began to focus on Gandhi. 
1. Indians—Muslim as well as Hindu—saw in the figure of Gandhi 
the symbol of their struggle for liberation and enlightenment. They 
began to recognize that England and Europe were not the only 
sources of culture and that India had its own set of ideas that were 
foreign to the West.  
2. Gandhi believed that the culture of England was based on war, 
struggle, and violence and that capitalism is a form of violence, 
because it steals from the poor to benefit the rich. Capitalism 
carries within itself the seeds of its own destruction. For Gandhi, 
the Indian way was the way of God, truth, and nonviolence. 
E. Gandhi was imprisoned many times. He found in prison new sources of 
strength.  
1. He read Unto This Last, by John Ruskin, which taught him three 
crucial lessons. First, the good of all is encompassed in the good of 
one individual. Harm to one individual is harm to everyone. 
Second, every form of work has its own dignity. A barber is as 
worthy of respect as an attorney. Third, the noblest form of work is 
to farm and make something with your own hands. 
2. Tolstoy’s The Kingdom of God Is within You opened a new world 
to Gandhi. According to Tolstoy, Jesus was not God but taught 
that everyone has a God within himself. A similar teaching also 
appears in the Bhagavad Gita. 
3. Gandhi’s readings showed that unfamiliar books, in addition to 
great books, can touch the soul. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
51 
F. Gandhi used self-imposed hunger strikes to protest British actions or 
the actions of his followers when they refused to follow his path of 
truth and nonviolence. When Gandhi went on a hunger strike, the 
British raj feared that he might die and would give in. 
G. Gandhi thus harmed no one in his fight for the truth. 
H. Gandhi’s moral authority played a decisive role in Britain’s decision to 
give India its freedom and in the decision of many Indians to form 
political parties that could achieve freedom under a constitutional 
government. 
1. Gandhi was bitterly disappointed in 1947 when India gained its 
independence but allowed itself to be divided into a largely 
Muslim Pakistan and a largely Hindu India.  
2. Gandhi believed that this partition contradicted his teaching that 
God had fashioned many roads to truth and that all religions teach 
the same fundamental values. 
I. 
When civil war broke out over disputed territory and thousands were 
killed, the elderly Gandhi walked from village to village trying to bring 
people together. 
J. The moral authority of Gandhi had become a threat. Radicals who 
wanted a truly separate Hindu India set out to assassinate Gandhi, and 
he was shot. 
K. With his last word, “Ram,” Gandhi invoked the name of God. The 
Bhagavad Gita says, “He who dies with my name upon his lips is freed 
forever from the cycle of life and joins me in bliss.” 
 
Essential Reading: 
Gandhi, An Autobiography: The Story of My Experiments with the Truth. 
 
Supplementary Reading: 
Brown, Gandhi: Prisoner of Hope. 
 
Questions to Consider: 
1. Expound on your understanding of Gandhi’s ideal that “it is more important 
to believe that truth is God than that God is truth.” 
2. What would Gandhi have said to Dietrich Bonhoeffer regarding the plot to 
assassinate Hitler? 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
52 
Lecture Thirty-Five 
 
Churchill, My Early Life, Painting as a Pastime, 
The Second World War 
 
Scope: In the spirit of Greek tragedy, we believe that we learn the wisdom to 
live our lives from the study of the successes and failures of the truly 
great. In the Teaching Company course Churchill, we saw why this 
statesman might well be called the greatest figure in the 20th century. 
Here, we look at three of the books by this Nobel Prize–winning author 
and find wisdom to guide us in drawing fundamental lessons for our 
lives: Our lives are never over and we are never failures as long as we 
strive in a good cause. Take time for yourself and renew your spiritual 
being. You have a destiny. Find it. Evil is real and you must resist it 
where you find it. But ultimately, be optimistic, for the world is 
becoming better and freedom will one day triumph. 
 
Outline 
I. 
This lecture closes our discussion of three great individuals who made 
history and wrote books that can be read today for their wisdom and 
guidance. We have discussed Cicero, Gandhi, and now, Winston Churchill. 
II. Churchill played a role in the parliamentary debates of the 1920s and 1930s 
about Indian independence and whether India should receive dominion 
status. Gandhi had brought the British Empire and its government to a halt 
and forced the government to accede to his demands.  
A. Churchill called Gandhi “a fakir of a type well-known in the East. He 
further said that the sight of Gandhi “striding half-naked up the steps of 
the Viceregal palace” was “nauseating” and an “encouragement to all 
the forces that are hostile to the British authority.” 
B. Churchill’s stand was opposed by the British Liberal Party, as well as 
by most members of his own party, the Conservative Party. 
1. Churchill was convinced that the British Empire was a great force 
for good and liberty under the law. 
2. Churchill believed that India could never govern itself. 
3. He said that concessions to Gandhi were a symbol of the lack of 
moral fiber that was eroding Britain and its government and would 
ultimately destroy its empire, as well as its liberty. 
III. Many believe that Churchill was the greatest man of the 20th century, 
perhaps the greatest man of all history. Although Gandhi and Churchill 
were different in many ways, both wrote books that touch us. Churchill 
wrote good books, not great books, but good books can teach a person to 
love great books and can give profound insights. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
53 
IV. By 1930, when Churchill was 56, he had fallen from power and was 
thought to be finished in British politics. He then wrote My Early Life. 
A. This autobiography, called A Roving Commission in its American 
edition, is very different from Gandhi’s Experiments with the Truth. In 
My Early Life, Churchill, knowing that his public career was over, 
looks back on his experience with insight. 
B. Both Churchill and Gandhi found their compulsory education not only 
worthless but counterproductive.  
1. Churchill pondered whether great books should be given to young 
people. He believed that life experiences were necessary and that 
exposure to great books would only make students hate literature. 
2. Churchill was a failure in school and was last in his class. 
3. Churchill was accepted at Sandhurst. There, he did credibly and 
finished eighth in his class, which showed that he could learn 
when he felt the material was worth learning. 
4. Churchill favored a good, practical education that goes along with 
what the child learns best. 
C. Churchill loved the army because it satisfied his search for glory. He 
wanted to be famous and known for his bravery. 
D. My Early Life describes Churchill’s election to Parliament. 
E. The book also describes, in touching terms, Churchill’s relationship 
with his father. Although his father believed that he would never 
amount to anything, by the age of 26, Churchill had become a 
bestselling author, a millionaire from the proceeds of his writings and 
lectures, a war hero, and a member of Parliament. 
F. In 1915, Churchill was dismissed from government because he was 
blamed for the destruction of the British forces at Gallipoli. 
V. After his dismissal, Churchill took up painting. In 1932, he wrote a 
magazine article, which he later expanded into Painting as a Pastime. 
A. In this book, Churchill says that at every stage of life, the individual 
must be willing to try something new. The greatest relief from stress is 
to take up a vocation that is different from one’s ordinary activities. 
B. Churchill describes the sheer joy of translating nature from the eye to 
the canvas and raises the question of how we relate to nature. He 
worshipped nature, traveling as far as Morocco to paint landscapes. 
C. Churchill was a successful artist. In 1924, only eight years after taking 
up painting, he won prizes for works submitted anonymously. 
D. The paintings give us insight into the character of this statesman. An 
autobiography can be crafted, but Churchill’s paintings offer a glimpse 
into his soul—a soul of great optimism. Optimism also percolates 
through My Early Life, despite Churchill’s failures to that time. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
54 
VI. Britain turned to Churchill again in 1940. On June 4, 1940, he delivered a 
stirring oration in Parliament, in which he declared, “We shall never 
surrender.” As we know, he was turned out of office after he led his country 
to victory and then wrote The Second World War. 
A. This work won the Nobel Prize and made history. It shows World War 
II as Churchill saw it. The first volume is a lesson for us today. It 
shows us a soul that has greatness. 
B. Churchill’s motto for the book—“You should be resolute in defeat and 
magnanimous in victory”—is a statement of Cicero’s moral qualities.  
C. Churchill called World War II the “unnecessary war.” He believed that 
it would never have happened if Britain had shown the moral resolve to 
make the proper peace at the end of World War I. Instead, excessive 
reparations were exacted from Germany, and it was allowed to regain 
its power after being dishonored and humiliated. 
D. Step-by-step, Churchill traces how failure to meet Hitler’s aggression 
led to World War II.  
1. Britain’s acceptance of Hitler’s rise to power came back to haunt 
the nation. Like Gandhi and Cicero, Churchill believed in absolute 
evil in a struggle with absolute good. For Churchill, Hitler was 
absolute evil. 
2. Churchill realized that passive injustice was as wrong as active 
injustice. Before the war, Britain lacked the moral fiber to take up 
the fight. If the Conservative Party stood up to Hitler, it would 
have to raise expenditures, and a balanced budget was essential for 
the party to stay in power. Thus, passive injustice and the false 
notion of British self-interest allowed Hitler to gain power.  
3. Britain did not understand the value of bringing large and small 
powers together into a working coalition that would have the 
moral authority and strength to overthrow Hitler. The British 
initially dismissed the possibility of coalition. With the collapse of 
France, Britain was alone. 
4. Britain allowed Hitler to move into the Rhineland, considering this 
action to be in its own self-interest. After all, Hitler was only 
moving into his own backyard. 
5. Britain’s false conception of where its interests lay proved ruinous. 
Self-interest, Churchill says, is always in doing what is right. 
6. When Hitler threatened Czechoslovakia, Britain moved from 
passive to active injustice. Without allowing Czechoslovakia at the 
bargaining table, Britain, France, Italy, and Germany decided its 
fate. 
E. The British progressed from allowing wrongs to be done to actively 
doing wrong themselves, because they lacked a sense of true justice. 
According to Churchill, the concept of true justice harks back to 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
55 
Cicero. It consists of keeping one’s world; it is the fides, the honor of a 
nation.  
1. The Second World War breathes an air of old-fashioned honor. 
The generation of the 1940s did not understand the concept of 
honor, and Churchill seemed to be a relic of a bygone age. As 
Cicero, Gandhi, and Churchill understood, honor is at the heart of 
justice, because it rests on integrity and courage. Justice and 
courage were fundamental to Churchill’s view of history and the 
world. 
2. Churchill also exhibited moderation. No one was more resolute in 
pursuit of the war than Churchill, and no one was more willing to 
rebuild Germany at the end of the war. 
F. Churchill showed wisdom gained not in school and not from a series of 
great books. He read few books but absorbed those that he read. 
Churchill’s writing, for example, reflects the power of Gibbon’s prose. 
He made the books that he read part of himself—and therein lies true 
wisdom. 
VII.  Churchill approached life always willing to change. Like Gandhi, his life 
was a series of experiments with the truth. He was never afraid to say that 
he had been wrong or to seek redemption. For Gandhi, Cicero, and 
Churchill, the ultimate lesson is to never give in.  
 
Essential Reading: 
Churchill, My Early Life. 
———, Painting as a Pastime. 
———, The Second World War, vol. I. 
 
Supplementary Reading: 
Manchester, Churchill, vols. I and II.  
 
Questions to Consider: 
1. Churchill thought that great books are frequently wasted on the young. 
College students do not have the life experience to appreciate these books. 
Do you agree? 
2. Churchill disliked Gandhi in life. Do you think, upon reflection, he would 
appreciate the comparison? 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
56 
Lecture Thirty-Six 
 
Lessons from the Great Books 
 
Scope: A great book can lead us from information and facts to knowledge and 
on to wisdom, the ability to apply information and knowledge to living 
our lives. That has been the purpose of our course. In the first place, we 
have explored some of the greatest and most influential works ever 
written. We have learned facts about their authors and the times in 
which they were written. We have gained knowledge about what these 
books say. But our ultimate goal has been the search for wisdom. Can 
we find in these books wisdom to understand and change our 
individual lives? This gives us our true definition of a “great book.” It 
is a book of good ideas. It is book not just to read but to ponder. It is a 
book with ideas that makes us better, better as individuals and better as 
citizens of a democracy. This is a definition as true and vital today as it 
was in the age of Socrates and Cicero. 
 
Outline 
I. 
As we approach the conclusion of this course, we must ask ourselves why 
we should read great books.  
A. At the beginning, this course defined a great book as having a great 
theme, being written in noble language that elevates the soul, and 
speaking across the ages, that is, possessing universality. 
B. Any discussion of great books must involve values. People cannot 
learn from great books unless they are willing to enter sympathetically 
into the mind of the author. 
II. This course has discussed books that made history. 
A. One example, of course, is Machiavelli’s The Prince. 
1. Lord Acton argues that the modern world began with 
Machiavelli’s idea that the state has no sense of moral judgment 
and politics has no moral dimension whatsoever. 
2. Machiavelli believed that Socrates and Cicero were wrong. A state 
and its leaders are judged by different criteria than those used for 
private individuals. There is a complete separation between public 
and private morals. 
3. In addition to The Prince, several other works discussed in this 
course reveal the soul of a tyrant.  
B. Beowulf, Gilgamesh, and the Iliad all discuss ambition and the desire to 
leave behind a reputation that will be remembered forever. In the epic 
of Gilgamesh, for example, Gilgamesh recognized that he would not 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
57 
live forever; however, he had built the walls of Uruk, and men would 
talk about them forever. 
C. The Divine Comedy is a story of redemption, but it also clarifies ideals 
that led people from across Europe to take up the Cross and go to the 
Holy Land to wage war against the infidel. The justification for the 
crusades can be found in the ideals of the Divine Comedy. Although it 
is a story of divine love, that love must be spread by the sword and by 
men who believe that they are undertaking the work of God. 
D. John Stuart Mill’s On Liberty looks back at the founders of the United 
States. Mill represents the continuation of ideas found in the 
Declaration of Independence. Lord Acton says that the American 
Revolution is the only revolution in history that was fought for a 
principle, liberty. Mill’s work embodies ideals that led Churchill to 
stand up and say, “We shall never surrender.” 
E. The Book of Exodus is still alive in newspapers today. It propounds the 
idea that one religion has its sanction in a holy book and that sanction 
must be worked out politically and militarily. 
F. The Koran, like the Book of Exodus, made spiritual and political 
history. It presents a worldview that is total and complete. 
III. Some books we have read in this course have made spiritual history. 
A. The Gospel of Mark is one such book. 
B. In the Bhagavad Gita, Gandhi found a statement that truth is God and 
is the salvation of a soul. 
C. Confucius is both a spiritual and a political guide who laid the 
foundation for more than 2,000 years of Chinese history. 
IV. Can these books change our lives today? 
A. Many of these values seem irrelevant to contemporary Americans. 
1. The Iliad embodies values of a heroic age of honor, in which 
warfare was significant. That era was an age of the duel. The 
concept of honor cannot exist in a society that lacks the duel. 
Honor may be an outmoded concept. 
2. The age of Dante believed that all of life is preparation for death. 
3. Goethe’s Faust asks whether absolute standards of beauty exist. 
For contemporary Americans, the answer is that they do not. 
4. Walden deals with nature and the environment, which are certainly 
major concerns today. Contemporary Americans, however, have 
difficulty taking seriously the values of a man who left everything 
behind and ignored correspondence with others. 
B. The values embodied in these great books can change the lives of 
people today. 
1. The Koran changes lives every day, winning converts to Islam. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
58 
2. The Book of Mark still speaks and changes people’s lives, as does 
the Bhagavad Gita.  
V. One of the first people to grapple with the question of what makes a great 
book was Aristotle. 
A. Aristotle died in 322 B.C. He was the tutor of Alexander the Great and a 
pupil of Plato. He was a professor who was interested in science, the 
natural world, politics, and empirical evidence. 
B. Aristotle wrote Poetics, which has been called the only work of literary 
criticism that is absolutely indispensable. 
C. Aristotle asserted that a great book should be judged by its moral 
impact. Thus, a tragedy arouses fear and pity and achieves a catharsis. 
VI. In What Is Art? Tolstoy says that a great book can be judged not only by 
the feelings that it arouses but by the quality of those feelings. 
A. To take the most obvious example, Mein Kampf, although written after 
the time of Tolstoy, appeals to all that is evil in human emotions. On 
the other hand, a work such as Dostoyevski’s Notes from the 
Underground, which is about the soul in prison, is horrifying to read 
but imparts the message that even in the midst of terror, torture, and 
suffering, what is good in people lives on. 
B. For Tolstoy, Goethe’s Faust is not a great book because it is too 
complicated for ordinary people to read, too much a product of its own 
time, too full of allusions to Greek and Roman mythology, and too full 
of philosophical allusions. If a reader has to spend much effort trying to 
understand what the author is saying, his emotions are not touched.  
C. However, others believe that such books as the Aeneid, The Divine 
Comedy, and Goethe’s Faust are worth the struggle. After deciphering 
the obscure references, the reader sees that these are soul-elevating 
works. That is why it is worth reading to Gilgamesh, with its 
complicated references to Mesopotamian religion, or the Iliad. 
VII.  Aristotle and Tolstoy’s requirement that a great book must arouse good 
moral feelings begs the question of whose morality is important. One lesson 
of this course is that a universal set of values exists and that these values 
can be found throughout these great books.  
A. Books from China (The Analects), India (the Bhagavad Gita), the 
Christian Middle Ages, and pagan classical Greece, along with the 
Koran and 1984, all reveal a belief in the common set of values defined 
by Socrates: wisdom, justice, moderation, and courage. 
1. Confucius said that he was happy to meet a good man, a man who 
practices justice, moderation, and courage. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
59 
2. In the Koran, the Book of Exodus, and the Book of Job, the fear of 
the Lord is the beginning of wisdom. Some great books link 
wisdom with belief in God. 
3. Although Cicero understands that natural law must be founded in 
God, he describes his moral approach to life in purely practical 
terms. He believes that the person who practices justice, 
moderation, and courage based on wisdom will be successful and 
morally good. Some books teach that even without a belief in God, 
the individual can still lead a moral life. 
B. We may not want to accept this universal set of values, but in reading 
great books, we learn that such a set of values exists.  
VIII. How do these books touch our lives? They touch us only if we are willing 
to use the wisdom that comes from these books to live our lives. That 
wisdom is broader than a set of values. It is an education for freedom; these 
great books educate us to live our lives freely and responsibly. 
IX. What role does reading play in today’s society?  
A. A movie or video game has a more attractive and compelling appeal 
than a book today.  
B. We may be entering an age that is radically different from the previous 
5,000 years. The invention of writing transformed the mind because 
knowledge could be stored and transmitted in a different fashion. 
C. The past 25 years have seen another radical transformation. The printed 
word in a book has been replaced by a computer screen, video games, 
and movies.  
D. These innovations might transform the character of education. 
X. What is the meaning of “education for freedom”? 
A. As previously mentioned in this course, education comes from a root 
meaning “to lead out from yourself.” 
B. Education is a three-stage process. 
1. Education begins with information—a collection of facts and data. 
Our era is so overwhelmed with facts and data that we scarcely 
have time to think. 
2. The next step is to weave these facts and data into knowledge. 
Knowledge is the ability to see the pattern in a particular subject. 
3. The next step is to apply that pattern, to live one’s life by it. This 
step is what Socrates, Cicero, Dante, and Goethe all meant by 
wisdom.  
C. Wisdom is ultimately an act of meditation. We can come to wisdom 
only by sitting alone and thinking about what we have learned.  

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
60 
1. The contemplative life was considered the highest calling in the 
Middle Ages. The monk would cut himself off from human society 
to devote his mind to the contemplation of God. 
2. In the Bhagavad Gita, the highest calling is seen in those who 
devote themselves to meditation. 
3. Gandhi talks about those who have the freedom to cut themselves 
off from all human ties to meditate as a way to achieve wisdom. 
4. Although meditation is essential in transforming knowledge into 
wisdom, contemporary Americans lack the ability and the time to 
meditate. 
5. Reading a great book means sitting down with the book and 
allowing it to speak. It will speak to us only if we open our minds, 
which we can do only through meditation—the final step to 
wisdom. 
6. Wisdom is ultimately a source of freedom. As long as people read 
great books, they can have insights that lead them to freedom. 
D. In a commencement address at Harvard, Solzhenitsyn pointed out a 
danger. People today are flooded with such a wealth of books and 
information that they are in danger of losing the truth. A great thinker 
may have ideas that can save the country, but unless that work is 
picked up by the media or a publishing house, people will remain 
unaware of it. 
E. Some great books have been written and ignored until times and values 
changed and people were willing to return to them.  
1. Walden created little stir when first published. After about 100 
years, people began reading it and saw in Thoreau’s love of nature 
a challenge to our destruction of the environment. 
2. Although Gandhi was well known, Martin Luther King first 
learned about Gandhi in a theological seminary. He recognized 
that Gandhi’s satyagraha, his steadfastness in truth, was key to 
overthrowing an evil system that had paralyzed the moral fiber of 
this country. Martin Luther King, like Gandhi and Solzhenitsyn, 
exhibited the sense of justice, moral fortitude, and moderation that 
comes from wisdom to transform society. 
XI. We can all change our lives in small ways and in grand ways as long as we 
accept the fundamental premise that life is about the individual and as long 
as we are willing to learn, are willing to make mistakes and admit them, 
exhibit the ability to redeem ourselves—in an individual sense, not in a 
theological sense—and never give up. The ultimate lesson of the great 
books is to never give up. The individual must live his or her life and 
realize—as both Homer and Thoreau say—that every day offers an 
opportunity to begin again. 
 
Essential Reading: 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
61 
Aristotle, Poetics. 
 
Supplementary Reading: 
Leo Tolstoy, What Is Art? 
 
Questions to Consider: 
1. How, at the end of our course, would you define a great book? 
2. Which of the books we have discussed would you say was once a great 
book but now no longer speaks to us or our moral values? 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
62 
Timeline 
 
B.C. 
 
3000 ................................................Birth of civilization in the Near East and 
Egypt 
2500 ................................................Pyramids of Giza in Egypt 
2500 ................................................Indus Valley civilization in India 
2000 ................................................Stonehenge  
1760 ................................................Shang Dynasty in China, first historical 
dynasty, with writing and bronze artworks 
1500 ................................................Aryan invasion of India 
1295–1225 ......................................Ramses II, pharaoh of Egypt; historical 
context for the Exodus 
1250 ................................................Trojan War 
1027–56 ..........................................Zhou Dynasty in China, political context for 
Confucius (551–479) 
1000 ................................................Beginning of Sanskrit literature 
563–483 ..........................................Buddha 
550–531 ..........................................Persian Empire rules the Middle East  
490–404 ..........................................Golden age of Athenian democracy 
336–323 ..........................................Alexander the Great 
218–146 ..........................................Rise of the Roman Empire 
48–31 ..............................................Julius Caesar and Augustus establish 
monarchy in the Roman Empire 
A.D. 
31 B.C.–180 A.D...............................Golden age of the Roman Empire 
6 ......................................................Birth of Jesus 
312 ..................................................Conversion of the Roman emperor 
Constantine to Christianity, which became 
the official religion of the Roman Empire 
476 ..................................................Fall of the Roman Empire in Western 
Europe 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
63 
800 ..................................................Charlemagne establishes what became the 
Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation 
1066 ................................................Norman Conquest of England 
1194–1500 ......................................Gothic art and architecture dominate Europe 
1215 ................................................Magna Carta 
1304–1527 ......................................Renaissance 
1517–1648 ......................................Reformation 
1558–1603 ......................................Queen Elizabeth of England 
1648–1789 ......................................Age of the Enlightenment 
1775–1789 ......................................American Revolution and Constitution, 
“The Founding” 
1789–1815 ......................................French Revolution and Napoleon 
1860–1914 ......................................Golden age of the British Empire 
1861–1865 ......................................American Civil War 
1914–1918 ......................................World War I 
1929–1953 ......................................Joseph Stalin rules the Soviet Union 
1933–1945 ......................................Adolf Hitler rules Germany 
1945– ............................................. Scientific and technological revolution 
1990– .............................................United States as the world’s only 
superpower 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
64 
Glossary 
 
Akkad: The geographical term to describe the northern portion of ancient 
Mesopotamia. The Akkadians and their descendants, the Babylonians, spoke a 
Semitic language and were much indebted culturally to the neighboring 
Sumerians. 
Aryan: A term derived from the Sanskrit word for “noble.” Aryan was much 
used in the 19th and first half of the 20th centuries to describe the Indo-European 
invaders of India, who conquered the peoples of the Indus Valley civilization 
and developed the literature and culture of classical India. The term was 
misused by the Nazis but still retains its value as a collective designation for use 
in discussing the early history of India. 
Asia Minor: Classical term to describe the area now known as Turkey. 
Birth of civilization: Rise of complex political structures, writing, monumental 
architecture, and use of metal. These advances occurred simultaneously in 
Egypt and Mesopotamia. 
City-state: A term to describe a sovereign political unit based on a walled city 
and surrounding territory. City-state is frequently used to describe the political 
units of early Mesopotamia, Greece and Italy, Phoenicia, and medieval and 
Renaissance Italy.  
Classical antiquity: The Greek and Roman world from roughly 800 B.C. 
(Homer) to 476 A.D. (fall of the Roman Empire in Western Europe). 
Classics: Conventional term for the writings of classical antiquity, now used in 
general to describe great books from all periods and cultures. 
Communism: An ideology maintaining that society should be constituted so 
that the means of production and subsistence are held in common and labor is 
organized for the common benefit of all. This ideal was maintained by Plato. 
However, as a modern political system, communism has been marked by the 
creation of the totalitarian state and party apparatus to subordinate all aspects of 
the individual, the society, and the economy to the control of the state. 
Determinism: The antithesis of free will, determinism argues that humans have 
no control over decisions, actions, and events, which are the inevitable 
consequences of forces independent of the human will. 
Enlightenment: Term to describe the epoch in European history from 1648 
(Descartes and the end of the Wars of Religion) to 1789 (the French 
Revolution). The age of the Enlightenment was marked intellectually by faith in 
reason and progress and admiration for the legacy of classical antiquity. 
Founders (Founding Fathers): Collective term for the American statesmen who 
signed the Declaration of Independence, waged the Revolutionary War, and 
established the Constitution. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
65 
Free will: The idea that humans make their own choices, unconstrained by 
necessity or external circumstances. 
Gentile: A non-Jew. 
Gestapo: Geheime Staatspolizei, the secret state police of Nazi Germany. 
Ideology: A complex set of ideas and values that unifies a community, directs 
its actions, and validates its decision making. For example, democracy is the 
ideology of the United States. 
Indo-European: A linguistic term to describe a number of related languages, 
ranging geographically from India to North and South America. These include 
Sanskrit and the derived languages of India (such as Hindi); Persian; Greek and 
Latin; the Romance languages, such as French and Spanish, derived from Latin; 
the Germanic languages, including English; the Slavic languages, including 
Russian; and the Celtic languages, including Irish. The original home of the 
Indo-European speakers seems to have been in southern Russia, from which 
they migrated east and west, beginning around 2200 B.C. 
Law (Jewish): The complex code of laws and regulations, based on the Ten 
Commandments and elaborated in the first five books of the Old Testament (the 
Pentateuch) and later Jewish tradition. 
Marxism: An ideology based on the ideas of Karl Marx (1818–1893) and 
Friedrich Engels (1820–1895) and the intellectual foundation of modern 
communism. 
Mesopotamia: “Land between the rivers.” A geographical term used 
historically to identify the region, now largely in Iraq, between the Tigris and 
Euphrates Rivers. Location of early civilizations of Sumer, Akkad, and 
Babylonia. 
Middle Ages (medieval period): The period in European history between the 
fall of the Roman Empire in Western Europe (476) and the fall of the Roman 
Empire in the East at Constantinople in 1453. 
National Socialism (Nazism): The ideology of Germany under Adolf Hitler, 
based on racism, nationalism, and socialism and espousing a totalitarian state in 
which the individual and all aspects of life were absolutely subordinate to the 
state.  
Pharisee: Member of an influential Jewish group in Judaea at the time of Jesus. 
The Pharisees were trained in the Jewish law and insisted on a strict 
interpretation of that law. Their role in society might be compared to that of 
professors in our own day. 
Renaissance: The beginning of the modern age, marked by the Renaissance 
(“rebirth”) of interest in classical antiquity. As is true of most historical 
designations, such as Middle Ages, it is difficult to define precisely the 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
66 
chronological limits of the Renaissance. It began in Italy, then spread to 
Northern Europe. Defensible dates are from the career of the Italian poet and 
lover of antiquity Petrarch (1304–1374) to Martin Luther and the beginning of 
the Protestant Reformation (1517).  
Roman Empire: The Roman world from 48 B.C.–476 A.D. Used in this way, the 
term Roman Empire describes the political system of monarchy established by 
Julius Caesar and his successors to rule over territory ultimately stretching from 
Britain to Iraq. However, starting in 246 B.C., long before Caesar, the Roman 
Republic began to conquer an overseas empire. Thus, historians commonly, if 
confusingly, speak of the Roman Republic ruling the Roman Empire. The 
Roman people permitted Caesar and his successors, especially Augustus, to 
transform Rome from a republic into a monarchy in order to continue to rule 
this overseas empire. 
Roman Republic: Rome from 509–48 B.C., marked by political liberty and a 
balanced constitution. 
Sadducees: Members of an influential group in Judaea at the time of Jesus. 
Sadducees tended to be wealthy and insisted on the Temple as the focus of 
Jewish religion. 
Semitic: Linguistic and cultural term used to describe certain related languages 
and cultures of the Middle East in antiquity and the modern world, including 
Babylonian, Hebrew, Phoenician, Syriac, and Arabic. 
Socialism: A term that first appears in English in 1832 to describe an ideology 
opposing laissez-faire economics in favor of some form of communal ownership 
of productive assets. 
Soviet Union (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics): The political entity that in 
1922 replaced the Russian Empire. In 1991, this communist state fragmented 
into numerous nations, including the Russian Federation. 
Sumer: A nation composed of a number of city-sates in ancient Mesopotamia, 
speaking the same language and sharing the same culture. The Sumerians 
influenced greatly the later history of the Middle East. The Sumerian language 
seems to be unrelated to any other known language. 
Third Reich: Name given by Hitler to Germany under National Socialism 
(1933–1945). 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
67 
Biographical Notes 
 
Aristotle: Greek philosopher (386–32 B.C.). Not an Athenian by birth, Aristotle 
spent much of his life teaching in Athens. He was the pupil of Plato and founded 
his own university in Athens, the Lyceum. Far more than Plato, Aristotle 
focused on empirical studies, including natural science and history. He was 
perhaps the most profound mind of classical Greece as Plato was the most 
intellectual and Socrates the noblest. He was the tutor of Alexander the Great. 
Aristotle was the most influential intellectual figure in both the European and 
the Islamic Middle Ages. His Poetics is the first book on literary criticism to 
come down to us from classical antiquity. It provides us with a working 
definition of a great book as one that has a beneficent moral impact on its 
audience. 
Augustus Caesar: Roman statesman (63 B.C.–14 A.D.). Born Gaius Octavius, he 
was the great-nephew and adopted son of Julius Caesar. Modern historians 
generally refer to him as Octavian during his early political career and rise to 
power (44–27 B.C.), from his adopted name of Gaius Julius Caesar Octavianus. 
Building on his relationship with the popular Julius Caesar, Octavian, at the age 
of 19, raised an army on his own initiative. With extraordinary political skills, 
he achieved absolute mastery over the Roman world, winning a decisive victory 
over Marc Antony and Cleopatra at Actium in 31 B.C. He then carried out a 
series of political, military, social, and economic reforms that successfully 
transformed Rome from a republic into a monarchy and inaugurated two 
centuries of peace and prosperity throughout the Roman world. In 27 B.C., he 
marked the inauguration of the new order by adopting the name Augustus, 
which means “messiah.” Augustus is rightly regarded as the greatest statesman 
in history, the model of the good Roman emperor. He was celebrated by Vergil 
in the Aeneid, and during his reign, Jesus was born. He is discussed at length in 
The Teaching Company course Famous Romans (Lectures Fourteen–Sixteen). 
Brown, John: American opponent of slavery and terrorist (1800–1859). Born in 
Connecticut and Puritan in background, Brown was a failure in business. 
Deeply convinced of the immorality of slavery and profoundly influenced by the 
Bible, he took his sons to Kansas and Nebraska in 1845 in a violent effort to 
oppose the supporters of slavery. On October 16, 1859, funded by respected 
New England abolitionists, Brown, along with his sons, formed a small group 
that seized the federal arsenal at Harpers Ferry. The goal, which failed, was to 
start a slave rebellion. Brown was captured, tried, and hanged for treason. 
Cato, Marcus Porcius the Younger: Roman statesman and opponent of Julius 
Caesar (95–46 B.C.). Far more than Brutus, Cato was the noblest Roman. He 
loved liberty, which he defined as the political freedom of the balanced 
constitution of the Roman Republic. He saw Caesar as the preeminent threat to 
that liberty. Thus, Cato opposed Caesar at every step of the rise to power. 
Ultimately, Cato chose civil war rather than allow Caesar to become despot. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
68 
Defeated in that war, Cato chose suicide rather than accept the clemency of 
Caesar. In The Divine Comedy, Dante paid tribute to his own love of political 
liberty by placing Cato as the guardian of the gates of Purgatory. Cato is 
discussed at length in Famous Romans (Lecture Twelve). 
Gladstone, William Ewart: British statesman (1809–1898). Gladstone was 
four times prime minister of Britain during the golden age of the British Empire 
(1868–1874, 1880–1885, 1886, 1892–1894). He embodied the ideals of the 
Liberal Party. He believed in free trade and a broad franchise of voters. He 
believed in democracy, and he believed that democracy was only viable if 
ordinary citizens were educated and had economic opportunity. It was the role 
of the government to provide education and economic opportunity. Gladstone 
believed that the British Empire was a great force for good, but he was opposed 
to wars of aggression. He was much influenced by Lord Acton in his views of 
history and served as a model for Winston Churchill. For us, in addition, 
Gladstone is a model for how a statesman shaped his life and values around the 
lessons of the great books. Gladstone believed that all we need to know about 
ethics can be learned from Homer, and he himself wrote scholarly volumes on 
Homer and the historical context of the Iliad and Odyssey.  
Hammurabi: Babylonian king (1728–1686 B.C.). Hammurabi is one of the most 
important figures in the early history of the Middle East. His reign marked the 
high point of Babylonian civilization and political power. He ruled over an 
extensive empire, including modern-day Iraq and parts of Iran and Turkey. 
Babylonian civilization reached new levels in astronomy and literature. The 
government was marked by a well-trained bureaucracy. Hammurabi issued a 
major code of laws that influenced the subsequent legal systems of the ancient 
Middle East, including the Old Testament. He is important both for our 
understanding of the historical background of the Ten Commandments and for 
the transmission of the Gilgamesh epic. 
Hitler, Adolf: German dictator (1889–1945). Born an ethnic German in the 
Austro-Hungarian Empire, Adolf Hitler was a failed artist who discovered the 
meaning of his life in World War I. Determined to lead Germany back to 
greatness after the defeat of 1918, Hitler became leader of the National Socialist 
Party. He transformed a fringe political group into the dominant force in the 
chaotic democratic politics of Germany in the 1920s and early 1930s, the 
Weimar Republic. In jail, he wrote Mein Kampf, which stated clearly his 
determination to destroy the Jewish people of Europe and to begin another 
world war. He became chancellor of Germany in 1933 by legal means. He 
moved swiftly to establish a totalitarian system as complete and as evil as that of 
Stalin. True to his promise, he led the world into World War II. That war, as 
Winston Churchill said, would never have happened except for Hitler. In the 
name of his crackpot ideas of racism and nationalism, Hitler ordered the murder 
of more than 6 million people in concentration camps. The total number of 
people who died as a result of Hitler’s war and policies is estimated at 50 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
69 
million. He committed suicide in the last days of World War II, leaving his 
nation and Europe in ruins. 
Julius Caesar: Roman statesman (100–44 B.C.). Julius Caesar is one of the most 
influential figures in world history and one of the most gifted individuals in 
history. Beginning his career as a rather shady politician, he grew into a figure 
who transformed history. A military genius, Caesar conquered Gaul (France), 
successfully invaded Britain, and defeated his rival Pompey, reputed to be the 
best general of the age. Caesar used this military success and the loyalty of the 
army to establish himself as dictator of the Roman Empire. He understood that a 
republic could no longer rule this empire and that the Roman people wanted 
authoritarian rule. He described his victories in Gaul and in the civil war against 
Pompey in Commentaries, which became the model for history and Latin prose. 
Such generals as Napoleon, Robert E. Lee, and George Patton have paid tribute 
to the military brilliance of Caesar. Caesar undertook a series of economic, 
political, and social reforms at Rome and in the provinces of the Roman Empire, 
which laid the foundation for the next 2,000 years of European history and 
civilization. Jealousy of Caesar and his own lack of patience led to Caesar’s 
assassination by a conspiracy of 63 senators, headed by Brutus and Cassius. 
Among the great books we study, Vergil’s Aeneid, Dante’s The Divine Comedy, 
and Shakespeare’s Julius Caesar all pay him tribute. 
King, Martin Luther, Jr.: American civil rights leader (1929–1968). A 
minister and son of a minister, King was a man of profound faith and courage. 
He stood up against a corrupt social and political system in the American South, 
which denied to U.S. citizens their constitutional rights on the basis of race. 
King led nonviolent resistance to segregation that resulted in major legislation 
and the collapse of segregation. His political and social views evolved into a 
strong resistance to the American war in Vietnam and an increasing focus on 
economic reform. His assassination in 1968 remains a mystery. King was 
profoundly influenced in his beliefs by the Bible, Thoreau, and Gandhi, as well 
as a number of great books, which he quoted in his profoundly moving Letter 
from a Birmingham Jail (discussed in A History of Freedom [Lecture Thirty-
Five]). 
Lenin, Vladimir: Soviet Russian revolutionary and dictator (1870–1924). Lenin 
was a convinced follower of Karl Marx who instituted one of the most brutal 
tyrannies in history in order to transform the Russian Empire into a Marxist 
state. Lenin came from a middle-class background and was well educated. His 
plots against the tsarist regime forced him into exile. By the agency of the 
German government, he returned to Russia in 1917 at a critical moment in the 
beginning of the revolution. Lenin had a powerful intellect and an utterly 
ruthless drive for power. He masterminded the Bolshevik seizure of power and 
victory in the civil war. He crushed all opposition and established the main 
features of the communist dictatorship in the Soviet Union, including the use of 
terror as a state policy and the concentration camps. In addition to his political 
leadership, Lenin also made fundamental contributions to Marxist theory, and 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
70 
subsequent generations of communists all over the world have called their 
ideology Marxism-Leninism. 
Marx, Karl: Economic thinker and intellectual founder of communism (1818–
1883). Marx was one of the most influential figures of the 20th century. Born in 
Germany, he was educated in philosophy and the classics. He developed an all-
encompassing philosophy based on economic determinism. He believed that 
ideas were the product of economic conditions. He was a political activist who 
sought to drive the workers to revolution through such publications as The 
Communist Manifesto, written with his close collaborator Friedrich Engels. 
Marx spent his last years in London, writing his massive work Das Kapital. 
Marx is important to us to show the different lessons that can be drawn from a 
study of the great books. He is also one of the preeminent examples to 
contradict his own view. Marx shows that history is indeed made by ideas, as 
the long and unfortunate history of the Soviet Union, communist China, and 
other communist regimes has shown. 
Sophocles: Athenian writer of tragedies (496–406 B.C.). Along with Aeschylus 
and Euripides, Sophocles was one of the three greatest playwrights of the 
golden age of Athenian tragedy. Aristotle considered his Oedipus the King to be 
the perfect tragedy. He is discussed at length in A History of Freedom (Lecture 
Four) and Famous Greeks (Lecture Fourteen). 
Stalin, Joseph: Dictator of the Soviet Union (1879–1953). Born a Georgian in 
the Caucasus, Stalin’s birth name was Iosif Dzhugashvili. He took the name 
Stalin during his early career as a political activist for Marxism and the 
overthrow of the regime of the tsar in Russia. Stalin means “man of steel,” and 
Stalin was one of the hardest and most ruthless figures in history. A protégé of 
Lenin, he played an important role in the Russian Revolution and the civil war 
of 1917–1924. After Lenin’s death, Stalin secured by brute force and cunning 
absolute mastery of the Soviet Union. From 1929–1953, he ruled by terror the 
most complete despotism the world has ever seen. Some 20 million of his own 
citizens died in his concentration camps. Despite this terror, he was genuinely 
loved by millions of Russians and was hailed as the savior of his country for the 
victory over Germany in World War II. Stalin is the model for Big Brother in 
George Orwell’s 1984. Stalin is discussed in A History of Freedom (Lecture 
Thirty-Four). 
Thucydides: Athenian historian (died c. 400 B.C.). Thucydides was an admirer 
of Pericles. During the Peloponnesian War, he was exiled by his fellow 
Athenian citizens for his failure on a military assignment. This left him with an 
abiding hatred of democracy but gave him the time and opportunity to write his 
monumental History of the Peloponnesian War. This is one of the most 
influential works of history ever written. The Founders of the United States 
regarded Thucydides as a guide for political decision making in the new 
republic. Thucydides and his history are discussed at length in Famous Greeks 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
71 
(Lecture Fifteen). He is important in this course as our source for the Funeral 
Oration of Pericles. 
Tolkien, John Robert Reuel: British author (1892–1973). J. R. R. Tolkien was 
the creator of a fantasy world based on the ideals and values of the Anglo-Saxon 
and Scandinavian heroic age of the early Middle Ages. He was a scholar of 
medieval English literature and a specialist on Beowulf. He was professor at 
Oxford University from 1925–1959. But he is remembered and important for his 
novels, above all The Lord of the Rings, which continues to grow in popularity 
and has been the source of one of the most successful and critically acclaimed 
series of films in movie history. 
 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
72 
Bibliography 
 
Note: The Essential Readings focus on the books we are discussing. I have 
recommended editions that are available and offer guides to further reading on 
the book and the author. I have recommended as Supplementary Reading books 
that put our works into a broader context or that I find especially useful in 
understanding the text. This means that on several occasions, I recommend 
books and essays that are older and more traditional simply because I think they 
will be more useful than the most recent scholarship on our book and author. 
Essential Reading 
Aeschylus. Oresteia. R. Lattimore, trans. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1953, numerous reprints. The best translation of this compelling tragedy. 
———. Prometheus Bound, The Suppliants, Seven against Thebes, The 
Persians. P. Vellacott, trans. Baltimore: Penguin, 1961, numerous reprints. A 
convenient and good translation. 
Aristotle. Poetics. W. Fyfe and W. Roberts, trans. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press, 1932, numerous reprints. A good translation and valuable for 
its inclusion of other classical works on literary criticism. 
Beowulf. S. Heaney, trans. New York: Farrar, Strauss, and Girard, 2000. A 
brilliant translation by a highly regarded modern poet. 
Bhagavad Gita. J. Mascaro, trans. London: Penguin, 2003. An accurate and 
sensitive translation. 
Bible. I prefer the majesty of the King James Version. Of the modern revised 
versions, the best, for translation and notes, is the New Revised Standard 
Version of the New Oxford Annotated Bible, New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1991.  
Bonhoeffer, Dietrich. Letters and Papers from Prison. New York: Simon and 
Schuster, 1997. A moving testimony to the courage under trial of a remarkable 
intellectual and man of action. 
Churchill, Winston S. My Early Life. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1996. A 
recent and in-print edition of Churchill’s autobiography, written in 1930, when 
the British political world and the press thought he was finished.  
———. Painting as a Pastime. Delray Beach: Levenger Press, 2003. 
Churchill’s masterly essay on how to stay young, giving unique insights into the 
paintings of Churchill, which themselves give unique insight into Churchill the 
statesman. 
———. The Second World War. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1986. A 
masterpiece of historical writing, filled with the lessons of history for our own 
day.  

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
73 
Cicero, Marcus Tullius. On Duties (De Officiis). W. Miller, trans. Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1913, numerous revisions. By far the best 
translation, in print, of this fundamental work on education and morality.  
Confucius. The Analects. D. C. Lau, trans. New York: Penguin, 1979. The best 
translation into English, with a valuable introduction. 
Dante. The Divine Comedy. R. Sinclair, trans. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1961. Of the many English translations, I prefer that of Sinclair for 
accuracy and for the clarity of its notes. . 
Euripides. Bacchae. P. Vellacott, trans. Baltimore: Penguin, 1972, numerous 
reprints. A convenient translation of this last tragedy of Euripides. 
Fears, J. Rufus. Selected Writings of Lord Acton, vol. I, Essays in the History of 
Liberty. Indianapolis: LibertyClassics, 1985. Part of a three-volume edition, the 
most complete collection of the writings, published and unpublished, of this 
seminal figure in the liberal tradition and in the great books tradition. 
Gandhi, Mahatma. An Autobiography: The Story of My Experiments with the 
Truth. Boston: Beacon, 1993. A recent edition of the autobiography of a great 
and original man of action and thought. The biography is as idiosyncratic—I use 
the word in a most positive sense—as was Gandhi himself. 
Gibbon, E. The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire. New York: Random 
House, 2000. This complete edition in three volumes is to be preferred to the 
various abridged versions in print. 
Gilgamesh. B. Foster and D. Frayne, trans. New York: Norton, 2001. A good. 
recent translation, with useful supplementary material. 
Goethe, Johann Wolgang von. Faust: A Tragedy. W. Arndt, trans. New York: 
Norton, 2000. A convenient edition and translation, with useful supplementary 
material. 
Homer. Iliad. R. Lattimore, trans. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1951, 
numerous reprints. This has rightly been called “the finest translation of Homer 
ever made into the English language.” 
Koran. The best translation is that of A. J. Arberry, The Koran Interpreted. New 
York: Simon and Schuster, 1996. 
Lincoln, Abraham. Speeches and Writings. New York: Library of America, 
1974. The fullest collection of Lincoln’s words and, of course, containing the 
Gettysburg Address (vol. II, p. 536). 
Machiavelli, Nicolo. The Prince. New York: Penguin, 2003. A convenient 
translation of this fundamental work in the great books tradition. 
Malory, Thomas. Morte d’Arthur. New York: Norton, 2003. An excellent 
edition, with useful supplementary material, of this work, celebrating the central 
medieval values of loyalty, chivalry, love, and religion. 
Marcus Aurelius. Meditations. M. Staniforth, trans. Baltimore: Penguin Books, 
1964. A good, convenient translation of this enduring guide to how to live your 
life with Stoic courage. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
74 
Mill, John Stuart. On Liberty. New York: Penguin, 1974. One of the seminal 
books on the history of liberty. 
Orwell, George. 1984. New York: Penguin, 2003. The masterpiece of insight 
into the mentality of totalitarianism. 
Plato. Euthyphro, Apology, Crito, Phaedo, and Phaedrus. Harold North Fowler, 
trans. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1990. A good translation of 
the dialogues focusing on the trial and death of Socrates. 
———.  Republic. D. Lee, trans. New York: Penguin, 2003. A convenient and 
accessible translation of this book, which we have called the embodiment of the 
values and ideals of classical Greece. 
Remarque, Erich Maria. All Quiet on the Western Front. A. W. Wheen, trans. 
New York: Spark, 2003. The brilliant novel of World War I that is a powerful 
indictment of the folly of modern wars. 
Shakespeare, William. The Complete Works. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1986. This is a superb complete edition. 
———. Julius Caesar. New York: Penguin, 2000. A convenient edition with 
good notes, part of the Penguin Shakespeare Series. 
———. Othello, the Moor of Venice. New York: Simon and Schuster, 2004. An 
excellent edition of the single play, valuable for its explanatory notes. Part of the 
Folger Shakespeare Series, from the famous library in Washington, D.C. 
Solzhenitsyn, Aleksandr. The Gulag Archipelago, 1918–1956: An Experiment 
in Literary Investigation. New York: Harper and Row, 1974–1978. The massive 
indictment of Soviet communism by the Noble Prize-winner and survivor of the 
labor camps of Stalin. 
Thoreau, Henry David. Walden and On Civil Disobedience. New York: 
Penguin, 2004. A convenient edition of these classic works by one of America’s 
most original thinkers. 
Thucydides. The History of the Peloponnesian War. Rex Warner, trans. New 
York: Penguin, 1954, numerous reprints. The monumental work of history; 
contains the Funeral Oration of Pericles. 
Vergil. Aeneid. R. Fitzgerald, trans. New York: Knopf, 1990. The best 
translation into English, done by a noteworthy American poet. More than other 
versions in print, Fitzgerald’s edition has a feel for the poetry of the Aeneid. 
Supplementary Reading 
Achtemeier, P. “Mark, Gospel of.” In The Anchor Bible Dictionary, D. 
Freedman, ed., vol. IV, pp. 541–557. New York: Doubleday, 1992. A useful 
introduction to contemporary views on the composition and context of the 
Gospel of Mark. 
Adler, Mortimer. How to Think About the Great Ideas: From the Great Books of 
Western Civilization. Chicago: Open Court, 2000. A traditional defense of the 
great books. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
75 
Andrewes, A. The Greek Tyrants. New York: Harper and Row, 1963, numerous 
reprints. The best study of tyranny among the Greeks and of the intellectual and 
political context in which the audience of Aeschylus responded to Prometheus 
Bound. 
Barker, E. Greek Political Thought: Plato and His Predecessors. London: 
Methuen, 1960. This remains the best introduction to Plato for the general 
reader. 
Barth, K. The Word of God and the Word of Man. New York: Harper, 1957. An 
extremely influential and provocative approach to reading and understanding 
the Bible. 
Bethge, E. Dietrich Bonhoeffer: Man of Vision, Man of Character. New York: 
Harper and Row, 1970. The best biography of Bonhoeffer, by a close friend and 
confident.  
Brooke, Rubert. Rupert Brooke and Wilfred Owen: Selected Poems. New York: 
Sterling, 2003. Poets of World War I who help us understand the impact of All 
Quiet on the Western Front. 
Brown, J. Gandhi: Prisoner of Hope. New Haven: Yale, 1991. A standard and 
good biography of Gandhi. 
Burckhardt, Jacob. The Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy. New York: 
Random House, 2002. A masterly interpretative study of the age of Machiavelli 
by a true humanist, a work that might well be called a great book itself. 
Carrithers, M. “Hinduism.” In Cambridge Encyclopedia of India, F. Robinson, 
ed., pp. 333–339. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982. A good 
orientation for the general reader on the Hindu religion, so vital for 
understanding the Bhagavad Gita. 
Carrithers, M., M. Cook, H. Carpenter, and R. Dawson. Founders of Faith: The 
Buddha, Confucius, Jesus, and Muhammad. New York: Oxford, 1990. Recent 
accounts of these four central figures in the great books tradition and in the 
history of ideas. 
Chadwick, H. Munro. The Heroic Age. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1912, numerous reprints. A classic study of the values of Beowulf and the 
Iliad. 
Champakalakshmi, R., et al. “History to Independence.” In Cambridge 
Encyclopedia of India, F. Robinson, ed., pp. 68–85. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1982. A good introduction to the history of early India and the 
context of the Bhagavad Gita. 
Conquest, Robert. Stalin: Breaker of Nations. New York: Viking, 1991. The 
best biography of Stalin in English. 
Coomaraswamy, A. Hinduism and Buddhism. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood 
Press, 1971, rep. New Delhi: Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts, 1999. 
A sensitive and compelling interpretation by a distinguished scholar. Very 
important for understanding the Bhagavad Gita and its message. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
76 
Crenshaw, J. “Job, Book of.” In The Anchor Bible Dictionary, D. Freedman, 
ed., vol. IV, pp. 858–868. New York: Doubleday, 1992. A good introduction to 
recent scholarly views on the Book of Job. 
Dill, S. Roman Society from Nero to Marcus Aurelius. London: Macmillan, 
1904, numerous reprints, including New York: Meridian Books, 1964. This is 
by far the best book written on the intellectual history of the Roman Empire of 
Marcus Aurelius. It remains a classic. 
Dodds, E. R. The Greeks and the Irrational. Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1951, numerous reprints. Remains a highly influential treatment of the 
broader context of the ideas presented in the Bacchae of Euripides. 
Eliot, T. S. On Poetry and Poets. New York: Faber and Faber, 1985. A 
collection of essays by the most famous 20th-century poet in English and a major 
literary critic, well-versed in the classics. It contains his essay on “What Makes 
a Classic,” celebrating the Aeneid as the greatest European poem. 
Esposito, J. The Oxford History of Islam. New York: Oxford University Press, 
1999. A good, current reference work for understanding the Koran, Muhammad, 
and Islam. 
Everitt, A. Cicero: The Life and Times of Rome’s Greatest Politician. New 
York: Random House, 2003. A recent, popular biography, sympathetic to 
Cicero. 
Fadiman, Clifton. The New Lifetime Reading Plan. New York: HarperCollins, 
1997. A traditional defense of the great books.  
Fears, J. Rufus. “Antiquity: The Model of Rome.” In An Uncertain Legacy: 
Essays in Pursuit of Liberty, Edward McClean, ed., pp. 1–38. Wilmington: 
Intercollegiate Studies Institute, 1997. This places Vergil’s ideas in the Aeneid 
into the political context of the age of Augustus. 
———. “The Roman Experience.” In Preparing America’s Foreign Policy for 
the 21st Century, David Boren and Edward Perkins, eds., pp. 369–372. Norman: 
University of Oklahoma Press, 1999. The lessons of the Roman superpower for 
the American superpower. 
———. Selected Writings of Lord Acton, vol. I, Essays in the History of 
Liberty. Indianapolis: LibertyClassics, 1985. 
———. Selected Writings of Lord Acton, vol. II, Essays in the Study and 
Writing of History. Indianapolis: LibertyClassics, 1985.  
———. Selected Writings of Lord Acton, vol. III, Essays in Religion, Politics, 
and Morality. Indianapolis: LibertyClassics, 1985. This three-volume edition is 
the most complete collection of the writing of this fundamental figure in the 
great books tradition, including much unpublished material. 
Frankfort, H., et al., Before Philosophy: The Intellectual Adventures of Ancient 
Man. Baltimore: Penguin, 1964, numerous reprints. A classic study on 
speculative thought in the ancient Near East and Egypt, of great value for 
understanding Gilgamesh.  

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
77 
Gibbon, Edward. Memoirs of My Life and Writings. New York: Columbia, 
1998. One of the best autobiographies in the English language, carefully crafted 
to present a public image of Gibbon. 
Greene, W. Moira: Fate, Good and Evil in Greek Thought. New York: Harper 
and Row, 1963. Originally published in 1944, this remains the best treatment of 
these ideas so fundamental to understanding Greek tragedy. 
Hallo, W., and W. Simpson. The Ancient Near East: A History. Fort Worth: 
Harcourt Brace, 1998. The best short history of the ancient Near East and the 
historical context of Gilgamesh. 
Hogan, J. A Commentary on the Complete Greek Tragedies, vol. I, Aeschylus. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984. Helpful for understanding some of 
the more difficult passages in the Oresteia and Prometheus Bound. 
 
Horne, A. The Price of Glory: Verdun 1916. Harmondsworh: Penguin, 1978. 
Vivid account of the battle that for many epitomized the folly of World War I. 
Huizinga, Johan. The Waning of the Middle Ages. Mineola: Dover, 1998. A 
brilliant discussion of the values that lay at the heart of the Morte d’Arthur. A 
classic of historiography. 
Kallen, H. The Book of Job as a Greek Tragedy. New York: Hill and Wang, 
1959. Originally published in 1918, this is a provocative comparison of Job and 
Greek tragedy. Few have accepted its thesis, but the book encourages thought 
about how we compare great books. 
Kitcher, K. “Exodus, The.” In The Anchor Bible Dictionary, D. Freedman, ed., 
vol. II, pp. 700–708. New York: Doubleday, 1992. A good introduction to 
recent scholarly views on the historical context of the Book of Exodus. 
Kramer, N. History Begins at Sumer. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1959. An 
engaging discussion of Sumerian civilization and the historical context of 
Gilgamesh. 
Lewis, R. W. B. Dante: A Life. New York: Viking, 2001. A recent biography of 
the great poet. 
 
Manchester, William. The Last Lion: Winston Spencer Churchill; Visions of 
Glory 1874-1932. Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1983. 
 
_________________. The Last Lion: Winston Spencer Churchill; Alone 1932-
1940. Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1988. 
Matthews, John. King Arthur, Dark Age Warrior, Mythic King. New York: 
Random House, 2003. A recent study of the historical background of the legend 
of King Arthur. 
Mill, John Stuart, The Autobiography of John Stuart Mill. New York: New 
American Library, 1964. Mill’s account of his intellectual development. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
78 
Murray, G. Aeschylus: The Creator of Tragedy. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1940. 
A penetrating study of the tragedies of Aeschylus by a great humanist. Far more 
valuable to the general reader than most contemporary scholarship on 
Aeschylus, which is written for specialists. 
Nietzsche, F. The Birth of Tragedy and Other Writings. R. Geuss and R. Speirs, 
trans.  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999.  In this early work of the 
philosopher Nietzsche, written while he was still a professor of classics, the idea 
of the “rational” Greeks was exploded. Such a challenge to conventional 
scholarly ideas destroyed Nietzsche’s academic career, but his essay laid the 
foundation for much of 20th-century interpretation of Greek tragedy.  
Orwell, George. Animal Farm. New York: Penguin, 2003. Orwell’s satire on 
communism in action, valuable for the light its throws on his views in 1984. 
———. Homage to Catalonia. San Diego: Harcourt, 1969. Orwell’s account of 
his experiences in fighting on the socialist (Loyalist) side during the Spanish 
Civil War, giving us valuable insight into the ideals that motivated many of 
Orwell’s generation in Britain.  
Platt, Michael. Rome and the Romans According to Shakespeare. Lanham, Md.: 
University Press of America, 1983. The best scholarly study of Shakespeare’s 
use of the lessons of Roman history but no longer in print. 
Plutarch. The Lives of the Noble Grecians and Romans. New York: Modern 
Library, 1992. This complete edition of Plutarch’s Lives is much preferable to 
various editions of individual lives, which wrench them from the literary context 
of the work as a whole. Plutarch is invaluable for understanding Shakespeare’s 
Julius Caesar. Plutarch himself is a great author, who served as the basis for 
The Teaching Company courses Famous Greeks and Famous Romans. 
Rohde, E. The Cult of Souls and Belief in Immortality among the Greeks. New 
York: Harper and Row, 1966. The classic account of the intellectual and 
religious context of Plato’s Phaedo. 
Rose, H. J. Religion in Greece and Rome. New York: Harper, 1959. Remains 
the best introduction to Greek religion for the general reader. 
Rutherford, R. The Meditations of Marcus Aurelius. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
1989. The best recent scholarly interpretative study. 
Salway, P., and J. Blair. Roman and Anglo-Saxon Britain. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1992. A good brief introduction to the historical context of 
Beowulf. 
Sarna, N. “Exodus, Book of.” In The Anchor Bible Dictionary, D. Freedman, 
ed., vol. II, pp. 689–700. New York: Doubleday, 1992. A good introduction to 
modern scholarly views on the composition and content of the Book of Exodus. 
Sassoon, Siegfried. War Poems of Siegfried Sassoon. Mineola: Dover, 2004. A 
favorite poet and friend of Winston Churchill and one who gives us insight into 
the impact of All Quiet on the Western Front. 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
79 
Schoeck, H. Envy: A Theory of Social Behaviour. New York: Harcourt, Brace 
and World, 1969. A sociological study of this key element in human nature, 
portrayed with such brilliance by Shakespeare in Othello. 
Schweitzer, A. The Quest for the Historical Jesus. New York: Macmillan, 1910, 
rep. 1968. A remarkable scholarly book that transformed the life of its author, 
who became a humanitarian compared by many to Jesus. 
Sharpe. L. The Cambridge Companion to Goethe. New York: Cambridge, 2002. 
A compendium of material to help in understanding Faust. 
Solzhenitsyn, Aleksandr. One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich. New York: 
Dutton, 1963. Solzhenitsyn’s first book, a fictional but gripping account of life 
in a Stalinist labor camp. 
Spivack, B. Shakespeare and the Allegory of Evil. New York: Columbia 
University Press, 1958. A scholarly study of this central aspect of Othello. 
Taylor, H. O. The Medieval Mind. London: Macmillan, 1914, numerous 
reprints. This remains the most readable account of the intellectual context of 
The Divine Comedy. 
Thoreau, Henry David. Political Writings. New York, Cambridge, 1996. This 
edition contains Thoreau’s essay on John Brown, giving a very different view—
at first sight—of Thoreau’s ideals. 
Tolstoy, Leo. What Is Art? L. Volokhonsky, trans. New York: Penguin, 1996. 
The author of War and Peace writes one of the most stimulating books on the 
meaning of art and the beautiful. 
Watt, W. Montgomery. Companion to the Qur’an. London: Allen and Unwin, 
1967. A good reference guide to the Koran by a distinguished scholar. 
Weston, Jessie L. From Ritual to Romance. Princeton, 1993. A brilliant 
interpretation of the legend of King Arthur. A classic work of literary and 
anthropological interpretation that influenced T. S. Eliot in The Wasteland.  
Willcock, M. A Companion to the Iliad: Based on the Translation by Richmond 
Lattimore. Chicago: University of Chicago, 1976. Very useful for understanding 
the numerous mythological and other references that can make the Iliad difficult 
to access for modern readers. 
Wills, Garry. Lincoln at Gettysburg: The Words That Remade America. New 
York: Simon and Schuster, 1993. A well-reviewed and detailed study of the 
Gettysburg Address. 
Wright, G., and R. Fuller. The Book of the Acts of God. Garden City, N.Y.: 
Doubleday, 1960. A traditional and clear introduction to the historical and 
theological aspects of the Bible by two distinguished scholars, Wright, a biblical 
archaeologist, and Fuller, a New Testament theologian. 
Wyatt-Brown, B. The Shaping of Southern Culture: Honor, Grace, and War, 
1760s–1890s. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2001. An 
excellent discussion of the ideal of honor as a real force in human behavior, 

 
©2005 The Teaching Company Limited Partnership 
80 
affording us a valuable comparative insight into the role of honor in 
Shakespeare. 
Yao, X., ed. The Encyclopedia of Confucianism. New York: Routledge/Curzon, 
2003. Authoritative articles on all aspects of the teaching and influence of 
Confucius. 
Zimmern. Alfred. The Greek Commonwealth. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1911, numerous subsequent editions and reprints. A highly sympathetic account 
of the Athenian democracy and Pericles, written by a scholar and a man of 
affairs.  
 
 
 

