
Jorge Luis Borges
Labyrinths
Selected Stories & Other Writings
Edited by Donald A. Yates & James E. Irby
Preface by André Maurois
2

Although his work has been restricted to the short story, the essay, 
and poetry, Jorge Luis Borges of Argentina is recognized all over 
the world as one of the most original and significant figures in 
modern literature. In his preface André Maurois writes: "Borges is 
a  great  writer  who  has  composed  only  little  essays  or  short 
narratives. Yet they suffice for us to call him great because of their 
wonderful intelligence, their wealth of invention, and their tight, 
almost mathematical style."
Labyrinths  is a representative selection of Borges' writing, some 
forty pieces drawn from various of his books published over the 
years. The translations are by Harriet de Onís, Anthony Kerrigan, 
and  others,  including  the  editors,  who  have  provided  a 
biographical  and  critical  introduction,  as well  as  an  extensive 
bibliography.
3

Copyright © 1962, 1964 by New Directions Publishing Corporation 
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 64-25440
(ISBN: 0-08112-0012-4)
All rights reserved. Except for brief passages quoted in a newspaper, 
magazine, radio, or television review, no part of this book may be 
reproduced in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including 
photocopying and recording, or by any information storage and retrieval 
system, without permission in writing from the Publisher.
This augmented edition was first published in 1964.
Labyrinths, Selected Stories & Other Writings, by Jorge Luis Barges, 
has been translated and published by agreement with Emecé Editores, S, A., 
Bolivar 177, Buenos Aires, Argentina. All selections here included and 
translated into English have been taken from the following volumes originally 
published in Spanish by Emecé: Ficciones (1956), El Aleph (1957), Discussión (1957), 
Otras Inquisiciones (1960) and El Hacedor (1960).
We also acknowledge permission to reprint those translations into English here 
included which have previously appeared in magazines and books, as follows: 
translated by Donald A. Yates: "The Garden of Forking Paths," Michigan Alumnus 
Quarterly Review, Spring 1958; translated by James E. Irby: "Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis 
Tertius," New World Writing No. 18, April 1961, and "The Waiting" Américas, June 
1959; translated by John M. Fein: "The Lottery in Babylon," Prairie Schooner, Fall 
1959; translated by Harriet de Onís: "The Secret Miracle," Spanish Stories & Tales, 
Pocket Books (PL 40) 1956; translated by Julian Palley: "Deutsches Requiem," New 
World Writing No. 14, 1958 (Property of the Rutgers Translators); translated by Dudley 
Fitts: "The Zahir," Partisan Review, February 1950; translated by Anthony Kerrigan: 
"The Fearful Sphere of Pascal" Noonday No. 3, 1959.
Manufactured in the United States of America Published in Canada 
by McClelland and Stewart, Ltd. New Directions Books are published 
for James Laughlin by New Directions Publishing Corporation, 331 
Sixth Avenue, New York 10014.
TENTH PRINTING
4

Contents
Preface
7
Introduction
12
Fictions
Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius
20
The Garden of Forking Paths
34
The Lottery in Babylon
43
Pierre Menard, Author of the Quixote 49
The Circular Ruins
57
The Library of Babel
62
Funes the Memorious
69
The Shape of the Sword 76
Theme of the Traitor and the Hero
81
Death and the Compass
85
The Secret Miracle
95
Three Versions of Judas 101
The Sect of the Phoenix 106
The Immortal
109
The Theologians
122
Story of the Warrior and the Captive
129
Emma Zunz
133
The House of Asterion
138
Deutsches Requiem
141
Averroe's Search
147
The Zahir
154
The Waiting
162
The God's Script
165
Essays
The Argentine Writer and Tradition
171
The Wall and the Books
179
The Fearful Sphere of Pascal
182
Partial Magic in the Quixote
185
5

Valéry as Symbol
188
Kafka and His Precursors
190
Avatars of the Tortoise
193
The Mirror of Enigmas
199
A Note on (toward) Bernard Shaw
203
A New Refutation of Time
206
Parables
Inferno, 1, 32
223
Paradiso, XXXI, 108
224
Ragnarök
225
Parable of Cervantes and the Quixote 227
The Witness
228
A Problem
229
Borges and I
230
Everything and Nothing 231
Elegy
233
Chronology
234
Bibliography
237
6

Preface
orge Luis Borges is a great writer who has composed only little essays or 
short narratives. Yet they suffice for us to call him great because of their 
wonderful intelligence, their wealth of invention, and their tight, almost 
mathematical, style. Argentine by birth and temperament, but nurtured on 
universal literature, Borges has no spiritual homeland. He creates, outside 
time  and  space,  imaginary  and  symbolic  worlds.  It  is  a  sign  of  his 
importance that, in placing him, only strange and perfect works can be 
called to mind. He is akin to Kafka, Poe, sometimes to Henry James and 
Wells, always to Valéry by the abrupt projection of his paradoxes in what 
has been called "his private metaphysics."
J
I
His sources are innumerable and unexpected. Borges has read everything, 
and especially what nobody reads any more: the Cabalists, the Alexandrine 
Greeks, medieval philosophers. His erudition is not profound—he asks of it 
only flashes of lightning and ideas—but it is vast. For example, Pascal 
wrote: "Nature is an infinite sphere whose center is everywhere, whose 
circumference is nowhere." Borges sets out to hunt down this metaphor 
through the centuries. He finds in Giordano Bruno (1584): "We can assert 
with certainty that the universe is all center, or that the center of the universe 
is everywhere and its circumference nowhere." But Giordano Bruno had 
been able to read in a twelfth-century French theologian, Alain de Lille, a 
formulation borrowed from the Corpus Hermeticum (third century): "God is 
an intelligible sphere whose center is everywhere and whose circumference 
is nowhere." Such researches, carried out among the Chinese as among the 
Arabs or the Egyptians, delight Borges, and lead him to the subjects of his 
stories.
Many of his masters are English. He has an infinite admiration for 
Wells and is indignant that Oscar Wilde could define him as "a scientific 
Jules Verne." Borges makes the observation that the fiction of Jules Verne 
speculates on future probability (the submarine, the trip to the moon), that of 
Wells on pure possibility (an invisible man, a flower that devours a man, a 
machine to explore time), or even on impossibility (a man returning from the 
7

hereafter with a future flower). Beyond that, a Wells novel symbolically 
represents features inherent in all human destinies. Any great and lasting 
book must be ambiguous, Borges says; it is a mirror that makes the reader's 
features known, but the author must seem to be unaware of the significance 
of his work—which is an excellent description of Borges's own art. "God 
must  not  engage  in  theology;  the  writer  must  not  destroy  by  human 
reasonings the faith that art requires of us."
He admires Poe and Chesterton as much as he does Wells. Poe wrote 
perfect tales of fantastic horror and invented the detective story, but he never 
combined the two types of writing. Chesterton did attempt and felicitously 
brought off this tour de force. Each of Father Brown's adventures proposes 
to explain, in reason's name, an unexplainable fact. "Though Chesterton 
disclaimed being a Poe or Kafka, there was, in the material out of which his 
ego was molded, something that tended to nightmare." Kafka was a direct 
precursor of Borges.  The Castle  might be by Borges, but he would have 
made it into a ten-page story, both out of lofty laziness and out of concern 
for perfection. As for Kafka's precursors, Borges's erudition takes pleasure 
in finding them in Zeno of Elea, Kierkegaard and Robert Browning. In each 
of these authors there is some Kafka, but if Kafka had not written, nobody 
would have been able to notice it—whence this very Borgesian paradox: 
"Every writer creates his own precursors."
Another man who inspires him is the English writer John William 
Dunne, author of such curious books about time, in which he claims that the 
past, present and future exist simultaneously, as is proved by our dreams. 
(Schopenhauer, Borges remarks, had already written that life and dreams are 
leaves of the same book: reading them in order is living; skimming through 
them is dreaming.) In death we shall rediscover all the instants of our life 
and we shall freely combine them as in dreams. "God, our friends, and 
Shakespeare will collaborate with us." Nothing pleases Borges better than to 
play in this way with mind, dreams, space and time. The more complicated 
the game becomes, the happier he is. The dreamer can be dreamed in his 
turn.  "The  Mind  was  dreaming;  the  world  was  its  dream."  In  all 
philosophers,  from  Democritus  to  Spinoza,  from  Schopenhauer  to 
Kierkegaard, he is on the watch for paradoxical intellectual possibilities.
8

II
There are to be found in Valéry's notebooks many notes such as this: "Idea 
for a frightening story: it is discovered that the only remedy for cancer is 
living human flesh. Consequences." I can well imagine a piece of Borges 
"fiction" written on such a theme. Reading ancient and modern philosophers, 
he stops at an idea or a hypothesis. The spark flashes. "If this absurd 
postulate were developed to its extreme logical consequences," he wonders, 
"what world would be created?"
For example, an author, Pierre Menard, undertakes to compose Don 
Quixote—not another  Quixote,  but  the  Quixote. His method?  To  know 
Spanish well, to rediscover the Catholic faith, to war against the Moors, to 
forget the history of Europe—in short, to  be  Miguel de Cervantes. The 
coincidence then becomes so total that the twentieth-century author rewrites 
Cervantes'  novel  literally,  word  for word,  and  without  referring  to  the 
original.  And  here  Borges  has  this  astonishing  sentence:  "The  text  of 
Cervantes and that of Menard are verbally identical, but the second is almost 
infinitely  richer."  This  he  triumphantly  demonstrates,  for  this  subject, 
apparently absurd, in fact expresses a real idea: the Quixote that we read is 
not that of Cervantes, any more than our Madame Bovary is that of Flaubert. 
Each twentieth-century reader involuntarily rewrites in his own way the 
masterpieces of past centuries. It was enough to make an extrapolation in 
order to draw Borges's story out of it.
Often a paradox that ought to bowl us over does not strike us in the 
abstract form given it by philosophers. Borges makes a concrete reality out 
of it. The "Library of Babel" is the image of the universe, infinite and always 
started over again. Most of the books in this library are unintelligible, letters 
thrown together by chance or perversely repeated, but sometimes, in this 
labyrinth of letters, a reasonable line or sentence is found. Such are the laws 
of nature, tiny cases of regularity in a  chaotic world. The  "Lottery in 
Babylon" is another ingenious and penetrating staging of the role of chance 
in life. The mysterious Company that distributes good and bad luck reminds 
us of the "musical banks" in Samuel Butler's Erewhon.
Attracted by metaphysics, but accepting no system as true, Borges 
makes out of all of them a game for the mind. He discovers two tendencies 
in  himself:  "one  to  esteem  religious  and  philosophical  ideas  for  their 
9

aesthetic value, and even for what is magical or marvelous in their content. 
That is perhaps the indication of an essential skepticism. The other is to 
suppose in advance that the quantity of fables or metaphors of which man's 
imagination is capable is limited, but that this small number of inventions 
can be everything to everyone."
Among these fables or ideas, certain ones particularly fascinate him: 
that of Endless Recurrence, or the circular repetition of all the history of the 
world, a theme dear to Nietzsche; that of the dream within a dream; that of 
centuries  that  seem  minutes and  seconds  that  seem  years  ("The  Secret 
Miracle"); that of the hallucinatory nature of the world. He likes to quote 
Novalis: "The greatest of sorcerers would be the one who would cast a spell 
on himself to the degree of taking his own phantasmagoria for autonomous 
apparitions. Might that not be our case?" Borges answers that indeed it is our 
case: it is we who have dreamed the universe. We can see in what it consists, 
the  deliberately  constructed  interplay  of the  mirrors and  mazes of this 
thought, difficult but always acute and laden with secrets. In all these stories 
we  find  roads  that  fork,  corridors  that  lead  nowhere,  except  to  other 
corridors, and so on as far as the eye can see. For Borges this is an image of 
human thought, which endlessly makes its way through concatenations of 
causes and effects without ever exhausting infinity, and marvels over what is 
perhaps only inhuman chance. And why wander in these labyrinths? Once 
more, for aesthetic reasons; because this present infinity, these "vertiginous 
symmetries," have their tragic beauty. The form is more important than the 
content.
III
Borges's form often recalls Swift's: the same gravity amid the absurd, the 
same precision of detail. To demonstrate an impossible discovery, he will 
adopt the tone of the most scrupulous scholar, mix imaginary writings in 
with real and erudite sources. Rather than write a whole book, which would 
bore him, he analyzes a book which has never existed. "Why take five 
hundred pages," he asks, "to develop an idea whose oral demonstration fits 
into a few minutes?"
Such is, for example, the narrative that bears this bizarre title: "Tlön, 
Uqbar, Orbis Tertius." This concerns the history of an unknown planet, 
10

complete  "with  its  architectures  and  quarrels,  with  the  terror  of  its 
mythologies and the uproar of its languages, its emperors and seas, its 
minerals  and  birds  and  fish,  its  algebra  and  fire,  its  theological  and 
metaphysical controversies." This invention of a new world appears to be 
the  work  of  a  secret  society  of  astronomers,  engineers,  biologists, 
metaphysicians and geometricians. This world that they have created, Tlön, 
is a Berekeleyan and Kierkegaardian world where only inner life exists. On 
Tlön everyone has his own truth; external objects are whatever each one 
wants. The international press broadcasts this discovery, and very soon the 
world of Tlön obliterates our world. An imaginary past takes the place of 
our own. A group of solitary scientists has transformed the universe. All this 
is mad, subtle, and gives food for endless thought.
Other stories by Borges are parables, mysterious and never explicit; 
still others are detective narratives in the manner of Chesterton. Their plots 
remain entirely intellectual. The criminal exploits his familiarity with the 
methods of the detective. It is Dupin against Dupin or Maigret against 
Maigret. One of these pieces of "fiction" is the insatiable search for a person 
through the scarcely perceptible reflections that he has left on other souls. In 
another, because a condemned man has noticed that expectations never 
coincide with reality, he imagines the circumstances of his own death. Since 
they have thus become expectations, they can no longer become realities.
These inventions are described in a pure and scholarly style which 
must be linked up with Poe, "who begat Baudelaire, who begat Mallarmé, 
who begat Valéry," who begat Borges. It is especially by his rigor that he 
reminds us of Valéry. "To be in love is to create a religion whose god is 
fallible." By his piled-up imperfects he sometimes recalls Flaubert; by the 
rarity of his adjectives, St. John Perse. "The inconsolable cry of a bird." But, 
once these relationships are pointed out, it must be said that Borges's style is, 
like his thought, highly original. Of the metaphysicians of Tlön he writes: 
"They seek neither truth nor likelihood; they seek astonishment. They think 
metaphysics is a branch of the literature of fantasy." That rather well defines 
the greatness and the art of Borges.
ANDRÉ MAUROIS
of the French Academy
Translated by Sherry Mangan
11

Introduction
orge Luis Borges was born on 24 August 1899 in Buenos Aires, of 
Spanish,  English  and  (very  remotely)  Portuguese  Jewish  origin.  His 
parents were of the intellectual middle class and descended from military 
and  political  figures  prominent  in  the  struggles  for  Argentine  national 
independence and unity that occupied most of the nineteenth century. After 
completing his secondary education in Geneva and then spending some three 
years in Spain associated with the avant-garde  ultraísta  group of poets, 
Borges returned to Buenos Aires in 1921. There he immediately became the 
leading exponent and theorist of Argentine ultraísmo, distinguished from its 
Spanish counterpart by a peculiar fusion of modern expressionist form and 
anachronistic nostalgia for certain national values—values most palpably 
embodied for those writers in the old  criollo  quarters of Buenos Aires—
which were by then disappearing amid the postwar boom and rush of foreign 
immigration. Borges's and his companions' situation was not unlike that of 
some North American writers of the same generation who suffered the 
impact  of  war,  industrialism  and  modern  European  art  on  a  tranquil 
Midwestern or Southern heritage.
J
But out of these general conditions, shared by many in our time, 
Borges  has  created  a  work  like  no  other.  Perhaps  the  most  striking 
characteristic of his writings is their extreme intellectual reaction against all 
the disorder and contingency of immediate reality, their radical insistence on 
breaking  with  the  given  world  and  postulating  another.  Born  into  the 
dizzying flux and inconstancy of a far-flung border area of Western culture, 
keen witness of the general crisis of that culture, Borges has used his 
strangely gifted mind—the mind of a Cabalist, of a seventeenth-century 
"metaphysical," of a theorist of pure literature much like Poe or Valéry—to 
erect an order with what Yeats called "monuments of unageing intellect." 
Borges is skeptical as few have ever been about the ultimate value of mere 
ideas and mere literature. But he has striven to turn this skepticism into an 
ironic method, to make of disbelief an aesthetic system, in which what 
matters most is not ideas as such, but their resonances and suggestions, the 
drama of their possibilities and impossibilities, the immobile and lasting 
quintessence of ideas as it is distilled at the dead center of their warring 
contradictions.
12

Until about 1930 Borges's main creative medium was poetry: laconic 
free-verse poems which evoked scenes and atmospheres of old Buenos Aires 
or treated timeless themes of love, death and the self. He also wrote many 
essays on subjects of literary criticism, metaphysics and language, essays 
reminiscent of Chesterton's in their compactness and unexpected paradoxes. 
The  lucidity  and  verbal  precision  of  these  writings  belie  the  agitated 
conditions of avant-garde polemic and playfulness under which most of 
them  were  composed.  During  these  years  Borges  was  content  to  seek 
expression in serene lyric images perhaps too conveniently abstracted from 
the surrounding world and have all his speculations and creations respond 
primarily to the need for a new national literature as he saw it. The years 
from 1930 to 1940, however, brought a deep change in Borges's work. He 
virtually abandoned poetry and turned to the short narrative genre. Though 
he never lost his genuine emotion for the unique features of his native 
ground, he ceased to exalt them nationalistically as sole bulwarks against 
threatening disorder and began to rank them more humbly within a context 
of  vast  universal  processes:  the  nightmarish  city  of  "Death  and  the 
Compass" is an obvious stylization of Buenos Aires, no longer idealized as 
in the poems, but instead used as the dark setting for a tragedy of the human 
intellect. The witty and already very learned young poet who had been so 
active in editing such little reviews as  Martín Fierro, Prisma  and  Proa, 
became a sedentary writer-scholar who spent many solitary hours in reading 
the most varied and unusual works of literature and philosophy and in 
meticulously  correcting  his  own  manuscripts,  passionately  but  also 
somewhat  monstrously  devoted  to  the  written  word  as  his  most  vital 
experience, as failing eyesight and other crippling afflictions made him more 
and more a semi-invalid, more and more an incredible mind in an ailing and 
almost useless body, much like his character Ireneo Funes. Oppressed by 
physical reality and also by the turmoil of Europe, which had all-too-direct 
repercussions in Argentina, Borges sought to create a coherent fictional 
world of the intelligence. This world is essentially adumbrated in "Tlön, 
Uqbar,  Orbis  Tertius."  As  Borges  slyly  observes  there,  Tlön  is  no 
"irresponsible figment of the imagination"; the stimulus which prompted its 
formulation is stated with clarity (though not without irony) toward the end 
of that story's final section, projected as a kind of tentative Utopia into the 
future beyond the grim year 1940 when it was written:
13

Ten  years  ago  any  symmetry  with  a  semblance  of  order—dialectical 
materialism, anti-Semitism, Nazism—was sufficient to charm the minds of 
men. How could one do other than submit to Tlön, to the minute and vast 
evidence of an orderly planet? It is useless to answer that reality is also 
orderly. Perhaps it is, but in accordance with divine laws—I translate: 
inhuman laws—which we never quite grasp. Tlön is surely a labyrinth, but 
it is a labyrinth devised by men, a labyrinth destined to be deciphered by 
men.
Borges's  metaphysical  fictions,  his  finest  creations,  which  are 
collected in the volumes Ficciones (1945) and El Aleph (1949), all elaborate 
upon the varied idealist possibilities outlined in the "article" on Tlön. In 
these narratives the analytical and imaginative functions previously kept 
separate  in  his  essays  and  poems  curiously  fuse,  producing  a  form 
expressive of all the tension and complexity of Borges's mature thought.
His fictions are always concerned with processes of striving which 
lead to discovery and insight; these are achieved at times gradually, at other 
times suddenly, but always with disconcerting and even devastating effect. 
They are tales of the fantastic, of the hyperbolic, but they are never content 
with fantasy in the simple sense of facile wish-fulfillment. The insight they 
provide is ironic, pathetic: a painful sense of inevitable limits that block total 
aspirations. Some of these narratives ("Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius," "Pierre 
Menard, Author of the Quixote" "Three Versions of Judas," "The Sect of the 
Phoenix") might be called "pseudo essays"—mock scrutinies of authors or 
books  or  learned  subjects  actually  of  Borges's  own  invention—that  in 
turning in upon themselves make the "plot" (if it can be called that) an 
intricate interplay of creation and critique. But all his stories, whatever their 
outward form, have the same self-critical dimension; in some it is revealed 
only in minimal aspects of tone and style (as, for example, in "The Circular 
Ruins"). Along with these "vertical" superpositions of different and mutually 
qualifying levels, there  are also  "horizontal" progressions  of qualitative 
leaps, after the manner of tales of adventure or of crime detection (Borges's 
favorite types of fiction). Unexpected turns elude the predictable; hidden 
realities are revealed through their diverse effects and derivations. Like his 
beloved Chesterton, who made the Father Brown stories a vehicle for his 
Catholic theology, Borges uses mystery and the surprise effect in literature 
to achieve that sacred astonishment at the universe which is the origin of all 
14

true religion and metaphysics. However, Borges as theologian is a complete 
heretic, as the casuistical "Three Versions of Judas" more than suffices to 
show.
Borges once claimed that the basic devices of all fantastic literature 
are only four in number: the work within the work, the contamination of 
reality by dream, the voyage in time, and the double. These are both his 
essential themes—the problematical nature of the world, of knowledge, of 
time, of the self—and his essential techniques of construction. Indeed, in 
Borges's narratives the usual distinction between form and content virtually 
disappears, as does that between the world of literature and the world of the 
reader. We almost unconsciously come to accept the world of Tlön because 
it has been so subtly inserted into our own. In "Theme of the Traitor and the 
Hero," Borges's discovery of his own story (which is worked up before our 
very eyes and has areas "not yet revealed" to him), Nolan's of Kilpatrick's 
treason, Ryan's of the curious martyrdom, and ours of the whole affair, are 
but  one  awareness  of  dark  betrayal  and  creative  deception.  We  are 
transported into a realm where fact and fiction, the real and the unreal, the 
whole and the part, the highest and the lowest, are complementary aspects of 
the same continuous being: a realm where "any man is all men," where "all 
men who repeat a line of Shakespeare are William Shakespeare." The world 
is a book and the book is a world, and both are labyrinthine and enclose 
enigmas designed to be understood and participated in by man. We should 
note that this all-comprising intellectual unity is achieved precisely by the 
sharpest and most scandalous confrontation of opposites. In "Avatars of the 
Tortoise," the paradox of Zeno triumphantly demonstrates the unreality of 
the visible world, while in "The Library of Babel" it shows the anguishing 
impossibility of the narrator's ever reaching the Book of Books. And in "The 
Immortal,"  possibly  Borges's  most  complete  narrative,  the  movements 
toward and from immortality become one single approximation of universal 
impersonality.
Borges  is  always  quick  to  confess  his  sources  and  borrowings, 
because for him no one has claim to originality in literature; all writers are 
more or less faithful amanuenses of the spirit, translators and annotators of 
pre-existing archetypes. (Hence Tlön, the impersonal and hereditary product 
of a "secret society"; hence Pierre Menard, the writer as perfect reader.) By 
critics he has often been compared with Kafka, whom he was one of the first 
to translate into Spanish. Certainly, we can see the imprint of his favorite 
15

Kafka story, "The Great Wall of China," on "The Lottery in Babylon" and 
"The  Library  of  Babel";  the  similarity  lies  mainly  in  the  narrators' 
pathetically inadequate examination of an impossible subject, and also in the 
idea  of  an  infinite,  hierarchical  universe,  with  its  corollary  of  infinite 
regression. But the differences between the two writers are perhaps more 
significant  than  their  likenesses.  Kafka's  minutely  and  extensively 
established  portrayals  of  degradation,  his  irreducible  and  enigmatic 
situations, contrast strongly with Borges's compact but vastly significant 
theorems, his all-dissolving ratiocination. Kafka wrote novels, but Borges 
has openly confessed he cannot; his miniature forms are intense realizations 
of Poe's famous tenets of unity of effect and brevity to the exclusion of 
"worldly interests." And no matter how mysterious they may seem at first 
glance, all Borges's works contain the keys to their own elucidation in the 
form of clear parallelisms with other of his writings and explicit allusions to 
a definite literary and philosophical context within which he has chosen to 
situate himself. The list of Pierre Menard's writings, as Borges has observed, 
is not "arbitrary," but provides a "diagram of his mental history" and already 
implies the nature of his "subterranean" undertaking. All the footnotes in 
Borges's fictions, even those marked "Editor's Note," are the author's own 
and form an integral part of the works as he has conceived them. Familiarity 
with Neo-Platonism and related doctrines will clarify Borges's preferences 
and intentions, just as it will, say, Yeats's or Joyce's. But, as Borges himself 
has  remarked  of  the  theological  explications  of  Kafka's  work,  the  full 
enjoyment of his writings precedes and in no way depends upon such 
interpretations. Greater and more important than his intellectual ingenuity is 
Borges's consummate skill as a narrator, his magic in obtaining the most 
powerful effects with a strict economy of means.
Borges's  stories  may  seem  mere  formalist  games,  mathematical 
experiments devoid of any sense of human responsibility and unrelated even 
to the author's own life, but quite the opposite is true. His idealist insistence 
on knowledge and insight, which mean finding order and becoming part of 
it, has a definite moral significance, though that significance is for him 
inextricably dual: his traitors are always somehow heroes as well. And all 
his fictional situations, all his characters, are at bottom autobiographical, 
essential projections of his experiences as writer, reader and human being 
(also divided, as "Borges and I" tells us). He is the dreamer who learns he is 
the dreamed one, the detective deceived by the hidden pattern of crimes, the 
16

perplexed Averroes whose ignorance mirrors the author's own in portraying 
him. And yet, each of these intimate failures is turned into an artistic 
triumph. It could be asked what such concerns of a total man of letters have 
to do with our plight as ordinary, bedeviled men of our bedeviled time. Here 
it seems inevitable to draw a comparison with Cervantes, so apparently 
unlike Borges, but whose name is not invoked in vain in his stories, essays 
and parables. Borges's fictions, like the enormous fiction of Don Quixote, 
grow out of the deep confrontation of literature and life which is not only the 
central problem of all literature but also that of all human experience: the 
problem of illusion and reality. We are all at once writers, readers and 
protagonists  of  some  eternal  story;  we  fabricate  our  illusions,  seek  to 
decipher the symbols around us and see our efforts overtopped and cut short 
by a supreme Author; but in our defeat, as in the Mournful Knight's, there 
can  come  the  glimpse  of  a  higher  understanding  that  prevails,  at  our 
expense. Borges's "dehumanized" exercises in ars combinatoria are no less 
human than that.
Narrative prose is usually easier to translate than verse, but Borges's 
prose raises difficulties not unlike those of poetry, because of its constant 
creative deformations and cunning artifices. Writers as diverse as George 
Moore and Vladimir Nabokov have argued that translations should sound 
like  translations.  Certainly,  since  Borges's  language  does  not  read 
"smoothly" in Spanish, there is no reason it should in English. Besides, as 
was indicated above, he considers his own style at best only a translation of 
others': at the end of "Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius" he speaks of making an 
"uncertain" version of Sir Thomas Browne's Urn Burial after the manner of 
the great Spanish Baroque writer Francisco de Quevedo. Borges's prose is in 
fact a modern adaptation of the Latinized Baroque  stil coupé.  He has a 
penchant for what seventeenth- and eighteenth-century rhetoricians called 
"hard"  or  "philosophic"  words,  and  will  often  use  them  in  their  strict 
etymological  sense,  restoring  radical  meanings  with  an  effect  of 
metaphorical novelty. In the opening sentence of "The Circular Ruins," 
"unanimous" means quite literally "of one mind"  (unus animus)  and thus 
foreshadows the magician's final discovery. Elevated terms are played off 
against more humble and direct ones; the image joining unlike terms is 
frequent; heterogeneous contacts are also created by Borges's use of colons 
and semicolons in place  of causal  connectives to give static,  elliptical, 
overlapping effects. Somewhat like Eliot in  The Waste Land,  Borges will 
17

deliberately  work  quotations  into  the  texture  of  his  writing.  The  most 
striking  example  is  "The  Immortal,"  which  contains  many  more  such 
"intrusions or thefts" than its epilogue admits. All his other stories do the 
same  to  some  degree:  there  are  echoes  of  Gibbon  in  "The  Lottery  in 
Babylon," of Spengler in "Deutsches Requiem," of Borges himself in "The 
Library of Babel" and "Funes the Memorious." Borges has observed that 
"the Baroque is that style which deliberately exhausts (or tries to exhaust) its 
possibilities and borders on its own caricature." A self-parodying tone is 
particularly evident in "Pierre Menard, Author of the Quixote," "The Zahir," 
"The Sect of the Phoenix." In that sense, Borges also ironically translates 
himself.
Most of the present volume is given over to a sizable selection of 
Borges's fictions. The essays here represent only a very small portion of his 
production in that form; they have been chosen for the importance of their 
themes in Borges's work as a whole and for their relevance to the stories, 
which were written during the same years. All are taken from his best essay 
collection, Otras inquisiciones (1952), with the exception of "The Argentine 
Writer and Tradition" (originally a lecture), which is contained in the revised 
edition of another collection entitled Discusión (1957). Because of his near-
blindness, Borges ceased to write stories after 1953 (though "Borges and I" 
suggest other reasons for the abandonment of that genre), and since then he 
has concentrated on even shorter forms which can be dictated more easily. 
The parables concluding this collection are examples of that later work. 
They are all found in the volume El hacedor (1960).
Borges's somewhat belated recognition as a major writer of our time 
has come more from Europe than from his native America.  The 1961 
Formentor Prize, which he shared with Samuel Beckett, is the most recent 
token  of  that  recognition.  In  Argentina,  save  for  the  admiration  of  a 
relatively small group, he has often been criticized as non-Argentine, as an 
abstruse dweller in an ivory tower, though his whole work and personality 
could only have emerged from that peculiar crossroads of the River Plate 
region, and his nonpolitical opposition to Perón earned him persecutions 
during the years of the dictatorship. Apparently, many of his countrymen 
cannot  pardon in him what is precisely  his greatest  virtue—his almost 
superhuman effort to transmute his circumstances into an art as universal as 
the finest of Europe—and expect their writers to be uncomplicated reporters 
of the national scene. A kind of curious inverse snobbism is evident here. As 
18

the Argentine novelist Ernesto Sábato remarked in 1945, "if Borges were 
French or Czech, we would all be reading him enthusiastically in bad 
translations." Not being French has undoubtedly also relegated Borges to 
comparative obscurity in the English-speaking countries, where it is rare that 
a Hispanic writer is ever accorded any major importance at all. Perhaps this 
selection of his writings will help correct that oversight and justify the 
critical judgments of René Etiemble and Marcel Brion, who have found in 
Borges the very perfection of the cosmopolitan spirit, and in his work one of 
the most extraordinary expressions in all Western literature of modern man's 
anguish of time, of space, of the infinite.
J.E.I.
19

Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius
I
 owe the discovery of Uqbar to the conjunction of a mirror and an 
encyclopedia. The mirror troubled the depths of a corridor in a country 
house on Gaona Street in Ramos Mejía; the encyclopedia is fallaciously 
called The Anglo-American Cyclopaedia (New York, 1917) and is a literal 
but delinquent reprint of the Encyclopaedia Britannica of 1902. The event 
took place some five years ago. Bioy Casares had had dinner with me that 
evening and we became lengthily engaged in a vast polemic concerning the 
composition of a novel in the first person, whose narrator would omit or 
disfigure the facts and indulge in various contradictions which would permit 
a few readers—very few readers—to perceive an atrocious or banal reality. 
From the remote depths of the corridor, the mirror spied upon us. We 
discovered (such a discovery is inevitable in the late hours of the night) that 
mirrors have something monstrous about them. Then Bioy Casares recalled 
that one of the heresiarchs of Uqbar had declared that mirrors and copulation 
are abominable, because they increase the number of men. I asked him the 
origin  of  this  memorable  observation  and  he  answered  that  it  was 
reproduced in The Anglo-American Cyclopaedia, in its article on Uqbar. The 
house (which we had rented furnished) had a set of this work. On the last 
pages of Volume XLVI we found an article on Upsala; on the first pages of 
Volume XLVII, one on Ural-Altaic Languages, but not a word about Uqbar. 
Bioy, a bit taken aback, consulted the volumes of the index. In vain he 
exhausted all of the imaginable spellings: Ukbar, Ucbar, Ooqbar, Ookbar, 
Oukbahr. . . Before leaving, he told me that it was a region of Iraq or of Asia 
Minor. I must confess that I agreed with some discomfort. I conjectured that 
this undocumented country and its anonymous heresiarch were a fiction 
devised by Bioy's modesty in order to justify a statement. The fruitless 
examination of one of Justus Perthes' atlases fortified my doubt.
I
The following day, Bioy called me from Buenos Aires. He told me he 
had before him the article on Uqbar, in Volume XLVI of the encyclopedia. 
The heresiarch's name was not forthcoming, but there was a note on his 
doctrine, formulated in words almost identical to those he had repeated, 
though perhaps literarily inferior. He had recalled: Copulation and mirrors 
20

are  abominable.  The  text  of  the  encyclopedia  said:  For  one  of  those 
gnostics, the visible universe was an illusion or (more precisely) a sophism. 
Mirrors  and  fatherhood  are  abominable  because  they  multiply  and 
disseminate that universe. I told him, in all truthfulness, that I should like to 
see that article. A few days later he brought it. This surprised me, since the 
scrupulous  cartographical  indices  of  Ritter's  Erdkunde  were  plentifully 
ignorant of the name Uqbar.
The tome Bioy brought was, in fact, Volume XLVI of the  Anglo-
American Cyclopaedia. On the half-title page and the spine, the alphabetical 
marking (Tor-Ups) was that of our copy, but, instead of 917, it contained 
921 pages. These four additional pages made up the article on Uqbar, which 
(as the reader will have noticed) was not indicated by the alphabetical 
marking. We later determined that there was no other difference between the 
volumes. Both of them (as I believe I have indicated) are reprints of the tenth 
Encyclopaedia Britannica. Bioy had acquired his copy at some sale or other.
We read the article with some care. The passage recalled by Bioy was 
perhaps the only surprising one. The rest of it seemed very plausible, quite 
in keeping with the general tone of the work and (as is natural) a bit boring. 
Reading  it  over  again,  we  discovered  beneath  its  rigorous  prose  a 
fundamental  vagueness.  Of  the  fourteen  names  which  figured  in  the 
geographical part, we only recognized three—Khorasan, Armenia, Erzerum
—interpolated in the text in an ambiguous way. Of the historical names, 
only one: the impostor magician Smerdis, invoked more as a metaphor. The 
note seemed to fix the boundaries of Uqbar, but its nebulous reference points 
were rivers and craters and mountain ranges of that same region. We read, 
for example, that the lowlands of Tsai Khaldun and the Axa Delta marked 
the  southern  frontier  and  that  on  the  islands  of  the  delta  wild  horses 
procreate. All this, on the first part of page 918. In the historical section 
(page 920) we learned that as a result of the religious persecutions of the 
thirteenth century, the orthodox believers sought refuge on these islands, 
where to this day their obelisks remain and where it is not uncommon to 
unearth their stone mirrors. The section on Language and Literature was 
brief. Only one trait is worthy of recollection: it noted that the literature of 
Uqbar was one of fantasy and that its epics and legends never referred to 
reality, but to the two imaginary regions of Mlejnas and Tlön. . . The 
bibliography enumerated four volumes which we have not yet found, though 
the third—Silas Haslam: History of the Land Called Uqbar, 1874—figures 
21

in the catalogues of Bernard Quaritch's book shop.1 The first, Lesbare und 
lesenswerthe Bemerkungen  über das Land Ukkbar in Klein-Asien,  dates 
from 1641 and is the work of Johannes Valentinus Andreä. This fact is 
significant; a few years later, I came upon that name in the unsuspected 
pages of De Quincey (Writings, Volume XIII) and learned that it belonged to 
a German theologian who, in the early seventeenth century, described the 
imaginary community of Rosae Crucis—a community that others founded 
later, in imitation of what he had prefigured.
That night we visited the National Library. In vain we exhausted 
atlases,  catalogues,  annuals  of  geographical  societies,  travelers'  and 
historians' memoirs: no one had ever been in Uqbar. Neither did the general 
index of Bioy's encyclopedia register that name. The following day, Carlos 
Mastronardi (to whom I had related the matter) noticed the black and gold 
covers of the Anglo-American Cyclopaedia in a bookshop on Corrientes and 
Talcahuano. . . He entered and examined Volume XLVI. Of course, he did 
not find the slightest indication of Uqbar.
II
Some limited and waning memory of Herbert Ashe, an engineer of the 
southern railways, persists in the hotel at Adrogué, amongst the effusive 
honeysuckles and in the illusory depths of the mirrors. In his lifetime, he 
suffered from unreality, as do so many Englishmen; once dead, he is not 
even the ghost he was then. He was tall and listless and his tired rectangular 
beard had once been red. I understand he was a widower, without children. 
Every few years he would go to England, to visit (I judge from some 
photographs he showed us) a sundial and a few oaks. He and my father had 
entered  into  one  of  those  close  (the  adjective  is  excessive)  English 
friendships that begin by excluding confidences and very soon dispense with 
dialogue. They used to carry out an exchange of books and newspapers and 
engage in taciturn chess games. . . I remember him in the hotel corridor, 
with a mathematics book in his hand, sometimes looking at the irrecoverable 
colors of the sky. One afternoon, we spoke of the duodecimal system of 
numbering  (in  which  twelve  is  written  as  10).  Ashe  said  that  he  was 
converting some kind of tables from the duodecimal to the sexagesimal 
1
Haslam has also published A General History of Labyrinths.
22

system (in which sixty is written as 10). He added that the task had been 
entrusted to him by a Norwegian, in Rio Grande do Sul. We had known him 
for eight years and he had never mentioned his sojourn in that region. . . We 
talked of country life, of the  capangas,  of the Brazilian etymology of the 
word  gaucho  (which some old Uruguayans still pronounce  gaúcho)  and 
nothing more was said—may God forgive me—of duodecimal functions. In 
September of 1937 (we were not at the hotel), Herbert Ashe died of a 
ruptured  aneurysm.  A  few  days  before,  he  had  received  a  sealed  and 
certified package from Brazil. It was a book in large octavo. Ashe left it at 
the bar, where—months later—I found it. I began to leaf through it and 
experienced an astonished and airy feeling of vertigo which I shall not 
describe, for this is not the story of my emotions but of Uqbar and Tlön and 
Orbis Tertius. On one of the nights of Islam called the Night of Nights, the 
secret doors of heaven open wide and the water in the jars becomes sweeter; 
if those doors opened, I would not feel what I felt that afternoon. The book 
was written in English and contained 1001 pages. On the yellow leather 
back I read these curious words which were repeated on the title page: A 
First  Encyclopaedia  of  Tlön.  Vol.  XI.  Hlaer  to  Jangr.  There  was  no 
indication of date or place. On the first page and on a leaf of silk paper that 
covered one of the color plates there was stamped a blue oval with this 
inscription: Orbis Tertius. Two years before I had discovered, in a volume of 
a certain pirated encyclopedia, a superficial description of a nonexistent 
country; now chance afforded me something more precious and arduous. 
Now I held in my hands a vast methodical fragment of an unknown planet's 
entire history, with its architecture and its playing cards, with the dread of its 
mythologies and the murmur of its languages, with its emperors and its seas, 
with its minerals and its birds and its fish, with its algebra and its fire, with 
its  theological  and  metaphysical  controversy.  And  all  of  it  articulated, 
coherent, with no visible doctrinal intent or tone of parody.
In the "Eleventh Volume" which I have mentioned, there are allusions 
to preceding and succeeding volumes. In an article in the N. R. F. which is 
now classic, Néstor Ibarra has denied the existence of those companion 
volumes; Ezequiel Martínez Estrada and Drieu La Rochelle have refuted that 
doubt, perhaps victoriously. The fact is that up to now the most diligent 
inquiries have been fruitless. In vain we have upended the libraries of the 
two Americas and of Europe. Alfonso Reyes, tired of these subordinate 
sleuthing procedures, proposes that we should all undertake the task of 
23

reconstrucing  the  many  and  weighty  tomes that  are  lacking:  ex  ungue 
leonem. He calculates, half in earnest and half jokingly, that a generation of 
tlönistas should be sufficient. This venturesome computation brings us back 
to the fundamental problem: Who are the inventors of Tlön? The plural is 
inevitable, because the hypothesis of a lone inventor—an infinite Leibniz 
laboring away darkly and modestly—has been unanimously discounted. It is 
conjectured that this brave new world is the work of a secret society of 
astronomers,  biologists,  engineers,  metaphysicians,  poets,  chemists, 
algebraists, moralists, painters, geometers. . . directed by an obscure man of 
genius. Individuals mastering these diverse disciplines are abundant, but not 
so those capable of inventiveness and less so those capable of subordinating 
that inventiveness to a rigorous and systematic plan. This plan is so vast that 
each writer's contribution is infinitesimal. At first it was believed that Tlön 
was a mere chaos, an irresponsible license of the imagination; now it is 
known that it is a cosmos and that the intimate laws which govern it have 
been formulated, at least provisionally. Let it suffice for me to recall that the 
apparent contradictions of the Eleventh Volume are the fundamental basis 
for the proof that the other volumes exist, so lucid and exact is the order 
observed in it. The popular magazines, with pardonable excess, have spread 
news of the zoology and topography of Tlön; I think its transparent tigers 
and towers of blood perhaps do not merit the continued attention of all men. 
I shall venture to request a few minutes to expound its concept of the 
universe.
Hume noted for all time that Berkeley's arguments did not admit the 
slightest refutation nor did they cause the slightest conviction. This dictum is 
entirely correct in its application to the earth, but entirely false in Tlön. The 
nations of this planet  are  congenitally idealist.  Their  language and  the 
derivations of their language—religion, letters, metaphysics—all presuppose 
idealism. The world for them is not a concourse of objects in space; it is a 
heterogeneous series of independent acts. It is successive and temporal, not 
spatial. There are no nouns in Tlön's conjectural Ursprache, from which the 
"present" languages and the dialects are derived: there are impersonal verbs, 
modified by monosyllabic suffixes (or prefixes) with an adverbial value. For 
example: there is no word corresponding to the word "moon," but there is a 
verb which in English would be "to moon" or "to moonate." "The moon rose 
above the river" is hlör u fang axaxaxas mlö, or literally: "upward behind 
the on-streaming it mooned."
24

The preceding applies to the languages of the southern hemisphere. In 
those of the northern hemisphere (on whose Ursprache there is very little 
data  in  the  Eleventh  Volume)  the  prime  unit  is  not  the  verb,  but  the 
monosyllabic  adjective.  The  noun  is  formed  by  an  accumulation  of 
adjectives. They do not say "moon," but rather "round airy-light on dark" or 
"pale-orange-of-the-sky" or any other such combination. In the example 
selected the mass of adjectives refers to a real object, but this is purely 
fortuitous.  The  literature  of  this  hemisphere  (like  Meinong's  subsistent 
world) abounds in ideal objects, which are convoked and dissolved in a 
moment, according to poetic needs. At times they are determined by mere 
simultaneity. There are objects composed of two terms, one of visual and 
another of auditory character: the color of the rising sun and the faraway cry 
of a bird. There are objects of many terms: the sun and the water on a 
swimmer's chest, the vague tremulous rose color we see with our eyes 
closed, the sensation of being carried along by a river and also by sleep. 
These second-degree objects can be combined with others; through the use 
of certain abbreviations, the process is practically infinite. There are famous 
poems made up of one enormous word. This word forms a  poetic object 
created by the author. The fact that no one believes in the reality of nouns 
paradoxically causes their number to be unending. The languages of Tlön's 
northern hemisphere contain all the nouns of the Indo-European languages
—and many others as well.
It is no exaggeration to state that the classic culture of Tlön comprises 
only one discipline: psychology. All others are subordinated to it. I have said 
that the men of this planet conceive the universe as a series of mental 
processes which do not develop in space but successively in time. Spinoza 
ascribes to his inexhaustible divinity the attributes of extension and thought; 
no one in Tlön would understand the juxtaposition of the first (which is 
typical only of certain states) and the second—which is a perfect synonym 
of the cosmos. In other words, they do not conceive that the spatial persists 
in time. The perception of a cloud of smoke on the horizon and then of the 
burning field and then of the half-extinguished cigarette that produced the 
blaze is considered an example of association of ideas.
This  monism  or  complete  idealism  invalidates  all  science.  If  we 
explain (or judge) a fact, we connect it with another; such linking, in Tlön, is 
a later state of the subject which cannot affect or illuminate the previous 
state. Every mental state is irreducible: the mere fact of naming it—i.e., of 
25

classifying it—implies a falsification. From which it can be deduced that 
there are no sciences on Tlön, not even reasoning. The paradoxical truth is 
that they do exist, and in almost uncountable number. The same thing 
happens  with  philosophies  as  happens  with  nouns  in  the  northern 
hemisphere. The fact that every philosophy is by definition a dialectical 
game, a Philosophic des Ah Ob, has caused them to multiply. There is an 
abundance of incredible systems of pleasing design or sensational type. The 
metaphysicians of Tlön do not seek for the truth or even for verisimilitude, 
but rather for the astounding. They judge that metaphysics is a branch of 
fantastic literature. They know that a system is nothing more than the 
subordination of all aspects of the universe to any one such aspect. Even the 
phrase "all aspects" is rejectable, for it supposes the impossible addition of 
the present and of all past moments. Neither is it licit to use the plural "past 
moments," since it supposes another impossible operation. . . One of the 
schools of Tlön goes so far as to negate time: it reasons that the present is 
indefinite, that the future has no reality other than as a present hope, that the 
past has no reality other than as a present memory.2 Another school declares 
that all time has already transpired and that our life is only the crepuscular 
and  no  doubt  falsified  and  mutilated  memory  or  reflection  of  an 
irrecoverable process. Another, that the history of the universe—and in it 
our lives and the most tenuous detail of our lives—is the scripture produced 
by a subordinate god in order to communicate with a demon. Another, that 
the  universe is comparable  to  those  cryptographs in  which  not  all the 
symbols are valid and that only what happens every three hundred nights is 
true. Another, that while we sleep here, we are awake elsewhere and that in 
this way every man is two men.
Amongst the doctrines of Tlön, none has merited the scandalous 
reception accorded to materialism. Some thinkers have formulated it with 
less clarity than fervor, as one might put forth a paradox. In order to 
facilitate the comprehension of this inconceivable thesis, a heresiarch of the 
eleventh century3 devised the sophism of the nine copper coins, whose 
scandalous renown is in Tlön equivalent to that of the Eleatic paradoxes. 
2
Russell  (The Analysis of Mind,  1921, page 159) supposes that the planet has been 
created a few minutes ago, furnished with a humanity that "remembers" an illusory 
past.
3
A century, according to the duodecimal system, signifies a period of a hundred and 
forty-four years.
26

There  are  many  versions  of  this  "specious  reasoning,"  which  vary  the 
number of coins and the number of discoveries; the following is the most 
common:
On Tuesday, X crosses a deserted road and loses nine copper coins. On 
Thursday, Y finds in the road four coins, somewhat rusted by Wednesday's 
rain. On Friday, Z discovers three coins in the road. On Friday morning, X 
finds two coins in the corridor of his house. The heresiarch would deduce 
from this story the reality—i.e., the continuity—of the nine coins which 
were recovered. It is absurd (he affirmed) to imagine that four of the coins 
have not existed between Tuesday and Thursday, three between Tuesday 
and Friday afternoon, two between Tuesday and Friday morning. It is 
logical to think that they have existed—at least in some secret way, hidden 
from the comprehension of men—at every moment of those three periods.
The language of Tlön resists the formulation of this paradox; most 
people did not even understand it. The defenders of common sense at first 
did no more than negate the veracity of the anecdote. They repeated that it 
was a verbal fallacy, based on the rash application of two neologisms not 
authorized by usage and alien to all rigorous thought: the verbs "find" and 
"lose," which beg the question, because they presuppose the identity of the 
first and of the last nine coins. They recalled that all nouns (man, coin, 
Thursday,  Wednesday,  rain)  have  only  a  metaphorical  value.  They 
denounced the treacherous circumstance "somewhat rusted by Wednesday's 
rain," which presupposes what is trying to be demonstrated: the persistence 
of the four coins from Tuesday to Thursday. They explained that equality is 
one  thing  and  identity  another,  and  formulated  a  kind  of  reductio  ad 
absurdum: the hypothetical case of nine men who on nine successive nights 
suffer  a  severe  pain.  Would  it  not  be  ridiculous—they  questioned—to 
pretend that this pain is one and the same?4 They said that the heresiarch was 
prompted  only  by  the  blasphemous  intention  of  attributing  the  divine 
category of being to some simple coins and that at times he negated plurality 
and at other times did not. They argued: if equality implies identity, one 
would also have to admit that the nine coins are one.
4
Today, one of the churches of Tlön Platonically maintains that a certain pain, a certain 
greenish tint of yellow, a certain temperature, a certain sound, are the only reality. All 
men, in the vertiginous moment of coitus, are the same man. All men who repeat a 
line from Shakespeare are William Shakespeare.
27

Unbelievably, these refutations were not definitive. A hundred years 
after the problem was stated, a thinker no less brilliant than the heresiarch 
but of orthodox tradition formulated a very daring hypothesis. This happy 
conjecture  affirmed  that  there  is  only  one  subject,  that  this  indivisible 
subject is every being in the universe and that these beings are the organs 
and masks of the divinity. X is Y and is Z. Z discovers three coins because 
he remembers that X lost them; X finds two in the corridor because he 
remembers  that the  others have  been  found.  . .  The  Eleventh Volume 
suggests that three prime reasons determined the complete victory of this 
idealist pantheism. The first, its repudiation of solipsism; the second, the 
possibility of preserving the psychological basis of the sciences; the third, 
the  possibility  of  preserving  the  cult  of  the  gods.  Schopenhauer  (the 
passionate and lucid Schopenhauer) formulates a very similar doctrine in the 
first volume of Parerga und Paralipomena.
The geometry of Tlön comprises two somewhat different disciplines: 
the visual and the tactile. The latter corresponds to our own geometry and is 
subordinated to the first. The basis of visual geometry is the surface, not the 
point. This geometry disregards parallel lines and declares that man in his 
movement  modifies  the  forms  which  surround  him.  The  basis  of  its 
arithmetic  is  the  notion  of  indefinite  numbers.  They  emphasize  the 
importance of the concepts of greater and lesser, which our mathematicians 
symbolize as > and <. They maintain that the operation of counting modifies 
quantities and converts them from indefinite into definite sums. The fact that 
several individuals who count the same quantity should obtain the same 
result is, for the psychologists, an example of association of ideas or of a 
good exercise of memory. We already know that in Tlön the subject of 
knowledge is one and eternal.
In literary practices the idea of a single subject is also all-powerful. It 
is uncommon for books to be signed. The concept of plagiarism does not 
exist: it has been established that all works are the creation of one author, 
who is atemporal and anonymous. The critics often invent authors: they 
select two dissimilar works—the Tao Te Ching and the 1001 Nights, say—
attribute them to the same writer and then determine most scrupulously the 
psychology of this interesting homme de lettres. . .
Their books are also different. Works of fiction contain a single plot, 
with  all  its  imaginable  permutations.  Those  of  a  philosophical  nature 
invariably include both the thesis and the antithesis, the rigorous pro and con 
28

of a doctrine. A book which does not contain its counterbook is considered 
incomplete.
Centuries  and  centuries  of  idealism  have  not  failed  to  influence 
reality. In the most ancient regions of Tlön, the duplication of lost objects is 
not infrequent. Two persons look for a pencil; the first finds it and says 
nothing; the second finds a second pencil, no less real, but closer to his 
expectations. These secondary objects are called  hrönir  and are, though 
awkward in form, somewhat longer. Until recently, the  hrönir  were the 
accidental products of distraction and forgetfulness. It seems unbelievable 
that their methodical production dates back scarcely a hundred years, but 
this  is  what  the  Eleventh  Volume  tells  us.  The  first  efforts  were 
unsuccessful. However, the modus operandi merits description. The director 
of one of the state prisons told his inmates that there were certain tombs in 
an ancient river bed and promised freedom to whoever might make an 
important  discovery.  During  the  months  preceding  the  excavation  the 
inmates were shown photographs of what they were to find. This first effort 
proved that expectation and anxiety can be inhibitory; a week's work with 
pick and shovel did not manage to unearth anything in the way of a hrön 
except a rusty wheel of a period posterior to the experiment. But this was 
kept in secret and the process was repeated later in four schools. In three of 
them the failure was almost complete; in the fourth (whose director died 
accidentally  during  the  first  excavations)  the  students  unearthed—or 
produced—a gold mask, an archaic sword, two or three clay urns and the 
moldy and mutilated torso of a king whose chest bore an inscription which it 
has not yet been possible to decipher. Thus was discovered the unreliability 
of witnesses who knew of the experimental nature of the search. . . Mass 
investigations produce contradictory objects; now individual and almost 
improvised jobs are preferred. The methodical fabrication of  hrönir  (says 
the Eleventh Volume) has performed prodigious services for archaeologists. 
It has made possible the interrogation and even the modification of the past, 
which is now no less plastic and docile than the future. Curiously, the hrönir 
of second and third degree—the  hrönir  derived from another  hrön,  those 
derived from the hrön of a hrön—exaggerate the aberrations of the initial 
one; those of fifth degree are almost uniform; those of ninth degree become 
confused with those of the second; in those of the eleventh there is a purity 
of line not found in the original. The process is cyclical: the hrön of twelfth 
degree begins to fall off in quality. Stranger and more pure than any hrön is, 
29

at times, the ur: the object produced through suggestion, educed by hope. 
The great golden mask I have mentioned is an illustrious example. 
Things become duplicated in Tlön; they also tend to become effaced 
and lose their details when they are forgotten. A classic example is the 
doorway  which  survived  so  long  as  it  was  visited  by  a  beggar  and 
disappeared at his death. At times some birds, a horse, have saved the ruins 
of an amphitheater.
Postscript (1941). I reproduce the preceding article just as it appeared in the 
Anthology of Fantastic Literature (1940), with no omission other than that 
of a few metaphors and a kind of sarcastic summary which now seems 
frivolous. So many things have happened since then. . . I shall do no more 
than recall them here.
In March of 1941 a letter written by Gunnar Erfjord was discovered in 
a book by Hinton which had belonged to Herbert Ashe. The envelope bore a 
cancellation from Ouro Preto; the letter completely elucidated the mystery 
of Tlön. Its text corroborated the hypotheses of Martínez Estrada. One night 
in Lucerne or in London, in the early seventeenth century, the splendid 
history has its beginning. A secret and benevolent society (amongst whose 
members  were  Dalgarno  and  later  George  Berkeley)  arose  to  invent  a 
country. Its vague initial program included "hermetic studies," philanthropy 
and the cabala. From this first period dates the curious book by Andrea. 
After a few years of  secret  conclaves  and  premature  syntheses  it  was 
understood that one generation was not sufficient to give articulate form to a 
country. They resolved that each of the masters should elect a disciple who 
would continue his work. This hereditary arrangement prevailed; after an 
interval  of  two  centuries  the  persecuted  fraternity  sprang  up  again  in 
America. In 1824, in Memphis (Tennessee), one of its affiliates conferred 
with the ascetic millionaire Ezra Buckley. The latter, somewhat disdainfully, 
let him speak—and laughed at the plan's modest scope. He told the agent 
that in America it was absurd to invent a country and proposed the invention 
of  a  planet.  To  this  gigantic  idea  he  added  another,  a  product  of  his 
nihilism:5 that of keeping the enormous enterprise secret. At that time the 
twenty volumes of the  Encyclopaedia Britannica  were circulating in the 
United States; Buckley suggested that a methodical encyclopedia of the 
5
Buckley was a freethinker, a fatalist and a defender of slavery.
30

imaginary planet be written. He was to leave them his mountains of gold, his 
navigable  rivers,  his  pasture  lands  roamed  by  cattle  and  buffalo,  his 
Negroes, his brothels and his dollars, on one condition: "The work will make 
no pact with the impostor Jesus Christ." Buckley did not believe in God, but 
he wanted to demonstrate to this nonexistent God that mortal man was 
capable of conceiving a world. Buckley was poisoned in Baton Rouge in 
1828; in 1914 the society delivered to its collaborators, some three hundred 
in number, the last volume of the First Encyclopedia of Tlön. The edition 
was a secret one; its forty volumes (the vastest undertaking ever carried out 
by man) would be the basis for another more detailed edition, written not in 
English but in one of the languages of Tlön. This revision of an illusory 
world,  was  called,  provisionally,  Orbis  Tertius  and  one  of  its  modest 
demiurgi was Herbert Ashe, whether as an agent of Gunnar Erfjord or as an 
affiliate, I do not know. His having received a copy of the Eleventh Volume 
would seem to favor the latter assumption. But what about the others?
In 1942 events became more intense. I recall one of the first of these 
with particular clarity and it seems that I perceived then something of its 
premonitory character. It happened in an apartment on Laprida Street, facing 
a high and light balcony which looked out toward the sunset. Princess 
Faucigny Lucinge had received her silverware from Poitiers. From the vast 
depths of a box embellished with foreign stamps, delicate immobile objects 
emerged: silver from Utrecht and Paris covered with hard heraldic fauna, 
and a samovar. Amongest them—with the perceptible and tenuous tremor of 
a sleeping bird—a compass vibrated mysteriously. The Princess did not 
recognize it. Its blue needle longed for magnetic north; its metal case was 
concave in shape; the letters around its edge corresponded to one of the 
alphabets of Tlön. Such was the first intrusion of this fantastic world into the 
world of reality.
I am still troubled by a stroke of chance which made me the witness 
of the second intrusion as well. It happened some months later, at a country 
store owned by a Brazilian in Cuchilla Negra. Amorim and I were returning 
from Sant' Anna. The River Tacuarembó had flooded and we were obliged 
to sample (and endure) the proprietor's rudimentary hospitality. He provided 
us with some creaking cots in a large room cluttered with barrels and hides. 
We went to bed, but were kept from sleeping until dawn by the drunken 
ravings of an unseen neighbor, who intermingled inextricable insults with 
snatches of  milongas—or rather with snatches of the same  milonga.  As 
31

might be supposed, we attributed this insistent uproar to the store owner's 
fiery cane liquor. By daybreak, the man was dead in the hallway. The 
roughness of his voice had deceived us: he was only a youth. In his delirium 
a few coins had fallen from his belt, along with a cone of bright metal, the 
size of a die. In vain a boy tried to pick up this cone. A man was scarely able 
to raise it from the ground. I held it in my hand for a few minutes; I 
remember that its weight was intolerable and that after it was removed, the 
feeling of oppressiveness remained. I also remember the exact circle it 
pressed into my palm. This sensation of a very small and at the same time 
extremely heavy object produced a disagreeable impression of repugnance 
and fear. One of the local men suggested we throw it into the swollen river; 
Amorim acquired it for a few pesos. No one knew anything about the dead 
man, except that "he came from the border." These small, very heavy cones 
(made from a metal which is not of this world) are images of the divinity in 
certain regions of Tlön.
Here I bring the personal part of my narrative to a close. The rest is in 
the memory (if not in the hopes or fears) of all my readers. Let it suffice for 
me to recall or mention the following facts, with a mere brevity of words 
which the reflective recollection of all will enrich or amplify. Around 1944, 
a person doing research for the newspaper  The American  (of Nashville, 
Tennessee) brought to light in a Memphis library the forty volumes of the 
First Encyclopedia of Tlön. Even today there is a controversy over whether 
this discovery was accidental or whether it was permitted by the directors of 
the still nebulous  Orbis Tertius.  The latter is most likely. Some of the 
incredible aspects of the Eleventh Volume (for example, the multiplication 
of the hrönir) have been eliminated or attenuated in the Memphis copies; it 
is reasonable to imagine that these omissions follow the plan of exhibiting a 
world which is not too incompatible with the real world. The dissemination 
of  objects  from  Tlön  over  different  countries  would  complement  this 
plan. . .6 The fact is that the international press infinitely proclaimed the 
"find." Manuals, anthologies,  summaries,  literal versions,  authorized  re-
editions and pirated editions of the Greatest Work of Man flooded and still 
flood the earth. Almost immediately, reality yielded on more than one 
account. The truth is that it longed to yield. Ten years ago any symmetry 
with a semblance of order—dialectical materialism, anti-Semitism, Nazism
6
There remains, of course, the problem of the material of some objects.
32

—was sufficient to entrance the minds of men. How could one do other than 
submit to Tlön, to the minute and vast evidence of an orderly planet? It is 
useless to answer that reality is also orderly. Perhaps it is, but in accordance 
with divine laws—I translate: inhuman laws—which we never quite grasp. 
Tlön is surely a labyrinth, but it is a labyrinth devised by men, a labyrinth 
destined to be deciphered by men. 
The contact and the  habit of Tlön have disintegrated  this world. 
Enchanted by its rigor, humanity forgets over and again that it is a rigor of 
chess masters, not of angels. Already the schools have been invaded by the 
(conjectural)  "primitive  language"  of  Tlön;  already  the  teaching  of  its 
harmonious history (filled with moving episodes) has wiped out the one 
which governed in my childhood; already a fictitious past occupies in our 
memories the place of another, a past of which we know nothing with 
certainty—not  even  that  it  is false.  Numismatology,  pharmacology  and 
archaeology have been reformed. I understand that biology and mathematics 
also await their avatars. . . A scattered dynasty of solitary men has changed 
the face of the world. Their task continues. If our forecasts are not in error, a 
hundred years from now someone will discover the hundred volumes of the 
Second Encyclopedia of Tlön.
Then English and French and mere Spanish will disappear from the 
globe. The world will be Tlön. I pay no attention to all this and go on 
revising, in the still days at the Adrogué hotel, an uncertain Quevedian 
translation (which I do not intend to publish) of Browne's Urn Burial.
Translated by J.E.I.
33

The Garden of Forking Paths
n page 22 of Liddell Hart's History of World War I you will read that 
an attack against the Serre-Montauban line by thirteen British divisions 
(supported by 1,400 artillery pieces), planned for the 24th of July, 1916, had 
to be postponed until the morning of the 29th. The torrential rains, Captain 
Liddell Hart comments, caused this delay, an insignificant one, to be sure.
O
The following statement, dictated, reread and signed by Dr. Yu Tsun, 
former  professor  of  English  at  the  Hochschule  at  Tsingtao,  throws  an 
unsuspected light over the whole affair. The first two pages of the document 
are missing.
". . . and I hung up the receiver. Immediately afterwards, I recognized 
the voice that had answered in German. It was that of Captain Richard 
Madden. Madden's presence in Viktor Runeberg's apartment meant the end 
of  our  anxieties  and—but  this  seemed,  or  should  have  seemed,  very 
secondary to me—also the end of our lives. It meant that Runeberg had been 
arrested or murdered.7 Before the sun set on that day, I would encounter the 
same fate. Madden was implacable. Or rather, he was obliged to be so. An 
Irishman at the service of England, a man accused of laxity and perhaps of 
treason, how could he fail to seize and be thankful for such a miraculous 
opportunity: the discovery capture, maybe even the death of two agents of 
the German Reich? I went up to my room; absurdly I locked the door and 
threw myself on my back on the narrow iron cot. Through the window I saw 
the familiar roofs and the cloud-shaded six o'clock sun. It seemed incredible 
to me that that day without premonitions or symbols should be the one of my 
inexorable death. In spite of my dead father, in spite of having been a child 
in a symmetrical garden of Hai Feng, was I—now—going to die? Then I 
reflected  that  everything  happens  to  a  man  precisely,  precisely  now. 
Centuries of centuries and only in the present do things happen; countless 
men in the air, on the face of the earth and the sea, and all that really is 
happening is happening to me. . . The almost intolerable recollection of 
Madden's horselike face banished these wanderings. In the midst of my 
7
An hypothesis both hateful and odd. The Prussian spy Hans Rabener, alias Viktor 
Runeberg, attacked with drawn automatic the bearer of the warrant for his arrest, 
Captain  Richard  Madden.  The  latter,  in self-defense, inflicted  the wound which 
brought about Runeberg's death. (Editor's note.)
34

hatred and terror (it means nothing to me now to speak of terror now that I 
have mocked Richard Madden, now that my throat yearns for the noose) it 
occurred to me that that tumultuous and doubtless happy warrior did not 
suspect that I possessed the Secret. The name of the exact location of the 
new British artillery park on the River Ancre. A bird streaked across the 
gray sky and blindly I translated it into an airplane and that airplane into 
many (against the French sky) annihilating the artillery station with vertical 
bombs. If only my mouth, before a bullet shattered it, could cry out that 
secret name so it could be heard in Germany. . . My human voice was very 
weak. How might I make it carry to the ear of the Chief? To the ear of that 
sick and hateful man who knew nothing of Runeberg and me save that we 
were in Staffordshire and who was waiting in vain for our report in his arid 
office in Berlin, endlessly examining newspapers. . . I said out loud: I must 
flee.  I sat up noiselessly, in a useless perfection of silence, as if Madden 
were already lying in wait for me. Something—perhaps the mere vain 
ostentation of proving my resources were nil—made me look through my 
pockets. I found what I knew I would find. The American watch, the nickel 
chain and the square coin, the key ring with the incriminating useless keys to 
Runeberg's apartment, the notebook, a letter which I resolved to destroy 
immediately (and which I did not destroy), a crown, two shillings and a few 
pence, the red and blue pencil, the handkerchief, the revolver with one 
bullet. Absurdly, I took it in my hand and weighed it in order to inspire 
courage within myself. Vaguely I thought that a pistol report can be heard at 
a great distance. In ten minutes my plan was perfected. The telephone book 
listed the name of the only person capable of transmitting the message; he 
lived in a suburb of Fenton, less than a half hour's train ride away.
I am a cowardly man. I say it now, now that I have carried to its end a 
plan whose perilous nature no one can deny. I know its execution was 
terrible. I didn't do it for Germany, no. I care nothing for a barbarous 
country which imposed upon me the abjection of being a spy. Besides, I 
know of a man from England—a modest man—who for me is no less great 
than Goethe. I talked with him for scarcely an hour, but during that hour he 
was Goethe. . . I did it because I sensed that the Chief somehow feared 
people of my race—for the innumerable ancestors who merge within me. I 
wanted to prove to him that a yellow man could save his armies. Besides, I 
had to flee from Captain Madden, His hands and his voice could call at my 
door at any moment. I dressed silently, bade farewell to myself in the mirror, 
35

went downstairs, scrutinized the peaceful street and went out. The station 
was not far from my home, but I judged it wise to take a cab. I argued that in 
this way I ran less risk of being recognized; the fact is that in the deserted 
street I felt myself visible and vulnerable, infinitely so. I remember that I 
told the cab driver to stop a short distance before the main entrance. I got out 
with voluntary, almost painful slowness;  I was going to the village of 
Ashgrove but I bought a ticket for a more distant station. The train left 
within a very few minutes, at eight-fifty. I hurried; the next one would leave 
at nine-thirty. There was hardly a soul on the platform. I went through the 
coaches; I remember a few farmers, a woman dressed in mourning, a young 
boy who was reading with fervor the  Annals  of Tacitus, a wounded and 
happy  soldier.  The  coaches  jerked  forward  at  last.  A  man  whom  I 
recognized ran in vain to the end of the platform. It was Captain Richard 
Madden. Shattered, trembling, I shrank into the far corner of the seat, away 
from the dreaded window.
From this broken state I passed into an almost abject felicity. I told 
myself that the duel had already begun and that I had won the first encounter 
by frustrating, even if for forty minutes, even if by a stroke of fate, the attack 
of my adversary. I argued that this slightest of victories foreshadowed a total 
victory. I argued (no less fallaciously) that my cowardly felicity proved that 
I was a man capable of carrying out the adventure successfully. From this 
weakness I took strength that did not abandon me. I foresee that man will 
resign himself each day to more atrocious undertakings; soon there will be 
no one but warriors and brigands; I give them this counsel: The author of an 
atrocious undertaking ought to imagine that he has already accomplished it, 
ought to impose upon himself a future as irrevocable as the past.  Thus I 
proceeded as my eyes of a man already dead registered the elapsing of that 
day, which was perhaps the last, and the diffusion of the night. The train ran 
gently along, amid ash trees. It stopped, almost in the middle of the fields. 
No one announced the name of the station. "Ashgrove?" I asked a few lads 
on the platform. "Ashgrove," they replied. I got off.
A lamp enlightened the platform but the faces of the boys were in 
shadow. One questioned me, "Are you going to Dr. Stephen Albert's house?" 
Without waiting for my answer, another said, "The house is a long way from 
here, but you won't get lost if you take this road to the left and at every 
crossroads turn again to your left." I tossed them a coin (my last), descended 
a few stone steps and started down the solitary road. It went downhill, 
36

slowly. It was of elemental earth; overhead the banches were tangled; the 
low, full moon seemed to accompany me.
For an instant, I thought that Richard Madden in some way had 
penetrated my desperate plan. Very quickly, I understood that that was 
impossible. The instructions to turn always to the left reminded me that such 
was the common procedure for discovering the central point of certain 
labyrinths. I have some understanding of labyrinths: not for nothing am I the 
great grandson of that Ts'ui Pên who was governor of Yunnan and who 
renounced worldly power in order to write a novel that might be even more 
populous than the Hung Lu Meng and to construct a labyrinth in which all 
men would become lost. Thirteen years he dedicated to these heterogeneous 
tasks,  but  the  hand  of  a  stranger  murdered  him—and  his  novel  was 
incoherent and no one found the labyrinth. Beneath English trees I meditated 
on that lost maze: I imagined it inviolate and perfect at the secret crest of a 
mountain;  I  imagined  it  erased  by  rice  fields  or  beneath  the  water;  I 
imagined it infinite, no longer composed of octagonal kiosks and returning 
paths, but of rivers and provinces and kingdoms. . . I thought of a labyrinth 
of labyrinths, of one sinuous spreading labyrinth that would encompass the 
past and the future and in some way involve the stars. Absorbed in these 
illusory images, I forgot my destiny of one pursued. I felt myself to be, for 
an unknown period of time, an abstract perceiver of the world. The vague, 
living countryside, the moon, the remains of the day worked on me, as well 
as the slope of the road which eliminated any possibility of weariness. The 
afternoon was intimate, infinite. The road descended and forked among the 
now confused meadows. A high-pitched, almost syllabic music approached 
and receded in the shifting of the wind, dimmed by leaves and distance. I 
thought that a man can be an enemy of other men, of the moments of other 
men, but not of a country: not of fireflies, words, gardens, streams of water, 
sunsets. Thus I arrived before a tall, rusty gate. Between the iron bars I made 
out a poplar grove and a pavilion. I understood suddenly two things, the first 
trivial, the second almost unbelievable: the music came from the pavilion, 
and the music was Chinese. For precisely that reason I had openly accepted 
it without paying it any heed. I do not remember whether there was a bell or 
whether I knocked with my hand. The sparkling of the music continued.
From the rear of the house within a lantern approached: a lantern that 
the trees sometimes striped and sometimes eclipsed, a paper lantern that had 
the form of a drum and the color of the moon. A tall man bore it. I didn't see 
37

his face for the light blinded me. He opened the door and said slowly, in my 
own language: "I see that the pious Hsi P'êng persists in correcting my 
solitude. You no doubt wish to see the garden?"
I  recognized  the  name  of  one  of  our  consuls  and  I  replied, 
disconcerted, "The garden?"
"The garden of forking paths."
Something stirred in my memory and I uttered with incomprehensible 
certainty, "The garden of my ancestor Ts'ui Pên." 
"Your ancestor? Your illustrious ancestor? Come in." 
The damp path zigzagged like those of my childhood. We came to a 
library of Eastern and Western books. I recognized bound in yellow silk 
several volumes of the Lost Encyclopedia, edited by the Third Emperor of 
the Luminous Dynasty but never printed. The record on the phonograph 
revolved next to a bronze phoenix. I also recall a  famille rose  vase and 
another, many centuries older, of that shade of blue which our craftsmen 
copied from the potters of Persia. . .
Stephen Albert observed me with a smile. He was, as I have said, very 
tall, sharp-featured, with gray eyes and a gray beard. He told me that he had 
been a missionary in Tientsin "before aspiring to become a Sinologist."
We sat down—I on a long, low divan, he with his back to the window 
and a tall circular clock. I calculated that my pursuer, Richard Madden, 
could not arrive for at least an hour. My irrevocable determination could 
wait.
"An  astounding  fate,  that  of  Ts'ui  Pên,"  Stephen  Albert  said. 
"Governor of his native province, learned in astronomy, in astrology and in 
the tireless interpretation of the canonical books, chess player, famous poet 
and calligrapher—he abandoned all this in order to compose a book and a 
maze.  He  renounced  the  pleasures  of  both  tyranny  and  justice,  of  his 
populous couch, of his banquets and even of erudition—all to close himself 
up for thirteen years in the Pavilion of the Limpid Solitude. When he died, 
his heirs found nothing save chaotic manuscripts. His family, as you may be 
aware, wished to condemn them to the fire; but his executor—a Taoist or 
Buddhist monk—insisted on their publication."
"We descendants of Ts'ui Pên," I replied, "continue to curse that 
monk. Their publication was senseless. The book is an indeterminate heap of 
contradictory drafts. I examined it once: in the third chapter the hero dies, in 
the  fourth  he  is  alive.  As  for  the  other  undertaking  of  Ts'ui  Pên,  his 
38

labyrinth. . ."
"Here is Ts'ui Pên's labyrinth," he said, indicating a tall lacquered 
desk.
"An ivory labyrinth!" I exclaimed. "A minimum labyrinth."
"A labyrinth of symbols," he corrected. "An invisible labyrinth of 
time. To me, a barbarous Englishman, has been entrusted the revelation of 
this diaphanous mystery. After more than a hundred years, the details are 
irretrievable; but it is not hard to conjecture what happened. Ts'ui Pên must 
have said once: I am withdrawing to write a book. And another time: I am 
withdrawing to construct a labyrinth. Every one imagined two works; to no 
one did it occur that the book and the maze were one and the same thing. 
The Pavilion of the Limpid Solitude stood in the center of a garden that was 
perhaps intricate; that circumstance could have suggested to the heirs a 
physical labyrinth. Hs'ui Pen died; no one in the vast territories that were his 
came upon the labyrinth; the confusion of the novel suggested to me that it 
was the maze. Two circumstances gave me the correct solution of the 
problem. One: the curious legend that Ts'ui Pên had planned to create a 
labyrinth which would be strictly infinite. The other: a fragment of a letter I 
discovered."
Albert rose. He turned his back on me for a moment; he opened a 
drawer of the black and gold desk. He faced me and in his hands he held a 
sheet of paper that had once been crimson, but was now pink and tenuous 
and cross-sectioned. The fame of Ts'ui Pên as a calligrapher had been justly 
won. I read, uncomprehendingly and with fervor, these words written with a 
minute brush by a man of my blood: I leave to the various futures (not to 
all) my garden of forking paths.  Wordlessly, I returned the sheet. Albert 
continued:
"Before unearthing this letter, I had questioned myself about the ways 
in which a book can be infinite. I could think of nothing other than a cyclic 
volume, a circular one. A book whose last page was identical with the first, a 
book which had the possibility of continuing indefinitely. I remembered too 
that night which is at the middle of the Thousand and One Nights when 
Scheherazade (through a magical oversight of the copyist) begins to relate 
word for word the story of the Thousand and One Nights, establishing the 
risk of coming once again to the night when she must repeat it, and thus on 
to infinity. I imagined as well a Platonic, hereditary work, transmitted from 
father to son, in which each new individual adds a chapter or corrects with 
39

pious care the pages of his elders. These conjectures diverted me; but none 
seemed to correspond, not even remotely, to the contradictory chapters of 
Ts'ui Pên. In the midst of this perplexity,  I received from Oxford the 
manuscript you have examined. I lingered, naturally, on the sentence:  I 
leave to the various futures (not to all) my garden of forking paths. Almost 
instantly, I understood: 'the garden of forking paths' was the chaotic novel; 
the phrase 'the various futures (not to all)' suggested to me the forking in 
time, not in space. A broad rereading of the work confirmed the theory. In 
all fictional works, each time a man is confronted with several alternatives, 
he chooses one and eliminates the others; in the fiction of Ts'ui Pên, he 
chooses—simultaneously—all  of them.  He creates,  in this way, diverse 
futures, diverse times which themselves also proliferate and fork. Here, then, 
is the explanation of the novel's contradictions. Fang, let us say, has a secret; 
a stranger calls at his door; Fang resolves to kill him. Naturally, there are 
several possible outcomes: Fang can kill the intruder, the intruder can kill 
Fang, they both can escape, they both can die, and so forth. In the work of 
Ts'ui Pên, all possible outcomes occur; each one is the point of departure for 
other forkings. Sometimes, the paths of this labyrinth converge: for example, 
you arrive at this house, but in one of the possible pasts you are my enemy, 
in  another,  my  friend.  If  you  will  resign  yourself  to  my  incurable 
pronunciation, we shall read a few pages."
His face, within the vivid circle of the lamplight, was unquestionably 
that of an old man, but with something unalterable about it, even immortal. 
He read with slow precision two versions of the same epic chapter. In the 
first, an army marches to a battle across a lonely mountain; the horror of the 
rocks and shadows makes the men undervalue their lives and they gain an 
easy victory. In the second, the same army traverses a palace where a great 
festival is taking place; the resplendent battle seems to them a continuation 
of the celebration and they win the victory. I listened with proper veneration 
to these ancient narratives, perhaps less admirable in themselves than the 
fact that they had been created by my blood and were being restored to me 
by a man of a remote empire, in the course of a desperate adventure, on a 
Western isle. I remember the last words, repeated in each version like a 
secret  commandment:  Thus fought  the heroes,  tranquil their admirable 
hearts, violent their swords, resigned to kill and to die.
From that moment on, I felt about me and within my dark body an 
invisible, intangible swarming. Not the swarming of the divergent, parallel 
40

and  finally  coalescent  armies,  but  a  more  inaccessible,  more  intimate 
agitation that they in some manner prefigured. Stephen Albert continued:
"I don't believe that your illustrious ancestor played idly with these 
variations. I don't consider it credible that he would sacrifice thirteen years 
to the infinite execution of a rhetorical experiment. In your country, the 
novel  is  a  subsidiary  form  of  literature;  in  Ts'ui  Pên's  time  it  was  a 
despicable form. Ts'ui Pên was a brilliant novelist, but he was also a man of 
letters  who  doubtless  did  not  consider  himself  a  mere  novelist.  The 
testimony of his contemporaries proclaims—and his life fully confirms—his 
metaphysical and mystical interests. Philosophic controversy usurps a good 
part of the novel. I know that of all problems, none disturbed him so greatly 
nor worked upon him so much as the abysmal problem of time. Now then, 
the latter is the only problem that does not figure in the pages of the Garden. 
He does not even use the word that signifies time. How do you explain this 
voluntary omission?"
I proposed several solutions—all unsatisfactory. We discussed them. 
Finally, Stephen Albert said to me:
"In a riddle whose answer is chess, what is the only prohibited word?"
I thought a moment and replied, "The word chess."
"Precisely,"  said  Albert.  "The  Garden  of  Forking  Paths  is  an 
enormous riddle, or parable, whose theme is time; this recondite cause 
prohibits its mention. To omit a word always, to resort to inept metaphors 
and obvious periphrases, is perhaps the most emphatic way of stressing it. 
That is the tortuous method preferred, in each of the meanderings of his 
indefatigable novel, by the oblique Ts'ui Pên. I have compared hundreds of 
manuscripts, I have corrected the errors that the negligence of the copyists 
has introduced, I have guessed the plan of this chaos, I have re-established—
I  believe  I  have  re-established—the  primordial  organization,  I  have 
translated the entire work: it is clear to me that not once does he employ the 
word 'time.' The explanation is obvious: The Garden of Forking Paths is an 
incomplete, but not false, image of the universe as Ts'ui Pên conceived it. In 
contrast to Newton and Schopenhauer, your ancestor did not believe in a 
uniform, absolute time. He believed in an infinite series of times, in a 
growing, dizzying net of divergent, convergent and parallel times. This 
network of times which approached one another, forked, broke off, or were 
unaware of one another for centuries, embraces all possibilities of time. We 
do not exist in the majority of these times; in some you exist, and not I; in 
41

others I, and not you; in others, both of us. In the present one, which a 
favorable fate has granted me, you have arrived at my house; in another, 
while crossing the garden, you found me dead; in still another, I utter these 
same words, but I am a mistake, a ghost."
"In every one," I pronounced, not without a tremble to my voice, "I 
am grateful to you and revere you for your re-creation of the garden of Ts'ui 
Pên."
"Not in all," he murmured with a smile. "Time forks perpetually 
toward innumerable futures. In one of them I am your enemy."
Once again I felt the swarming sensation of which I have spoken. It 
seemed to me that the humid garden that surrounded the house was infinitely 
saturated with invisible persons. Those persons were Albert and I, secret, 
busy and multiform in other dimensions of time. I raised my eyes and the 
tenuous nightmare dissolved. In the yellow and black garden there was only 
one man; but this man was as strong as a statue. . . this man was approaching 
along the path and he was Captain Richard Madden.
"The future already exists," I replied, "but I am your friend. Could I 
see the letter again?"
Albert rose. Standing tall, he opened the drawer of the tall desk; for 
the moment his back was to me. I had readied the revolver. I fired with 
extreme caution. Albert fell uncomplainingly, immediately. I swear his death 
was instantaneous—a lightning stroke.
The rest is unreal, insignificant. Madden broke in, arrested me. I have 
been  condemned  to  the  gallows.  I  have  won  out  abominably;  I  have 
communicated to Berlin the secret name of the city they must attack. They 
bombed it yesterday; I read it in the same papers that offered to England the 
mystery of the learned Sinologist Stephen Albert who was murdered by a 
stranger, one Yu Tsun. The Chief had deciphered this mystery. He knew my 
problem was to indicate (through the uproar of the war) the city called 
Albert, and that I had found no other means to do so than to kill a man of 
that name. He does not know (no one can know) my innumerable contrition 
and weariness.
For Victoria Ocampo
Translated by D.A.Y.
42

The Lottery in Babylon
ike all men in Babylon, I have been proconsul; like all, a slave. I have 
also known omnipotence, opprobrium, imprisonment. Look: the index 
finger on my right hand is missing. Look: through the rip in my cape you 
can see a vermilion tattoo on my stomach. It is the second symbol, Beth. 
This letter, on nights when the moon is full, gives me power over men 
whose mark is Gimmel, but it subordinates me to the men of Aleph, who on 
moonless nights owe obedience to those marked with Gimmel. In the half 
light of dawn, in a cellar, I have cut the jugular vein of sacred bulls before a 
black stone. During a lunar year I have been declared invisible. I shouted 
and they did not answer me; I stole bread and they did not behead me. I have 
known what the Greeks do not know, incertitude. In a bronze chamber, 
before the silent handkerchief of the strangler, hope has been faithful to me, 
as  has  panic  in  the  river  of  pleasure.  Heraclides  Ponticus  tells  with 
amazement that Pythagoras remembered having been Pyrrhus and before 
that Euphorbus and before that some other mortal. In order to remember 
similar vicissitudes I do not need to have recourse to death or even to 
deception. I owe this almost atrocious variety to an institution which other 
republics do not know or which operates in them in an imperfect and secret 
manner: the lottery. I have not looked into its history; I know that the wise 
men cannot agree. I know of its powerful purposes what a man who is not 
versed in astrology can know about the moon. I come from a dizzy land 
where the lottery is the basis of reality. Until today I have thought as little 
about it as I have about the conduct of indecipherable divinities or about my 
heart. Now, far from Babylon and its beloved customs, I think with a certain 
amount  of  amazement  about  the  lottery  and  about  the  blasphemous 
conjectures which veiled men murmur in the twilight.
L
My father used to say that formerly—a matter of centuries, of years?
—the lottery in Babylon was a game of plebeian character. He recounted (I 
don't know whether rightly) that barbers sold, in exchange for copper coins, 
squares of bone or of parchment adorned with symbols. In broad daylight a 
drawing took place. Those who won received silver coins without any other 
test of luck. The system was elementary, as you can see.
Naturally these "lotteries" failed. Their moral virtue was nil. They 
were not directed at all of man's faculties, but only at hope. In the face of 
43

public indifference, the merchants who founded these venal lotteries began 
to  lose  money.  Someone  tried  a  reform:  The  interpolation  of  a  few 
unfavorable tickets in the list of favorable  numbers.  By means of this 
reform, the buyers of numbered squares ran the double risk of winning a 
sum and of paying a fine that could be considerable. This slight danger (for 
every thirty favorable numbers there was one unlucky one) awoke, as is 
natural, the interest of the public. The Babylonians threw themselves into the 
game. Those who did not acquire chances were considered pusillanimous, 
cowardly. In time, that justified disdain was doubled. Those who did not 
play were scorned, but also the losers who paid the fine were scorned. The 
Company (as it came to be known then) had to take care of the winners, who 
could not cash in their prizes if almost the total amount of the fines was 
unpaid. It started a lawsuit against the losers. The judge condemned them to 
pay the original fine and costs or spend several days in jail. All chose jail in 
order to defraud the Company. The bravado of a few is the source of the 
omnipotence of the Company and of its metaphysical and ecclesiastical 
power.
A little while afterward the lottery lists omitted the amounts of fines 
and limited themselves to publishing the days of imprisonment that each 
unfavorable number indicated. That laconic spirit, almost unnoticed at the 
time, was of capital importance. It was the first appearance in the lottery of 
non-monetary  elements.  The  success  was  tremendous.  Urged  by  the 
clientele, the Company was obliged to increase the unfavorable numbers.
Everyone knows that the people of Babylon are fond of logic and even 
of symmetry. It was illogical for the lucky numbers to be computed in round 
coins and the unlucky ones in days and nights of imprisonment. Some 
moralists reasoned that the possession of money does not always determine 
happiness and that other forms of happiness are perhaps more direct.
Another  concern  swept  the  quarters  of  the  poorer  classes.  The 
members of the college of priests multiplied their stakes and enjoyed all the 
vicissitudes of terror and hope; the poor (with reasonable or unavoidable 
envy) knew that they were excluded from that notoriously delicious rhythm. 
The just desire that all, rich and poor, should participate equally in the 
lottery, inspired an indignant agitation, the memory of which the years have 
not erased. Some obstinate people did not understand (or pretended not to 
understand) that it was a question of a new order, of a necessary historical 
stage. A slave stole a crimson ticket, which in the drawing credited him with 
44

the burning of his tongue. The legal code fixed that same penalty for the one 
who stole a ticket. Some Babylonians argued that he deserved the burning 
irons in his status of a thief; others, generously, that the executioner should 
apply it to him because chance had determined it that way. There were 
disturbances, there were lamentable drawings of blood, but the masses of 
Babylon finally imposed their will against the opposition of the rich. The 
people achieved amply its generous purposes. In the first place, it caused the 
Company to accept total power. (That unification was necessary, given the 
vastness and complexity of the new operations.) In the second place, it made 
the lottery secret, free and general. The mercenary sale of chances was 
abolished.  Once  initiated  in  the  mysteries  of  Baal,  every  free  man 
automatically participated in the sacred drawings, which took place in the 
labyrinths of the god every sixty nights and which determined his destiny 
until the next drawing. The consequences were incalculable. A fortunate 
play could bring about his promotion to the council of wise men or the 
imprisonment of an enemy (public or private) or finding, in the peaceful 
darkness of his room, the woman who begins to excite him and whom he 
never expected to see again. A bad play: mutilation, different kinds of 
infamy,  death.  At  times  one  single  fact—the  vulgar  murder  of  C,  the 
mysterious  apotheosis  of  B—was the  happy  solution  of  thirty  or  forty 
drawings. To combine the plays was difficult, but one must remember that 
the individuals of the Company were (and are) omnipotent and astute. In 
many cases the knowledge that certain happinesses were the simple product 
of chance would have diminished their virtue. To avoid that obstacle, the 
agents of the Company made use of the power of suggestion and magic. 
Their steps, their maneuverings, were secret. To find out about the intimate 
hopes and terrors of each individual, they had astrologists and spies. There 
were certain stone lions, there was a sacred latrine called Qaphqa, there were 
fissures in a dusty aqueduct which, according to general opinion, led to the 
Company; malignant or benevolent persons deposited information in these 
places. An alphabetical file collected these items of varying truthfulness.
Incredibly,  there  were  complaints.  The  Company,  with  its  usual 
discretion, did not answer directly. It preferred to scrawl in the rubbish of a 
mask factory a brief statement which now figures in the sacred scriptures. 
This doctrinal item observed that the lottery is an interpolation of chance in 
the order of the world and that to accept errors is not to contradict chance: it 
is to corroborate it. It likewise observed that those lions and that sacred 
45

receptacle, although not disavowed by the Company (which did not abandon 
the right to consult them), functioned without official guarantee.
This declaration pacified the public's restlessness. It also produced 
other effects, perhaps unforeseen by its writer. It deeply modified the spirit 
and the operations of the Company. I don't have much time left; they tell us 
that the ship is about to weigh anchor. But I shall try to explain it.
However unlikely it might seem, no one had tried out before then a 
general theory of chance. Babylonians are not very speculative. They revere 
the judgments of fate, they deliver to them their lives, their hopes, their 
panic, but it does not occur to them to investigate fate's labyrinthine laws nor 
the gyratory spheres which reveal it. Nevertheless, the unofficial declaration 
that I have mentioned inspired many discussions of judicial-mathematical 
character. From some one of them the following conjecture was born: If the 
lottery is an intensification of chance, a periodical infusion of chaos in the 
cosmos, would it not be right for chance to intervene in all stages of the 
drawing and not in one alone? Is it not ridiculous for chance to dictate 
someone's  death  and  have  the  circumstances  of  that  death—secrecy, 
publicity, the fixed time of an hour or a century—not subject to chance? 
These  just  scruples  finally  caused  a  considerable  reform,  whose 
complexities  (aggravated  by  centuries'  practice)  only  a  few  specialists 
understand, but which I shall try to summarize, at least in a symbolic way.
Let us imagine a first drawing, which decrees the death of a man. For 
its fulfillment one proceeds to another drawing, which proposes (let us say) 
nine possible executors. Of these executors, four can initiate a third drawing 
which will tell the name of the executioner, two can replace the adverse 
order with a fortunate one (finding a treasure, let us say), another will 
intensify the death penalty (that is, will make it infamous or enrich it with 
tortures), others can refuse to fulfill it. This is the symbolic scheme. In 
reality  the number of drawings is infinite. No decision is final, all branch 
into others. Ignorant people suppose that infinite drawings require an infinite 
time; actually it is sufficient for time to be infinitely subdivisible, as the 
famous  parable  of  the  contest  with  the  tortoise  teaches.  This  infinity 
harmonizes admirably with the sinuous numbers of Chance and with the 
Celestial Archetype of the Lottery, which the Platonists adore. Some warped 
echo of our rites seems to have resounded on the Tiber: Ellus Lampridius, in 
the Life of Antoninus Heliogabalus, tells that this emperor wrote on shells 
the lots that were destined for his guests, so that one received ten pounds of 
46

gold and another ten flies, ten dormice, ten bears. It is permissible to recall 
that Heliogabalus was brought up in Asia Minor, among the priests of the 
eponymous god.
There are also impersonal drawings, with an indefinite purpose. One 
decrees that a sapphire of Taprobana be thrown into the waters of the 
Euphrates; another, that a bird be released from the roof of a tower; another, 
that each century there be withdrawn (or added) a grain of sand from the 
innumerable ones on the beach. The consequences are, at times, terrible.
Under the beneficent influence of the Company, our customs are 
saturated with chance. The buyer of a dozen amphoras of Damascene wine 
will not be surprised if one of them contains a talisman or a snake. The 
scribe who writes a contract almost never fails to introduce some erroneous 
information. I myself, in this hasty declaration, have falsified some splendor, 
some atrocity. Perhaps, also, some mysterious monotony. . . Our historians, 
who are the most penetrating on the globe, have invented a method to 
correct chance. It is well known that the operations of this method are (in 
general) reliable, although, naturally, they are not divulged without some 
portion of deceit. Furthermore, there is nothing so contaminated with fiction 
as the history of the Company. A paleographic document, exhumed in a 
temple, can be the result of yesterday's lottery or of an age-old lottery. No 
book is published without some discrepancy in each one of the copies. 
Scribes take a secret oath to omit, to interpolate, to change. The indirect lie 
is also cultivated.
The Company, with divine modesty, avoids all publicity. Its agents, as 
is  natural,  are  secret.  The  orders  which  it  issues  continually  (perhaps 
incessantly) do not differ from those lavished by impostors. Moreover, who 
can brag about being a mere impostor? The drunkard who improvises an 
absurd order, the dreamer who awakens suddenly and strangles the woman 
who sleeps at his side, do they not execute, perhaps, a secret decision of the 
Company? That silent functioning, comparable to God's, gives rise to all 
sorts of conjectures. One abominably insinuates that the Company has not 
existed for centuries and that the sacred disorder of our lives is purely 
hereditary, traditional. Another judges it eternal and teaches that it will last 
until the last night, when the last god annihilates the world. Another declares 
that the Company is omnipotent, but that it only has influence in tiny things: 
in a bird's call, in the shadings of rust and of dust, in the half dreams of 
dawn. Another, in the words of masked heresiarchs, that it has never existed 
47

and will not exist.  Another, no less vile, reasons that it is indifferent to 
affirm or deny the reality of the shadowy corporation, because Babylon is 
nothing else than an infinite game of chance.
Translated by John M. Fein
48

Pierre Menard, Author of the Quixote
he visible work left by this novelist is easily and briefly enumerated. 
Impardonable, therefore, are the omissions and additions perpetrated by 
Madame Henri Bachelier in a fallacious catalogue which a certain daily, 
whose Protestant tendency is no secret, has had the inconsideration to inflict 
upon its deplorable readers—though  these be few and Calvinist, if not 
Masonic and circumcised. The true friends of Menard have viewed this 
catalogue with alarm and even with a certain melancholy. One might say 
that only yesterday we gathered before his final monument, amidst the 
lugubrious cypresses, and already Error tries to tarnish his Memory. . . 
Decidedly, a brief rectification is unavoidable.
T
I am aware that it is quite easy to challenge my slight authority. I 
hope, however, that I shall not be prohibited from mentioning two eminent 
testimonies. The Baroness de Bacourt (at whose unforgettable  vendredis  I 
had the honor of meeting the lamented poet) has seen fit to approve the 
pages which follow. The Countess de Bagnoregio, one of the most delicate 
spirits of the Principality of Monaco (and now of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 
following  her  recent  marriage  to  the  international  philanthropist  Simon 
Kautzsch, who has been so inconsiderately slandered, alas! by the victims of 
his disinterested maneuvers) has sacrificed "to veracity and to death" (such 
were her words) the stately reserve which is her distinction, and, in an open 
letter published in the magazine  Luxe,  concedes me her approval as well. 
These authorizations, I think, are not entirely insufficient.
I have said that Menard's visible work can be easily enumerated. 
Having examined with care his personal files, I find that they contain the 
following items:
a) A Symbolist sonnet which appeared twice (with variants) in the
review La conque (issues of March and October 1899).
b) A monograph on the possibility of constructing a poetic vocabulary
of concepts which would not be synonyms or periphrases of
those which make up our everyday language, "but rather ideal
objects  created  according  to  convention  and  essentially
designed to satisfy poetic needs" (Nîmes, 1901).
c) A monograph on "certain connections or affinities" between the
49

thought of Descartes, Leibniz and John Wilkins (Nîmes, 1903).
d) A monograph on Leibniz's  Characteristica universalis  (Nîmes,
1904).
e) A technical article on the possibility of improving the game of
chess, eliminating one of the rook's pawns. Menard proposes,
recommends, discusses and finally rejects this innovation.
f) A monograph on Raymond Lully's Ars magna generalis (Nîmes,
1906).
g) A translation, with prologue and notes, of Ruy López de Segura's
Libro de la inventión liberal y arte del juego del axedrez (Paris, 
1907).
h) The work sheets of a monograph on George Boole's symbolic
logic.
i) An examination of the  essential  metric laws of  French  prose,
illustrated with examples taken from Saint-Simon  (Revue des
langues romanes, Montpellier, October 1909).
j) A reply to Luc Durtain (who had denied the existence of suchlaws), 
illustrated with examples from Luc Durtain (Revue des langues 
romanes, Montpellier, December 1909).
k)  A  manuscript  translation  of  the  Aguja  de  navegar  cultos  of
Quevedo, entitled La boussole des précieux.
1) A preface to the Catalogue of an exposition of lithographs by
Carolus Hourcade (Nîmes, 1914).
m) The work  Les problèmes d'un problème  (Paris, 1917), which
discusses, in chronological order, the different solutions given
to the illustrous problem of Achilles and the tortoise. Two
editions of this book have appeared so far; the second bears as
an  epigraph  Leibniz's  recommendation  "Ne  craignez  point,
monsieur,  la  tortue"  and  revises  the  chapters  dedicated  to
Russell and Descartes.
n)  A determined  analysis  of  the  "syntactical  customs"  of  Toulet
(N.R.F., March 1921). Menard—I recall—declared that censure
and praise are sentimental operations which have nothing to do
with literary criticism.
o) A transposition into alexandrines of Paul Valéry's  Le cimitière
marin (N.R.F., January 1928).
p) An invective against Paul Valéry, in the Papers for the Suppression 
50

of Reality of Jacques Reboul. (This invective, we might say
parenthetically, is the exact opposite of his true opinion of
Valéry. The latter understood it as such and their old friendship
was not endangered.)
q) A "definition" of the Countess de Bagnoregio, in the "victorious
volume"—the locution is Gabriele d'Annunzio's, another of its
collaborators—published annually by this lady to rectify the
inevitable falsifications of journalists and to present "to the
world and to Italy" an authentic image of her person, so often
exposed (by very reason of her beauty and her activities) to
erroneous or hasty interpretations.
r) A cycle of admirable sonnets for the Baroness de Bacourt (1934). 
s) A manuscript  list of verses which owe their efficacy to their
punctuation.8
This, then, is the visible work of Menard, in chronological order (with 
no omission other than a few vague sonnets of circumstance written for the 
hospitable, or avid, album of Madame Henri Bachelier). I turn now to his 
other work: the subterranean, the interminably heroic, the peerless. And—
such are the capacities of man!—the unfinished. This work, perhaps the 
most significant of our time, consists of the ninth and thirty-eighth chapters 
of the first part of  Don Quixote  and a fragment of chapter twenty-two. I 
know such an affirmation seems an absurdity; to justify this "absurdity" is 
the primordial object of this note.9
Two texts of unequal value inspired this undertaking. One is that 
philological fragment by Novalis—the one numbered 2005 in the Dresden 
edition—which outlines the theme of a  total  identification with a given 
author. The other is one of those parasitic books which situate Christ on a 
boulevard, Hamlet on La Cannebière or Don Quixote on Wall Street. Like 
all men of good taste, Menard abhorred these useless carnivals, fit only—as 
8
Madame Henri Bachelier also lists a literal translation of Quevedo's literal translation 
of the Introduction à la vie dévote of St. Francis of Sales. There are no traces of such a 
work in Menard's library. It must have been a jest of our friend, misunderstood by the 
lady.
9
I also had the secondary intention of sketching a personal portrait of Pierre Menard. 
But how could I dare to compete with the golden pages which, I am told, the Baroness 
de Bacourt is preparing or with the delicate and punctual pencil of Carolus Hourcade?
51

he would say—to produce the plebeian pleasure of anachronism or (what is 
worse) to enthrall us with the elementary idea that all epochs are the same or 
are  different.  More  interesting,  though  contradictory  and  superficial  of 
execution,  seemed  to  him  the  famous  plan  of  Daudet:  to  conjoin  the 
Ingenious Gentleman and his squire in one figure, which was Tartarin. . . 
Those who have insinuated that Menard dedicated his life to writing a 
contemporary Quixote calumniate his illustrious memory.
He did not want to compose another Quixote—which is easy—but the 
Quixote  itself.  Needless  to  say,  he  never  contemplated  a  mechanical 
transcription of the original; he did not propose to copy it. His admirable 
intention was to produce a few pages which would coincide—word for word 
and line for line—with those of Miguel de Cervantes.
"My intent is no more than astonishing," he wrote me the 30th of 
September,  1934,  from  Bayonne.  "The  final  term  in  a  theological  or 
metaphysical demonstration—the objective world, God, causality, the forms 
of the universe—is no less previous and common than my famed novel. The 
only difference is that the philosophers publish the intermediary stages of 
their labor in pleasant volumes and I have resolved to do away with those 
stages." In truth, not one worksheet remains to bear witness to his years of 
effort.
The first method he conceived was relatively simple. Know Spanish 
well, recover the Catholic faith, fight against the Moors or the Turk, forget 
the history of Europe between the years 1602 and 1918,  be  Miguel de 
Cervantes. Pierre Menard studied this procedure (I know he attained a fairly 
accurate command of seventeenth-century Spanish) but discarded it as too 
easy. Rather as impossible! my reader will say. Granted, but the undertaking 
was impossible from the very beginning and of all the impossible ways of 
carrying it out, this was the least interesting. To be, in the twentieth century, 
a popular novelist of the seventeenth seemed to him a diminution. To be, in 
some way, Cervantes and reach the Quixote seemed less arduous to him—
and, consequently, less interesting—than to go on being Pierre Menard and 
reach  the  Quixote  through  the  experiences  of  Pierre  Menard.  (This 
conviction, we might say in passing, made him omit the autobiographical 
prologue to the second part of Don Quixote. To include that prologue would 
have been to create another character—Cervantes—but it would also have 
meant presenting the Quixote in terms of that character and not of Menard. 
The latter, naturally, declined that facility.) "My undertaking is not difficult, 
52

essentially," I read in another part of his letter. "I should only have to be 
immortal to carry it out." Shall I confess that I often imagine he did finish it 
and that I read the Quixote—all of it—as if Menard had conceived it? Some 
nights past, while leafing through chapter XXVI—never essayed by him—I 
recognized our friend's style and something of his voice in this exceptional 
phrase: "the river nymphs and the dolorous and humid Echo." This happy 
conjunction of a spiritual and a physical adjective brought to my mind a 
verse by Shakespeare which we discussed one afternoon:
Where a malignant and a turbaned Turk. . .
But  why  precisely  the  Quixote?  our  reader  will  ask.  Such  a 
preference, in a Spaniard, would not have been inexplicable; but it is, no 
doubt,  in  a  Symbolist  from  Nîmes,  essentially  a  devote  of  Poe,  who 
engendered Baudelaire, who engendered Mallarmé, who engendered Valéry, 
who engendered Edmond Teste. The aforementioned letter illuminates this 
point. "The Quixote," clarifies Menard, "interests me deeply, but it does not 
seem—how  shall  I  say  it?—inevitable.  I  cannot  imagine  the  universe 
without Edgar Allan Poe's exclamation:
Ah, bear in mind this garden was enchanted!
or without the  Bateau ivre  or the  Ancient Mariner,  but I am quite 
capable of imagining it without the  Quixote.  (I speak, naturally, of my 
personal capacity and not of those works' historical resonance.) The Quixote 
is a contingent book; the Quixote is unnecessary. I can premeditate writing 
it, I can write it, without falling into a tautology. When I was ten or twelve 
years old, I read it, perhaps in its entirety. Later, I have reread closely certain 
chapters, those which I shall not attempt for the time being. I have also gone 
through the interludes, the plays, the  Galatea,  the exemplary novels, the 
undoubtedly laborious tribulations of Persiles and Segismunda and the Viaje 
del Parnaso. . . My general recollection  of the  Quixote,  simplified  by 
forgetfulness and indifference, can well equal the imprecise and prior image 
of a book not yet written. Once that image (which no one can legitimately 
deny me) is postulated, it is certain that my problem is a good bit more 
difficult than Cervantes' was. My obliging predecessor did not refuse the 
collaboration of chance: he composed his immortal work somewhat  à la 
53

diable, carried along by the inertias of language and invention. I have taken 
on the mysterious duty of reconstructing literally his spontaneous work. My 
solitary game is governed by two polar laws. The first permits me to essay 
variations of a formal or psychological type; the second obliges me to 
sacrifice  these  variations  to  the  "original"  text  and  reason  out  this 
annihilation in an irrefutable manner. . . To these artificial hindrances, 
another—of a congenital kind—must be added. To compose the Quixote at 
the beginning of the seventeenth century was a reasonable undertaking, 
necessary and perhaps even unavoidable; at the beginning of the twentieth, it 
is almost impossible. It is not in vain that three hundred years have gone by, 
filled with exceedingly complex events. Amongst them, to mention only 
one, is the Quixote itself."
In spite of these three obstacles, Menard's fragmentary  Quixote  is 
more subtle than Cervantes'. The latter, in a clumsy fashion, opposes to the 
fictions of chivalry the tawdry provincial reality of his country; Menard 
selects as his "reality" the land of Carmen during the century of Lepanto and 
Lope de Vega. What a series of  espagnolades  that selection would have 
suggested to Maurice Barrès or Dr. Rodriguez Larreta! Menard eludes them 
with complete naturalness. In his work there are no gypsy nourishes or 
conquistadors or mystics or Philip the Seconds or autos da fé. He neglects or 
eliminates  local  color.  This disdain  points  to  a  new  conception  of  the 
historical novel. This disdain condemns  Salammbô,  with no possibility of 
appeal.
It is no less astounding to consider isolated chapters. For example, let 
us examine Chapter XXXVIII of the first part, "which treats of the curious 
discourse of Don Quixote on arms and letters." It is well known that Don 
Quixote (like Quevedo in an analogous and later passage in  La hora de 
todos) decided the debate against letters and in favor of arms. Cervantes was 
a former soldier: his verdict is understandable. But that Pierre Menard's Don 
Quixote—a contemporary of La trahison des clercs and Bertrand Russell—
should fall prey to such nebulous sophistries! Madame Bachelier has seen 
here an admirable and typical subordination on the part of the author to the 
hero's psychology; others (not at all perspicaciously), a transcription of the 
Quixote; the Baroness de Bacourt, the influence of Nietzsche. To this third 
interpretation (which I judge to be irrefutable) I am not sure I dare to add a 
fourth, which concords very well with the almost divine modesty of Pierre 
Menard: his resigned or ironical habit of propagating ideas which were the 
54

strict reverse of those he preferred. (Let us recall once more his diatribe 
against  Paul  Valéry  in  Jacques  Reboul's  ephemeral  Surrealist  sheet.) 
Cervantes' text and Menard's are verbally identical, but the second is almost 
infinitely richer. (More ambiguous, his detractors will say, but ambiguity is 
richness.)
It is a revelation to compare Menard's Don Quixote with Cervantes'. 
The latter, for example, wrote (part one, chapter nine):
. . . truth, whose mother is history, rival of time, depository of deeds, 
witness of the past, exemplar and adviser to the present, and the future's 
counselor.
Written in the seventeeth century, written by the "lay genius" Cervantes, 
this enumeration is a mere rhetorical praise of history. Menard, on the other 
hand, writes:
. . . truth, whose mother is history, rival of time, depository of deeds, 
witness of the past, exemplar and adviser to the present, and the future's 
counselor.
History,  the  mother  of  truth:  the  idea  is  astounding.  Menard,  a 
contemporary of William James, does not define history as an inquiry into 
reality but as its origin. Historical truth, for him, is not what has happened; it 
is what we judge to have  happened.  The final phrases—exemplar and 
adviser to the present, and the future's counselor—are brazenly pragmatic.
The contrast in style is also vivid. The archaic style of Menard—quite 
foreign, after all—suffers from a certain affectation. Not so that of his 
forerunner, who handles with ease the current Spanish of his time.
There is no exercise of the intellect which is not, in the final analysis, 
useless. A philosophical doctrine begins as a plausible description of the 
universe; with the passage of the years it becomes a mere chapter—if not a 
paragraph  or  a  name—in  the  history  of  philosophy.  In  literature,  this 
eventual caducity is even more notorious. The Quixote—Menard told me—
was, above all, an entertaining book; now it is the occasion for patriotic 
toasts, grammatical insolence and obscene de luxe editions. Fame is a form 
of incomprehension, perhaps the worst.
There is nothing new in these nihilistic verifications; what is singular 
55

is the determination Menard derived from them. He decided to anticipate the 
vanity awaiting all man's efforts; he set himself to an undertaking which was 
exceedingly complex and, from the very beginning, futile. He dedicated his 
scruples and his sleepless nights to repeating an already extant book in an 
alien tongue. He multiplied draft upon draft, revised tenaciously and tore up 
thousands of manuscript pages.10 He did not let anyone examine these drafts 
and took care they should not survive him. In vain have I tried to reconstruct 
them.
I have reflected that it is permissible to see in this "final" Quixote a 
kind  of  palimpsest,  through  which  the  traces—tenuous  but  not 
indecipherable—of our friend's "previous" writing should be translucently 
visible. Unfortunately, only a second Pierre Menard, inverting the other's 
work, would be able to exhume and revive those lost Troys. . .
"Thinking, analyzing, inventing (he also wrote me) are not anomalous 
acts; they are the normal respiration of the intelligence. To glorify the 
occasional performance of that function, to hoard ancient and alien thoughts, 
to recall with incredulous stupor that the  doctor universalis thought, is to 
confess our laziness or our barbarity. Every man should be capable of all 
ideas and I understand that in the future this will be the case."
Menard (perhaps without wanting to) has enriched, by means of a new 
technique, the halting and rudimentary art of reading: this new technique is 
that  of  the  deliberate  anachronism  and  the  erroneous  attribution.  This 
technique, whose applications are infinite, prompts us to go through the 
Odyssey  as if it were posterior to the  Aeneid  and the book  Le jardin du 
Centaure  of  Madame Henri  Bachelier  as if it  were  by Madame  Henri 
Bachelier. This technique fills the most placid works with adventure. To 
attribute the Imitatio Christi to Louis Ferdinand Céline or to James Joyce, is 
this not a sufficient renovation of its tenuous spiritual indications?
For Silvina Ocampo
Translated by J.E.I.
10 I remember his quadricular notebooks, his black crossed-out passages, his peculiar 
typographical symbols and his insect-like handwriting. In the afternoons he liked to go 
out for a walk around the outskirts of Nîmes; he would take a notebook with him and 
make a merry bonfire.
56

The Circular Ruins
And if he left off dreaming about you. . . 
Through the Looking Glass, VI
o one saw him disembark in the unanimous night, no one saw the 
bamboo canoe sinking into the sacred mud, but within a few days no 
one was unaware that the silent man came from the South and that his home 
was one of the infinite villages upstream, on the violent mountainside, where 
the Zend tongue is not contaminated with Greek and where leprosy is 
infrequent. The truth is that the obscure man kissed the mud, came up the 
bank without pushing aside (probably without feeling) the brambles which 
dilacerated his flesh, and dragged himself, nauseous and bloodstained, to the 
circular enclosure crowned by a stone tiger or horse, which once was the 
color of fire and now was that of ashes. This circle was a temple, long ago 
devoured by fire, which the malarial jungle had profaned and whose god no 
longer received the homage of men. The stranger stretched out beneath the 
pedestal. He was awakened by the sun high above. He evidenced without 
astonishment that his wounds had closed; he shut his pale eyes and slept, not 
out of bodily weakness but out of determination of will. He knew that this 
temple was the place required by his invincible purpose; he knew that, 
downstream, the incessant trees had not managed to choke the ruins of 
another propitious temple, whose gods were also burned and dead; he knew 
that  his  immediate  obligation  was  to  sleep.  Towards  midnight  he  was 
awakened by the disconsolate cry of a bird. Prints of bare feet, some figs and 
a jug told him that men of the region had respectfully spied upon his sleep 
and were solicitous of his favor or feared his magic. He felt the chill of fear 
and sought out a burial niche in the dilapidated wall and covered himself 
with some unknown leaves.
N
The purpose which guided him was not impossible, though it was 
supernatural. He wanted to dream a man: he wanted to dream him with 
minute  integrity  and  insert  him  into  reality.  This  magical  project  had 
exhausted the entire content of his soul; if someone had asked him his own 
name or any trait of his previous life, he would not have been able to 
answer.  The  uninhabited  and  broken  temple  suited  him,  for  it  was  a 
minimum of visible world; the nearness of the peasants also suited him, for 
57

they would see that his frugal necessities were supplied. The rice and fruit of 
their tribute were sufficient sustenance for his body, consecrated to the sole 
task of sleeping and dreaming.
At first, his dreams were chaotic; somewhat later, they were of a 
dialectical nature. The stranger dreamt that he was in the center of a circular 
amphitheater which in some way was the burned temple: clouds of silent 
students filled the gradins; the faces of the last ones hung many centuries 
away and at a cosmic height, but were entirely clear and precise. The man 
was lecturing to them on anatomy, cosmography, magic; the countenances 
listened with eagerness and strove to respond with understanding, as if they 
divined the importance of the examination which would redeem one of them 
from his state of vain appearance and interpolate him into the world of 
reality. The man, both in dreams and awake, considered his phantoms' 
replies, was not deceived by impostors, divined a growing intelligence in 
certain perplexities. He sought a soul which would merit participation in the 
universe.
After nine or ten nights, he comprehended with some bitterness that 
he  could  expect  nothing  of  those  students  who  passively  accepted  his 
doctrines,  but  that  he  could  of  those  who,  at  times,  would  venture  a 
reasonable contradiction. The former, though worthy of love and affection, 
could not rise to the state of individuals; the latter pre-existed somewhat 
more. One afternoon (now his afternoons too were tributaries of sleep, now 
he remained awake only for a couple of hours at dawn) he dismissed the vast 
illusory college forever and kept one single student. He was a silent boy, 
sallow, sometimes obstinate, with sharp features which reproduced those of 
the dreamer. He was not long disconcerted by his companions' sudden 
elimination; his progress, after a few special lessons, astounded his teacher. 
Nevertheless, catastrophe ensued. The man emerged from sleep one day as if 
from a viscous desert, looked at the vain light of afternoon, which at first he 
confused with that of dawn, and understood that he had not really dreamt. 
All that night and all day, the intolerable lucidity of insomnia weighed upon 
him. He tried to explore the jungle, to exhaust himself; amidst the hemlocks, 
he was scarcely able to manage a few snatches of feeble sleep, fleetingly 
mottled with some rudimentary visions which were useless. He tried to 
convoke  the  college  and  had  scarcely  uttered  a  few  brief  words  of 
exhortation, when it became deformed and was extinguished. In his almost 
perpetual sleeplessness, his old eyes burned with tears of anger.
58

He  comprehended  that  the  effort  to  mold  the  incoherent  and 
vertiginous matter dreams are made of was the most arduous task a man 
could undertake, though he might penetrate all the enigmas of the upper and 
lower orders: much more arduous than weaving a rope of sand or coining 
the faceless wind. He comprehended that an initial failure was inevitable. He 
swore he would forget the enormous hallucination which had misled him at 
first,  and  he  sought  another  method.  Before  putting  it  into  effect,  he 
dedicated a month to replenishing the powers his delirium had wasted. He 
abandoned any premeditation of dreaming and, almost at once, was able to 
sleep for a considerable part of the day. The few times he dreamt during this 
period, he did not take notice of the dreams. To take up his task again, he 
waked until the moon's disk was perfect. Then, in the afternoon, he purified 
himself in the waters of the river, worshiped the planetary gods, uttered the 
lawful syllables of a powerful name and slept. Almost immediately, he 
dreamt of a beating heart.
He dreamt it as active, warm, secret, the size of a closed fist, of garnet 
color in the penumbra of a human body as yet without face or sex; with 
minute love he dreamt it, for fourteen lucid nights. Each night he perceived 
it with greater clarity. He did not touch it, but limited himself to witnessing 
it, observing it, perhaps correcting it with his eyes. He perceived it, lived it, 
from many distances and many angles. On the fourteenth night he touched 
the pulmonary artery with his ringer, and then the whole heart, inside and 
out. The examination satisfied him. Deliberately, he did not dream for a 
night; then he took the heart again, invoked the name of a planet and set 
about to envision another of the principal organs. Within a year he reached 
the  skeleton,  the  eyelids.  The  innumerable  hair  was  perhaps  the  most 
difficult task. He dreamt a complete man, a youth, but this youth could not 
rise nor did he speak nor could be open his eyes. Night after night, the man 
dreamt him as asleep.
In the Gnostic cosmogonies, the demiurgi knead and mold a red 
Adam who cannot stand alone; as unskillful and crude and elementary as 
this Adam of dust was the Adam of dreams fabricated by the magician's 
nights of effort. One afternoon, the man almost destroyed his work, but then 
repented. (It would have been better for him had he destroyed it.) Once he 
had completed his supplications to the numina of the earth and the river, he 
threw himself down at the feet of the effigy which was perhaps a tiger and 
perhaps a horse, and implored its unknown succor. That twilight, he dreamt 
59

of the statue. He dreamt of it as a living, tremulous thing: it was not an 
atrocious mongrel of tiger and horse, but both these vehement creatures at 
once and also a bull, a rose, a tempest. This multiple god revealed to him 
that its earthly name was Fire, that in the circular temple (and in others of its 
kind) people had rendered it sacrifices and cult and that it would magically 
give life to the sleeping phantom, in such a way that all creatures except Fire 
itself and the dreamer would believe him to be a man of flesh and blood. The 
man was ordered by the divinity to instruct his creature in its rites, and send 
him to the other broken temple whose pyramids survived downstream, so 
that in this deserted edifice a voice might give glory to the god. In the 
dreamer's dream, the dreamed one awoke.
The magician carried out these orders. He devoted a period of time 
(which finally comprised two years) to revealing the arcana of the universe 
and of the fire cult to his dream child. Inwardly, it pained him to be 
separated from the boy. Under the pretext of pedagogical necessity, each day 
he prolonged the hours he dedicated to his dreams. He also redid the right 
shoulder, which was perhaps deficient. At times, he was troubled by the 
impression that all this had happened before. . . In general, his days were 
happy; when he closed his eyes, he would think: Now I shall be with my son. 
Or, less often: The child I have engendered awaits me and will not exist if I 
do not go to him.
Gradually, he accustomed the boy to reality. Once he ordered him to 
place a banner on a distant peak. The following day, the banner flickered 
from the mountain top. He tried other analogous experiments, each more 
daring than the last. He understood with certain bitterness that his son was 
ready—and perhaps impatient—to be born. That night he kissed him for the 
first time and sent him to the other temple whose debris showed white 
downstream, through many leagues of inextricable jungle and swamp. But 
first (so that he would never know he was a phantom, so that he would be 
thought a man like others) he instilled into him a complete oblivion of his 
years of apprenticeship.
The man's victory and peace were dimmed by weariness. At dawn and 
at twilight, he would prostrate himself before the stone figure, imagining 
perhaps that his unreal child was practicing the same rites, in other circular 
ruins, downstream; at night, he would not dream, or would dream only as all 
men do. He perceived the sounds and forms of the universe with a certain 
colorlessness: his absent son was being nurtured with these diminutions of 
60

his soul. His life's purpose was complete; the man persisted in a kind of 
ecstasy. After a time, which some narrators of his story prefer to compute in 
years and others in lustra, he was awakened one midnight by two boatmen; 
he could not see their faces, but they told him of a magic man in a temple of 
the North who could walk upon fire and not be burned. The magician 
suddenly remembered the words of the god. He recalled that, of all the 
creatures of the world, fire was the only one that knew his son was a 
phantom. This recollection, at first soothing, finally tormented him. He 
feared his son might meditate on his abnormal privilege and discover in 
some way that his condition was that of a mere image. Not to be a man, to 
be the projection of another man's dream, what a feeling of humiliation, of 
vertigo! All fathers are interested in the children they have procreated (they 
have permitted to exist) in mere confusion or pleasure; it was natural that the 
magician should fear for the future of that son, created in thought, limb by 
limb and feature by feature, in a thousand and one secret nights.
The end of his meditations was sudden, though it was foretold in 
certain signs. First (after a long drought) a faraway cloud on a hill, light and 
rapid as a bird; then, toward the south, the sky which had the rose color of 
the leopard's mouth; then the smoke which corroded the metallic nights; 
finally, the panicky flight of the animals. For what was happening had 
happened many centuries ago. The ruins of the fire god's sanctuary were 
destroyed by fire. In a birdless dawn the magician saw the concentric blaze 
close round the walls. For a moment, he thought of taking refuge in the 
river, but then he knew that death was coming to crown his old age and 
absolve him of his labors. He walked into the shreds of flame. But they did 
not bite into his flesh, they caressed him and engulfed him without heat or 
combustion. With relief, with humiliation, with terror, he understood that he 
too was a mere appearance, dreamt by another.
Translated by J.E.I.
61

The Library of Babel
By this art you may contemplate the variation of the 23 letters. . .
The Anatomy of Melancholy, part 2, sect. II, mem. IV
he universe (which others call the Library) is composed of an indefinite 
and perhaps infinite number of hexagonal galleries, with vast air shafts 
between, surrounded by very low railings. From any of the hexagons one 
can see, interminably, the upper and lower floors. The distribution of the 
galleries is invariable. Twenty shelves, five long shelves per side, cover all 
the sides except two; their height, which is the distance from floor to ceiling, 
scarcely exceeds that of a normal bookcase. One of the free sides leads to a 
narrow hallway which opens onto another gallery, identical to the first and 
to all the rest. To the left and right of the hallway there are two very small 
closets. In the first, one may sleep standing up; in the other, satisfy one's 
fecal necessities, Also through here passes a spiral stairway, which sinks 
abysmally and soars upwards to remote distances. In the hallway there is a 
mirror which faithfully duplicates all appearances. Men usually infer from 
this mirror that the Library is not infinite (if it really were, why this illusory 
duplication?); I prefer to dream that its polished surfaces represent and 
promise the infinite. . . Light is provided by some spherical fruit which bear 
the name of lamps. There are two, transversally placed, in each hexagon. 
The light they emit is insufficient, incessant.
T
Like all men of the Library, I have traveled in my youth; I have 
wandered in search of a book, perhaps the catalogue of catalogues; now that 
my eyes can hardly decipher what I write, I am preparing to die just a few 
leagues from the hexagon in which I was born. Once I am dead, there will be 
no lack of pious hands to throw me over the railing; my grave will be the 
fathomless air; my body will sink endlessly and decay and dissolve in the 
wind generated by the fall, which is infinite. I say that the Library is 
unending. The idealists argue that the hexagonal rooms are a necessary form 
of absolute space or, at least, of our intuition of space. They reason that a 
triangular or pentagonal room is inconceivable. (The mystics claim that their 
ecstasy reveals to them a circular chamber containing a great circular book, 
whose spine is continuous and which follows the complete circle of the 
walls; but their testimony is suspect; their words, obscure. This cyclical 
62

book is God.) Let it suffice now for me to repeat the classic dictum: The 
Library is a sphere whose exact center is any one of its hexagons and whose 
circumference is inaccessible.
There are five shelves for each of the hexagon's walls; each shelf 
contains thirty-five books of uniform format; each book is of four hundred 
and ten pages; each page, of forty lines, each line, of some eighty letters 
which are black in color. There are also letters on the spine of each book; 
these letters do not indicate or prefigure what the pages will say. I know that 
this incoherence at one time seemed mysterious. Before summarizing the 
solution (whose discovery, in spite of its tragic projections, is perhaps the 
capital fact in history) I wish to recall a few axioms.
First: The Library exists  ab aeterno.  This truth, whose immediate 
corollary is the future eternity of the world, cannot be placed in doubt by any 
reasonable mind. Man, the imperfect librarian, may be the product of chance 
or of malevolent demiurgi; the universe, with its elegant endowment of 
shelves, of enigmatical volumes, of inexhaustible stairways for the traveler 
and latrines for the seated librarian, can only be the work of a god. To 
perceive the distance between the divine and the human, it is enough to 
compare these crude wavering symbols which my fallible hand scrawls on 
the cover of a book, with the organic letters inside: punctual, delicate, 
perfectly black, inimitably symmetrical.
Second: The orthographical symbols are twenty-five in number.11 This 
finding made it possible, three hundred years ago, to formulate a general 
theory  of  the  Library  and  solve  satisfactorily  the  problem  which  no 
conjecture had deciphered: the formless and chaotic nature of almost all the 
books. One which my father saw in a hexagon on circuit fifteen ninety-four 
was made up of the letters MCV, perversely repeated from the first line to 
the last. Another (very much consulted in this area) is a mere labyrinth of 
letters, but the next-to-last page says Oh time thy pyramids. This much is 
already known: for every sensible line of straightforward statement, there 
are leagues of senseless cacophonies, verbal jumbles and incoherences. (I 
know  of  an  uncouth  region  whose  librarians  repudiate  the  vain  and 
superstitious custom of finding a meaning in books and equate it with that of 
11 The original manuscript does not contain digits or capital letters. The punctuation has 
been limited to the comma and the period. These two signs, the space and the twenty-
two letters of the alphabet are the twenty-five symbols considered sufficient by this 
unknown author. (Editor's note.)
63

finding a meaning in dreams or in the chaotic lines of one's palm. . . They 
admit that the inventors of this writing imitated the twenty-five natural 
symbols, but maintain that this application is accidental and that the books 
signify nothing in themselves. This dictum, we shall see, is not entirely 
fallacious.)
For  a  long  time  it  was  believed  that  these  impenetrable  books 
corresponded to past or remote languages. It is true that the most ancient 
men, the first librarians, used a language quite different from the one we 
now speak; it is true that a few miles to the right the tongue is dialectal and 
that ninety floors farther up, it is incomprehensible. All this, I repeat, is true, 
but four hundred and ten pages of inalterable MCV's cannot correspond to 
any language, no matter how dialectal or rudimentary it may be. Some 
insinuated that each letter could influence the following one and that the 
value of MCV in the third line of page 71 was not the one the same series 
may have in another position on another page, but this vague thesis did not 
prevail. Others though of cryptographs; generally, this conjecture has been 
accepted,  though  not  in  the  sense  in  which  it  was  formulated  by  its 
originators.
Five hundred years ago, the chief of an upper hexagon12 came upon a 
book  as  confusing  as  the  others,  but  which  had  nearly  two  pages  of 
homogeneous lines. He showed his find to a wandering decoder who told 
him the lines were written in Portuguese; others said they were Yiddish. 
Within a century, the language was established: a Samoyedic Lithuanian 
dialect of Guarani, with classical Arabian inflections. The content was also 
deciphered: some notions of combinative analysis, illustrated with examples 
of variation with unlimited repetition. These examples made it possible for a 
librarian of genius to discover the fundamental law of the Library. This 
thinker observed that all the books, no matter how diverse they might be, are 
made up of the same elements: the space, the period, the comma, the twenty-
two letters of the alphabet. He also alleged a fact which travelers have 
confirmed: In the vast Library there are no two identical books. From these 
two incontrovertible premises he deduced that the Library is total and that its 
shelves  register  all  the  possible  combinations  of  the  twenty-odd 
12 Before, there was a man for every three hexagons. Suicide and pulmonary diseases 
have destroyed that proportion. A memory of unspeakable melancholy: at times I have 
traveled for many nights through corridors and along polished stairways without 
finding a single librarian.
64

orthographical symbols (a number which, though extremely vast, is not 
infinite): in other words, all that it is given to express, in all languages. 
Everything:  the  minutely  detailed  history  of  the  future,  the  archangels' 
autobiographies,  the  faithful  catalogue  of  the  Library,  thousands  and 
thousands of false catalogues, the demonstration of the fallacy of those 
catalogues,  the  demonstration  of  the  fallacy  of  the  true  catalogue,  the 
Gnostic gospel of Basilides, the commentary on that gospel, the commentary 
on  the  commentary  on  that  gospel,  the  true  story  of  your  death,  the 
translation of every book in all languages, the interpolations of every book 
in all books. 
When it was proclaimed that the Library contained all books, the first 
impression was one of extravagant happiness. All men felt themselves to be 
the masters of an intact and secret treasure. There was no personal or world 
problem  whose  eloquent  solution  did  not  exist  in  some  hexagon.  The 
universe  was  justified,  the  universe  suddenly  usurped  the  unlimited 
dimensions  of  hope.  At  that  time  a  great  deal  was  said  about  the 
Vindications: books of apology and prophecy which vindicated for all time 
the acts of every man in the universe and retained prodigious arcana for his 
future. Thousands of the greedy abandoned their sweet native hexagons and 
rushed up the stairways, urged on by the vain intention of finding their 
Vindication. These pilgrims disputed in the narrow corridors, proffered dark 
curses, strangled each other on the divine stairways, flung the deceptive 
books into the air shafts, met their death cast down in a similar fashion by 
the inhabitants of remote regions. Others went mad. . . The Vindications 
exist (I have seen two which refer to persons of the future, to persons who 
perhaps are not imaginary) but the searchers did not remember that the 
possibility of a man's finding his Vindication, or some treacherous variation 
thereof, can be computed as zero.
At that time it was also hoped that a clarification of humanity's basic 
mysteries—the origin of the Library and of time—might be found. It is 
verisimilar that these grave mysteries could be explained in words: if the 
language of philosophers is not sufficient, the multiform Library will have 
produced the unprecedented language required, with its vocabularies and 
grammars. For four centuries now men have exhausted the hexagons. . . 
There are official searchers, inquisitors. I have seen them in the performance 
of their function: they always arrive extremely tired from their journeys; 
they speak of a broken stairway which almost killed them; they talk with the 
65

librarian of galleries and stairs; sometimes they pick up the nearest volume 
and leaf through it, looking for infamous words. Obviously, no one expects 
to discover anything.
As was natural, this inordinate hope was followed by an excessive 
depression. The certitude that some shelf in some hexagon held precious 
books  and  that  these  precious books were  inaccessible,  seemed  almost 
intolerable. A blasphemous sect suggested that the searches should cease 
and that all should juggle letters and symbols until they constructed, by an 
improbable gift of chance, these canonical books. The authorities were 
obliged to issue severe orders. The sect disappeared, but in my childhood I 
have seen old men who, for long periods of time, would hide in the latrines 
with some metal disks in a forbidden dice cup and feebly mimic the divine 
disorder.
Others,  inversely,  believed  that  it  was  fundamental  to  eliminate 
useless works. They invaded the hexagons, showed credentials which were 
not always false, leafed through a volume with displeasure and condemned 
whole shelves: their hygienic, ascetic furor caused the senseless perdition of 
millions of books. Their name is execrated, but those who deplore the 
"treasures" destroyed by this frenzy neglect two notable facts. One: the 
Library is so enormous that any reduction of human origin is infinitesimal. 
The other: every copy is unique, irreplaceable, but (since the Library is total) 
there  are  always  several  hundred  thousand  imperfect  facsimiles:  works 
which differ only in a letter or a comma. Counter to general opinion, I 
venture to suppose that the consequences of the Purifiers' depredations have 
been exaggerated by the horror these fanatics produced. They were urged on 
by the delirium of trying to reach the books in the Crimson Hexagon: books 
whose format is smaller than usual, all-powerful, illustrated and magical.
We also know of another superstition of that time: that of the Man of 
the Book. On some shelf in some hexagon (men reasoned) there must exist a 
book which is the formula and perfect compendium  of all the rest:  some 
librarian has gone though it and he is analogous to a god. In the language of 
this  zone  vestiges  of  this  remote  functionary's  cult  still  persist.  Many 
wandered in search of Him. For a century they exhausted in vain the most 
varied areas. How could one locate the venerated and secret hexagon which 
housed Him? Someone proposed a regressive method: To locate book A, 
consult first a book B which indicates A's position; to locate book B, consult 
first a book C, and so on to infinity. . . In adventures such as these, I have 
66

squandered and wasted my years. It does not seem unlikely to me that there 
is a total book on some shelf of the universe;13 I pray to the unknown gods 
that a man—just one, even though it were thousands of years ago!—may 
have examined and read it. If honor and wisdom and happiness are not for 
me, let them be for others. Let heaven exist, though my place be in hell. Let 
me be outraged and annihilated, but for one instant, in one being, let Your 
enormous  Library  be  justified.  The  impious  maintain  that  nonsense  is 
normal in the Library and that the reasonable (and even humble and pure 
coherence) is an almost miraculous exception. They speak (I know) of the 
"feverish  Library  whose  chance  volumes  are  constantly  in  danger  of 
changing  into  others  and  affirm,  negate  and  confuse  everything  like  a 
delirious divinity." These words, which not only denounce the disorder but 
exemplify it as well, notoriously prove their authors' abominable taste and 
desperate ignorance. In truth, the Library includes all verbal structures, all 
variations permitted by the twenty-five orthographical symbols, but not a 
single example of absolute nonsense. It is useless to observe that the best 
volume of the many hexagons under my administration is entitled  The 
Combed Thunderclap and another The Plaster Cramp and another Axaxaxas 
mlö. These phrases, at first glance incoherent, can no doubt be justified in a 
cryptographical or allegorical manner; such a justification is verbal and, ex 
hypothesi, already figures in the Library. I cannot combine some characters 
dhcmrlchtdj which the divine Library has not foreseen and which in one of 
its secret tongues do not contain a terrible meaning. No one can articulate a 
syllable which is not filled with tenderness and fear, which is not, in one of 
these languages, the powerful name of a god. To speak is to fall into 
tautology. This wordy and useless epistle already exists in one of the thirty 
volumes of the five shelves of one of the innumerable hexagons—and its 
refutation  as  well.  (An  n  number  of  possible  languages  use  the  same 
vocabulary;  in  some  of  them,  the  symbol  library  allows  the  correct 
definition a ubiquitous and lasting system of hexagonal galleries, but library 
is bread or pyramid or anything else, and these seven words which define it 
have another value. You who read me, are You sure of understanding my 
language?)
13 I repeat: it suffices that a book be possible for it to exist. Only the impossible is 
excluded. For example: no book can be a ladder, although no doubt there are books 
which discuss and negate and demonstrate this possibility and others whose structure 
corresponds to that of a ladder.
67

The methodical task of writing distracts me from the present state of 
men. The certitude that everything has been written negates us or turns us 
into  phantoms.  I  know  of  districts  in  which  the  young  men  prostrate 
themselves before books and kiss their pages in a barbarous manner, but 
they do not know how to decipher a single letter. Epidemics, heretical 
conflicts, peregrinations which inevitably degenerate into banditry, have 
decimated the population. I believe I have mentioned the suicides, more and 
more frequent with the years. Perhaps my old age and fearfulness deceive 
me, but I suspect that the human species—the unique species—is about to be 
extinguished, but the Library will endure: illuminated, solitary, infinite, 
perfectly  motionless,  equipped  with  precious  volumes,  useless, 
incorruptible, secret.
I have just written the word "infinite." I have not interpolated this 
adjective out of rhetorical habit; I say that it is not illogical to think that the 
world is infinite. Those who judge it to be limited postulate that in remote 
places the corridors and stairways and hexagons can conceivably come to an 
end—which is absurd. Those who imagine it to be without limit forget that 
the possible number of books does have such a limit. I venture to suggest 
this solution to the ancient problem: The Library is unlimited and cyclical. If 
an eternal traveler were to cross it in any direction, after centuries he would 
see that the same volumes were repeated in the same disorder (which, thus 
repeated, would be an order: the Order). My solitude is gladdened by this 
elegant hope.14
Translated by J.E.I.
14 Letizia Álvarez de Toledo has observed that this vast Library is useless: rigorously 
speaking, a single volume would be sufficient, a volume of ordinary format, printed in 
nine or ten point type, containing an infinite number of infinitely thin leaves. (In the 
early seventeenth century, Cavalieri said that all solid bodies are the superimposition 
of an infinite number of planes.) The handling of this silky vade mecum would not be 
convenient:  each  apparent  page  would  unfold  into  other  analogous  ones;  the 
inconceivable middle page would have no reverse.
68

Funes the Memorious
 remember him (I have no right to utter this sacred verb, only one man on 
earth had that right and he is dead) with a dark passion flower in his hand, 
seeing it as no one has ever seen it, though he might look at it from the 
twilight of dawn till that of evening, a whole lifetime. I remember him, with 
his face taciturn and Indian-like and singularly remote, behind the cigarette. 
I remember (I think) his angular, leather-braiding hands. I remember near 
those hands a maté gourd bearing the Uruguayan coat of arms; I remember a 
yellow screen with a vague lake landscape in the window of his house. I 
clearly remember his voice: the slow, resentful, nasal voice of the old-time 
dweller of the suburbs, without the Italian sibilants we have today. I never 
saw him more than three times; the last was in 1887. . . I find it very 
satisfactory  that  all  those  who  knew  him  should  write  about  him;  my 
testimony will perhaps be the shortest and no doubt the poorest, but not the 
most impartial in the volume you will edit. My deplorable status as an 
Argentine will prevent me from indulging in a dithyramb, an obligatory 
genre in Uruguay whenever the subject is an Uruguayan.  Highbrow, city 
slicker, dude: Funes never spoke these injurious words, but I am sufficiently 
certain I represented for him those misfortunes. Pedro Leandro Ipuche has 
written that Funes was a precursor of the supermen, "a vernacular and rustic 
Zarathustra"; I shall not debate the point, but one should not forget that he 
was also a kid from Fray Bentos, with certain incurable limitations. 
I
My first memory of Funes is very perspicuous. I can see him on an 
afternoon in March or February of the year 1884. My father, that year, had 
taken me to spend the summer in Fray Bentos. I was returning from the San 
Francisco ranch with my cousin Bernardo Haedo. We were singing as we 
rode  along  and  being  on  horseback  was  not  the  only  circumstance 
determining my happiness. After a sultry day, an enormous slate-colored 
storm had hidden the sky. It was urged on by a southern wind, the trees were 
already going wild; I was afraid (I was hopeful) that the elemental rain 
would take us by surprise in the open. We were running a kind of race with 
the storm. We entered an alleyway that sank down between two very high 
brick sidewalks. It had suddenly got dark; I heard some rapid and almost 
secret footsteps up above; I raised my eyes and saw a boy running along the 
narrow and broken path as if it were a narrow and broken wall. I remember 
69

his baggy gaucho trousers, his rope-soled shoes, I remember the cigarette in 
his hard face, against the now limitless storm cloud. Bernardo cried to him 
unexpectedly: "What time is it, Ireneo?" Without consulting the sky, without 
stopping,  he  replied:  "It's  four  minutes  to  eight,  young  Bernardo  Juan 
Francisco." His voice was shrill, mocking.
I am so unperceptive that the dialogue I have just related would not 
have attracted my attention had it not been stressed by my cousin, who (I 
believe) was prompted by a certain local pride and the desire to show that he 
was indifferent to the other's tripartite reply.
He told me the fellow in the alleyway was one Ireneo Funes, known 
for certain peculiarities such as avoiding contact with people and always 
knowing what time it was, like a clock. He added that he was the son of the 
ironing woman in town, María Clementina Funes, and that some people said 
his father was a doctor at the meat packers, an Englishman by the name of 
O'Connor, and others that he was a horse tamer or scout from the Salto 
district. He lived with his mother, around the corner from the Laureles 
house.
During the years eighty-five and eighty-six we spent the summer in 
Montevideo. In eighty-seven I returned to Fray Bentos. I asked, as was 
natural, about all my acquaintances and, finally, about the "chronometrical" 
Funes. I was told he had been thrown by a half-tamed horse on the San 
Francisco ranch and was left hopelessly paralyzed. I remember the sensation 
of uneasy magic the news produced in me: the only time I had seen him, we 
were returning from San Francisco on horseback and he was running along a 
high place; this fact, told me by my cousin Bernardo, had much of the 
quality of a dream made up of previous elements. I was told he never moved 
from his cot, with his eyes fixed on the fig tree in the back or on a spider 
web. In the afternoons, he would let himself be brought out to the window. 
He carried his pride to the point of acting as if the blow that had felled him 
were beneficial. . . Twice I saw him behind the iron grating of the window, 
which  harshly  emphasized  his  condition  as  a  perpetual  prisoner:  once, 
motionless, with his eyes closed; another time, again motionless, absorbed in 
the contemplation of a fragrant sprig of santonica.
Not without a certain vaingloriousness, I had begun at that time my 
methodical study of Latin. My valise contained the  De viris illustribus of 
Lhomond, Quicherat's Thesaurus, the commentaries of Julius Caesar and an 
odd volume of Pliny's  Naturalis historia,  which then exceeded (and still 
70

exceeds) my moderate virtues as a Latinist. Everything becomes public in a 
small town; Ireneo, in his house on the outskirts, did not take long to learn of 
the arrival of these anomalous books. He sent me a flowery and ceremonious 
letter  in  which  he  recalled  our  encounter,  unfortunately  brief,  "on  the 
seventh day of February of the year 1884," praised the glorious services my 
uncle Gregorio Haedo, deceased that same year, "had rendered to our two 
nations in the valiant battle of Ituzaingó" and requested the loan of any one 
of my volumes, accompanied by a dictionary "for the proper intelligence of 
the original text, for I am as yet ignorant of Latin." He promised to return 
them to me in good condition, almost immediately. His handwriting was 
perfect, very  sharply outlined; his orthography, of the type favored by 
Andrés Bello: i for y, j for g. At first I naturally feared a joke. My cousins 
assured me that was not the case, that these were peculiarities of Ireneo. I 
did not know whether to attribute to insolence, ignorance or stupidity the 
idea that the arduous Latin tongue should require no other instrument than a 
dictionary; to disillusion him fully, I sent him the Gradus ad Parnassum of 
Quicherat and the work by Pliny.
On the fourteenth of February, I received a telegram from Buenos 
Aires saying I should return immediately, because my father was "not at all 
well." May God forgive me; the prestige of being the recipient of an urgent 
telegram, the desire to communicate to all Fray Bentos the contradiction 
between the negative form of the message and the peremptory adverb, the 
temptation to dramatize my suffering, affecting a virile stoicism, perhaps 
distracted me from all possibility of real sorrow. When I packed my valise, I 
noticed the  Gradus  and the first volume of the  Naturalis historia  were 
missing. The  Saturn  was sailing the next day, in the morning; that night, 
after supper, I headed towards Funes' house. I was astonished to find the 
evening no less oppressive than the day had been.
At the respectable little house, Funes' mother opened the door for me.
She told me Ireneo was in the back room and I should not be surprised 
to find him in the dark, because he knew how to pass the idle hours without 
lighting the candle. I crossed the tile patio, the little passageway; I reached 
the second patio. There was a grape arbor; the darkness seemed complete to 
me. I suddenly heard Ireneo's high-pitched, mocking voice. His voice was 
speaking in Latin; his voice (which came from the darkness) was articulating 
with morose delight a speech or prayer or incantation. The Roman syllables 
resounded in the earthen patio; my fear took them to be indecipherable, 
71

interminable; afterwards, in the enormous dialogue of that night, I learned 
they formed the first paragraph of the twenty-fourth chapter of the seventh 
book of the Naturalis historia. The subject of that chapter is memory; the 
last words were ut nihil non iisdem verbis redderetur auditum.
Without the slightest change of voice, Ireneo told me to come in. He 
was on his cot, smoking. It seems to me I did not see his face until dawn; I 
believe I recall the intermittent glow of his cigarette. The room smelled 
vaguely of dampness. I sat down; I repeated the story about the telegram and 
my father's illness.
I now arrive at the most difficult point in my story. This story (it is 
well the reader know it by now) has no other plot than that dialogue which 
took place half a century ago. I shall not try to reproduce the words, which 
are now irrecoverable. I prefer to summarize with veracity the many things 
Ireneo  told  me.  The  indirect  style  is  remote  and  weak;  I  know  I  am 
sacrificing the efficacy of my narrative; my readers should imagine for 
themselves the hesitant periods which overwhelmed me that night.
Ireneo began by enumerating, in Latin and in Spanish, the cases of 
prodigious memory recorded in the  Naturalis historia: Cyrus, king of the 
Persians, who could call every soldier in his armies by name; Mithridates 
Eupator, who administered the law in the twenty-two languages of his 
empire; Simonides, inventor of the science of mnemonics; Metrodorus, who 
practiced the art of faithfully repeating what he had heard only once. In 
obvious  good  faith,  Ireneo  was  amazed  that  such  cases  be  considered 
amazing. He told me that before that rainy afternoon when the blue-gray 
horse threw him, he had been what all humans are: blind, deaf, addlebrained, 
absent-minded. (I tried to remind him of his exact perception of time, his 
memory for proper names; he paid no attention to me.) For nineteen years he 
had lived as one in a dream: he looked without seeing, listened without 
hearing, forgetting everything, almost everything. When he fell, he became 
unconscious; when he came to, the present was almost intolerable in its 
richness  and sharpness,  as were  his most distant and  trivial memories. 
Somewhat  later  he  learned  that  he  was  paralyzed.  The  fact  scarcely 
interested him. He reasoned (he felt) that his immobility was a minimum 
price to pay. Now his perception and his memory were infallible.
We, at one glance, can perceive three glasses on a table; Funes, all the 
leaves and tendrils and fruit that make up a grape vine. He knew by heart the 
forms of the southern clouds at dawn on the 30th of April, 1882, and could 
72

compare them in his memory with the mottled streaks on a book in Spanish 
binding he had only seen once and with the outlines of the foam raised by an 
oar  in  the  Rio  Negro  the  night  before  the  Quebracho  uprising.  These 
memories were not simple ones; each visual image was linked to muscular 
sensations, thermal sensations, etc. He could reconstruct all his dreams, all 
his half-dreams. Two or three times he had reconstructed a whole day; he 
never hesitated, but each reconstruction had required a whole day. He told 
me: "I alone have more memories than all mankind has probably had since 
the world has been the world." And again: "My dreams are like you people's 
waking hours." And again, toward dawn: "My memory, sir, is like a garbage 
heap." A circle drawn on a blackboard, a right triangle, a lozenge—all these 
are forms we can fully and intuitively grasp; Ireneo could do the same with 
the stormy mane of a pony, with a herd of cattle on a hill, with the changing 
fire  and  its  innumerable  ashes,  with  the  many  faces  of  a  dead  man 
throughout a long wake. I don't know how many stars he could see in the 
sky.
These things he told me; neither then nor later have I ever placed them 
in doubt. In those days there were no cinemas or phonographs; nevertheless, 
it is odd and even incredible that no one ever performed an experiment with 
Funes. The truth is that we live out our lives putting off all that can be put 
off; perhaps we all know deep down that we are immortal and that sooner or 
later all men will do and know all things. Out of the darkness, Funes' voice 
went on talking to me. He told me that in 1886 he had invented an original 
system of numbering and that in a very few days he had gone beyond the 
twenty-four-thousand mark. He had not written it down, since anything he 
thought of once would never be lost to him. His first stimulus was, I think, 
his discomfort at the fact that the famous thirty-three gauchos of Uruguayan 
history should require two signs and two words, in place of a single word 
and a single sign. He then applied this absurd principle to the other numbers. 
In place of seven thousand thirteen, he would say (for example)  Máximo 
Pérez;  in place of seven thousand fourteen,  The Railroad;  other numbers 
were Luis Melián Lafinur, Olimar, sulphur, the reins, the whale, the gas, the 
caldron, Napoleon, Agustín de Vedia. In place of five hundred, he would say 
nine. Each word had a particular sign, a kind of mark; the last in the series 
were very complicated. . . I tried to explain to him that this rhapsody of 
incoherent terms was precisely the opposite of a system of numbers. I told 
him that saying 365 meant saying three hundreds, six tens, five ones, an 
73

analysis which is not found in the "numbers" The Negro Timoteo or meat 
blanket. Funes did not understand me or refused to understand me.
Locke,  in  the  seventeenth  century,  postulated  (and  rejected)  an 
impossible language in which each individual thing, each stone, each bird 
and  each  branch,  would  have  its own  name;  Funes  once  projected  an 
analogous language, but discarded it because it seemed too general to him, 
too ambiguous. In fact, Funes remembered not only every leaf of every tree 
of every wood, but also every one of the times he had perceived or imagined 
it. He decided to reduce each of his past days to some seventy thousand 
memories, which would then be defined by means of ciphers. He was 
dissuaded from this by two considerations: his awareness that the task was 
interminable, his awareness that it was useless. He thought that by the hour 
of his death he would not even have finished classifying all the memories of 
his childhood.
The two projects I have indicated (an infinite vocabulary for the 
natural series of numbers, a useless mental catalogue of all the images of his 
memory) are senseless, but they betray a certain stammering grandeur. They 
permit us to glimpse or infer the nature of Funes' vertiginous world. He was, 
let us not forget, almost incapable of ideas of a general, Platonic sort. Not 
only was it difficult for him to comprehend that the generic symbol  dog 
embraces so many unlike individuals of diverse size and form; it bothered 
him that the dog at three fourteen (seen from the side) should have the same 
name as the dog at three fifteen (seen from the front). His own face in the 
mirror, his own hands, surprised him every time he saw them. Swift relates 
that the emperor of Lilliput could discern the movement of the minute hand; 
Funes could continuously discern the tranquil advances of corruption, of 
decay, of fatigue. He could note the progress of death, of dampness. He was 
the solitary and lucid spectator of a multiform, instantaneous and almost 
intolerably  precise  world.  Babylon,  London  and  New  York  have 
overwhelmed with their ferocious splendor the imaginations of men; no one, 
in their populous towers or their urgent avenues, has felt the heat and 
pressure of a reality as indefatigable as that which day and night converged 
upon the hapless Ireneo, in his poor South American suburb. It was very 
difficult for him to sleep. To sleep is to turn one's mind from the world; 
Funes, lying on his back on his cot in the shadows, could imagine every 
crevice and every molding in the sharply defined houses surrounding him. (I 
repeat that the least important of his memories was more minute and more 
74

vivid than our perception of physical pleasure or physical torment.) Towards 
the east, along a stretch not yet divided into blocks, there were new houses, 
unknown  to  Funes.  He  imagined  them  to  be  black,  compact,  made  of 
homogeneous darkness; in that direction he would turn his face in order to 
sleep. He would also imagine himself at the bottom of the river, rocked and 
annihilated by the current.
With no effort, he had learned English, French, Portuguese and Latin. 
I suspect, however, that he was not very capable of thought. To think is to 
forget differences, generalize, make abstractions. In the teeming world of 
Funes, there were only details, almost immediate in their presence.
The wary light of dawn entered the earthen patio.
Then I saw the face belonging to the voice that had spoken all night 
long. Ireneo was nineteen years old; he had been born in 1868; he seemed to 
me as monumental as bronze, more ancient than Egypt, older than the 
prophecies and the pyramids. I thought that each of my words (that each of 
my movements) would persist in his implacable memory; I was benumbed 
by the fear of multiplying useless gestures.
Ireneo Funes died in 1889, of congestion of the lungs.
Translated by J.E.I.
75

The Shape of the Sword
 spiteful scar crossed his face: an ash-colored and nearly perfect arc 
that creased his temple at one tip and his cheek at the other. His real 
name  is  of  no  importance;  everyone  in  Tacuarembo  called  him  the 
"Englishman from La Colorada." Cardoso, the owner of those fields, refused 
to sell them: I understand that the Englishman resorted to an unexpected 
argument: he confided to Cardoso the secret of the scar. The Englishman 
came from the border, from Rio Grande del Sur; there are many who say 
that in Brazil he had been a smuggler. The fields were overgrown with grass, 
the  waterholes  brackish;  the  Englishman,  in  order  to  correct  those 
deficiencies, worked fully as hard as his laborers. They say that he was 
severe to the point of cruelty, but scrupulously just. They say also that he 
drank: a few times a year he locked himself into an upper room, not to 
emerge until two or three days later as if from a battle or from vertigo, pale, 
trembling, confused and as authoritarian as ever. I remember the glacial 
eyes, the energetic leanness, the gray mustache. He had no dealings with 
anyone; it is a fact that his Spanish was rudimentary and cluttered with 
Brazilian. Aside from a business letter or some pamphlet, he received no 
mail.
A
The last  time I passed  through the  northern  provinces,  a  sudden 
overflowing of the Caraguatá stream compelled me to spend the night at La 
Colorada. Within a few moments, I seemed to sense that my appearance was 
inopportune; I tried to ingratiate myself with the Englishman; I resorted to 
the least discerning of passions: patriotism. I claimed as invincible a country 
with such spirit as England's. My companion agreed, but added with a smile 
that he was not English. He was Irish, from Dungarvan. Having said this, he 
stopped short, as if he had revealed a secret. After dinner we went outside to 
look at the sky. It had cleared up, but beyond the low hills the southern sky, 
streaked and gashed by lightning, was conceiving another storm. Into the 
cleared up dining room the boy who had served dinner brought a bottle of 
rum. We drank for some time, in silence.
I don't know what time it must have been when I observed that I was 
drunk; I don't know what inspiration or what exultation or tedium made me 
mention the scar. The Englishman's face changed its expression; for a few 
seconds I thought he was going to throw me out of the house. At length he 
76

said in his normal voice:
"I'll tell you the history of my scar under one condition: that of not 
mitigating one bit of the opprobrium, of the infamous circumstances."
I agreed. This is the story that he told me, mixing his English with 
Spanish, and even with Portuguese:
"Around 1922, in one of the cities of Connaught, I was one of the 
many  who  were  conspiring  for  the  independence  of  Ireland.  Of  my 
comrades,  some  are  still  living,  dedicated  to  peaceful  pursuits;  others, 
paradoxically, are fighting on desert and sea under the English flag; another, 
the most worthy, died in the courtyard of a barracks, at dawn, shot by men 
filled with sleep; still others (not the most unfortunate) met their destiny in 
the  anonymous  and  almost  secret  battles  of  the  civil  war.  We  were 
Republicans, Catholics; we were, I suspect, Romantics. Ireland was for us 
not only the Utopian future and the intolerable present; it was a bitter and 
cherished mythology, it was the circular towers and the red marshes, it was 
the repudiation of Parnell and the enormous epic poems which sang of the 
robbing of bulls which in another incarnation were heroes and in others fish 
and mountains. . . One afternoon I will never forget, an affiliate from 
Munster joined us: one John Vincent Moon.
"He was scarcely twenty years old. He was slender and flaccid at the 
same time; he gave the uncomfortable impression of being invertebrate. He 
had studied with fervor and with vanity nearly every page of Lord knows 
what Communist manual; he made use of dialectical materialism to put an 
end to any discussion whatever. The reasons one can have for hating another 
man, or for loving him, are  infinite: Moon reduced  the  history  of the 
universe to a sordid economic conflict. He affirmed that the revolution was 
predestined to succeed. I told him that for a gentleman only lost causes 
should  be  attractive.  .  .  Night  had  already  fallen;  we  continued  our 
disagreement in the hall, on the stairs, then along the vague streets. The 
judgments Moon emitted impressed me less than his irrefutable, apodictic 
note. The new comrade did not discuss: he dictated opinions with scorn and 
with a certain anger.
"As we were arriving at the outlying houses, a sudden burst of gunfire 
stunned us. (Either before or afterwards we skirted the blank wall of a 
factory or barracks.) We moved into an unpaved street; a soldier, huge in the 
firelight, came out of a burning hut. Crying out, he ordered us to stop. I 
quickened my pace; my companion did not follow. I turned around: John 
77

Vincent Moon was motionless, fascinated, as if eternized by fear. I then ran 
back and knocked the soldier to the ground with one blow, shook Vincent 
Moon, insulted him and ordered him to follow. I had to take him by the arm; 
the passion of fear had rendered him helpless. We fled, into the night pierced 
by flames. A rifle volley reached out for us, and a bullet nicked Moon's right 
shoulder; as we were fleeing amid pines, he broke out in weak sobbing.
"In that fall of 1923 I had taken shelter in General Berkeley's country 
house.  The  general  (whom  I  had  never  seen)  was  carrying  out  some 
administrative assignment or other in Bengal; the house was less than a 
century old, but it was decayed and shadowy and flourished in puzzling 
corridors and in pointless antechambers. The museum and the huge library 
usurped the first floor: controversial and uncongenial books which in some 
manner are the history of the nineteenth century; scimitars frorn Nishapur, 
along whose captured arcs there seemed to persist still the wind and violence 
of battle. We entered (I seem to recall) through the rear. Moon, trembling, 
his mouth parched, murmured that the events of the night were interesting; I 
dressed his wound and brought him a cup of tea; I was able to determine that 
his 'wound' was superficial. Suddenly he stammered in bewilderment:
" 'You know, you ran a terrible risk.'
"I told him not to worry about it. (The habit of the civil war had 
incited me to act as I did; besides, the capture of a single member could 
endanger our cause.)
"By the following day Moon had recovered his poise. He accepted a 
cigarette  and  subjected  me  to  a  severe  interrogation  on  the  'economic 
resources of our revolutionary party.' His questions were very lucid; I told 
him (truthfully) that the situation was serious. Deep bursts of rifle fire 
agitated the south. I told Moon our comrades were waiting for us. My 
overcoat and my revolver were in my room; when I returned, I found Moon 
stretched out on the sofa, his eyes closed. He imagined he had a fever; he 
invoked a painful spasm in his shoulder.
"At that moment I understood that his cowardice was irreparable. I 
clumsily entreated him to take care of himself and went out. This frightened 
man mortified me, as if I were the coward, not Vincent Moon. Whatever one 
man does, it is as if all men did it. For that reason it is not unfair that one 
disobedience in a garden should contaminate all humanity; for that reason it 
is not unjust that the crucifixion of a single Jew should be sufficient to save 
it. Perhaps Schopenhauer was right: I am all other men, any man is all men, 
78

Shakespeare is in some manner the miserable John Vincent Moon.
"Nine days we spent in the general's enormous house. Of the agonies 
and the successes of the war I shall not speak: I propose to relate the history 
of the scar that insults me. In my memory, those nine days form only a 
single day, save for the next to the last, when our men broke into a barracks 
and we were able to avenge precisely the sixteen comrades who had been 
machine-gunned in Elphin. I slipped out of the house towards dawn, in the 
confusion of daybreak. At nightfall I was back. My companion was waiting 
for me upstairs: his wound did not permit him to descend to the ground 
floor. I recall him having some volume of strategy in his hand, F. N. Maude 
or Clausewitz. 'The weapon I prefer is the artillery,' he confessed to me one 
night. He inquired into our plans; he liked to censure them or revise them. 
He also was accustomed to denouncing 'our deplorable economic basis'; 
dogmatic and gloomy, he predicted the disastrous end.  'C'est une affaire 
flambée,' he murmured. In order to show that he was indifferent to being a 
physical coward, he magnified his mental arrogance. In this way, for good or 
for bad, nine days elapsed.
"On the tenth day the city fell definitely to the Black and Tans. Tall, 
silent horsemen patrolled the roads; ashes and smoke rode on the wind; on 
the corner I saw a corpse thrown to the ground, an impression less firm in 
my memory than that of a dummy on which the soldiers endlessly practiced 
their marksmanship, in the middle of the square. . . I had left when dawn 
was in the sky; before noon I returned. Moon, in the library, was speaking 
with someone; the tone of his voice told me he was talking on the telephone. 
Then  I  heard  my  name;  then,  that  I  would  return  at  seven;  then,  the 
suggestion that they should arrest me as I was crossing the garden. My 
reasonable  friend  was  reasonably  selling  me  out.  I  heard  him  demand 
guarantees of personal safety.
"Here my story is confused and becomes lost. I know that I pursued 
the informer along the black, nightmarish halls and along deep stairways of 
dizzyness. Moon knew the house very well, much better than I. One or two 
times I lost him. I cornered him before the soldiers stopped me. From one of 
the general's collections of arms I tore a cutlass: with that half moon I carved 
into his face forever a half moon of blood. Borges, to you, a stranger, I have 
made this confession. Your contempt does not grieve me so much."
Here the narrator stopped. I noticed that his hands were shaking.
"And Moon?" I asked him.
79

"He collected his Judas money and fled to Brazil. That afternoon, in 
the square, he saw a dummy shot up by some drunken men."
I waited in vain for the rest of the story. Finally I told him to go on.
Then a sob went through his body; and with a weak gentleness he 
pointed to the whitish curved scar.
"You don't believe me?" he stammered. "Don't you see that I carry 
written on my face the mark of my infamy? I have told you the story thus so 
that you would hear me to the end. I denounced the man who protected me: I 
am Vincent Moon. Now despise me."
To E.H.M.
Translated by D.A.Y.
80

Theme of the Traitor and the Hero
So the Platonic year 
Whirls out new right and wrong, 
Whirls in the old instead; 
All men are dancers and their tread 
Goes to the barbarous clangour of a gong. 
W. B. Yeats: The Tower
nder the notable influence of Chesterton (contriver and embellisher of 
elegant mysteries) and the palace counselor Leibniz (inventor of the 
pre-established harmony), in my idle afternoons I have imagined this story 
plot which I shall perhaps write someday and which already justifies me 
somehow. Details, rectifications, adjustments are lacking; there are zones of 
the story not yet revealed to me; today, January 3rd, 1944, I seem to see it as 
follows:
U
The action takes place in an oppressed and tenacious country: Poland, 
Ireland, the Venetian Republic, some South American or Balkan state. . . Or 
rather it has taken place, since, though the narrator is contemporary, his 
story  occurred  towards  the  middle  or  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth 
century. Let us say (for narrative convenience) Ireland; let us say in 1824. 
The narrator's name is Ryan; he is the great-grandson of the young, the 
heroic, the beautiful, the assassinated Fergus Kilpatrick, whose grave was 
mysteriously violated, whose name illustrated the verses of Browning and 
Hugo, whose statue presides over a gray hill amid red marshes.
Kilpatrick  was  a  conspirator,  a  secret  and  glorious  captain  of 
conspirators; like Moses, who from the land of Moab glimpsed but could not 
reach the promised land, Kilpatrick perished on the eve of the victorious 
revolt which he had premeditated and dreamt of. The first centenary of his 
death draws near; the circumstances of the crime are enigmatic; Ryan, 
engaged in writing a biography of the hero, discovers that the enigma 
exceeds  the  confines  of  a  simple  police  investigation.  Kilpatrick  was 
murdered in a theater; the British police never found the killer; the historians 
maintain that this scarcely soils their good reputation, since it was probably 
the police themselves who had him killed. Other facets of the enigma disturb 
Ryan. They are of a cyclic nature: they seem to repeat or combine events of 
remote regions, of remote ages. For example, no one is unaware that the 
81

officers who examined the hero's body found a sealed letter in which he was 
warned of the risk of attending the theater that evening; likewise Julius 
Caesar, on his way to the place where his friends' daggers awaited him, 
received a note he never read, in which the treachery was declared along 
with the traitors'  names.  Caesar's  wife,  Calpurnia,  saw  in a dream  the 
destruction of a tower decreed him by the Senate; false and anonymous 
rumors on the eve of Kilpatrick's death publicized throughout the country 
that the circular tower of Kilgarvan had burned, which could be taken as a 
presage, for he had been born in Kilgarvan. These parallelisms (and others) 
between the story of Caesar and the story of an Irish conspirator lead Ryan 
to suppose the existence of a secret form of time, a pattern of repeated lines. 
He  thinks  of  the  decimal  history  conceived  by  Condorcet,  of  the 
morphologies proposed by Hegel, Spengler and Vico, of Hesiod's men, who 
degenerate from gold to iron. He thinks of the transmigration of souls, a 
doctrine  that  lends  horror  to  Celtic  literature  and  that  Caesar  himself 
attributed to the British druids; he thinks that, before having been Fergus 
Kilpatrick, Fergus Kilpatrick was Julius Caesar. He is rescued from these 
circular labyrinths by a curious finding, a finding which then sinks him into 
other, more inextricable and heterogeneous labyrinths: certain words uttered 
by a beggar who spoke with Fergus Kilpatrick the day of his death were 
prefigured by Shakespeare in the tragedy Macbeth. That history should have 
copied history was already sufficiently astonishing; that history should copy 
literature was inconceivable. . . Ryan finds that, in 1814, James Alexander 
Nolan, the oldest of the hero's companions, had translated the principal 
dramas of Shakespeare into Gaelic; among these was Julius Caesar. He also 
discovers in the archives the manuscript of an article by Nolan on the Swiss 
Festspiele: vast and errant theatrical representations which require thousands 
of actors and repeat historical episodes in the very cities and mountains 
where they took place. Another unpublished document reveals to him that, a 
few days before the end, Kilpatrick, presiding over the last meeting, had 
signed the order for the execution of a traitor whose name has been deleted 
from the records. This order does not accord with Kilpatrick's merciful 
nature. Ryan investigates the matter (this investigation is one of the gaps in 
my plot) and manages to decipher the enigma.
Kilpatrick was killed in a theater, but the entire city was a theater as 
well, and the actors were legion, and the drama crowned by his death 
extended over many days and many nights.
82

This is what happened:
On the 2nd of August, 1824, the conspirators gathered. The country 
was ripe for revolt; something, however, always failed: there was a traitor in 
the  group.  Fergus  Kilpatrick  had  charged  James  Nolan  with  the 
responsibility of discovering the traitor. Nolan carried out his assignment: he 
announced in the very midst of the meeting that the traitor was Kilpatrick 
himself. He demonstrated the truth of his accusation with irrefutable proof; 
the  conspirators  condemned  their  president  to  die.  He  signed  his  own 
sentence, but begged that his punishment not harm his country.
It was then that Nolan conceived his strange scheme. Ireland idolized 
Kilpatrick; the most tenuous suspicion of his infamy would have jeopardized 
the revolt; Nolan proposed a plan which made of the traitor's execution an 
instrument for the country's emancipation. He suggested that the condemned 
man die at  the  hands of an unknown assassin  in deliberately dramatic 
circumstances  which  would remain  engraved  in  the imagination  of  the 
people and would hasten the revolt. Kilpatrick swore he would take part in 
the scheme, which gave him the occasion to redeem himself and for which 
his death would provide the final flourish.
Nolan, urged on by time, was not able to invent all the circumstances 
of the multiple execution; he had to plagiarize another dramatist, the English 
enemy William Shakespeare. He repeated scenes from Macbeth, from Julius 
Caesar.  The public  and  secret  enactment  comprised  various  days.  The 
condemned man entered Dublin, discussed, acted, prayed, reproved, uttered 
words of pathos, and each of these gestures, to be reflected in his glory, had 
been pre-established by Nolan. Hundreds of actors collaborated with the 
protagonist; the role of some was complex; that of others momentary. The 
things they did and said endure in the history books, in the impassioned 
memory of Ireland. Kilpatrick, swept along by this minutely detailed destiny 
which both redeemed him and destroyed him, more than once enriched the 
text of his judge with improvised acts and words. Thus the populous drama 
unfolded in time, until on the 6th of August, 1824, in a theater box with 
funereal curtains prefiguring Lincoln's, a long-desired bullet entered the 
breast of the traitor and hero, who, amid two effusions of sudden blood, was 
scarcely able to articulate a few foreseen words.
In Nolan's work, the passages imitated from Shakespeare are the least 
dramatic; Ryan suspects that the author interpolated them so that in the 
future someone might hit upon the truth. He understands that he too forms 
83

part of Nolan's plot. . . After a series of tenacious hesitations, he resolves to 
keep his discovery silent. He publishes a book dedicated to the hero's glory; 
this too, perhaps, was foreseen.
Translated by J.E.I.
84

Death and the Compass
f the many problems which exercised the reckless discernment of 
Lönnrot, none was so strange—so rigorously strange, shall we say—as 
the periodic series of bloody events which culminated at the villa of Triste-
le-Roy, amid the ceaseless  aroma of the eucalypti. It is true  that  Erik 
Lönnrot  failed  to  prevent  the  last  murder,  but  that  he  foresaw  it  is 
indisputable. Neither did he guess the identity of Yarmolinsky's luckless 
assassin, but he did succeed in divining the secret morphology behind the 
fiendish series as well as the participation of Red Scharlach, whose other 
nickname is Scharlach the Dandy. That criminal (as countless others) had 
sworn on his honor to kill Lönnrot, but the latter could never be intimidated. 
Lönnrot believed himself a pure reasoner, an Auguste Dupin, but there was 
something of the adventurer in him, and even a little of the gambler.
O
The first murder occurred in the Hôtel du Nord—that tall prism which 
dominates the estuary whose waters are the color of the desert. To that tower 
(which  quite  glaringly  unites  the  hateful  whiteness  of  a  hospital,  the 
numbered divisibility of a jail, and the general appearance of a bordello) 
there came on the third day of December the delegate from Podolsk to the 
Third Talmudic Congress, Doctor Marcel Yarmolinsky, a gray-bearded man 
with gray eyes. We shall never know whether the Hôtel du Nord pleased 
him; he accepted it with the ancient resignation which had allowed him to 
endure three years of war in the Carpathians and three thousand years of 
oppression and pogroms. He was given a room on Floor R, across from the 
suite  which  was  occupied—not  without  splendor—by  the  Tetrarch  of 
Galilee.  Yarmolinsky  supped,  postponed  until  the  following  day  an 
inspection of the unknown city, arranged in a placard his many books and 
few personal possessions, and before midnight extinguished his light. (Thus 
declared the Tetrarch's chauffeur who slept in the adjoining room.) On the 
fourth, at 11:03 A.M., the editor of the Yidische Zaitung put in a call to him; 
Doctor Yarmolinsky did not answer. He was found in his room, his face 
already a little dark, nearly nude beneath a large, anachronistic cape. He was 
lying not far from the door which opened on the hall; a deep knife wound 
had split his breast. A few hours later, in the same room amid journalists, 
photographers  and  policemen,  Inspector  Treviranus  and  Lönnrot  were 
calmly discussing the problem.
85

"No need to look for a three-legged cat here," Treviranus was saying 
as he brandished an imperious cigar. "We all know that the Tetrarch of 
Galilee owns the finest sapphires in the world. Someone, intending to steal 
them, must have broken in here by mistake. Yarmolinsky got up; the robber 
had to kill him. How does it sound to you?"
"Possible, but not interesting," Lönnrot answered. "You'll reply that 
reality hasn't the least obligation to be interesting. And I'll answer you that 
reality  may  avoid  that  obligation  but  that  hypotheses  may  not.  In  the 
hypothesis that you propose, chance intervenes copiously. Here we have a 
dead rabbi; I would prefer a purely rabbinical explanation, not the imaginary 
mischances of an imaginary robber."
Treviranus replied ill-humoredly:
"I'm  not  interested  in  rabbinical  explanations.  I  am  interested  in 
capturing the man who stabbed this unknown person."
"Not so unknown," corrected Lönnrot. "Here are his complete works." 
He indicated in the wall-cupboard a row of tall books: a Vindication of the 
Cabala;  An  Examination  of  the  Philosophy  of  Robert  Fludd;  a  literal 
translation of the Sepher Yezirah; a Biography of the Baal Shem; a History 
of the Hasidic Sect;  a monograph (in German) on the Tetragrammaton; 
another,  on  the  divine  nomenclature  of  the  Pentateuch.  The  inspector 
regarded them with dread, almost with repulsion. Then he began to laugh.
"I'm a poor Christian," he said. "Carry off those musty volumes if you 
want; I don't have any time to waste on Jewish superstitions."
"Maybe the crime belongs to the history of Jewish superstitions," 
murmured Lönnrot.
"Like Christianity," the editor of the Yidische Zaitung ventured to add. 
He was myopic, an atheist and very shy.
No one answered him. One of the agents had found in the small 
typewriter a piece of paper on which was written the following unfinished 
sentence:
The first letter of the Name has been uttered
Lönnrot abstained from smiling. Suddenly become a bibliophile or 
Hebraist, he ordered a package made of the dead man's books and carried 
them  off  to  his  apartment.  Indifferent  to  the  police  investigation,  he 
dedicated himself to studying them. One large octavo volume revealed to 
86

him the teachings of Israel Baal Shem Tobh, founder of the sect of the Pious; 
another,  the  virtues  and  terrors  of  the  Tetragrammaton,  which  is  the 
unutterable name of God; another, the thesis that God has a secret name, in 
which is epitomized (as in the crystal sphere which the Persians ascribe to 
Alexander of Macedonia) his ninth attribute, eternity—that is to say, the 
immediate knowledge of all things that will be, which are and which have 
been in the universe. Tradition numbers ninety-nine names of God; the 
Hebraists attribute that imperfect number to magical fear of even numbers; 
the  Hasidim  reason  that  that  hiatus  indicates  a  hundredth  name—the 
Absolute Name.
From this erudition Lönnrot was distracted, a few days later, by the 
appearance of the editor of the Yidische Zaitung. The latter wanted to talk 
about the murder; Lönnrot preferred to discuss the diverse names of God; 
the journalist declared, in three columns, that the investigator, Erik Lönnrot, 
had dedicated himself to studying the names of God in order to come across 
the name of the murderer. Lönnrot, accustomed to the simplifications of 
journalism, did not become indignant. One of those enterprising shopkeepers 
who have discovered that any given man is resigned to buying any given 
book published a popular edition of the History of the Hasidic Sect.
The second murder occurred on the evening of the third of January, in 
the  most  deserted  and  empty  corner  of  the  capital's  western  suburbs. 
Towards  dawn,  one  of  the  gendarmes  who  patrol  those  solitudes  on 
horseback saw a man in a poncho, lying prone in the shadow of an old paint 
shop. The harsh features seemed to be masked in blood; a deep knife wound 
had split his breast. On the wall, across the yellow and red diamonds, were 
some words written in chalk. The gendarme spelled them out. . . That 
afternoon, Treviranus and Lönnrot headed for the remote scene of the crime. 
To the left and right of the automobile the city disintegrated; the firmament 
grew and houses were of less importance than a brick kiln or a poplar tree. 
They arrived at their miserable destination: an alley's end, with rose-colored 
walls which somehow seemed to reflect the extravagant sunset. The dead 
man  had  already  been  identified.  He  was  Daniel  Simon  Azevedo,  an 
individual of some fame in the old northern suburbs, who had risen from 
wagon driver to political tough, then degenerated to a thief and even an 
informer. (The singular  style of his death seemed appropriate  to them: 
Azevedo was the last representative of a generation of bandits who knew 
how to manipulate a dagger, but not a revolver.) The words in chalk were 
87

the following:
The second letter of the Name has been uttered
The third murder occurred on the night of the third of February. A little 
before one o'clock, the telephone in Inspector Treviranus' office rang. In 
avid secretiveness, a man with a guttural voice spoke; he said his name was 
Ginzberg (or Ginsburg) and that he was prepared to communicate, for 
reasonable  remuneration,  the  events  surrounding  the  two  sacrifices  of 
Azevedo  and  Yarmolinsky.  A  discordant  sound  of  whistles  and  horns 
drowned out the informer's voice. Then, the connection was broken off. 
Without yet rejecting the possibility of a hoax (after all, it was carnival 
time), Treviranus found out that he had been called from the Liverpool 
House, a tavern on the rue de Toulon, that dingy street where side by side 
exist the cosmorama and the coffee shop, the bawdy house and the bible 
sellers. Treviranus spoke with the owner. The latter (Black Finnegan, an old 
Irish criminal who was immersed in, almost overcome by, respectability) 
told him that the last person to use the phone was a lodger, a certain 
Gryphius, who had just left with some friends. Treviranus went immediately 
to  Liverpool  House.  The  owner  related  the  following.  Eight  days  ago 
Gryphius had rented a room above the tavern. He was a sharp-featured man 
with a nebulous gray beard, and was shabbily dressed in black; Finnegan 
(who used the room for a purpose which Treviranus guessed) demanded a 
rent which was undoubtedly excessive; Gryphius paid the stipulated sum 
without hesitation. He almost never went out; he dined and lunched in his 
room; his face was scarcely known in the bar. On the night in question, he 
came downstairs to make a phone call from Finnegan's office. A closed cab 
stopped in front of the tavern. The driver didn't move from his seat; several 
patrons recalled that he was wearing a bear's mask. Two harlequins got out 
of the cab; they were of short stature and no one failed to observe that they 
were very drunk. With a tooting of horns, they burst into Finnegan's office; 
they embraced Gryphius, who appeared to recognize them but responded 
coldly; they exchanged a few words in Yiddish—he in a low, guttural voice, 
they in high-pitched, false voices—and then went up to the room. Within a 
quarter hour the three descended, very happy. Gryphius, staggering, seemed 
as drunk as the others. He walked—tall and dizzy—in the middle, between 
the masked harlequins. (One of the women at the bar remembered the 
88

yellow, red and green diamonds.) Twice he stumbled; twice he was caught 
and held by the harlequins. Moving off toward the inner harbor which 
enclosed  a  rectangular  body  of  water,  the  three  got  into  the  cab  and 
disappeared.  From  the  footboard  of the cab,  the  last  of  the  harlequins 
scrawled an obscene figure and a sentence on one of the slates of the pier 
shed.
Treviranus saw the sentence. It was virtually predictable. It said:
The last of the letters of the Name has been uttered
Afterwards, he examined the small room of Gryphius-Ginzberg. On 
the  floor  there  was  a  brusque  star  of  blood,  in  the  corners,  traces  of 
cigarettes  of  a  Hungarian  brand;  in  a  cabinet,  a  book  in  Latin—the 
Philologus Hebraeo-Graecus (1739) of Leusden—with several manuscript 
notes. Treviranus looked it over with indignation and had Lönnrot located. 
The latter, without removing his hat, began to read while the inspector was 
interrogating the contradictory witnesses to the possible kidnapping. At four 
o'clock they left. Out on the twisted rue de Toulon, as they were treading on 
the dead serpentines of the dawn, Treviranus said:
"And what if all this business tonight were just a mock rehearsal?"
Erik Lönnrot smiled and, with all gravity, read a passage (which was 
underlined)  from  the  thirty-third  dissertation  of  the  Philologus:  Dies 
Judacorum incipit ad soils occasu usque ad soils occasum diei sequentis.
"This means," he added, " 'The Hebrew day begins at sundown and 
lasts until the following sundown.' "
The inspector attempted an irony.
"Is that fact the most valuable one you've come across tonight?"
"No. Even more valuable was a word that Ginzberg used."
The afternoon papers did not overlook the periodic disappearances. 
La Cruz de la Espada  contrasted them with the admirable discipline and 
order of the last Hermetical Congress; Ernst Palast, in El Mártir, criticized 
"the intolerable delays in this clandestine and frugal pogrom, which has 
taken three months to murder three Jews"; the Yidische Zaitung rejected the 
horrible hypothesis of an anti-Semitic plot, "even though many penetrating 
intellects admit no other solution to the triple mystery"; the most illustrious 
gunman of the south, Dandy Red Scharlach, swore that in his district similar 
crimes could never occur, and he accused Inspector Franz Treviranus of 
89

culpable negligence.
On the night of March first, the inspector received an impressive-
looking sealed envelope. He opened it; the envelope contained a letter 
signed "Baruch Spinoza" and a detailed plan of the city, obviously torn from 
a Baedeker. The letter prophesied that on the third of March there would not 
be a fourth murder, since the paint shop in the west, the tavern on the rue de 
Toulon and  the Hôtel du  Nord were  "the  perfect  vertices of a  mystic 
equilateral triangle"; the map demonstrated in red ink the regularity of the 
triangle. Treviranus read the  more geometrico  argument with resignation, 
and sent the letter and the map to Lönnrot—who, unquestionably, was 
deserving of such madnesses.
Erik  Lönnrot  studied  them.  The  three  locations  were  in  fact 
equidistant. Symmetry in time (the third of December, the third of January, 
the third of February); symmetry in space as well. . . Suddenly, he felt as if 
he were on the point of solving the mystery. A set of calipers and a compass 
completed  his  quick  intuition.  He  smiled,  pronounced  the  word 
Tetragrammaton (of recent acquisition) and phoned the inspector. He said:
"Thank you for the equilateral triangle you sent me last night. It has 
enabled me to solve the problem. This Friday the criminals will be in jail, 
we may rest assured."
"Then they're not planning a fourth murder?" 
"Precisely because they  are  planning a fourth murder we can rest 
assured."
Lönnrot hung up. One hour later he was traveling on one of the 
Southern Railway's trains, in the direction of the abandoned villa of Triste-
le-Roy. To the south of the city of our story, flows a blind little river of 
muddy water, defamed by refuse and garbage. On the far side is an industrial 
suburb where, under the protection of a political boss from Barcelona, 
gunmen thrive.  Lönnrot smiled at  the  thought that the  most  celebrated 
gunman of all—Red Scharlach—would have given a great deal to know of 
his clandestine visit. Azevedo had been an associate of Scharlach; Lönnrot 
considered the remote possibility that the fourth victim might be Scharlach 
himself. Then he rejected the idea. . . He had very nearly deciphered the 
problem; mere circumstances, reality (names, prison records, faces, judicial 
and penal proceedings) hardly interested him now. He wanted to travel a bit, 
he wanted to rest from three months of sedentary investigation. He reflected 
that the explanation of the murders was in an anonymous triangle and a 
90

dusty Greek word. The mystery appeared almost crystalline to him now; he 
was mortified to have dedicated a hundred days to it.
The train stopped at a silent loading station. Lönnrot got off. It was 
one of those deserted afternoons that seem like dawns. The air of the turbid, 
puddled  plain  was  damp  and  cold.  Lönnrot  began  walking  along  the 
countryside. He saw dogs, he saw a car on a siding, he saw the horizon, he 
saw a silver-colored horse drinking the crapulous water of a puddle. It was 
growing dark when he saw the rectangular belvedere of the villa of Triste-le-
Roy, almost as tall as the black eucalypti which surrounded it. He thought 
that scarcely one dawning and one nightfall (an ancient splendor in the east 
and another in the west) separated him from the moment long desired by the 
seekers of the Name.
A rusty wrought-iron fence defined the irregular perimeter of the 
villa. The main gate was closed. Lönnrot, without much hope of getting in, 
circled the area. Once again before the insurmountable gate, he placed his 
hand between the bars almost mechanically and encountered the bolt. The 
creaking of the iron surprised him. With a laborious passivity the whole gate 
swung back.
Lönnrot  advanced  among  the  eucalypti  treading  on  confused 
generations of rigid, broken leaves. Viewed from anear, the house of the 
villa of Triste-le-Roy abounded in pointless symmetries and in maniacal 
repetitions: to one Diana in a murky niche corresponded a second Diana in 
another  niche;  one  balcony  was  reflected  in  another  balcony;  double 
stairways  led  to  double  balustrades.  A  two-faced  Hermes  projected  a 
monstrous  shadow.  Lönnrot  circled  the  house  as  he  had  the  villa.  He 
examined everything; beneath the level of the terrace he saw a narrow 
Venetian blind.
He pushed it; a few marble steps descended to a vault. Lönnrot, who 
had now perceived the architect's preferences, guessed that at the opposite 
wall there would be another stairway. He found it, ascended, raised his 
hands and opened the trap door.
A brilliant light led him to a window. He opened it: a yellow, rounded 
moon  defined  two  silent  fountains  in  the  melancholy  garden.  Lönnrot 
explored the house. Through anterooms and galleries he passed to duplicate 
patios, and time after time to the same patio. He ascended the dusty stairs to 
circular antechambers; he was multiplied infinitely in opposing mirrors; he 
grew tired of opening or half-opening windows which revealed outside the 
91

same desolate garden from various heights and various angles; inside, only 
pieces of furniture wrapped in yellow dust sheets and chandeliers bound up 
in tarlatan. A bedroom detained him; in that bedroom, one single flower in a 
porcelain vase; at the first touch the ancient petals fell apart. On the second 
floor, on the top floor, the house seemed infinite and expanding. The house 
is not this large, he thought. Other things are making it seem larger: the dim 
light, the  symmetry,  the  mirrors,  so  many  years,  my  unfamiliarity,  the 
loneliness.
By way of a spiral staircase he arrived at the oriel. The early evening 
moon shone through the diamonds of the window; they were yellow, red and 
green. An astonishing, dizzying recollection struck him.
Two men of short stature, robust and ferocious, threw themselves on 
him and disarmed him; another, very tall, saluted him gravely and said:
"You are very kind. You have saved us a night and a day." It was Red 
Scharlach. The men handcuffed Lönnrot. The latter at length recovered his 
voice.  "Scharlach,  are  you  looking  for  the  Secret  Name?"  Scharlach 
remained standing, indifferent. He had not participated in the brief struggle, 
and he scarcely extended his hand to receive Lönnrot's revolver. He spoke; 
Lönnrot noted in his voice a fatigued triumph, a hatred the size of the 
universe, a sadness not less than that hatred.
"No," said Scharlach. "I am seeking something more ephemeral and 
perishable, I am seeking Erik Lönnrot. Three years ago, in a gambling house 
on the rue de Toulon, you arrested my brother and had him sent to jail. My 
men slipped me away in a coupe from the gun battle with a policeman's 
bullet in my stomach. Nine days and nine nights I lay in agony in this 
desolate, symmetrical villa; fever was demolishing me, and the odious two-
faced Janus who watches the twilights and the dawns lent horror to my 
dreams and to my waking. I came to abominate my body, I came to sense 
that two eyes, two hands, two lungs are as monstrous as two faces. An 
Irishman tried to convert me to the faith of Jesus; he repeated to me the 
phrase of the goyim: All roads lead to Rome. At night my delirium nurtured 
itself on that metaphor; I felt that the world was a labyrinth, from which it 
was impossible to flee, for all roads, though they pretend to lead to the north 
or south, actually lead to Rome, which was also the quadrilateral jail where 
my brother was dying and the villa of Triste-le-Roy. On those nights I swore 
by the God who sees with two faces and by all the gods of fever and of the 
mirrors to weave a labyrinth around the man who had imprisoned my 
92

brother.  I  have  woven  it  and  it  is  firm:  the  ingredients  are  a  dead 
heresiologist,  a  compass,  an  eighteenth-century  sect,  a  Greek  word,  a 
dagger, the diamonds of a paint shop.
"The first term of the sequence was given to me by chance. I had 
planned with a few colleagues—among them Daniel Azevedo—the robbery 
of the Tetrarch's sapphires. Azevedo betrayed us: he got drunk with the 
money that we had advanced him and he undertook the job a day early. He 
got lost in the vastness of the hotel; around two in the morning he stumbled 
into Yarmolinsky's room. The latter, harassed by insomnia, had started to 
write. He was working on some notes, apparently, for an article on the Name 
of God; he had already written the words: The first letter of the Name has 
been uttered. Azevedo warned him to be silent; Yarmolinsky reached out his 
hand for the bell which would awaken the hotel's forces; Azevedo countered 
with a single stab in the chest. It was almost a reflex action; half a century of 
violence had taught him that the easiest and surest thing is to kill. . . Ten 
days later I learned through the Yidische Zaitung that you were seeking in 
Yarmolinsky's writings the key to his death. I read the History of the Hasidic 
Sect; I learned that the reverent fear of uttering the Name of God had given 
rise to the doctrine that that Name is all powerful and recondite. I discovered 
that some Hasidim, in search of that secret Name, had gone so far as to 
perform human sacrifices. . . I knew that you would make the conjecture that 
the Hasidim had sacrificed the rabbi; I set myself the task of justifying that 
conjecture.
"Marcel Yarmolinsky died on the night of December third; for the 
second 'sacrifice' I selected the night of January third. He died in the north; 
for the second 'sacrifice' a place in the west was suitable. Daniel Azevedo 
was the necessary victim. He deserved death; he was impulsive, a traitor; his 
apprehension could destroy the entire plan. One of us stabbed him; in order 
to link his corpse to the other one I wrote on the paint shop diamonds: The 
second letter of the Name has been uttered.
"The third murder was produced on the third of February. It was, as 
Treviranus guessed,  a mere sham. I am Gryphius-Ginzberg-Ginsburg; I 
endured an interminable week (supplemented by a tenuous fake beard) in the 
perverse cubicle on the rue de Toulon, until my friends abducted me. From 
the footboard of the cab, one of them wrote on a post: The last of the letters 
of the Name has been uttered.  That sentence revealed that the series of 
murders  was  triple.  Thus  the  public  understood  it;  I,  nevertheless, 
93

interspersed  repeated  signs  that  would  allow  you,  Erik  Lönnrot,  the 
reasoner, to understand that the series was quadruple. A portent in the north, 
others in the east and west, demand a fourth portent in the south; the 
Tetragrammaton—the name of God, JHVH—is made up of four letters; the 
harlequins and the paint shop sign suggested four points. In the manual of 
Leusden I underlined a certain passage: that passage manifests that Hebrews 
compute the day from sunset to sunset; that passage makes known that the 
deaths occurred on the fourth of each month. I sent the equilateral triangle to 
Treviranus. I foresaw that you would add the missing point. The point which 
would form a perfect rhomb, the point which fixes in advance where a 
punctual death awaits you. I have premeditated everything, Erik Lönnrot, in 
order to attract you to the solitudes of Triste-le-Roy."
Lönnrot avoided Scharlach's eyes. He looked at the trees and the sky 
subdivided into diamonds of turbid yellow, green and red. He felt faintly 
cold, and he felt, too, an impersonal—almost anonymous—sadness. It was 
already night; from the dusty garden came the futile cry of a bird. For the 
last time, Lönnrot considered the problem of the symmetrical and periodic 
deaths.
"In your labyrinth there are three lines too many," he said at last. "I 
know of one Greek labyrinth which is a single straight line. Along that line 
so many philosophers have lost themselves that a mere detective might well 
do so, too. Scharlach, when in some other incarnation you hunt me, pretend 
to commit (or do commit) a crime at A, then a second crime at B, eight 
kilometers from A, then a third crime at C, four kilometers from A and B, 
half-way between the two. Wait for me afterwards at D, two kilometers from 
A and C, again halfway between both. Kill me at D, as you are now going to 
kill me at Triste-le-Roy."
"The next time I kill you," replied Scharlach, "I promise you that 
labyrinth, consisting of a single line which is invisible and unceasing."
He moved back a few steps. Then, very carefully, he fired.
For Mandie Molina Vedia
Translated by D.A.Y.
94

The Secret Miracle
And God had him die for a hundred
years and then revived him and said:
"How long have you been here?"
"A day or a part of a day," he answered.
Koran, II, 261
he night of March 14, 1943, in an apartment in the Zeltnergasse of 
Prague, Jaromir Hladik, the author of the unfinished drama entitled The 
Enemies,  of Vindication of Eternity,  and of a study of the indirect Jewish 
sources of Jakob Böhme, had a dream of a long game of chess. The players 
were not two persons, but two illustrious families; the game had been going 
on for centuries. Nobody could remember what the stakes were, but it was 
rumored that they were enormous, perhaps infinite; the chessmen and the 
board were in a secret tower. Jaromir (in his dream) was the first-born of 
one of the contending families. The clock struck the hour for the game, 
which could not be postponed. The dreamer raced over the sands of a rainy 
desert, and was unable to recall either the pieces or the rules of chess. At that 
moment he awoke. The clangor of the rain and of the terrible clocks ceased. 
A rhythmic, unanimous noise, punctuated by shouts of command, arose 
from the Zeltnergasse. It was dawn, and the armored vanguard of the Third 
Reich was entering Prague.
T
On the nineteenth the authorities received a denunciation; that same 
nineteenth, toward evening, Jaromir Hladik was arrested. He was taken to an 
aseptic, white barracks on the opposite bank of the Moldau. He was unable 
to refute a single one of the Gestapo's charges; his mother's family name was 
Jaroslavski, he was of Jewish blood, his study on Böhme had a marked 
Jewish emphasis, his signature had been one more on the protest against the 
Anschluss. In 1928 he had translated the Sepher Yezirah for the publishing 
house  of  Hermann  Barsdorf.  The  fulsome  catalogue  of  the  firm  had 
exaggerated,  for  publicity  purposes,  the  translator's  reputation,  and  the 
catalogue had been examined by Julius Rothe, one of the officials who held 
Hladik's fate in his hands. There is not a person who, except in the field of 
his own specialization, is not credulous; two or three adjectives in Gothic 
type were enough to persuade Julius Rothe of Hladik's importance, and he 
ordered him sentenced to death pour encourager les autres. The execution 
95

was set for March 29th, at 9:00 A.M. This delay (whose importance the reader 
will grasp later) was owing to the desire on the authorities' part to proceed 
impersonally and slowly, after the manner of vegetables and plants.
Hladik's first reaction was mere terror. He felt he would not have 
shrunk from the gallows, the block, or the knife, but that death by a firing 
squad was unbearable. In vain he tried to convince himself that the plain, 
unvarnished  fact  of  dying  was  the  fearsome  thing,  not  the  attendant 
circumstances.  He  never  wearied  of  conjuring  up  these  circumstances, 
senselessly  trying  to  exhaust  all  their  possible  variations.  He  infinitely 
anticipated  the  process  of  his  dying,  from  the  sleepless  dawn  to  the 
mysterious volley. Before the day set by Julius Rothe he died hundreds of 
deaths  in  courtyards  whose  forms  and  angles  strained  geometrical 
probabilities, machine-gunned by variable soldiers in changing numbers, 
who at times killed him from a distance, at others from close by. He faced 
these imaginary executions with real terror (perhaps with real bravery); each 
simulacrum lasted a few seconds. When the circle was closed, Jaromir 
returned once more and interminably to the tremulous vespers of his death. 
Then he reflected that reality does not usually coincide with our anticipation 
of it; with a logic of his own he inferred that to foresee a circumstantial 
detail is to prevent its happening. Trusting in this weak magic, he invented, 
so that they would not happen, the most gruesome details. Finally, as was 
natural, he came to fear that they were prophetic. Miserable in the night, he 
endeavored to find some way to hold fast to the fleeting substance of time. 
He knew that it was rushing headlong toward the dawn of the twenty-ninth. 
He reasoned aloud: "I am now in the night of the twenty-second; while this 
night lasts (and for six nights more), I am invulnerable, immortal." The 
nights of sleep seemed to him deep, dark pools in which he could submerge 
himself. There were moments when he longed impatiently for the final burst 
of fire that would free him, for better or for worse, from the vain compulsion 
of his imaginings. On the twenty-eighth, as the last sunset was reverberating 
from the high barred windows, the thought of his drama,  The Enemies, 
deflected him from these abject considerations.
Hladik had rounded forty. Aside from a few friendships and many 
habits, the problematic exercise of literature constituted his life. Like all 
writers,  he  measured  the  achievements  of  others  by  what  they  had 
accomplished, asking of them that they measure him by what he envisaged 
or planned. All the books he had published had left him with a complex 
96

feeling of repentance. His studies of the work of Böhme, of Ibn Ezra, and of 
Fludd had been characterized essentially by mere application; his translation 
of the Sepher Yezirah, by carelessness, fatigue, and conjecture. Vindication 
of Eternity perhaps had fewer shortcomings. The first volume gave a history 
of  man's  various  concepts  of  eternity,  from  the  immutable  Being  of 
Parmenides to the modifiable Past of Hinton. The second denied (with 
Francis Bradley) that all the events of the universe make up a temporal 
series, arguing that the number of man's possible experiences is not infinite, 
and that a single "repetition" suffices to prove that time is a fallacy. . . 
Unfortunately,  the  arguments  that  demonstrate  this  fallacy  are  equally 
fallacious. Hladik was in the habit of going over them with a kind of 
contemptuous perplexity. He had also composed a series of Expressionist 
poems;  to  the  poet's  chagrin  they  had  been  included  in  an  anthology 
published in 1924, and no subsequent anthology but inherited them. From all 
this equivocal, uninspired past Hladik had hoped to redeem himself with his 
drama in verse,  The Enemies.  (Hladik felt the verse form to be essential 
because it makes it impossible for the spectators to lose sight of irreality, 
one of art's requisites.)
The drama observed the unities of time, place, and action. The scene 
was laid in Hradcany, in the library of Baron von Roemerstadt, on one of the 
last afternoons of the nineteenth century. In the first scene of the first act a 
strange man visits Roemerstadt. (A clock was striking seven, the vehemence 
of  the  setting  sun's  rays  glorified  the  windows,  a  passionate,  familiar 
Hungarian  music  floated  in  the  air.)  This  visit  is  followed  by  others; 
Roemerstadt does not know the people who are importuning him, but he has 
the uncomfortable feeling that he has seen them somewhere, perhaps in a 
dream. They all fawn upon him, but it is apparent—first to the audience and 
then to the Baron—that they are secret enemies, in league to ruin him. 
Roemerstadt succeeds in checking or evading their involved schemings. In 
the dialogue mention is made of his sweetheart, Julia von Weidenau, and a 
certain Jaroslav Kubin, who at one time pressed his attentions on her. Kubin 
has now lost his mind, and believes himself to be Roemerstadt. The dangers 
increase; Roemerstadt, at the end of the second act, is forced to kill one of 
the conspirators. The third and final act opens. The incoherencies gradually 
increase;  actors  who  had  seemed  out  of  the  play  reappear;  the  man 
Roemerstadt killed returns for a moment. Someone points out that evening 
has not fallen; the clock strikes seven, the high windows reverberate in the 
97

western sun, the air carries an impassioned Hungarian melody. The first 
actor comes on and repeats the lines he had spoken in the first scene of the 
first  act.  Roemerstadt  speaks  to  him  without  surprise;  the  audience 
understands that Roemerstadt is the miserable Jaroslav Kubin. The drama 
has never taken place; it is the circular delirium that Kubin lives and relives 
endlessly.
Hladik had never asked himself whether this tragicomedy of errors 
was preposterous or admirable, well thought out or slipshod. He felt that the 
plot I have just sketched was best contrived to cover up his defects and point 
up  his  abilities  and  held  the  possibility  of  allowing  him  to  redeem 
(symbolically) the meaning of his life. He had finished the first act and one 
or two scenes of the third; the metrical nature of the work made it possible 
for him to keep working it over, changing the hexameters, without the 
manuscript in front of him. He thought how he still had two acts to do, and 
that he was going to die very soon. He spoke with God in the darkness: "If in 
some fashion I exist, if I am not one of Your repetitions and mistakes, I exist 
as the author of The Enemies. To finish this drama, which can justify me and 
justify You, I need another year. Grant me these days, You to whom the 
centuries and time belong." This was the last night, the most dreadful of all, 
but ten minutes later sleep flooded over him like a dark water.
Toward dawn he dreamed that he had concealed himself in one of the 
naves of the Clementine Library. A librarian wearing dark glasses asked 
him: "What are you looking for?" Hladik answered: "I am looking for God." 
The librarian said to him: "God is in one of the letters on one of the pages of 
one of the four hundred thousand volumes of the Clementine. My fathers 
and the fathers of my fathers have searched for this letter; I have grown 
blind seeking it." He removed his glasses, and Hladik saw his eyes, which 
were dead. A reader came in to return an atlas. "This atlas is worthless," he 
said, and handed it to Hladik, who opened it at random. He saw a map of 
India as in a daze. Suddenly sure of himself, he touched one of the tiniest 
letters. A ubiquitous voice said to him: "The time of your labor has been 
granted." At this point Hladik awoke.
He  remembered  that  men's  dreams  belong  to  God,  and  that 
Maimonides had written that the words heard in a dream are divine when 
they are distinct and clear and the person uttering them cannot be seen. He 
dressed: two soldiers came into the cell and ordered him to follow them.
From  behind  the  door,  Hladik  had  envisaged  a  labyrinth  of 
98

passageways, stairs, and separate buildings. The reality was less spectacular: 
they descended to an inner court by a narrow iron stairway. Several soldiers
—some  with  uniform  unbuttoned—were  examining  a  motorcycle  and 
discussing it. The sergeant looked at the clock; it was 8:44. They had to wait 
until it struck nine. Hladik, more insignificant than pitiable, sat down on a 
pile of wood. He noticed that the soldiers' eyes avoided his. To ease his wait, 
the sergeant handed him a cigarette. Hladik did not smoke; he accepted it out 
of politeness or humility. As he lighted it, he noticed that his hands were 
shaking. The day was clouding over; the soldiers spoke in a low voice as 
though he were already dead. Vainly he tried to recall the woman of whom 
Julia von Weidenau was the symbol.
The squad formed and stood at attention. Hladik, standing against the 
barracks wall, waited for the volley. Someone pointed out that the wall was 
going to be stained with blood; the victim was ordered to step forward a few 
paces. Incongruously, this reminded Hladik of the fumbling preparations of 
photographers. A big drop of rain struck one of Hladik's temples and rolled 
slowly down his cheek; the sergeant shouted the final order.
The physical universe came to a halt.
The guns converged on Hladik, but the men who were to kill him 
stood motionless. The sergeant's arm eternized an unfinished gesture. On a 
paving stone of the courtyard a bee cast an unchanging shadow. The wind 
had ceased, as in a picture. Hladik attempted a cry, a word, a movement of 
the hand. He realized that he was paralyzed. Not a sound reached him from 
the halted world. He thought: "I am in hell, I am dead." He thought: "I am 
mad." He thought: "Time has stopped." Then he reflected that if that was the 
case, his mind would have stopped too. He wanted to test this; he repeated 
(without moving his lips) Vergil's mysterious fourth Eclogue. He imagined 
that the now remote soldiers must be sharing his anxiety; he longed to be 
able to communicate with them. It astonished him not to feel the least 
fatigue,  not  even  the  numbness  of  his  protracted  immobility.  After  an 
indeterminate time he fell asleep. When he awoke the world continued 
motionless and mute. The drop of water still clung to his cheek, the shadow 
of the bee to the stone. The smoke from the cigarette he had thrown away 
had not dispersed. Another "day" went by before Hladik understood.
He  had  asked  God  for  a  whole  year  to  finish  his  work;  His 
omnipotence had granted it. God had worked a secret miracle for him; 
German lead would kill him at the set hour, but in his mind a year would go 
99

by between the order and its execution. From perplexity he passed to stupor, 
from stupor to resignation, from resignation to sudden gratitude.
He had no document but his memory; the training he had acquired 
with each added hexameter gave him a discipline unsuspected by those who 
set down and forget temporary, incomplete paragraphs. He was not working 
for posterity or even for God, whose literary tastes were unknown to him. 
Meticulously, motionlessly, secretly, he wrought in time his lofty, invisible 
labyrinth. He worked the third act over twice. He eliminated certain symbols 
as over-obvious, such as the repeated striking of the clock, the music. 
Nothing hurried him. He omitted, he condensed, he amplified. In certain 
instances he came back to the original version. He came to feel an affection 
for the courtyard, the barracks; one of the faces before him modified his 
conception of Roemerstadt's character. He discovered that the wearying 
cacophonies that bothered Flaubert so much are mere visual superstitions, 
weakness  and  limitation  of  the  written  word,  not  the  spoken.  .  .  He 
concluded his drama. He had only the problem of a single phrase. He found 
it. The drop of water slid down his cheek. He opened his mouth in a 
maddened cry, moved his face, dropped under the quadruple blast. 
Jaromir Hladik died on March 29, at 9:02 A.M.
Translated by Harriet de Onís
100

Three Versions of Judas
There seemed a certainty in degradation.
T. E. Lawrence: Seven Pillars of Wisdom, CIII
n Asia Minor or in Alexandria, in the second century of our faith, when 
Basilides disseminated the idea that the cosmos was the reckless or evil 
improvisation of deficient angels, Nils Runeberg would have directed, with 
singular intellectual passion, one of the Gnostic conventicles. Dante would 
have assigned him, perhaps, a fiery grave; his name would extend the list of 
lesser heresiarchs, along with Satornilus and Carpocrates; some fragment of 
his preachings, embellished with invective, would survive in the apocryphal 
Liber adversus omnes haereses or would have perished when the burning of 
a monastery library devoured the last copy of the Syntagma. Instead, God 
afforded Runeberg the twentieth century and the university town of Lund. 
There, in 1904, he published the first edition of Kristus och Judas and, in 
1909, his major book,  Den hemlige Frälsaren.  (Of the latter there is a 
German  translation,  made  in  1912  by  Emil  Schering;  it  is  called  Der 
heimliche Heiland.)
I
Before essaying an examination of the aforementioned works, it is 
necessary  to  repeat  that  Nils  Runeberg,  a  member  of  the  National 
Evangelical Union, was deeply religious. In the intellectual circles of Paris 
or even of Buenos Aires, a man of letters might well rediscover Runeberg's 
theses; these theses, set forth in such circles, would be frivolous and useless 
exercises in negligence or blasphemy. For Runeberg, they were the key to 
one of the central mysteries of theology; they were the subject of meditation 
and  analysis,  of  historical  and  philological  controversy,  of  pride,  of 
jubilation and of terror. They justified and wrecked his life. Those who read 
this article should also consider that it registers only Runeberg's conclusions, 
not his dialectic or his proof. Someone may observe that the conclusion no 
doubt preceded the "proof." Who would resign himself to seeking proof of 
something he did not believe or whose preachment did not matter to him?
The first edition of Kristus och Judas bears the following categorical 
epigraph,  whose  meaning,  years  later,  Nils  Runeberg  himself  would 
monstrously expand: "Not one, but all of the things attributed by tradition to 
Judas Iscariot are false" (De Quincey, 1857). Preceded by a German, De 
101

Quincey speculated that Judas reported Jesus to the authorities in order to 
force him to reveal his divinity and thus ignite a vast rebellion against the 
tyranny of Rome; Runeberg suggests a vindication of a metaphysical sort. 
Skillfully, he begins by stressing the superfluity of Judas' act. He observes 
(as does Robertson) that in order to identify a teacher who preached daily in 
the synagogue and worked miracles before gatherings of thousands of men, 
betrayal  by  an apostle  is unnecessary.  This,  nevertheless,  occurred.  To 
suppose an error in the Scriptures is intolerable; no less intolerable is to 
admit an accidental happening in the most precious event in world history. 
Ergo, Judas' betrayal was not accidental; it was a preordained fact which has 
its mysterious place in the economy of redemption. Runeberg continues: The 
Word, when it was made flesh, passed from ubiquity to space, from eternity 
to history, from limitless satisfaction to change  and death; in order  to 
correspond  to  such  a  sacrifice,  it  was  necessary  that  one  man,  in 
representation of all men, make a sacrifice of condign nature. Judas Iscariot 
was that man. Judas, alone among the apostles, sensed the secret divinity 
and terrible intent of Jesus. The Word had been lowered to mortal condition; 
Judas, a disciple of the Word, could lower himself to become an informer 
(the worst crime in all infamy) and reside amidst the perpetual fires of Hell. 
The lower order is a mirror of the higher; the forms of earth correspond to 
the forms of Heaven; the spots on one's skin are a chart of the incorruptible 
constellations; Judas in some way reflects Jesus. Hence the thirty pieces of 
silver and the kiss; hence the suicide, in order to merit Reprobation even 
more. Thus Nils Runeberg elucidated the enigma of Judas.
Theologians of  all  confessions  refuted  him.  Lars Peter  Engström 
accused him of being unaware of, or omitting, the hypostatic union; Axel 
Borelius, of renewing the heresy of the Docetists, who denied that Jesus was 
human; the rigid Bishop of Lund, of contradicting the third verse of the 
twenty-second chapter of the gospel of St. Luke.
These  varied  anathemas  had  their  influence  on  Runeberg,  who 
partially rewrote the rejected book and modified its doctrine. He left the 
theological ground to his adversaries and set forth oblique arguments of a 
moral  order.  He  admitted  that  Jesus,  "who  had  at  his  disposal  all  the 
considerable resources which Omnipotence may offer," did not need a man 
to redeem all men. He then refuted those who maintain we know nothing of 
the inexplicable traitor; we know, he said, that he was one of the apostles, 
one of those chosen to announce the kingdom of heaven, to cure the sick, to 
102

clean lepers, to raise the dead and cast out demons (Matthew 10:7-8; Luke 
9:1). A man whom the Redeemer has thus distinguished merits the best 
interpretation we can give of his acts. To attribute his crime to greed (as 
some have done, citing John 12:6) is to resign oneself to the basest motive. 
Nils  Runeberg  proposes  the  opposite  motive:  a  hyperbolic  and  even 
unlimited asceticism. The ascetic, for the greater glory of God, vilifies and 
mortifies his flesh; Judas did the same with his spirit. He renounced honor, 
morality, peace and the kingdom of heaven, just as others, less heroically, 
renounce  pleasure.15 With  terrible  lucidity  he  premeditated  his  sins.  In 
adultery there is usually tenderness and abnegation; in homicide, courage; in 
profanity and blasphemy, a certain satanic luster. Judas chose those sins 
untouched by any virtue: violation of trust (John 12:6) and betrayal. He 
acted with enormous humility, he believed himself unworthy of being good. 
Paul has written:
"He that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord" (I Corinthians 1:31); 
Judas sought Hell, because the happiness of the Lord was enough for him. 
He thought that happiness, like morality, is a divine attribute and should not 
be usurped by humans.16
Many have discovered,  post factum,  that in Runeberg's justifiable 
beginning lies his extravagant end and that Den hemlige Frälsaren is a mere 
perversion or exasperation of Kristus och Judas. Toward the end of 1907, 
Runeberg completed and corrected the manuscript text; almost two years 
went by without his sending it to the printer. In October 1909, the book 
appeared with a prologue (tepid to the point of being enigmatic) by the 
Danish Hebraist Erik Erfjord and with this perfidious epigraph: "He was in 
the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not" 
(John 1:10). The general argument is not complex, though the conclusion is 
monstrous. God, argues Nils Runeberg, lowered Himself to become a man 
15 Borelius inquires mockingly: "Why didn't he renounce his renunciation? Or renounce 
the idea of renouncing his renunciation?"
16 Euclides da Cunha, in a book unknown to Runeberg, notes that for the heresiarch of 
Canudos, Antonio Conselheiro, virtue "was almost an impiety." The Argentine reader 
will recall analogous passages in the work of Almafuerte. In the symbolist sheet Sju 
insegel, Runeberg published an assiduous descriptive poem, The Secret Waters; the 
first stanzas narrate the events of a tumultuous day; the last, the discovery of a glacial 
pond; the poet suggests that the permanence of those silent waters corrects our useless 
violence and in some way allows and absolves it. The poem ends as follows: "The 
waters of the forest are good; we can be evil and suffer."
103

for the redemption of mankind; we may conjecture that His sacrifice was 
perfect, not invalidated or attenuated by any omission. To limit what He 
underwent to the agony of one afternoon on the cross is blasphemous.17 To 
maintain he was a man and incapable of sin involves a contradiction; the 
attributes of impeccabilitas and of humanitas are not compatible. Kemnitz 
admits that the Redeemer could feel fatigue, cold, embarrassment, hunger 
and thirst; we may also admit that he could sin and go astray. The famous 
text "For he shall grow up before him as a tender plant, and as a root out of a 
dry ground; he hath no form nor comeliness; and when we shall see him, 
there is no beauty that we should desire him. He is despised and rejected of 
men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief" (Isaiah 53:2-3) is, for 
many, a future vision of the Saviour at the moment of his death; for others 
(for example, for Hans Lassen Martensen), a refutation of the beauty which 
vulgar opinion attributes to Christ; for Runeberg, the punctual prophesy not 
of a moment but of the whole atrocious future, in time and in eternity, of the 
Word made flesh. God made Himself totally a man but a man to the point of 
infamy, a man to the point of reprobation and the abyss. To save us, He 
could have chosen any of the destinies which make up the complex web of 
history; He could have been Alexander or Pythagoras or Rurik or Jesus; He 
chose the vilest destiny of all: He was Judas.
In  vain  the  bookshops  of  Stockholm  and  Lund  proposed  this 
revelation to the public. The incredulous considered it, a priori, an insipid 
and laborious theological game, the theologians scorned it. Runeberg sensed 
in this ecumenical indifference an almost miraculous confirmation. God had 
ordained this indifference; God did not want His terrible secret divulged on 
earth. Runeberg understood that the hour had not yet arrived. He felt that 
ancient and divine maledictions were converging upon him; he remembered 
Elijah and Moses, who on the mountain top covered their faces in order not 
17 Maurice Abramowicz observes:  "Jesus, d'après ce scandinave, a toujours le beau 
rôle; ses déboires, grâce à la science des typographes, jouissent d'une réputation 
polyglotte; sa résidence de trente-trois ans parmi les humains ne fut, en somrne, 
qu'une villégiature" Erfjord, in the third appendix to the Christelige Dogmatik, refutes 
this passage. He notes that the crucifixion of God has not ceased, for what has 
happened  once  in  time  is  repeated  ceaselessly  in  eternity.  Judas,  now,  goes  on 
receiving his pieces of silver, goes on kissing Christ, goes on throwing the coins into 
the temple, goes on making a noose in the rope on the field of blood. (Erfjord, in order 
to justify this affirmation, invokes the last chapter of the first volume of Jaromir 
Hladik's Vindication of Eternity.)
104

to see God; Isaiah, who was terrified when he saw the One whose glory fills 
the earth; Saul, whose eyes were struck blind on the road to Damascus; the 
rabbi Simeon ben Azai, who saw Paradise and died; the famous sorcerer 
John of Viterbo, who became mad when he saw the Trinity; the Midrashim, 
who abhor the impious who utter the Shem Hamephorash, the Secret Name 
of God. Was he not perhaps guilty of that dark crime? Would this not be the 
blasphemy against the Spirit, the one never to be forgiven (Matthew 12:31)? 
Valerius Soranus died for having divulged the hidden name of Rome; what 
infinite punishment would be his for having discovered and divulged the 
horrible name of God?
Drunk  with  insomnia  and  vertiginous  dialectic,  Nils  Runeberg 
wandered through the streets of Malmo, begging at the top of his voice that 
he be granted the grace of joining his Redeemer in Hell.
He died of a ruptured aneurysm on the first of March, 1912. The 
heresiologists will perhaps remember him; to the concept of the Son, which 
seemed exhausted, he added the complexities of evil and misfortune.
Translated by J.E.I.
105

The Sect of the Phoenix
hose who write that the sect of the Phoenix had its origin in Heliopolis 
and derive it from the religious restoration following upon the death of 
the reformer Amenophis IV, cite texts from Herodotus, Tacitus and the 
monuments  of  Egypt,  but  they  ignore,  or  prefer  to  ignore,  that  the 
designation "Phoenix" does not date before Hrabanus Maurus and that the 
oldest sources (the Saturnales of Flavius Josephus, let us say) speak only of 
the People of the Custom or of the People of the Secret. Gregorovius has 
already observed, in the conventicles of Ferrara, that mention of the Phoenix 
was very rare in oral speech; in Geneva I have known artisans who did not 
understand me when I inquired if they were men of the Phoenix, but who 
immediately admitted being men of the Secret. If I am not deceived, the 
same is true of the Buddhists; the name by which the world knows them is 
not the one they themselves utter.
T
Miklosich, in a page much too famous, has compared the sectarians of 
the Phoenix with the gypsies. In Chile and in Hungary there are gypsies and 
there are also sectarians; aside from this sort of ubiquity, one and the other 
have  very  little  in  common.  The  gypsies  are  traders,  coppersmiths, 
blacksmiths and fortunetellers; the sectarians usually practice the liberal 
professions with success. The gypsies constitute a certain physical type and 
speak, or used to speak, a secret language; the sectarians are confused with 
the rest of men and the proof lies in that they have not suffered persecutions. 
The  gypsies  are  picturesque  and  inspire  bad  poets;  ballads,  cheap 
illustrations and foxtrots omit the sectarians. . . Martin Buber declares that 
the Jews are essentially pathetic; not all sectarians are and some deplore the 
pathetic; this public and notorious truth is sufficient to refute the common 
error (absurdly defended by Urmann) which sees the Phoenix as a derivation 
of Israel. People more or less reason in this manner: Urmann was a sensitive 
man;  Urmann  was  a  Jew;  Urmann  came  in  frequent  contact  with  the 
sectarians in the ghetto of Prague; the affinity Urmann sensed proves the 
reality of the fact. In all sincerity, I cannot concur with this dictum. That 
sectarians  in  a  Jewish  environment  should  resemble  the  Jews  proves 
nothing; the undeniable fact it that, like Hazlitt's infinite Shakespeare, they 
resemble all the men in the world. They are everything for everyone, like the 
Apostle; several days ago, Dr. Juan Francisco Amaro, of Paysandú, admired 
106

the facility with which they assimilated Creole ways.
I have said that the history of the sect records no persecutions. This is 
true, but since there is no human group in which members of the sect do not 
figure, it is also true that there is no persecution or rigor they have not 
suffered and perpetrated. In the Occidental wars and in the remote wars of 
Asia they have shed their blood secularly, under opposing banners; it avails 
them very little to identify themselves with all the nations of the world.
Without a sacred book to join them as the scriptures do for Israel, 
without a common memory, without that other memory which is a language, 
scattered over the face of the earth, diverse in color and features, one thing 
alone—the Secret—unites them and will unite them until the end of time. 
Once,  in  addition  to  the  Secret,  there  was  a  legend  (and  perhaps  a 
cosmogonic myth), but the shallow men of the Phoenix have forgotten it and 
now only retain the obscure tradition of a punishment. Of a punishment, of a 
pact or of a privilege, for the versions differ and scarcely allow us to 
glimpse  the verdict  of  a  God  who  granted  eternity  to  a  lineage  if  its 
members, generation after generation, would perform a rite. I have collated 
accounts by travelers, I have conversed with patriarchs and theologians; I 
can testify that fulfillment of the rite is the only religious practice observed 
by the sectarians. The rite constitutes the Secret. This Secret, as I have 
already indicated, is transmitted from generation to generation, but good 
usage prefers that mothers should not teach it to their children, nor that 
priests  should;  initiation  into  the  mystery  is  the  task  of  the  lowest 
individuals. A slave, a leper or a beggar serve as mystagogues. Also one 
child may indoctrinate another. The act in itself is trivial, momentary and 
requires no description. The materials are cork, wax or gum arabic. (In the 
liturgy, mud is mentioned; this is often used as well.) There are no temples 
especially dedicated to the celebration of this cult, but certain ruins, a cellar 
or an entrance hall are considered propitious places. The Secret is sacred but 
is  always  somewhat  ridiculous;  its  performance  is  furtive  and  even 
clandestine and the adept do not speak of it. There are no decent words to 
name it, but it is understood that all words name it or, rather, inevitably 
allude to it, and thus, in a conversation I say something or other and the 
adept smile or become uncomfortable, for they realize I have touched upon 
the Secret. In Germanic literatures there are poems written by sectarians 
whose nominal subject is the sea or the twilight of evening; they are, in 
some way, symbols of the Secret, I hear it said repeatedly. Orbis terrarum 
107

est speculum Ludi reads an apocryphal adage recorded by Du Cange in his 
Glossary. A kind of sacred horror prevents some faithful believers from 
performing this very simple rite; the others despise them, but they despise 
themselves even more. Considerable credit is enjoyed, however, by those 
who deliberately renounce the custom and attain direct contact with the 
divinity; these sectarians, in order to express this contact, do so with figures 
taken from the liturgy and thus John of the Rood wrote:
May the Seven Firmaments know that God 
Is as delectable as the Cork and the Slime.
I have attained on three continents the friendship of many devotes of 
the  Phoenix;  I  know  that  the  Secret,  at  first,  seemed  to  them  banal, 
embarrassing, vulgar and (what is even stranger) incredible. They could not 
bring themselves to admit their parents had stooped to such manipulations. 
What  is odd is that the Secret  was not lost long ago; in spite of the 
vicissitudes of the Universe, in spite of wars and exoduses, it reaches, 
awesomely, all the faithful. Someone has not hesitated to affirm that it is 
now instinctive.
Translated by J.E.I.
108

The Immortal
Salomon saith, There is no new thing upon the earth. So that as Plato had 
an imagination,  that all knowledge was but remembrance;  so Salomon 
giveth his sentence, that all novelty is but oblivion.
Francis Bacon: Essays, LVIII
n London, in the first part of June 1929, the antique dealer  Joseph 
Cartaphilus of Smyrna offered the Princess of Lucinge the six volumes in 
small quarto (1715-1720) of Pope's  Iliad. The Princess acquired them; on 
receiving the books, she exchanged a few words with the dealer. He was, she 
tells us, a wasted and earthen man, with gray eyes and gray beard, of 
singularly  vague  features.  He  could  express  himself  with  fluency  and 
ignorance in several languages; in a very few minutes, he went from French 
to  English  and  from  English  to  an  enigmatic  conjunction  of  Salonika 
Spanish and Macao Portuguese.  In October, the Princess heard from a 
passenger of the  Zeus  that Cartaphilus had died at sea while returning to 
Smyrna, and that he had been buried on the island of Ios. In the last volume 
of the Iliad she found this manuscript.
I
The original is written in English and abounds in Latinisms. The 
version we offer is literal.
I
As far as I can recall, my labors began in a garden in Thebes Hekatompylos, 
when Diocletian was emperor. I had served (without glory) in the recent 
Egyptian wars, I was tribune of a legion quartered in Berenice, facing the 
Red Sea: fever and magic consumed many men who had magnanimously 
coveted the steel. The Mauretanians were vanquished; the land previously 
occupied by the rebel cities was eternally dedicated to the Plutonic gods; 
Alexandria, once subdued, vainly implored Caesar's mercy; within a year the 
legions  reported  victory,  but  I  scarcely  managed  a  glimpse  of  Mars' 
countenance. This privation pained me and perhaps caused me precipitously 
to undertake the discovery, through fearful and diffuse deserts, of the secret 
City of the Immortals.
My labors began, I have related, in a garden in Thebes. All that night I 
109

was unable to sleep, for something was struggling within my heart. I arose 
shortly before dawn; my slaves were sleeping, the moon was of the same 
color as the infinite sand. An exhausted and bloody horseman came from the 
east. A few steps from me, he tumbled from his mount. In a faint, insatiable 
voice he asked me in Latin the name of the river bathing the city's walls. I 
answered that it was the Egypt, fed by the rains. "Another is the river I 
seek," he replied sadly, "the secret river which cleanses men of death." Dark 
blood surged from his breast. He told me that his homeland was a mountain 
on the other side of the Ganges and that on this mountain it was said that if 
one traveled to the west, where the world ends, he would reach the river 
whose waters grant immortality. He added that on its far bank the City of the 
Immortals rises, rich in bastions and amphitheaters and temples. Before 
dawn he died, but I had determined to discover the city and its river. 
Interrogated by the executioner, some Mauretanian prisoners confirmed the 
traveler's tale; someone recalled the Elysian plain, at the end of the earth, 
where  men's  lives  are  perdurable;  someone  else,  the  peaks  where  the 
Pactolus rises, whose inhabitants live for a century. In Rome, I conversed 
with philosophers who felt that to extend man's life is to extend his agony 
and multiply his deaths. I do not know if I ever believed in the City of the 
Immortals: I think that then the task of finding it was sufficient. Flavius, 
proconsul of Getulia, gave me two hundred soldiers for the undertaking. I 
also recruited mercenaries, who said they knew the roads and were the first 
to desert.
Later events have deformed inextricably the memory of the first days 
of our journey. We departed from Arsinoe and entered the burning desert. 
We  crossed  the  land  of  the  troglodytes,  who  devour  serpents  and  are 
ignorant of verbal commerce; that of the garamants, who keep their women 
in common and feed on lions; that of the augyls, who worship only Tartarus. 
We exhausted other deserts where the sand is black, where the traveler must 
usurp the hours of night, for the fervor of day is intolerable. From afar, I 
glimpsed the mountain which gave its name to the Ocean: on its sides grows 
the spurge plant, which counteracts poisons; on its peak live the satyrs, a 
nation of fell and savage men, given to lewdness. That these barbarous 
regions, where the earth is mother of monsters, could shelter in their interior 
a famous city seemed inconceivable to all of us. We continued our march, 
for it would have been dishonor to turn back. A few foolhardy men slept 
with  their  faces  exposed  to  the  moon;  they  burned  with  fever;  in  the 
110

corrupted water of the cisterns others drank madness and death. Then the 
desertions began; very shortly thereafter, mutinies. To repress them, I did 
not hesitate to exercise severity. I proceeded justly, but a centurion warned 
me that the seditious (eager to avenge the crucifixion of one of their number) 
were plotting my death. I fled from the camp with the few soldiers loyal to 
me. I lost them in the desert, amid the sandstorms and the vast night. I was 
lacerated by a Cretan arrow. I wandered several days without finding water, 
or one enormous day multiplied by the sun, my thirst or my fear of thirst. I 
left the route to the judgment of my horse. In the dawn, the distance bristled 
up into pyramids and towers. Intolerably, I dreamt of an exiguous and nitid 
labyrinth: in the center was a water jar; my hands almost touched it, my eyes 
could see it, but so intricate and perplexed were the curves that I knew I 
would die before reaching it.
II
When finally I became untangled from this nightmare, I found myself lying 
with my hands tied, in an oblong stone niche no larger than a common 
grave, shallowly excavated into the sharp slope of a mountain. Its sides were 
damp,  polished  by  time  rather  than  by  human  effort.  I  felt  a  painful 
throbbing in my chest, I felt that I was burning with thirst. I looked out and 
shouted  feebly. At the  foot  of the mountain, an impure  stream  spread 
noiselessly, clogged with debris and sand; on the opposite bank (beneath the 
last sun or beneath the first) shone the evident City of the Immortals. I saw 
walls, arches, façades and fora: the base was a stone plateau. A hundred or 
so irregular niches, analogous to mine, furrowed the mountain and the 
valley. In the sand there were shallow pits; from these miserable holes (and 
from the niches) naked, gray-skinned, scraggly bearded men emerged. I 
thought  I  recognized  them:  they  belonged  to  the  bestial  breed  of  the 
troglodytes, who infest the shores of the Arabian Gulf and the caverns of 
Ethiopia; I was not amazed that they could not speak and that they devoured 
serpents.
The urgency of my thirst made me reckless. I calculated that I was 
some thirty feet from the sand; I threw myself headlong down the slope, my 
eyes closed, my hands behind my back. I sank my bloody face into the dark 
water. I drank just as animals water themselves. Before losing myself again 
111

in sleep and delirium, I repeated, inexplicably, some words in Greek: "the 
rich Trojans from Zelea who drink the black water of the Aisepos."
I do not know how many days and nights turned above me. Aching, 
unable to regain the shelter of the caverns, naked on the unknown sand, I let 
the moon and the sun gamble with my unfortunate destiny. The troglodytes, 
infantile in their barbarity, did not aid me to survive or to die. In vain I 
begged them to put me to death. One day, I broke my bindings on an edge of 
flint.  Another  day,  I  got  up  and  managed  to  beg  or  steal—I,  Marcus 
Flaminius  Rufus,  military  tribune  of  one  of  Rome's  legions—my  first 
detested portion of serpent flesh.
My covetousness to see the Immortals, to touch the superhuman city, 
almost kept me from sleep. As if they penetrated my purpose, neither did the 
troglodytes sleep: at first I inferred that they were watching me; later, that 
they had become contaminated by my uneasiness, much as dogs may do. To 
leave the barbarous village, I chose the most public of hours, the coming of 
evening, when almost all the men emerge from their crevices and pits and 
look at the setting sun, without seeing it. I prayed out loud, less as a 
supplication  to  divine  favor  than  as  an  intimidation  of  the  tribe  with 
articulate words. I crossed the stream clogged by the dunes and headed 
toward the City. Confusedly, two or three men followed me. They were (like 
the others of that breed) of slight stature; they did not inspire fear but rather 
repulsion. I had to skirt several irregular ravines which seemed to me like 
quarries; obfuscated by the City's grandeur, I had thought it nearby. Toward 
midnight, I set foot upon the black shadow of its walls, bristling out in 
idolatrous forms on the yellow sand. I was halted by a kind of sacred horror. 
Novelty and the desert are so abhorred by man that I was glad one of the 
troglodytes had followed me to the last. I closed my eyes and awaited 
(without sleeping) the light of day.
I have said that the City was founded on a stone plateau. This plateau, 
comparable to a high cliff, was no less arduous than the walls. In vain I 
fatigued myself: the black base did not disclose the slightest irregularity, the 
invariable walls seemed not to admit a single door. The force of the sun 
obliged me to seek refuge in a cave; in the rear was a pit, in the pit a 
stairway which sank down abysmally into the darkness below. I went down; 
through  a chaos of sordid  galleries  I  reached  a  vast  circular  chamber, 
scarcely visible. There were nine doors in this cellar; eight led to a labyrinth 
that treacherously returned to the same chamber; the ninth (through another 
112

labyrinth) led to a second circular chamber equal to the first. I do not know 
the total number of these chambers; my misfortune and anxiety multiplied 
them. The silence was hostile and almost perfect; there was no sound in this 
deep stone network save that of a subterranean wind, whose cause I did not 
discover; noiselessly, tiny streams of rusty water disappeared beween the 
crevices. Horribly, I became habituated to this doubtful world; I found it 
incredible that there could be anything but cellars with nine doors and long 
branched-out cellars; I do not know how long I must have walked beneath 
the ground; I know that I once confused, in the same nostalgia, the atrocious 
village of the barbarians and my native city, amid the clusters.
In the depths of a corridor, an unforeseen wall halted me; a remote 
light fell from above. I raised my confused eyes: in the vertiginous, extreme 
heights I saw a circle of sky so blue that it seemed purple. Some metal rungs 
scaled the wall. I was limp with fatigue, but I climbed up, stopping only at 
times to sob clumsily with joy. I began to glimpse capitals and astragals, 
triangular pediments and vaults, confused pageants of granite and marble. 
Thus I was afforded this ascension from the blind region of dark interwoven 
labyrinths into the resplendent City. I emerged into a kind of little square or, 
rather, a kind of courtyard. It was surrounded  by a single building of 
irregular form and variable height; to this heterogeneous building belonged 
the different cupolas and columns. Rather than by any other trait of this 
incredible monument, I was held by the extreme age of its fabrication. I felt 
that it was older than mankind, than the earth. This manifest antiquity 
(though in some way terrible to the eyes) seemed to me in keeping with the 
work of immortal builders. At first cautiously, later indifferently, at last 
desperately,  I  wandered  up  the  stairs  and  along  the  pavements  of  the 
inextricable palace. (Afterwards I learned that the width and height of the 
steps were not constant, a fact which made me understand the singular 
fatigue they produced.) "This palace is a fabrication of the gods," I thought 
at the beginning. I explored the uninhabited interiors and corrected myself: 
"The gods who built it have died." I noted its pecularities and said: "The 
gods who built it were mad." I said it, I know, with an incomprehensible 
reprobation which was almost remorse, with more intellectual horror than 
palpable fear. To the impression of enormous antiquity others were added: 
that  of  the  interminable,  that  of  the  atrocious,  that  of  the  complexly 
senseless. I had crossed a labyrinth, but the nitid City of the Immortals filled 
me with fright and repugnance. A labyrinth is a structure compounded to 
113

confuse men; its architecture, rich in symmetries, is subordinated to that end. 
In  the  palace  I  imperfectly  explored,  the  architecture  lacked  any  such 
finality. It abounded in dead-end corridors,  high unattainable  windows, 
portentous doors which led to a cell or pit, incredible inverted stairways 
whose steps and balustrades hung downwards. Other stairways, clinging 
airily to the side of a monumental wall, would die without leading anywhere, 
after making two or three turns in the lofty darkness of the cupolas. I do not 
know if all the examples I have enumerated are literal; I know that for many 
years they infested my nightmares; I am no longer able to know if such and 
such a detail is a transcription of reality or of the forms which unhinged my 
nights. "This City" (I thought) "is so horrible that its mere existence and 
perdurance, though in the midst of a secret desert, contaminates the past and 
the future and in some way even jeopardizes the stars. As long as it lasts, no 
one in the world can be strong or happy." I do not want to describe it; a 
chaos of heterogeneous words, the body of a tiger or a bull in which teeth, 
organs and heads monstrously pullulate in mutual conjunction and hatred 
can (perhaps) be approximate images. 
I do not remember the stages of my return, amid the dusty and damp 
hypogea. I only know I was not abandoned by the fear that, when I left the 
last labyrinth, I would again be surrounded by the nefarious City of the 
Immortals. I can remember nothing else. This oblivion, now insuperable, 
was perhaps voluntary; perhaps the circumstances of my escape were so 
unpleasant that, on some day no less forgotten as well, I swore to forget 
them.
III
Those who have read the account of my labors with attention will recall that 
a man from the tribe followed me as a dog might up to the irregular shadow 
of the walls. When I came out of the last cellar, I found him at the mouth of 
the cave. He was stretched out on the sand, where he was tracing clumsily 
and erasing a string of signs that, like the letters in our dreams, seem on the 
verge of being understood and then dissolve. At first, I thought it was some 
kind of primitive writing; then I saw it was absurd to imagine that men who 
have not attained to the spoken word could attain to writing. Besides, none 
of the forms was equal to another, which excluded or lessened the possibility 
114

that they were symbolic. The man would trace them, look at them and 
correct them. Suddenly, as if he were annoyed by this game, he erased them 
with his palm and forearm. He looked at me, seemed not to recognize me. 
However, so great was the relief which engulfed me (or so great and fearful 
was my loneliness) that I supposed this rudimentary troglodyte looking up at 
me from the floor of the cave had been waiting for me. The sun heated the 
plain; when we began the return to the village, beneath the first stars, the 
sand  burned  under  our  feet.  The  troglodyte  went  ahead;  that  night  I 
conceived the plan of teaching him to recognize and perhaps to repeat a few 
words. The dog and the horse (I reflected) are capable of the former; many 
birds, like the Caesars' nightingales, of the latter. No matter how crude a 
man's mind may be, it will always be superior to that of irrational creatures.
The  humility  and  wretchedness  of  the  troglodyte  brought  to  my 
memory the image of Argos, the moribund old dog in the Odyssey, and so I 
gave him the name Argos and tried to teach it to him. I failed over and again. 
Conciliation, rigor and obstinacy were completely in vain. Motionless, with 
lifeless eyes, he seemed not to perceive the sounds I tried to press upon him. 
A few steps from me, he seemed to be very distant. Lying on the sand like a 
small ruinous lava sphinx, he let the heavens turn above him from the 
twilight of dawn till that of evening. I judged it impossible that he not be 
aware of my purpose. I recalled that among the Ethiopians it is well known 
that monkeys deliberately do not speak so they will not be obliged to work, 
and I attributed Argos' silence to suspicion or fear. From that imagination I 
went on to others,  even more  extravagant. I thought that Argos and I 
participated in different universes; I thought that our perceptions were the 
same, but that he combined them in another way and made other objects of 
them;  I  thought  that  perhaps  there  were  no  objects  for  him,  only  a 
vertiginous and continuous play of extremely brief impressions. I thought of 
a world without memory, without time; I considered the possibility of a 
language without nouns, a language of impersonal verbs or indeclinable 
epithets.  Thus  the  days  went  on  dying  and  with  them  the  years,  but 
something akin to happiness happened one morning. It rained, with powerful 
deliberation.
Desert nights can be cold, but that night had been fire. I dreamt that a 
river in Thessaly (to whose waters I had returned a goldfish) came to rescue 
me; over the red sand and black rock I heard it approach; the coolness of the 
air and the busy murmur of the rain awoke me. I ran naked to meet it. Night 
115

was fading; beneath the yellow clouds, the tribe, no less joyful than I, 
offered themselves to the vivid downpour in a kind of ecstasy. They seemed 
like Corybantes possessed by the divinity. Argos, his eyes turned toward the 
sky, groaned; torrents ran down his face, not only of water but (I later 
learned) of tears. Argos, I cried, Argos.
Then, with gentle admiration, as if he were discovering something lost 
and forgotten a long time ago, Argos stammered these words: "Argos, 
Ulysses' dog." And then, also without looking at me: "This dog lying in the 
manure."
We accept reality easily, perhaps because we intuit that nothing is 
real. I asked him what he knew of the Odyssey. The exercise of Greek was 
painful for him; I had to repeat the question.
"Very little," he said. "Less than the poorest rhapsodist. It must be a 
thousand and one hundred years since I invented it."
IV
Everything  was  elucidated  for  me  that  day.  The  troglodytes  were  the 
Immortals; the rivulet of sandy water, the River sought by the horseman. As 
for the city whose renown had spread as far as the Ganges, it was some nine 
centuries since the Immortals had razed it. With the relics of its ruins they 
erected, in the same place, the mad city I had traversed: a kind of parody or 
inversion and also temple of the irrational gods who govern the world and of 
whom  we  know  nothing,  save  that  they  do  not  resemble  man.  This 
establishment was the last symbol to which the Immortals condescended; it 
marks a stage at which, judging that all undertakings are in vain, they 
determined  to  live  in  thought,  in  pure  speculation.  They  erected  their 
structure, forgot it and went to dwell in the caves. Absorbed in thought, they 
hardly perceived the physical world.
These things were told me by Homer, as one would speak to a child. 
He also related to me his old age and the last voyage he undertook, moved, 
as was Ulysses, by the purpose of reaching the men who do not know what 
the sea is nor eat meat seasoned with salt nor suspect what an oar is. He 
lived for a century in the City of the Immortals. When it was razed, he 
advised that the other be founded. This should not surprise us; it is famous 
that after singing of the war of Ilion, he sang of the war of the frogs and 
116

mice. He was like a god who might create the cosmos and then create a 
chaos.
To be immortal is commonplace; except for man, all creatures are 
immortal,  for  they  are  ignorant  of  death;  what  is  divine,  terrible, 
incomprehensible, is to know that one is immortal. I have noted that, in spite 
of religions, this conviction is very rare. Israelites, Christians and Moslems 
profess immortality, but the veneration they render this world proves they 
believe only in it, since they destine all other worlds, in infinite number, to 
be its reward or punishment. The wheel of certain Hindustani religions 
seems more reasonable to me; on this wheel, which has neither beginning 
nor end, each life is the effect of the preceding and engenders the following, 
but none determines the totality. . . Indoctrinated by a practice of centuries, 
the republic of immortal men had attained the perfection of tolerance and 
almost that of indifference. They knew that in an infinite period of time, all 
things happen to all men. Because of his past or future virtues, every man is 
worthy of all goodness, but also of all perversity, because of his infamy in 
the past or future. Thus, just as in games of chance the odd and even 
numbers tend toward equilibrium, so also wit and stolidity cancel out and 
correct  each  other  and  perhaps  the  rustic  Poem  of  the  Cid  is  the 
counterbalance demanded by one single epithet from the Eclogues or by an 
epigram of Heraclitus. The most fleeting thought obeys an invisible design 
and can crown, or inaugurate, a secret form. I know of those who have done 
evil so that in future centuries good would result, or would have resulted in 
those already past. . . Seen in this manner, all our acts are just, but they are 
also indifferent. There are no moral or intellectual merits. Homer composed 
the  Odyssey;  if  we  postulate  an  infinite  period  of  time,  with  infinite 
circumstances and changes, the impossible thing is not to compose the 
Odyssey,  at least once. No one is anyone, one single immortal man is all 
men. Like Cornelius Agrippa, I am god, I am hero, I am philosopher, I am 
demon and I am world, which is a tedious way of saying that I do not exist.
The concept  of  the  world  as a  system  of  precise  compensations 
influenced the Immortals vastly. In the first place, it made them invulnerable 
to pity. I have mentioned the ancient quarries which broke the fields on the 
other bank; a man once fell headlong into the deepest of them; he could not 
hurt himself or die but he was burning with thirst; before they threw him a 
rope, seventy years went by. Neither were they interested in their own fate. 
The body, for them, was a submissive domestic animal and it sufficed to 
117

give it, every month, the pittance of a few hours of sleep, a bit of water and a 
scrap of meat. Let no one reduce us to the status of ascetics. There is no 
pleasure more complex than that of thought and we surrendered ourselves to 
it. At times, an extraordinary stimulus would restore us to the physical 
world. For example, that morning, the old elemental joy of the rain. Those 
lapses were quite rare; all the Immortals were capable of perfect quietude; I 
remember one whom I never saw stand up: a bird had nested on his breast.
Among the corollaries of the doctrine that there is nothing lacking 
compensation in something else, there is one whose theoretical importance 
is very small, but which induced us, toward the end or the beginning of the 
tenth century, to disperse ourselves over the face of the earth. It can be 
stated in these words: "There exists a river whose waters grant immortality; 
in some region there must be another river whose waters remove it." The 
number of rivers is not infinite; an immortal traveler who traverses the 
world will finally, some day, have drunk from all of them. We proposed to 
discover that river.
Death (or its allusion) makes men precious and pathetic. They are 
moving because of their phantom condition; every act they execute may be 
their last; there is not a face that is not on the verge of dissolving like a face 
in a dream. Everything among the mortals has the value of the irretrievable 
and the perilous. Among the Immortals, on the other hand, every act (and 
every thought) is the echo of others that preceded it in the past, with no 
visible beginning, or the faithful presage of others that in the future will 
repeat it to a vertiginous degree. There is nothing that is not as if lost in a 
maze of indefatigable mirrors. Nothing can happen only once, nothing is 
preciously precarious. The elegiacal, the serious, the ceremonial, do not hold 
for the Immortals. Homer and I separated at the gates of Tangier; I think we 
did not even say goodbye.
V
I traveled over new kingdoms, new empires. In the fall of 1066, I fought at 
Stamford Bridge, I do not recall whether in the forces of Harold, who was 
not long in finding his destiny, or in those of the hapless Harald Hardrada, 
who conquered six feet of English soil, or a bit more. In the seventh century 
of  the  Hegira,  in  the  suburb  of  Bulaq,  I  transcribed  with  measured 
118

calligraphy, in a language I have forgotten, in an alphabet I do not know, the 
seven adventures of Sinbad and the history of the City of Bronze. In the 
courtyard of a jail in Samarkand I played a great deal of chess. In Bikaner I 
professed the science of astrology and also in Bohemia. In 1638 I was at 
Kolozsvar and later in Leipzig. In Aberdeen, in 1714, I subscribed to the six 
volumes of Pope's  Iliad;  I know that I frequented its pages with delight. 
About 1729 I discussed the origin of that poem with a professor of rhetoric 
named, I think, Giambattista; his arguments seemed to me irrefutable. On 
the fourth of October, 1921, the Patna, which was taking me to Bombay, 
had to cast anchor in a port on the Eritrean coast.18 I went ashore; I recalled 
other very ancient mornings, also facing the Red Sea, when I was a tribune 
of Rome and fever and magic and idleness consumed the soldiers. On the 
outskirts of the city I saw a spring of clear water; I tasted it, prompted by 
habit. When I came up the bank, a spiny bush lacerated the back of my hand. 
The unusual pain seemed very acute to me. Incredulous, speechless and 
happy, I contemplated the precious formation of a slow drop of blood. Once 
again I am mortal, I repeated to myself, once again I am like all men. That 
night, I slept until dawn. . .
After a year's time, I have inspected these pages. I am certain they 
reflect the truth, but in the first chapters, and even in certain paragraphs of 
the others, I seem to perceive something false. This is perhaps produced by 
the abuse of circumstantial details, a procedure I learned from the poets and 
which contaminates everything with falsity, since those details can abound 
in the realities but not in their recollection. . . I believe, however, that I have 
discovered a more intimate reason. I shall write it; no matter if I am judged 
fantastic.
The story I have narrated seems unreal because in it are mixed the 
events of two different men. In the first chapter, the horseman wants to know 
the name of the river bathing the walls of Thebes; Flaminius Rufus, who 
before has applied to the city the epithet of Hekatompylos, says that the river 
is the Egypt; none of these locutions is proper to him but rather to Homer, 
who makes express mention in the Iliad of Thebes Hekatompylos and who 
in the Odyssey, by way of Proteus and Ulysses, invariably says Egypt for 
Nile. In the second chapter, the Roman, upon drinking the immortal water, 
utters some words in Greek; these words are Homeric and may be sought at 
18 There is an erasure in the manuscript; perhaps the name of the port has been removed.
119

the end of the famous catalogue of the ships. Later, in the vertiginous palace, 
he speaks of "a reprobation which was almost remorse"; these words belong 
to Homer, who had projected that horror. Such anomalies disquieted me; 
others, of an aesthetic order, permitted me to discover the truth. They are 
contained in the last chapter; there it is written that I fought at Stamford 
Bridge, that I transcribed in Bulaq the travels of Sinbad the Sailor and that I 
subscribed in Aberdeen to the English Iliad of Pope. One reads, inter alia: 
"In Bikaner I professed the science of astrology and also in Bohemia." None 
of these testimonies is false; what is significant is that they were stressed. 
The first of them seems proper to a warrior, but later one notes that the 
narrator does not linger over warlike deeds, but does over the fates of men. 
Those which follow are even more curious. A dark elemental reason obliged 
me to record them; I did it because I knew they were pathetic. Spoken by the 
Roman Flaminius Rufus, they are not. They are, spoken by Homer; it is 
strange that the latter should copy in the thirteenth century the adventures of 
Sinbad, another Ulysses, and should discover after many centuries, in a 
northern kingdom and a barbarous tongue, the forms of his Iliad. As for the 
sentence containing the name of Bikaner, one can see that it was fabricated 
by a man of letters, desirous (as was the author of the ship catalogue) of 
exhibiting splendid words.19
When the end draws near, there no longer remain any remembered 
images; only words remain. It is not strange that time should have confused 
the words that once represented me with those that were symbols of the fate 
of he who accompanied me for so many centuries. I have been Homer; 
shortly, I shall be No One, like Ulysses; shortly, I shall be all men; I shall be 
dead.
Postscript  (1950).—Among  the  commentaries  elicited  by  the  preceding 
publication, the most curious, if not the most urbane, is biblically entitled A 
Coat of Many Colors  (Manchester, 1948) and is the work of the most 
tenacious pen of Doctor Nahum Cordovero. It comprises some one hundred 
pages. The author speaks of the Greek centos, of the centos of late Latinity, 
of Ben Jonson, who defined his contemporaries with bits of Seneca, of the 
Virgilius evangelizans of Alexander Ross, of the artifices of George Moore 
19 Ernesto Sabato suggests that the "Giambattista" who discussed the formation of the 
Iliad with the antique dealer Cartaphilus is Giambattista Vico; this Italian defended the 
idea that Homer is a symbolic character, after the manner of Pluto or Achilles.
120

and of Eliot and, finally, of "the narrative attributed to the antique dealer 
Joseph Cartaphilus." He denounces, in the first chapter, brief interpolations 
from  Pliny  (Historia  naturalis,  V,  8);  in  the  second,  from  Thomas de 
Quincey (Writings, III, 439); in the third, from an epistle of Descartes to the 
ambassador  Pierre Chanut; in the fourth, from Bernard Shaw  (Back to 
Methuselah,  V). He infers from these intrusions or thefts that the whole 
document is apocryphal.
In my opinion, such a conclusion is inadmissible. "When the end 
draws near," wrote Cartaphilus, "there no longer remain any remembered 
images; only words remain." Words, displaced and mutilated words, words 
of others, were the poor pittance left him by the hours and the centuries.
To Cecilia Ingenieros
Translated by J.E.I.
121

The Theologians
fter having razed the garden and profaned the chalices and altars, the 
Huns entered the monastery library on horseback and trampled the 
incomprehensible books and vituperated and burned them, perhaps fearful 
that the letters concealed blasphemies against their god, which was an iron 
scimitar. Palimpsests and codices were consumed, but in the heart of the 
fire, amid the ashes, there remained almost intact the twelfth book of the 
Civitas Dei, which relates how in Athens Plato taught that, at the centuries' 
end, all things will recover their previous state and he in Athens, before the 
same audience, will teach this same doctrine anew. The text pardoned by the 
flames enjoyed special veneration and those who read and reread it in that 
remote province came to forget that the author had only stated this doctrine 
in order better to refute it. A century later, Aurelian, coadjutor of Aquileia, 
learned  that  on  the  shores  of  the  Danube  the  very  recent  sect  of  the 
Monotones (called also the Annulars) professed that history is a circle and 
that there is nothing which has not been and will not be. In the mountains, 
the Wheel and the Serpent had displaced the Cross. All were afraid, but all 
were comforted by the rumor that John of Pannonia, who had distinguished 
himself with a treatise on the seventh attribute of God, was going to impugn 
such an abominable heresy.
A
Aurelian deplored this news, particularly the latter part. He knew that 
in questions of theology there is no novelty without risk; then he reflected 
that the thesis of a circular time was too different, too astounding, for the 
risk to be serious. (The heresies we should fear are those which can be 
confused with orthodoxy.) John of Pannonia's intervention—his intrusion—
pained him more. Two years before, with his verbose De septima affectione 
Dei sive de aeternitate, he had usurped a topic in Aurelian's speciality; now, 
as if the problem of time belonged to him, he was going to rectify the 
Annulars, perhaps with Procrustean arguments, with theriacas more fearful 
than the Serpent. . . That night, Aurelian turned the pages of Plutarch's 
ancient  dialogue  on  the  cessation  of  the  oracles;  in  the  twenty-ninth 
paragraph he read a satire against the Stoics, who defend an infinite cycle of 
worlds, with infinite suns, moons, Apollos, Dianas and Poseidons. The 
discovery seemed to him a favorable omen; he resolved to anticipate John of 
Pannonia and refute the heretics of the Wheel.
122

There are those who seek a woman's love in order to forget her, to 
think no more of her; Aurelian, in a similar fashion, wanted to surpass John 
of Pannonia in order to be rid of the resentment he inspired in him, not in 
order to harm him. Tempered by mere diligence, by the fabrication of 
syllogisms  and  the  invention  of  insults,  by  the  negos  and  autems  and 
nequaquams, he managed to forget that rancor. He erected vast and almost 
inextricable periods encumbered with parentheses, in which negligence and 
solecism seemed as forms of scorn. He made an instrument of cacophony. 
He foresaw that John would fulminate the Annulars with prophetic gravity; 
so as not to coincide with him, he chose mockery as his weapon. Augustine 
had written that Jesus is the straight path that saves us from the circular 
labyrinth  followed  by  the  impious;  these  Aurelian,  laboriously  trivial, 
compared with Ixion, with the liver of Prometheus, with Sisyphus, with the 
king  of  Thebes  who  saw  two  suns,  with  stuttering,  with  parrots,  with 
mirrors,  with  echoes,  with  the  mules  of  a  noria  and  with  two-horned 
syllogisms. (Here the heathen fables survived, relegated to the status of 
adornments.) Like all those possessing a library, Aurelian was aware that he 
was guilty of not knowing his in its entirety; this controversy enabled him to 
fulfill his obligations with many books which seemed to reproach him for 
his neglect. Thus he was able to insert a passage from Origen's work  De 
principiis, where it is denied that Judas Iscariot will again betray the Lord 
and that Paul will again witness Stephen's martyrdom in Jerusalem, and 
another from Cicero's  Academica priora, where the author scoffs at those 
who imagine that, while he converses with Lucullus, other Luculluses and 
Ciceros in infinite number say precisely the same thing in an infinite number 
of equal worlds. In addition, he wielded against the Monotones the text from 
Plutarch and denounced the scandalousness of an idolater's valuing the 
lumen naturae more than they did the word of God. The writing took him 
nine days; on the tenth, he was sent a transcript of John of Pannonia's 
refutation.
It was almost derisively brief; Aurelian looked at it with disdain and 
then with fear. The first part was a gloss on the end verses of the ninth 
chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews, where it is said that Jesus was not 
sacrificed many times since the beginning of the world, but now, once, in the 
consummation of the centuries. The second part adduced the biblical precept 
concerning the vain repetitions of the pagans (Matthew 6:7) and the passage 
from the seventh book of Pliny which ponders that in the wide universe 
123

there are no two faces alike. John of Pannonia declared that neither are there 
two like souls and that the vilest sinner is as precious as the blood Jesus shed 
for him. One man's act (he affirmed) is worth more than the nine concentric 
heavens  and imagining  that this act  can  be lost  and  return  again is a 
pompous frivolity. Time does not remake what we lose; eternity saves it for 
heaven and also for hell. The treatise was limpid, universal; it seemed not to 
have been written by a concrete person, but by any man or, perhaps, by all 
men.
Aurelian felt an almost physical humiliation. He thought of destroying 
or reforming his own work; then, with resentful integrity, he sent it to Rome 
without modifying a letter. Months later, when the council of Pergamum 
convened, the theologian entrusted with impugning the Monotones' errors 
was (predictably) John of Pannonia; his learned and measured refutation was 
sufficient to have Euphorbus the heresiarch condemned to the stake. "This 
has happened and will happen again," said Euphorbus. "You are not lighting 
a pyre, you are lighting a labyrinth of flames. If all the fires I have been 
were gathered together here, they would not fit on earth and the angels 
would be blinded. I have said this many times." Then he cried out, because 
the flames had reached him.
The Wheel fell before the Cross,20 but Aurelian and John of Pannonia 
continued their secret battle. Both served in the same army, coveted the 
same guerdon, warred against the same Enemy, but Aurelian did not write a 
word which secretly did not strive to surpass John. Their duel was an 
invisible one; if the copious indices do not deceive me, the name of the 
other does not figure once in the many volumes by Aurelian preserved in 
Migne's  Patrology.  (Of John's works only twenty words have survived.) 
Both condemned the anathemas of the second council of Constantinople; 
both persecuted the Arrianists, who denied the eternal generation of the Son; 
both testified to the othodoxy of Cosmas'  Topographia Christiana,  which 
teaches  that  the  earth  is  quadrangular,  like  the  Hebrew  tabernacle. 
Unfortunately, to the four corners of the earth another tempestuous heresy 
spread. Originating in Egypt or in Asia (for the testimonies differ and 
Bousset  will  not  admit  Harnack's  reasoning),  it  infested  the  eastern 
provinces and erected sanctuaries in Macedonia, in Carthage and in Treves. 
It seemed to be everywhere; it was said that in the diocese of Britannia the 
20 In the Runic crosses the two contrary emblems coexist entwined.
124

crucifixes had been inverted and that in Caesarea the image of the Lord had 
been  replaced  by  a  mirror.  The  mirror  and  the  obolus  were  the  new 
schismatics' emblems.
History knows them by many names (Speculars, Abysmals, Cainites), 
but the most common of all is Histriones, a name Aurelian gave them and 
which they insolently adopted. In Frigia they were called Simulacra, and 
also in Dardania. John of Damascus called them Forms; it is well to note that 
the passage has been rejected by Erfjord. There is no heresiologist who does 
not  relate  with  stupor  their  wild  customs.  Many  Histriones  professed 
asceticism;  some  mutilated  themselves,  as  did  Origen;  others  lived 
underground  in  the  sewers;  others  tore  out  their  eyes;  others  (the 
Nabucodonosors of Nitria) "grazed like oxen and their hair grew like an 
eagle's." They often went from mortification and severity to crime; some 
communities tolerated thievery; others, homicide; others, sodomy, incest and 
bestiality. All were blasphemous; they cursed not only the Christian God but 
also the arcane divinities of their own pantheon. They contrived sacred 
books whose disappearance is lamented by scholars. In the year 1658, Sir 
Thomas  Browne  wrote:  "Time  has  annihilated  the  ambitious  Histrionic 
gospels, not the Insults with which their Impiety was fustigated": Erfjord has 
suggested that these "insults" (preserved in a Greek codex) are the lost 
gospels.  This  is  incomprehensible  if  we  do  not  know  the  Histriones' 
cosmology.
In the hermetic books it is written that what is down below is equal to 
what is on high, and what is on high is equal to what is down below; in the 
Zohar,  that the higher world is a reflection of the lower. The Histriones 
founded their doctrine on a perversion of this idea. They invoked Matthew 
6:12 ("and forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors") and 11:12 ("the 
kingdom  of  heaven  suffereth  violence")  to  demonstrate  that  the  earth 
influences heaven, and I Corinthians 13:12 ("for now we see through a glass, 
darkly")  to  demonstrate  that  everything  we  see  is  false.  Perhaps 
contaminated by the Monotones, they imagined that all men are two men 
and that the real one is the other, the one in heaven. They also imagined that 
our acts project an inverted reflection, in such a way that if we are awake, 
the other sleeps, if we fornicate, the other is chaste, if we steal, the other is 
generous. When we die, we shall join this other and be him. (Some echo of 
these doctrines persisted in Léon Bloy.) Other Histriones reasoned that the 
world would end when the number of its possibilities was exhausted; since 
125

there can be no repetitions, the righteous should eliminate (commit) the most 
infamous acts, so that these will not soil the future and will hasten the 
coming of the kingdom of Jesus. This article was negated by other sects, 
who held that the history of the world should be fulfilled in every man. 
Most, like Pythagoras, will have to transmigrate through many bodies before 
attaining their liberation; some, the Proteans, "in the period of one lifetime 
are lions, dragons, boars, water and a tree." Demosthenes tells how the 
initiates into the Orphic mysteries were submitted to purification with mud; 
the Proteans, analogously, sought purification through evil. They knew, as 
did Carpocrates, that no one will be released from prison until he has paid 
the last obolus (Luke 12:59) and used to deceive penitents with this other 
verse: "I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more 
abundantly" (John 10:10). They also said that not to be evil is a satanic 
arrogance.  .  .  Many  and  divergent  mythologies  were  devised  by  the 
Histriones; some preached asceticism, others licentiousness. All preached 
confusion. Theopompus, a Histrione of Berenice, denied all fables; he said 
that every man is an organ put forth by the divinity in order to perceive the 
world.
The heretics of Aurelian's diocese were of those who affirmed that 
time does not tolerate repetitions, not of those who affirmed that every act is 
reflected  in  heaven.  This  circumstance  was  strange;  in  a  report  to  the 
authorities in Rome, Aurelian mentioned it. The prelate who was to receive 
the report was the empress' confessor; everyone knew that this demanding 
post  kept  him  from  the  intimate  delights  of  speculative  theology.  His 
secretary—a former collaborator of John of Pannonia, now hostile to him—
enjoyed fame as a punctual inquisitor of heterodoxies; Aurelian added an 
exposition of the Histrionic heresy, just as it was found in the conventicles 
of Genua and of Aquileia. He composed a few paragraphs; when he tried to 
write the atrocious thesis that there are no two moments alike, his pen 
halted. He could not find the necessary formula; the admonitions of this new 
doctrine ("Do you want to see what human eyes have never seen? Look at 
the moon. Do you want to hear what ears have never heard? Listen to the 
bird's cry. Do you want to touch what hands have never touched? Touch the 
earth. Verily I say that God is about to create the world.") were much too 
affected and metaphorical to be transcribed. Suddenly, a sentence of twenty 
words  came  to  his  mind.  He  wrote  it  down,  joyfully;  immediately 
afterwards, he was troubled by the suspicion that it was the work of another. 
126

The following day, he remembered that he had read it many years before in 
the  Adversus annulares  composed by John of Pannonia. He verified the 
quotation; there it was. He was tormented by incertitude. If he changed or 
suppressed those words he would weaken the expression; if he left them he 
would be plagiarizing a man he abhorred; if he indicated their source, he 
would be denouncing him. He implored divine assistance. Towards the 
beginning of the second twilight, his guardian angel dictated to him an 
intermediate solution. Aurelian kept the words, but preceded them with this 
notice: "What the heresiarchs now bark in confusion of the faith was said in 
our realm by a most learned man, with more frivolity than guilt." Then the 
dreaded, hoped for, inevitable thing happened. Aurelian had to declare who 
the man was; John of Pannonia was accused of professing heretical opinions.
Four  months  later,  a  blacksmith  of  Aventinus,  deluded  by  the 
Histriones' deceptions, placed a huge iron sphere on the shoulders of his 
small son, so that his double might fly. The boy died; the horror engendered 
by this crime obliged John's judges to assume an unexceptionable severity. 
He would not retract; he repeated that if he negated his proposition he would 
fall into the pestilential heresy of the Monotones. He did not understand (did 
not want to understand) that to speak of the Monotones was to speak of the 
already forgotten. With somewhat senile insistence, he abundantly gave 
forth with the most brilliant periods of his former polemics; the judges did 
not even hear what had once enraptured them. Instead of trying to cleanse 
himself of the slightest blemish of Histrionism, he strove to demonstrate that 
the proposition of which he  was accused  was rigorously orthodox. He 
argued with the men on whose judgment his fate depended and committed 
the extreme ineptitude of doing so with wit and irony. On the 26th of 
October, after a discussion lasting three days and three nights, he was 
sentenced to die at the stake.
Aurelian  witnessed  the  execution,  for  refusing  to  do  so  meant 
confessing his own guilt. The place for the ceremony was a hill, on whose 
green top there was a pole driven deep into the ground, surrounded by many 
bundles of wood. A bailiff read the tribunal's sentence. Under the noonday 
sun, John of Pannonia lay with his face in the dust, howling like an animal. 
He clawed the ground but the executioners pulled him away, stripped him 
naked and finally tied him to the stake. On his head they placed a straw 
crown dipped in sulphur; at his side, a copy of the pestilential  Adversus 
annulares. It had rained the night before and the wood burned badly. John of 
127

Pannonia prayed in Greek and then in an unknown language. The fire was 
about to engulf him when Aurelian finally dared to raise his eyes. The bursts 
of flame halted; Aurelian saw for the first and last time the face of the hated 
heretic. It reminded him of someone, but he could not remember who. Then 
he was lost in the flames; then he cried out and it was as if a fire had cried 
out. Plutarch has related that Julius Caesar wept for the death of Pompey; 
Aurelian did not weep for the death of John, but he felt what a man would 
feel when rid of an incurable disease that had become a part of his life. In 
Aquileia, in Ephesus, in Macedonia, he let the years pass over him. He 
sought  the  arduous  limits  of  the  Empire,  the  torpid  swamps  and 
contemplative  deserts,  so  that  solitude  might  help  him  understand  his 
destiny. In a cell in Mauretania, in a night laden with lions, he reconsidered 
the complex accusation brought against John of Pannonia and justified, for 
the nth time, the sentence. It was much more difficult to justify his own 
tortuous denunciation. In Rusaddir he preached the anachronistic sermon 
"Light of lights burning in the flesh of a reprobate." In Hibernia, in one of 
the hovels of a monastery surrounded by the forest, he was startled one night 
towards dawn by the sound of rain. He remembered a night in Rome when 
that minute noise had also startled him. At midday, a lightning bolt set fire to 
the trees and Aurelian died just as John had.
The end of this story can only be related in metaphors since it takes 
place in the kingdom of heaven, where there is no time. Perhaps it would be 
correct to say that Aurelian spoke with God and that He was so little 
interested in religious differences that He took him for John of Pannonia. 
This, however, would imply a confusion in the divine mind. It is more 
correct to say that in Paradise, Aurelian learned that, for the unfathomable 
divinity, he and John of Pannonia (the orthodox believer and the heretic, the 
abhorrer and the abhorred, the accuser and the accused) formed one single 
person.
Translated by J.E.I.
128

Story of the Warrior and the Captive
n page 278 of his book La poesia (Bari, 1942), Croce, abbreviating a 
Latin text of the historian Peter the Deacon, narrates the destiny and 
cites the epitaph of Droctulft; both these moved me  singularly; later I 
understood why. Droctulft was a Lombard warrior who, during the siege of 
Ravenna, left his companions and died defending the city he had previously 
attacked. The Ravennese gave him burial in a temple and composed an 
epitaph in which they manifested their gratitude (contempsit caros, dum nos 
amat ille, parentes) and observed the peculiar contrast evident between the 
barbarian's fierce countenance and his simplicity and goodness:
O
Terribilis visu facies, sed mente benignus,
Longaque robusto pectore barba fuit!21
Such is the story of the destiny of Droctulft, a barbarian who died 
defending Rome, or such is the fragment of his story Peter the Deacon was 
able to salvage. I do not even know in what period it took place: whether 
toward the middle of the sixth century, when the Longobardi desolated the 
plains of Italy, or in the eighth, before the surrender of Ravenna. Let us 
imagine (this is not a historical work) the former.
Let us imagine Droctulft  sub specie aeternitatis,  not the individual 
Droctulft, who no doubt was unique and unfathomable (all individuals are), 
but the generic type formed from him and many others by tradition, which is 
the effect of oblivion and of memory. Through an obscure geography of 
forests and marshes, the wars brought him to Italy from the banks of the 
Danube and the Elbe, and perhaps he did not know he was going south and 
perhaps he did not know he was fighting against the name of Rome. Perhaps 
he professed  the Arrianist  faith, which holds that the Son's glory is a 
reflection of the Holy Father's, but it is more congruous to imagine him a 
worshiper of the Earth, of Hertha, whose covered idol went from hut to hut 
in a cow-drawn cart, or of the gods of war and thunder, which were crude 
wooden figures wrapped in homespun clothing and hung with coins and 
bracelets. He came from the inextricable forests of the boar and the bison; he 
was light-skinned, spirited, innocent, cruel, loyal to his captain and his tribe, 
21 Also Gibbon (Decline and Fall, XLV) transcribes these verses.
129

but not to the universe. The wars bring him to Ravenna and there he sees 
something he has never seen before, or has not seen fully. He sees the day 
and the cypresses and the marble. He sees a whole whose multiplicity is not 
that of disorder; he sees a city, an organism composed of statues, temples, 
gardens, rooms, amphitheaters, vases, columns, regular and open spaces. 
None of  these  fabrications  (I  know)  impresses  him  as beautiful;  he  is 
touched by them as we now would be by a complex mechanism whose 
purpose we could not fathom but in whose design an immortal intelligence 
might be divined. Perhaps it is enough for him to see a single arch, with an 
incomprehensible  inscription  in  eternal  Roman  letters.  Suddenly  he  is 
blinded and renewed by this revelation, the City. He knows that in it he will 
be a dog, or a child, and that he will not even begin to understand it, but he 
also knows that it is worth more than his gods and his sworn faith and all the 
marshes of Germany. Droctulft abandons his own and fights for Ravenna. 
He dies and on his grave they inscribe these words which he would not have 
understood:
Contempsit caros, dum nos amat ille, parentes, 
Hanc patriam reputans esse, Ravenna, suam.
He was not a traitor (traitors seldom inspire pious epitaphs); he was a 
man enlightened, a convert. Within a few generations, the Longobardi who 
had condemned this turncoat proceeded just as he had; they became Italians, 
Lombards,  and  perhaps  one  of  their  blood—Aldiger—could  have 
engendered those who engendered the Alighieri. . . Many conjectures may 
be applied to Droctulft's act; mine is the most economical; if it is not true as 
fact it will be so as symbol.
When I read the story of this warrior in Croce's book, it moved me in 
an unusual way and I had the impression of having recovered, in a different 
form,  something  that  had  been  my  own.  Fleetingly  I  thought  of  the 
Mongolian horsemen who tried to make of China an infinite pasture ground 
and then grew old in the cities they had longed to destroy; this was not the 
memory I sought. At last I found it: it was a tale I had once heard from my 
English grandmother, who is now dead.
In 1872, my grandfather Borges was commander of the northern and 
western frontiers of Buenos Aires and the southern frontier of Santa Fe. His 
headquarters was in Junín; beyond that, four or five leagues distant from 
130

each other, the chain of outposts; beyond that, what was then termed the 
pampa  and also the "hinterland." Once—half out of wonder, half out of 
sarcasm—my  grandmother  commented  upon  her  fate  as  a  lone 
Englishwoman exiled to that far corner of the earth; people told her that she 
was not the only one there and, months later, pointed out to her an Indian 
girl who was slowly crossing the plaza. She wore two brightly colored 
blankets and went barefoot; her hair was blond. A soldier told her another 
Englishwoman wanted to speak to her. The girl agreed; she entered the 
headquarters without fear but not without suspicion. In her copper-colored 
face, which was daubed in ferocious colors, her eyes were of that reluctant 
blue the English call gray. Her body was lithe, like a deer's; her hands, 
strong  and  bony.  She  came  from  the  desert,  from  the  hinterland,  and 
everything seemed too small for her: doors, walls, furniture.
Perhaps the two women felt for an instant as sisters; they were far 
from their beloved island and in an incredible country. My grandmother 
uttered some kind of question; the other woman replied with difficulty, 
searching for words and repeating them, as if astonished by their ancient 
flavor. For some fifteen years she had not spoken her native language and it 
was not easy for her to recover it. She said that she was from Yorkshire, that 
her parents had emigrated to Buenos Aires, that she had lost them in an 
Indian raid, that she had been carried off by the Indians and was now the 
wife of a chieftain, to whom she had already given two sons, and that he was 
very brave. All this she said in a rustic English, interwoven with Araucanian 
or Pampan, and behind her story one could glimpse a savage life: the 
horsehide shelters, the fires made of dry manure, the feasts of scorched meat 
or raw entrails, the stealthy departures at dawn, the attacks on corrals, the 
yelling and the pillaging, the wars, the sweeping charges on the haciendas by 
naked  horsemen,  the  polygamy,  the  stench  and  the  superstition.  An 
Englishwoman had lowered herself to this barbarism. Moved by pity and 
shock, my grandmother urged her not to return. She swore to protect her, to 
retrieve her children. The woman answered that she was happy and returned 
that night to the desert. Francisco Borges was to die a short time later, in the 
revolution  of  seventy-four;  perhaps  then  my  grandmother  was  able  to 
perceive in this other woman, also held captive and transformed by the 
implacable continent, a monstrous mirror of her own destiny. . .
Every year, the blond Indian woman used to come to the country 
stores at Junín or at Fort Lavalle to obtain trinkets or makings for maté; she 
131

did not appear after the conversation with my grandmother. However, they 
saw each other once again. My grandmother had gone hunting one day; on a 
ranch, near the sheep dip, a man was slaughtering one of the animals. As if 
in a dream, the Indian woman passed by on horseback. She threw herself to 
the ground and drank the warm blood. I do not know whether she did it 
because she could no longer act any other way, or as a challenge and a sign.
A thousand three hundred years and the ocean lie between the destiny 
of the captive and the destiny of Droctulft. Both these, now, are equally 
irrecoverable.  The  figure  of  the  barbarian  who  embraced  the  cause  of 
Ravenna, the figure of the European woman who chose the wasteland, may 
seem antagonistic. And yet, both were swept away by a secret impulse, an 
impulse more profound than reason, and both heeded this impulse, which 
they would not have known how to justify. Perhaps the stories I have related 
are one single story. The obverse and the reverse of this coin are, for God, 
the same.
For Ulrike von Kühlmann
Translated by J.E.I.
132

Emma Zunz
eturning home from the Tarbuch and Loewenthal textile mills on the 
14th of January, 1922, Emma Zunz discovered in the rear of the 
entrance hall a letter, posted in Brazil, which informed her that her father 
had  died.  The  stamp  and  the  envelope  deceived  her  at  first;  then  the 
unfamiliar handwriting made her uneasy. Nine or ten lines tried to fill up the 
page; Emma read that Mr. Maier had taken by mistake a large dose of 
veronal and had died on the third of the month in the hospital of Bagé. A 
boarding-house friend of her father had signed the letter, some Fein or Fain 
from Río Grande, with no way of knowing that he was addressing the 
deceased's daughter.
R
Emma dropped the paper. Her first impression was of a weak feeling 
in her stomach and in her knees; then of blind guilt, of unreality, of coldness, 
of fear; then she wished that it were already the next day. Immediately 
afterward she realized that that wish was futile because the death of her 
father was the only thing that had happened in the world, and it would go on 
happening endlessly. She picked up the piece of paper and went to her room. 
Furtively, she hid it in a drawer, as if somehow she already knew the ulterior 
facts. She had already begun to suspect them, perhaps; she had already 
become the person she would be.
In the growing darkness, Emma wept until the end of that day for the 
suicide of Manuel Maier, who in the old happy days was Emmanuel Zunz. 
She remembered summer vacations at a little farm near Gualeguay, she 
remembered (tried to remember) her mother, she remembered the little 
house at Lanús which had been auctioned off, she remembered the yellow 
lozenges of a window, she remembered the warrant for arrest, the ignominy, 
she remembered the poison-pen letters with the newspaper's account of "the 
cashier's embezzlement," she remembered (but this she never forgot) that 
her father, on the last night, had sworn to her that the thief was Loewenthal. 
Loewenthal, Aaron Loewenthal, formerly the manager of the factory and 
now one of the owners. Since 1916 Emma had guarded the secret. She had 
revealed it to no one, not even to her best friend, Elsa Urstein. Perhaps she 
was shunning profane incredulity; perhaps she believed that the secret was a 
link between herself and the absent parent. Loewenthal did not know that 
she knew; Emma Zunz derived from this slight fact a feeling of power.
133

She did not sleep that night and when the first light of dawn defined 
the rectangle of the window, her plan was already perfected. She tried to 
make the day, which seemed interminable to her, like any other. At the 
factory there were rumors of a strike. Emma declared herself, as usual, 
against all violence. At six o'clock, with work over, she went with Elsa to a 
women's club that had a gymnasium and a swimming pool. They signed 
their names; she had to repeat and spell out her first and her last name, she 
had  to  respond  to  the  vulgar  jokes  that  accompanied  the  medical 
examination. With Elsa and with the youngest of the Kronfuss girls she 
discussed what movie they would go to Sunday afternoon. Then they talked 
about boyfriends and no one expected Emma to speak. In April she would be 
nineteen years old, but men inspired in her, still, an almost pathological fear. 
. . Having returned home, she prepared a tapioca soup and a few vegetables, 
ate early, went to bed and forced herself to sleep. In this way, laborious and 
trivial, Friday the fifteenth, the day before, elapsed.
Impatience awoke her on Saturday. Impatience it was, not uneasiness, 
and the special relief of it being that day at last. No longer did she have to 
plan and imagine; within a few hours the simplicity of the facts would 
suffice. She read in La Prensa that the Nordstjärnan, out of Malmö, would 
sail that evening from Pier 3. She phoned Loewenthal, insinuated that she 
wanted  to  confide  in  him,  without  the  other  girls  knowing,  something 
pertaining to the strike; and she promised to stop by at his office at nightfall. 
Her voice trembled; the tremor was suitable to an informer. Nothing else of 
note happened that morning. Emma worked until twelve o'clock and then 
settled with Elsa and Perla Kronfuss the details of their Sunday stroll. She 
lay down after lunch and reviewed, with her eyes closed, the plan she had 
devised. She thought that the final step would be less horrible than the first 
and that it would doubtlessly afford her the taste of victory and justice. 
Suddenly, alarmed, she got up and ran to the dresser drawer. She opened it; 
beneath the picture of Milton Sills, where she had left it the night before, 
was Fain's letter. No one could have seen it; she began to read it and tore it 
up.
To relate with some reality the events of that afternoon would be 
difficult and perhaps unrighteous. One attribute of a hellish experience is 
unreality, an attribute that seems to allay its terrors and which aggravates 
them perhaps. How could one make credible an action which was scarcely 
believed in by the person who executed it, how to recover that brief chaos 
134

which today the memory of Emma Zunz repudiates and confuses? Emma 
lived in Almagro, on Liniers Street: we are certain that in the afternoon she 
went down to the waterfront. Perhaps on the infamous Paseo de Julio she 
saw herself multiplied in mirrors, revealed by lights and denuded by hungry 
eyes,  but  it  is  more  reasonable  to  suppose  that  at  first  she  wandered, 
unnoticed, through the indifferent portico. . . She entered two or three bars, 
noted the routine or technique of the other women. Finally she came across 
men from the  Nordstjärnan.  One of them, very young, she feared might 
inspire some tenderness  in her  and  she  chose  instead  another,  perhaps 
shorter than she and coarse, in order that the purity of the horror might not 
be mitigated. The man led her to a door, then to a murky entrance hall and 
afterwards to a narrow stairway and then a vestibule (in which there was a 
window with lozenges identical to those in the house at Lanús) and then to a 
passageway and then to a door which was closed behind her. The arduous 
events  are  outside  of  time,  either  because  the  immediate  past  is  as  if 
disconnected from the future, or because the parts which form these events 
do not seem to be consecutive.
During  that  time  outside  of  time,  in  that  perplexing  disorder  of 
disconnected and atrocious sensations, did Emma Zunz think once about the 
dead man who motivated the sacrifice? It is my belief that she did think 
once, and in that moment she endangered her desperate undertaking. She 
thought (she was unable not to think) that her father had done to her mother 
the hideous thing that was being done to her now. She thought of it with 
weak amazement and took refuge, quickly, in vertigo. The man, a Swede or 
Finn, did not speak Spanish. He was a tool for Emma, as she was for him, 
but she served him for pleasure whereas he served her for justice.
When she was alone, Emma did not open her eyes immediately. On 
the little night table was the money that the man had left: Emma sat up and 
tore it to pieces as before she had torn the letter. Tearing money is an 
impiety, like throwing away bread; Emma repented the moment after she did 
it. An act of pride and on that day. . . Her fear was lost in the grief of her 
body, in her disgust. The grief and the nausea were chaining her, but Emma 
got up slowly and proceeded to dress herself. In the room there were no 
longer any bright colors; the last light of dusk was weakening. Emma was 
able to leave without anyone seeing her; at the corner she got on a Lacroze 
streetcar heading west. She selected, in keeping with her plan, the seat 
farthest toward the front, so that her face would not be seen. Perhaps it 
135

comforted her to verify in the insipid movement along the streets that what 
had  happened  had  not  contaminated  things.  She  rode  through  the 
diminishing opaque suburbs, seeing them and forgetting them at the same 
instant, and got off on one of the side streets of Warnes. Paradoxically her 
fatigue was turning out to be a strength, since it obligated her to concentrate 
on the details of the adventure and concealed from her the background and 
the objective.
Aaron Loewenthal was to all persons a serious man, to his intimate 
friends a miser. He lived above the factory, alone. Situated in the barren 
outskirts of the town, he feared thieves; in the patio of the factory there was 
a large dog and in the drawer of his desk, everyone knew, a revolver. He had 
mourned with gravity, the year before, the unexpected death of his wife—a 
Gauss who had brought him a fine dowry—but money was his real passion. 
With intimate embarrassment, he knew himself to be less apt at earning it 
than at saving it. He was very religious; he believed he had a secret pact with 
God which exempted him from doing good in exchange for prayers and 
piety. Bald, fat, wearing the band of mourning, with smoked glasses and 
blond beard, he was standing next to the window awaiting the confidential 
report of worker Zunz.
He saw her push the iron gate (which he had left open for her) and 
cross the gloomy patio. He saw her make a little detour when the chained 
dog  barked.  Emma's  lips  were  moving  rapidly,  like  those  of  someone 
praying in a low voice; weary, they were repeating the sentence which Mr. 
Loewenthal would hear before dying.
Things did not happen as Emma Zunz had anticipated. Ever since the 
morning before she had imagined herself wielding the firm revolver, forcing 
the wretched creature to confess his wretched guilt and exposing the daring 
stratagem which would permit the Justice of God to triumph over human 
justice. (Not out of fear but because of being an instrument of Justice she did 
not want to be punished.) Then, one single shot in the center of his chest 
would seal Loewenthal's fate. But things did not happen that way.
In Aaron Loewenthal's presence, more than the urgency of avenging 
her father, Emma felt the need of inflicting punishment for the outrage she 
had suffered. She was unable not to kill him after that thorough dishonor. 
Nor did she have time for theatrics. Seated, timid, she made excuses to 
Loewenthal, she invoked (as a privilege of the informer) the obligation of 
loyalty, uttered a few names, inferred others and broke off as if fear had 
136

conquered her. She managed to have Loewenthal leave to get a glass of 
water for her. When the former, unconvinced by such a fuss but indulgent, 
returned from the dining room, Emma had already taken the heavy revolver 
out of the drawer. She squeezed the trigger twice. The large body collapsed 
as if the reports and the smoke had shattered it, the glass of water smashed, 
the face looked at her with amazement and anger, the mouth of the face 
swore at her in Spanish and Yiddish. The evil words did not slacken; Emma 
had to fire again. In the patio the chained dog broke out barking, and a gush 
of rude blood flowed from the obscene lips and soiled the beard and the 
clothing. Emma began the accusation she had prepared ("I have avenged my 
father and they will not be able to punish me. . ."), but she did not finish it, 
because Mr. Loewenthal had already died. She never knew if he managed to 
understand.
The straining barks reminded her that she could not, yet, rest. She 
disarranged  the  divan,  unbuttoned  the  dead  man's  jacket,  took  off  the 
bespattered glasses and left them on the filing cabinet. Then she picked up 
the telephone and repeated what she would repeat so many times again, with 
these and with other words:  Something incredible has happened. . . Mr. 
Loewenthal had me come over on the pretext of the strike. . . He abused me, 
1 killed him . . .
Actually, the story was incredible, but it impressed everyone because 
substantially it was true. True was Emma Zunz' tone, true was her shame, 
true was her hate. True also was the outrage she had suffered: only the 
circumstances were false, the time, and one or two proper names.
Translated by D.A.Y.
137

The House of Asterion
And the queen gave birth to a child who was called Asterion. 
Apollodorus: Bibliotheca, III, I
 know they accuse me of arrogance, and perhaps of misanthropy, and 
perhaps  of  madness.  Such  accusations  (for  which  I  shall  extract 
punishment in due time) are derisory. It is true that I never leave my house, 
but it is also true that its doors (whose number is infinite)22 are open day and 
night to men and to animals as well. Anyone may enter. He will find here no 
female pomp nor gallant court formality, but he will find quiet and solitude. 
And he will also find a house like no other on the face of the earth. (There 
are those who declare there is a similar one in Egypt, but they lie.) Even my 
detractors admit there is not  one single piece of furniture  in the house. 
Another ridiculous falsehood has it that I, Asterion, am a prisoner. Shall I 
repeat that there are no locked doors, shall I add that there are no locks? 
Besides, one afternoon I did step into the street; if I returned before night, I 
did so because of the fear that the faces of the common people inspired in 
me, faces as discolored and flat as the palm of one's hand. The sun had 
already set, but the helpless crying of a child and the rude supplications of 
the  faithful  told  me  I  had  been  recognized.  The  people  prayed,  fled, 
prostrated themselves; some climbed onto the stylobate of the temple of the 
Axes, others gathered stones. One of them, I believe, hid himself beneath the 
sea. Not for nothing was my mother a queen; I cannot be confused with the 
populace, though my modesty might so desire.
I
The fact is that I am unique. I am not interested in what one man may 
transmit  to  other  men;  like  the  philosopher,  I  think  that  nothing  is 
communicable by the art of writing. Bothersome and trivial details have no 
place in my spirit, which is prepared for all that is vast and grand; I have 
never retained the difference between one letter and another. A certain 
generous impatience has not permitted that I learn to read. Sometimes I 
deplore this, for the nights and days are long.
Of course, I am not without distractions. Like the ram about to charge, 
I run through the stone galleries until I fall dizzy to the floor. I crouch in the 
22 The original says fourteen, but there is ample reason to infer that, as used by Asterion, 
this numeral stands for infinite.
138

shadow of a pool or around a corner and pretend I am being followed. There 
are roofs from which I let myself fall until I am bloody. At any time I can 
pretend  to  be  asleep,  with  my  eyes  closed  and  my  breathing  heavy. 
(Sometimes I really sleep, sometimes the color of day has changed when I 
open my eyes.) But of all the games, I prefer the one about the other 
Asterion. I pretend that he comes to visit me and that I show him my house. 
With  great  obeisance  I  say  to  him:  Now  we  shall  return  to  the  first 
intersection or Now we shall come out into another courtyard or I knew you 
would like the drain or Now you will see a pool that was filled with sand or 
You will soon see how the cellar branches out. Sometimes I make a mistake 
and the two of us laugh heartily.
Not only have I imagined these games, I have also meditated on the 
house. All the parts of the house are repeated many times, any place is 
another place. There is no one pool, courtyard, drinking trough, manger; the 
mangers,  drinking  troughs,  courtyards,  pools  are  fourteen  (infinite)  in 
number. The house is the same size as the world; or rather, it is the world. 
However, by dint of exhausting the courtyards with pools and dusty gray 
stone galleries I have reached the street and seen the temple of the Axes and 
the sea. I did not understand this until a night vision revealed to me that the 
seas  and  temples  are  also  fourteen  (infinite)  in  number.  Everything  is 
repeated many times, fourteen times, but two things in the world seem to be 
only once: above, the intricate sun; below, Asterion. Perhaps I have created 
the stars and the sun and this enormous house, but I no longer remember.
Every nine years nine men enter the house so that I may deliver them 
from all evil. I hear their steps or their voices in the depths of the stone 
galleries and I run joyfully to find them. The ceremony lasts a few minutes. 
They fall one after another without my having to bloody my hands. They 
remain where they fell and their bodies help distinguish one gallery from 
another.  I  do  not  know  who  they  are,  but  I  know  that  one  of  them 
prophesied, at the moment of his death, that some day my redeemer would 
come. Since then my loneliness does not pain me, because I know my 
redeemer lives and he will finally rise above the dust. If my ear could 
capture all the sounds of the world, I should hear his steps. I hope he will 
take me to a place with fewer galleries and fewer doors. What will my 
redeemer be like?, I ask myself. Will he be a bull or a man? Will he perhaps 
be a bull with the face of a man? Or will he be like me?
139

The morning sun reverberated from the bronze sword. There was no 
longer even a vestige of blood.
"Would  you  believe  it,  Ariadne?"  said  Theseus.  "The  Minotaur 
scarcely defended himself."
For Marta Mosquera Eastman
Translated by J.E.I.
140

Deutsches Requiem
Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him.
Job 13:15
y name is Otto Dietrich zur Linde. One of my ancestors, Christoph 
zur Linde, died in the cavalry charge which decided the victory of 
Zorndorf. My maternal great-grandfather, Ulrich Forkel, was shot in the 
forest of Marchenoir by franc-tireurs, late in the year 1870; my father, 
Captain Dietrich zur Linde, distinguished himself in the siege of Namur in 
1914, and, two years later, in the crossing of the Danube.23 As for me, I will 
be executed as a torturer and murderer. The tribunal acted justly; from the 
start I declared myself guilty. Tomorrow, when the prison clock strikes nine, 
I will have entered into death's realm; it is natural that I think now of my 
forebears, since I am so close to their shadow, since, after a fashion, I am 
already my ancestors.
M
I kept silent during the trial, which fortunately was brief; to try to 
justify myself at that time would have obstructed the verdict and would have 
seemed an act of cowardice. Now things have changed; on the eve of the 
execution I can speak without fear. I do not seek pardon, because I feel no 
guilt; but I would like to be understood. Those who care to listen to me will 
understand the history of Germany and the future history of the world. I 
know that cases like mine, which are now exceptional and astonishing, will 
shortly be commonplace. Tomorrow I will die, but I am a symbol of future 
generations.
I was born in Marienburg in 1908. Two passions, which now are 
almost forgotten, allowed me to bear with valor and even happiness the 
weight of many unhappy years: music and metaphysics. I cannot mention all 
my benefactors, but there are two names which I may not omit, those of 
Brahms and Schopenhauer. I also studied poetry; to these last I would add 
another immense Germanic name, William Shakespeare. Formerly I was 
interested  in  theology,  but  from  this  fantastic  discipline  (and  from  the 
23 lt is significant that the narrator has omitted the name of his most illustrious ancestor, 
the theologian and Hebraist Johannes Forkel (1799-1846), who applied the Hegelian 
dialectic to Christology, and whose literal version of several books of the Apocrypha 
merited  the  censure  of  Hengstenberg  and  the  approval  of  Thilo  and  Gesenius. 
(Editor's note.)
141

Christian faith) I was led away by Schopenhauer, with his direct arguments; 
and by Shakespeare and Brahms, with the infinite variety of their worlds. He 
who pauses in wonder, moved with tenderness and gratitude, before any 
facet of the work of these auspicious creators, let him know that I also 
paused there, I, the abominable.
Nietzsche and Spengler entered my life about 1927. An eighteenth-
century author has observed that no one wants to owe anything to his 
contemporaries. I, in order to free myself from an influence which I felt to 
be oppressive, wrote an article titled Abrechnung mit Spengler, in which I 
noted that the most unequivocal monument to those traits which the author 
calls Faust-like is not the miscellaneous drama of Goethe24 but a poem 
written twenty centuries ago, the De rerum natura. I paid homage, however, 
to the sincerity of the philosopher of history, to his essentially German 
(kerndeutsch) and military spirit. In 1929 I entered the Party.
I  will  say  little  of my years of  apprenticeship.  They  were  more 
difficult for me than for others, since, although I do not lack courage, I am 
repelled by violence. I understood, however, that we were on the verge of a 
new era, and that this era, comparable to the initial epochs of Islam and 
Christianity, demanded a new kind of man. Individually my comrades were 
disgusting to me; in vain did I try to reason that we had to suppress our 
individuality for the lofty purpose which brought us together.
The theologians maintain that if God's attention were to wander for a 
single second from the right hand which traces these words, that hand would 
plunge into nothingness, as if fulminated by a lightless fire. No one, I say, 
can exist, no one can taste a glass of water or break a piece of bread, without 
justification. For each man that justification must be different; I awaited the 
inexorable war that would prove our faith. It was enough for me to know 
that I would be a soldier in its battles. At times I feared that English and 
Russian cowardice would betray us. But chance, or destiny, decided my 
future differently. On March first, 1939, at nightfall, there was a disturbance 
in Tilsit which was not mentioned in the newspapers; in the street behind the 
synagogue, my leg was pierced by two bullets and it was necessary to 
24 Other nations live innocently, in themselves and for themselves, like minerals or 
meteors; Germany is the universal mirror which receives all, the consciousness of the 
world  (das  Weltbewusstsein).  Goethe  is  the  prototype  of  that  ecumenic 
comprehension. I do not censure him, but I do not see in him the Faust-like man of 
Spengler's thesis.
142

amputate.25 A few days later our armies entered Bohemia. As the sirens 
announced their entry, I was in a quiet hospital, trying to lose and forget 
myself in Schopenhauer. An enormous and flaccid cat, symbol of my vain 
destiny, was sleeping on the window sill.
In the first volume of  Parerga und Paralipomena  I read again that 
everything which can happen to a man, from the instant of his birth until his 
death, has been preordained by him. Thus, every negligence is deliberate, 
every chance encounter  an appointment, every humiliation a penitence, 
every failure a mysterious victory, every death a suicide. There is no more 
skillful consolation than the idea that we have chosen our own misfortunes; 
this individual teleology reveals a secret order and prodigiously confounds 
us with the divinity. What unknown intention (I questioned vainly) made me 
seek, that afternoon, those bullets and that mutilation? Surely not fear of 
war, I knew; something more profound. Finally I hit upon it. To die for a 
religion is easier than to live it absolutely; to battle in Ephesus against the 
wild beasts is not so trying (thousands of obscure martyrs did it) as to be 
Paul, servant of Jesus; one act is less than a man's entire life. War and glory 
are facilities; more arduous than the undertaking of Napoleon was that of 
Raskolnikov. On the seventh of February, 1941, I was named subdirector of 
the concentration camp at Tarnowitz.
The carrying  out of this task  was not pleasant,  but I was never 
negligent. The coward proves his mettle under fire; the merciful, the pious, 
seeks his trial in jails and in the suffering of others. Essentially, Nazism is an 
act of morality, a purging of corrupted humanity, to dress him anew. This 
transformation is common in battle, amidst the clamor of the captains and 
the  shouting;  such  is not  the  case  in  a  wretched  cell,  where  insidious 
deceitful mercy tempts us with ancient tenderness. Not in vain do I pen this 
word: for the superior man of Zarathustra, mercy is the greatest of sins. I 
almost committed it (I confess) when they sent us the eminent poet David 
Jerusalem from Breslau.
He  was  about  fifty  years  old.  Poor  in  the  goods  of  this  world, 
persecuted, denied, vituperated, he had dedicated his genius to the praise of 
Happiness. I recall that Albert Soergel, in his work  Dichtung der Zeit, 
compared  him  with  Whitman.  The  comparison  is  not  exact.  Whitman 
celebrates the universe in a preliminary, abstract, almost indifferent manner; 
25 It has been rumored that the consequences of this wound were very serious. (Editor's 
note.)
143

Jerusalem takes joy in each thing, with a scrupulous and exact love. He 
never falls into the error of enumerations and catalogues. I can still repeat 
from memory many hexameters from that superb poem, Tse Yang, Painter 
of Tigers, which is, as it were, streaked with tigers, overburdened and criss-
crossed with transversal and silent tigers. Nor will I ever forget the soliloquy 
called  Rosencrantz Speaks with the Angel,  in which a sixteenth-century 
London moneylender vainly tries on his deathbed to vindicate his crimes, 
without suspecting that the secret justification of his life is that of having 
inspired in one of his clients (whom he has seen but once and does not 
remember) the character of Shylock. A man of memorable eyes, jaundiced 
complexion, with an almost black beard, David Jerusalem was the prototype 
of the Sephardic Jew, although, in fact, he belonged to the depraved and 
hated  Ashkenazim.  I  was  severe  with  him;  I  permitted  neither  my 
compassion nor his glory to make me relent. I had come to understand many 
years before that there is nothing on earth that does not contain the seed of a 
possible Hell; a face, a word, a compass, a cigarette advertisement, are 
capable of driving a person mad if he is unable to forget them. Would not a 
man who continually imagined the map of Hungary be mad? I decided to 
apply this principle to the disciplinary regimen of our camp, and. . .26  By the 
end  of  1942,  Jerusalem  had  lost  his  reason;  on  March  first,  1943,  he 
managed to kill himself.27
I do not know whether Jerusalem understood that, if I destroyed him, 
it was to destroy my compassion. In my eyes he was not a man, not even a 
Jew; he had been transformed into a detested zone of my soul. I agonized 
with him, I died with him and somehow I was lost with him; therefore, I was 
implacable.
Meanwhile we reveled in the great days and nights of a successful 
war. In the very air we breathed there was a feeling not unlike love. Our 
hearts beat with amazement and exaltation, as if we sensed the sea nearby. 
26 It has been necessary to omit a few lines here. (Editor's note.) 
27 We have been unable to find any reference to the name of Jerusalem, even in Soergel's 
work. Nor is he mentioned in the histories of German literature. Nevertheless, I do not 
believe that he is fictitious. Many Jewish intellectuals were tortured at Tarnowitz 
under orders of Otto Dietrich zur Linde; among them, the pianist Emma Rosenzweig. 
"David Jerusalem" is perhaps a symbol of several individuals. It is said that he died 
March first, 1943; on March first, 1939, the narrator was wounded in Tilsit. (Editor's 
note.)
144

Everything was new and different then, even the flavor of our dreams. (I, 
perhaps, was never entirely happy. But it is known that misery requires lost 
paradises.) Every man aspires to the fullness of life, that is, to the sum of 
experiences which he is capable of enjoying; nor is there a man unafraid of 
being cheated out of some part of his infinite patrimony. But it can be said 
that my generation enjoyed the extremes of experience, because first we 
were granted victory and later defeat.
In October or November of 1942 my brother Friedrich perished in the 
second battle of El Alamein, on the Egyptian sands. Months later an aerial 
bombardment destroyed our family's home; another, at the end of 1943, 
destroyed my laboratory. The Third Reich was dying, harassed by vast 
continents; it struggled alone against innumerable enemies. Then a singular 
event occurred, which only now do I believe I understand. I thought I was 
emptying the cup of anger, but in the dregs I encountered an unexpected 
flavor, the mysterious and almost terrible flavor of happiness. I essayed 
several explanations, but none seemed adequate. I thought:  I am pleased 
with defeat, because secretly I know I am guilty, and only punishment can 
redeem me. I thought: I am pleased with the defeat because it is an end and I 
am very tired. I thought: I am pleased with defeat because it has occurred, 
because it is irrevocably united to all those events which are, which were, 
and which will be, because to censure or to deplore a single real occurrence 
is to blaspheme the universe. I played with these explanations, until I found 
the true one.
It has been said that every man is born an Aristotelian or a Platonist. 
This is the same as saying that every abstract contention has its counterpart 
in the polemics of Aristotle or Plato; across the centuries and latitudes, the 
names, faces and dialects change but not the eternal antagonists. The history 
of nations also registers a secret continuity. Arminius, when he cut down the 
legions of Varus in a marsh, did not realize that he was a precursor of the 
German Empire; Luther, translator of the Bible, could not suspect that his 
goal was to forge a people destined to destroy the Bible for all time; 
Christoph zur Linde, killed by a Russian bullet in 1758, was in some way 
preparing the victories of 1914; Hitler believed he was fighting for a nation 
but he fought for all, even for those which he detested and attacked. It 
matters not that his I was ignorant of this fact; his blood and his will were 
aware of it. The world was dying of Judaism and from that sickness of 
Judaism, the faith of Jesus; we taught it violence and the faith of the sword. 
145

That  sword  is  slaying  us,  and  we  are  comparable  to  the  wizard  who 
fashioned a labyrinth and was then doomed to wander in it to the end of his 
days; or to David, who, judging an unknown man, condemns him to death, 
only to hear the revelation: You are that man. Many things will have to be 
destroyed in order to construct the New Order; now we know that Germany 
also was one of those things. We have given more than our lives, we have 
sacrificed the destiny of our beloved Fatherland. Let others curse and weep; 
I rejoice in the fact that our destiny completes its circle and is perfect.
An inexorable epoch is spreading over the world. We forged it, we 
who are already its victim. What matters if England is the hammer and we 
the anvil, so long as violence reigns and not servile Christian timidity? If 
victory and injustice and happiness are not for Germany, let them be for 
other nations. Let Heaven exist, even though our dwelling place is Hell.
I look at myself in the mirror to discover who I am, to discern how I 
will act in a few hours, when I am face to face with death. My flesh may be 
afraid; I am not.
Translated by Julian Palley
146

Averroe's Search
S'imaginant que la tragédie n'est autre chose que l'art de louer. . .
Ernest Renan: Averroès, 48 (1861)
bulgualid  Muhammad  Ibn-Ahmad  ibn-Muhammad  ibn-Rushd  (a 
century this long name would take to become Averroes, first becoming 
Benraist  and  Avenryz  and  even  Aben-Rassad  and  Filius  Rosadis)  was 
writing the eleventh chapter of his work Tahafut-ul-Tahafut (Destruction of 
Destruction),  in which  it is maintained,  contrary  to the Persian  ascetic 
Ghazali, author of the Tahafut-ul-falasifa (Destruction of Philosophers), that 
the divinity knows only the general laws of the universe, those pertaining to 
the species, not to the individual. He wrote with slow sureness, from right to 
left; the effort of forming syllogisms and linking vast paragraphs did not 
keep him from feeling, like a state of well-being, the cool and deep house 
surrounding him. In the depths of the siesta amorous doves called huskily; 
from some unseen patio arose the murmur of a fountain; something in 
Averroes, whose ancestors came from the Arabian deserts, was thankful for 
the constancy of the water. Down below were the gardens, the orchard; 
down below, the busy Guadalquivir and then the beloved city of Cordova, 
no  less  eminent  than  Bagdad  or  Cairo,  like  a  complex  and  delicate 
instrument, and all around (this Averroes felt also) stretched out to the limits 
of the earth the Spanish land, where there are few things, but where each 
seems to exist in a substantive and eternal way.
A
His pen moved across the page, the arguments entwined irrefutably, 
but a slight preoccupation darkened Averroes' felicity. It was not caused by 
the  Tahafut,  a  fortuitous  piece  of  work,  but  rather  by  a  problem  of 
philological nature related to the monumental work which would justify him 
in the eyes of men: his commentary on Aristotle. This Greek, fountainhead 
of all philosophy, had been bestowed upon men to teach them all that could 
be known; to interpret his works as the ulema interpret the Koran was 
Averroes' arduous purpose. Few things more beautiful and more pathetic are 
recorded in history than this Arab physician's dedication to the thoughts of a 
man separated from him by fourteen centuries; to the intrinsic difficulties we 
should add that Averroes, ignorant of Syriac and of Greek, was working 
with the translation of a translation. The night before, two doubtful words 
147

had halted him at the beginning of the Poetics. These words were tragedy 
and comedy. He had encountered them years before in the third book of the 
Rhetoric; no one in the whole world of Islam could conjecture what they 
meant. In vain he had exhausted the pages of Alexander of Aphrodisia, in 
vain he had compared the versions of the Nestorian Hunain ibn-Ishaq and of 
Abu-Bashar Mata. These two arcane words pullulated throughout the text of 
the Poetics; it was impossible to elude them.
Averroes put down his pen. He told himself (without excessive faith) 
that what we seek is often nearby, put away the manuscript of the Tahafut 
and went over to the shelf where the many volumes of the blind Abensida's 
Mohkam, copied by Persian calligraphers, were aligned. It was derisory to 
imagine he had not consulted them, but he was tempted by the idle pleasure 
of turning their pages. From this studious distraction, he was distracted by a 
kind of melody. He looked through the lattice-work balcony; below, in the 
narrow earthen patio, some half-naked children were playing. One, standing 
on another's shoulders, was obviously playing the part of a muezzin; with his 
eyes tightly closed, he chanted "There is no god but the God." The one who 
held him motionlessly played the part of the minaret; another, abject in the 
dust and on his knees, the part of the faithful worshipers. The game did not 
last long; all wanted to be the muezzin, none the congregation or the tower. 
Averroes heard them dispute in the vulgar dialect, that is, in the incipient 
Spanish of the peninsula's Moslem populace. He opened the Quitab ul ain of 
Jalil and thought proudly that in all Cordova (perhaps in all Al-Andalus) 
there was no other copy of that perfect work than this one the emir Yacub 
Almansur had sent him from Tangier. The name of this port reminded him 
that the traveler Abulcasim Al-Ashari, who had returned from Morocco, 
would dine with him that evening in the home of the Koran scholar Farach. 
Abulcasim claimed to have reached the dominions of the empire of Sin 
(China); his detractors, with that peculiar logic of hatred, swore he had never 
set foot in China and that in the temples of that land he had blasphemed the 
name of Allah. Inevitably the gathering would last several hours; Averroes 
quickly resumed his writing of the Tahafut. He worked until the twilight of 
evening.
The conversation, at Farach's home, passed from the incomparable 
virtues of the governor to those of his brother the emir; later, in the garden, 
they spoke of roses. Abulcasim, who had not looked at them, swore there 
were no roses like those adorning the Andalusian country villas. Farach 
148

would not be bought with flattery; he observed that the learned Ibn Qutaiba 
describes an excellent variety of the perpetual rose, which is found in the 
gardens of Hindustan and whose petals, of a blood red, exhibit characters 
which read: "There is no god but the God, Mohammed is the Apostle of 
God."  He  added  that  surely  Abulcasim  would  know  of  those  roses. 
Abulcasim looked at him with alarm. If he answered yes, all would judge 
him,  justifiably,  the  readiest  and  most  gratuitous  of  impostors;  if  he 
answered no, he would be judged an infidel. He elected to muse that the 
Lord possesses the key to all hidden things and that there is not a green or 
withered thing on earth which is not recorded in His Book. These words 
belong to one of the first chapters of the Koran; they were received with a 
reverent murmur. Swelled with vanity by this dialectical victory, Abulcasim 
was about to announce that the Lord is perfect in His works and inscrutable. 
Then Averroes, prefiguring the remote arguments of an as yet problematical 
Hume, declared:
"It is less difficult for me to admit an error in the learned Ibn Qutaiba, 
or in the copyists, than to admit that the earth has roses with the profession 
of the faith."
"So it is. Great and truthful words," said Abulcasim.
"One traveler," recalled Abdalmalik the poet, "speaks of a tree whose 
fruit are green birds. It is less painful for me to believe in it than in roses 
with letters."
"The  color  of  the  birds,"  said  Averroes,  "seems  to  facilitate  the 
portent. Besides, fruit and birds belong to the world of nature, but writing is 
an art. Going from leaves to birds is easier than from roses to letters."
Another guest denied indignantly that writing is an art, since the 
original of the Koran—the mother of the Book—is prior to Creation and is 
kept in heaven. Another spoke of Chahiz of Basra, who said that the Koran 
is a substance which may take the form of a man or animal, an opinion 
seeming to concord with the opinion of those who attribute two faces to the 
sacred book. Farach expounded at length the orthodox doctrine. The Koran 
(he said) is one of the attributes of God, as is His piety; it is copied in a 
book, uttered by the tongue, remembered in the heart, and the language and 
the signs and the writing are the work of man, but the Koran is irrevocable 
and eternal. Averroes, who had written a commentary on the Republic, could 
have said that the mother of the Book is something like its Platonic model, 
but he noted that theology was a subject totally inaccessible to Abulcasim.
149

Others who had also noticed this urged Abulcasim to relate some 
marvel. Then as now, the world was an atrocious place; the daring could 
travel  it  as  well  as  the  despicable,  those  who  stooped  to  anything. 
Abulcasim's memory was a mirror of intimate cowardices. What could he 
tell? Besides,  they  demanded marvels of  him  and  marvels  are  perhaps 
incommunicable; the moon of Bengal is not the same as the moon of Yemen, 
but it may be described in the same words. Abulcasim hesitated; then he 
spoke.
"He who travels the climates and cities," he proclaimed with unction, 
"sees many things worthy of credit. This one, for example, which I have told 
only once, to the king of the Turks. It happened in Sin Kalan (Canton), 
where the river of the Water of Life spills into the sea."
Farach asked if the city stood many leagues from the wall Iskandar 
Zul Qarnain (Alexander the Great of Macedonia) raised to halt Gog and 
Magog.
"Deserts separate them," said Abulcasim, with involuntary arrogance, 
"forty days a cafila (caravan) would take to glimpse its towers and they say 
another forty to reach it. In Sin Kalan I know of no one who has seen it or 
has seen anyone who has seen it."
The fear of the crassly infinite, of mere space, of mere matter, touched 
Averroes for an instant. He looked at the symmetrical garden; he felt aged, 
useless, unreal. Abulcasim continued:
"One afternoon, the Moslem merchants of Sin Kalan took me to a 
house of painted wood where many people lived. It is impossible to describe 
the  house,  which  was  rather  a  single  room,  with  rows  of  cabinets  or 
balconies on top of each other. In these cavities there were people who were 
eating and drinking, and also on the floor, and also on a terrace. The persons 
on this terrace were playing the drum and the lute, save for some fifteen or 
twenty  (with  crimson-colored  masks)  who  were  praying,  singing  and 
conversing. They suffered prison, but no one could see the jail; they traveled 
on horseback, but no one could see the horse; they fought, but the swords 
were of reed; they died and then stood up again."
"The acts of madmen," said Farach, "exceed the previsions of the 
sane."
"These were no madmen," Abulcasim had to explain. "They were 
representing a story, a merchant told me."
No one understood, no one seemed to want to understand. Abulcasim, 
150

confused, now went from his narration to his inept explanation. With the aid 
of his hands, he said:
"Let us imagine that someone performs a story instead of telling it. 
Let that story be the one about the sleepers of Ephesus. We see them retire 
into the cavern, we see them pray and sleep, we see them sleep with their 
eyes open, we see them grow as they sleep, we see them awaken after three 
hundred and nine years, we see them give the merchant an ancient coin, we 
see them awaken in Paradise, we see them awaken with the dog. Something 
like this was shown to us that afternoon by the people of the terrace "
"Did those people speak?" asked Farach.
"Of course they spoke," said Abulcasim, now become the apologist of 
a performance he scarcely remembered and which had annoyed him quite a 
bit. "They spoke and sang and perorated."
"In that case," said Farach, "twenty persons are unnecessary. One 
single speaker can tell anything, no matter how complicated it might be."
Everyone approved this dictum. The virtues of Arabic were extolled, 
which is the language God uses to direct the angels; then, those of Arabic 
poetry. Abdalmalik, after giving this poetry due praise and consideration, 
labeled as antiquated the poets who in Damascus or in Cordova adhered to 
pastoral images and a Bedouin vocabulary. He said it was absurd for a man 
having the Guadalquivir before his eyes to exalt the water of a well. He 
urged the convenience of renewing the old metaphors; he said that at the 
time Zuhair compared destiny to a blind camel, such a figure could move 
people, but that five centuries of admiration had rendered it valueless. All 
approved this dictum, which they had already heard many times, from many 
tongues. Averroes was silent. Finally he spoke, less to the others than to 
himself.
"With less eloquence," Averroes said, "but with related arguments, I 
once defended the proposition Abdalmalik maintains. In Alexandria, it has 
been said that the only persons incapable of a sin are those who have already 
committed it and repented; to be free of an error, let us add, it is well to have 
professed it. Zuhair in his mohalaca says that in the course of eighty years of 
suffering and glory many times he has seen destiny suddenly trample men 
into the dust, like a blind camel; Abdalmalik finds that this figure can no 
longer marvel us. Many things could be offered in response to this objection. 
The first, that if the purpose of the poem is to surprise us, its life span would 
not be measured in centuries, but in days and hours and perhaps minutes. 
151

The second, that a famous poet is less of an inventor than he is a discoverer. 
In praise of Ibn-Sharaf of Berja it has been repeated that only he could 
imagine that the stars at dawn fall slowly, like leaves from a tree; if this 
were so, it would be evidence that the image is banal. The image one man 
can form is an image that touches no one. There are infinite things on earth; 
any one of them may be likened to any other. Likening stars to leaves is no 
less arbitrary than likening them to fish or birds. However, there is no one 
who has not felt at some time that destiny is clumsy and powerful, that it is 
innocent and also inhuman. For that conviction, which may be passing or 
continuous, but which no one may elude, Zuhair's verse was written. What 
was said there will not be said better. Besides (and this is perhaps the 
essential  part  of  my reflections),  time,  which  despoils castles,  enriches 
verses. Zuhair's verse, when he composed it in Arabia, served to confront 
two images, the old camel and destiny; when we repeat it now, it serves to 
evoke the memory of Zuhair and to fuse our misfortune with that dead 
Arab's. The figure had two terms then and now it has four. Time broadens 
the scope of verses and I know of some which, like music, are everything for 
all men. Thus, when I was tormented years go in Marrakesh by memories of 
Cordova,  I  took  pleasure  in  repeating  the  apostrophe  Abdurrahman 
addressed in the gardens of Ruzafa to an African palm:
You too, oh palm!, are 
Foreign to this soil. . .
The singular benefit of poetry: words composed by a king who longed 
for the Orient served me, exiled in Africa, to express my nostalgia for 
Spain."
Averroes then spoke of the first poets, of those who in the Time of 
Ignorance, before Islam, had already said all things in the infinite language 
of the deserts. Alarmed, and not without reason, by Ibn-Sharaf's trivialities, 
he said that in the ancients and in the Koran all poetry is contained and he 
condemned  as  illiterate  and  vain  the  desire  for  innovation.  The  others 
listened with pleasure, for he was vindicating the traditional.
The muezzins were calling the faithful to their early morning prayers 
when Averroes entered his library again. (In the harem, the dark-haired 
slave girls had tortured a red-haired slave girl, but he would not know it 
until the afternoon.) Something had revealed to him the meaning of the two 
152

obscure words. With firm and careful calligraphy he added these lines to the 
manuscript: "Aristu (Aristotle) gives the name of tragedy to panegyrics and 
that of comedy to satires and anathemas. Admirable tragedies and comedies 
abound in the pages of the Koran and in the mohalacas of the sanctuary."
He felt sleepy, he felt somewhat cold. Having unwound his turban, he 
looked at himself in a metal mirror. I do not know what his eyes saw, 
because no historian has ever described the forms of his face. I do know that 
he disappeared suddenly, as if fulminated by an invisible fire, and with him 
disappeared  the  house  and the  unseen  fountain and  the books and  the 
manuscript and the doves and the many dark-haired slave girls and the 
tremulous  red-haired  slave  girl  and  Farach  and  Abulcasim  and  the 
rosebushes and perhaps the Guadalquivir.
In the foregoing story, I tried to narrate the process of a defeat. I first 
thought of that archbishop of Canterbury who took it upon himself to prove 
there is a God; then, of the alchemists who sought the philosopher's stone; 
then, of the vain trisectors of the angle and squarers of the circle. Later I 
reflected that it would be more poetic to tell the case of a man who sets 
himself a goal which is not forbidden to others, but is to him. I remembered 
Averroes  who,  closed  within  the  orb  of  Islam,  could  never  know  the 
meaning of the terms tragedy and comedy. I related his case; as I went along, 
I felt what that god mentioned by Burton must have felt when he tried to 
create a bull and created a buffalo instead. I felt that the work was mocking 
me. I felt that Averroes, wanting to imagine what a drama is without ever 
having suspected what a theater is, was no more absurd than I, wanting to 
imagine Averroes with no other sources than a few fragments from Renan, 
Lane and Asín Palacios. I felt, on the last page, that my narration was a 
symbol of the man I was as I wrote it and that, in order to compose that 
narration, I had to be that man and, in order to be that man, I had to compose 
that narration, and so on to infinity. (The moment I cease to believe in him, 
"Averroes" disappears.)
Translated by J.E.I.
153

The Zahir
n Buenos Aires the Zahir is an ordinary coin worth twenty centavos. The 
letters N T and the number 2 are scratched as if with a razor-blade or 
penknife; 1929 is the date on the obverse. (In Guzerat, towards the end of 
the eighteenth century, the Zahir was a tiger; in Java, a blind man from the 
Mosque of Surakarta whom the Faithful pelted with stones; in Persia, an 
astrolabe which Nadir Shah caused to be sunk to the bottom of the sea; in 
the Mahdi's prisons, along about 1892, it was a little compass which Rudolf 
Carl von Slatin touched, tucked into the fold of a turban; in the Mosque of 
Cordova, according to Zotenberg, it was a vein in the marble of one of the 
twelve-hundred pillars; in the Tetuán ghetto, it was the bottom of a well.) 
Today is the thirteenth of November; the Zahir came into my possession at 
dawn on June seventh. I am no longer the "I" of that episode; but it is still 
posible for me to remember what happened, perhaps even to tell it. I am still, 
however incompletely, Borges.
I
Clementina  Villar  died  on  the  sixth  of  June.  Around  1930,  her 
pictures were clogging the society magazines: perhaps it was this ubiquity 
that contributed to the legend that she was extremely pretty, although not 
every  portrait  bore  out  this  hypothesis  unconditionally.  At  any  rate, 
Clementina Villar was interested less in beauty than in perfection. The 
Hebrews and the Chinese codified every conceivable human eventuality; it 
is written in the Mishnah that a tailor is not to go out into the street carrying 
a needle once the Sabbath twilight has set in, and we read in the Book of 
Rites that a guest should assume a grave air when offered the first cup, and a 
respectfully contented air upon receiving the second. Something of this sort, 
though in much greater detail, was to be discerned in the uncompromising 
strictness which Clementina Villar demanded of herself. Like any Confucian 
adept or Talmudist, she strove for irreproachable correctness in every action; 
but her zeal was more admirable and more exigent than theirs because the 
tenets of her creed were not eternal, but submitted to the shifting caprices of 
Paris or Hollywood. Clementina Villar appeared at the correct places, at the 
correct hour, with the correct appuretenances and the correct boredom; but 
the boredom, the appurtenances, the hour and the places would almost 
immediately become passé and would provide Clementina Villar with the 
material for a definition of cheap taste. She was in search of the Absolute, 
154

like Flaubert; only hers was an Absolute of a moment's duration. Her life 
was exemplary, yet she was ravaged unremittingly by an inner despair. She 
was forever experimenting with new metamorphoses, as though trying to get 
away from herself; the color of her hair and the shape of her coiffure were 
celebratedly unstable. She was always changing her smile, her complexion, 
the slant of her eyes. After thirty-two she was scrupulously slender. . . The 
war gave her much to think about: with Paris occupied by the Germans, how 
could one follow the fashions? A foreigner whom she had always distrusted 
presumed so far upon her good faith as to sell her a number of cylindrical 
hats; a year later it was divulged that those absurd creations had never been 
worn  in  Paris  at  all!—consequently  they  were  not  hats,  but  arbitrary, 
unauthorized eccentricities. And troubles never come singly: Dr. Villar had 
to move to Aráoz Street, and his daughter's portrait was now adorning 
advertisements for cold cream and automobiles. (The cold cream that she 
abundantly applied, the automobiles she  no longer  possessed.) She knew 
that the successful exercise of her art demanded a large fortune, and she 
preferred retirement from the scene to halfway effects. Moreover, it pained 
her to have to compete with giddy little  nobodies. The gloomy Aráoz 
apartment was too much to bear: on the sixth of June Clementina Villar 
committed the solecism of dying in the very middle of the Southern district. 
Shall I confess that I—moved by that most sincere of Argentinian passions, 
snobbery—was enamored of her, and that her death moved me to tears? 
Probably the reader has already suspected as much.
At a wake, the progress of corruption brings it about that the corpse 
reassumes its earlier faces. At some stage of that confused night of the sixth, 
Clementina Villar was magically what she had been twenty years before: her 
features recovered that authority which is conferred by pride, by money, by 
youth, by the awareness of rounding off a hierarchy, by lack of imagination, 
by limitations, by stolidity. Somehow, I thought, no version of that face 
which has disturbed me so will stay in my memory as long as this one; it is 
right that it should be the last, since it might have been the first. I left her 
rigid among the flowers, her disdain perfected by death. It must have been 
about two in the morning when I went away. Outside, the predictable rows 
of one- and two-story houses had taken on the abstract appearance that is 
theirs at night, when darkness and silence simplify them. Drunk with an 
almost impersonal piety, I walked through the streets. At the corner of Chile 
and Tacuarí I saw an open shop. And in that shop, unhappily for me, three 
155

men were playing cards.
In the figure of speech called oxymoron a word is modified by an 
epithet which seems to contradict it: thus, the Gnostics spoke of dark light, 
and the alchemists of a black sun. For me it was a kind of oxymoron to go 
straight from my last visit with Clementina Villar to buy a drink at a bar; I 
was intrigued by the coarseness of the act, by its ease. (The contrast was 
heightened by the circumstance that there was a card game in progress.) I 
asked for a brandy. They gave me the Zahir in my change. I stared at it for a 
moment and went out into the street, perhaps with the beginnings of a fever. 
I reflected that every coin in the world is a symbol of those famous coins 
which glitter in history and fable. I thought of Charon's obol; of the obol for 
which Belisarius begged; of Judas' thirty coins; of the drachmas of Laï's, the 
famous courtesan; of the ancient coin which one of the Seven Sleepers 
proffered; of the shining coins of the wizard in the 1001 Nights, that turned 
out to be bits of paper; of the inexhaustible penny of Isaac Laquedem; of the 
sixty thousand pieces of silver, one for each line of an epic, which Firdusi 
sent back to a king because they were not of gold; of the doubloon which 
Ahab nailed to the mast; of Leopold Bloom's irreversible florin; of the louis 
whose pictured face betrayed the fugitive Louis XVI near Varennes. As if in 
a dream, the thought that every piece of money entails such illustrious 
connotations  as  these,  seemed  to  me  of  huge,  though  inexplicable, 
importance. My speed increased as I passed through the empty squares and 
along the empty streets. At length, weariness deposited me at a corner. I saw 
a patient iron grating and, beyond, the black and white flagstones of the 
Conception. I had wandered in a circle and was now a block away from the 
store where they had given me the Zahir.
I turned back. The dark window told me from a distance that the shop 
was now closed. In Belgrano Street I took a cab. Sleepless, obsessed, almost 
happy, I reflected that there is nothing less material than money, since any 
coin  whatsoever  (let  us  say  a  coin  worth  twenty  centavos)  is,  strictly 
speaking, a repertory of possible futures. Money is abstract, I repeated; 
money is the future tense. It can be an evening in the suburbs, or music by 
Brahms; it can be maps, or chess, or coffee; it can be the words of Epictetus 
teaching us to despise gold; it is a Proteus more versatile than the one on the 
isle of Pharos. It is unforeseeable time, Bergsonian time, not the rigid time 
of Islam or the Porch. The determinists deny that there is such a thing in the 
world as a single possible act, id est an act that could or could not happen; a 
156

coin symbolizes man's free will. (I did not suspect that these "thoughts" were 
an artifice opposed  to the Zahir and an  initial form of its demoniacal 
influence.) I fell asleep after much brooding, but I dreamed that I was the 
coins guarded by a griffon.
The next day I decided that I had been drunk. I also made up my mind 
to get rid of the coin that had caused me so much worry. I looked at it: there 
was nothing out of the ordinary about it except for some scratches. The best 
thing to do would be to bury it in the garden or hide it in some corner of the 
library, but I wanted to remove myself from its orbit. I preferred to lose it. I 
did  not  go  to  the  Pilar  that  morning,  or  to  the  cemetery;  I  took  the 
underground to Constitucion and from Constitucion to the corner of San 
Juan and Boedo. I got off, on an impulse, at Urquiza and walked west and 
south. With scrupulous lack of plan I rounded a number of corners, and in a 
street which looked to me like all the others I went into a wretched little 
tavern, asked for a drink of brandy, and paid for it with the Zahir. I half 
closed my eyes behind my dark spectacles, managing not to see the house-
numbers or the name of the street. That night I took a veronal tablet and 
slept peacefully.
Up till the end of June I was busy writing a tale of fantasy. This 
contained  two  or  three  enigmatic  circumlocutions,  or  "kennings":  for 
example, instead of blood it says sword-water, and gold is the serpent's bed; 
the story is told in the first person. The narrator is an ascetic who has 
abjured the society of men and who lives in a kind of wilderness. (The name 
of this place is Gnitaheidr.) Because of the simplicity and candor of his life 
there are those who consider him an angel; but this is a pious exaggeration, 
for there is no man who is free of sin. As a matter of fact, he has cut his own 
father's throat, the old man having been a notorious wizard who by magic 
arts had got possession of a limitless treasure. To guard this treasure from 
the insane covetousness of human beings is the purpose to which our ascetic 
has dedicated his life: day and night he keeps watch over the hoard. Soon, 
perhaps too soon, his vigil will come to an end: the stars have told him that 
the sword has already been forged which will cut it short forever. (Gram is 
the  name  of  that  sword.)  In  a  rhetoric  increasingly  more  complex  he 
contemplates the brilliance and the flexibility of his body: in one paragraph 
he speaks distractedly of his scales; in another he says that the treasure 
which he guards is flashing gold and rings of red. In the end we understand 
that the ascetic is the serpent Fafnir, that the treasure upon which he lies is 
157

the treasure of the Nibelungs. The appearance of Sigurd brings the story to 
an abrupt end.
I have said that the composition of this trifle (into which I inserted, in 
a pseudo-erudite fashion, a verse or two from the  Fáfnismál)  gave me a 
chance to forget the coin. There were nights when I felt so sure of being able 
to forget it that I deliberately recalled it to mind. What is certain is that I 
overdid these occasions: it was easier to start the thing than to have done 
with it. It was in vain that I told myself that that abominable nickel disk was 
no different from others that pass from one hand to another, alike, countless, 
innocuous. Attracted by this idea, I tried to think of other coins; but I could 
not. I remember, too, a frustrated experiment I made with Chilean five- and 
ten-centavo pieces and an Uruguayan  vintén.  On the sixteenth of July I 
acquired a pound sterling. I did not look at it during the day, but that night 
(and other nights) I put it under a magnifying glass and studied it by the light 
of a powerful electric lamp. Afterwards I traced it on paper with a pencil. 
But the brilliance and the dragon and Saint George were of no help to me: I 
could not manage to change obsessions.
In August I decided to consult a psychiatrist. I did not tell him the 
whole of my ridiculous story; I said I was bothered by insomnia, that I was 
being haunted by the image of something or other. . . let us say a poker-chip 
or a coin. A little later, in a bookshop in Sarmiento Street, I dug up a copy of 
Julius Barlach's Urkunden zur Geschichte der Zahirsage (Breslau, 1899).
In  this  book  my  disease  was  clearly  revealed.  According  to  the 
preface, the author proposed "to gather together in one handy octavo volume 
all the documents having to do with the Zahir superstition, including four 
papers from the Habicht collection and the original manuscript of the study 
by Philip Meadows Taylor." Belief in the Zahir is of Islamic origin, and 
seems to date from the eighteenth century. (Barlach rejects the passages 
which Zotenberg attributes to Abulfeda). Zahir in Arabic means "notorious," 
"visible"; in this sense it is one of the ninety-nine names of God, and the 
people (in Muslim territories) use it to signify "beings or things which 
possess the terrible property of being unforgettable, and whose image finally 
drives one mad." The first irrefutable testimony is that of the Persian Lutf 
Ali Azur. In the precise pages of the biographical encyclopedia entitled 
Temple of Fire this polygraph dervish writes that in a school at Shiraz there 
was a copper astrolabe "fashioned in such a way that whoever looked once 
upon it could thereafter think of nothing else; whence the King ordered that 
158

it should be sunk in the deepest part of the sea, lest men forget the universe." 
The study of Meadows Taylor is more detailed (he was in the service of the 
Nizam of Hyderabad, and wrote the famous novel, Confessions of a Thug). 
In about 1832, in the outskirts of Bhuj, Taylor heard the unusual expression 
"Verily he has looked on the Tiger," to signify madness or saintliness. He 
was informed that the reference was to a magic tiger which was the ruin of 
whoever beheld it, even from far away, since the beholder continued to think 
about it to the end of his days. Someone said that one of these unfortunates 
had fled to Mysore, where he had painted the fugure of the tiger on the walls 
of some palace. Years later, Taylor was inspecting the jails of the kingdom; 
and in the one at Nittur the governor showed him a cell where the floor, the 
walls and the ceiling had been covered, in barbaric colors which time was 
subtilizing before erasing them, by a Muslim fakir's elaboration of a kind of 
infinite  Tiger.  This  Tiger  was  composed  of  many  tigers  in  the  most 
vertiginous fashion: it was traversed by tigers, scored by tigers, and it 
contained seas and Himalayas and armies which seemed to reveal still other 
tigers. The painter had died many years ago in this very cell; he had come 
from Sind, or maybe Guzerat, and his original purpose had been to design a 
map of the world. Indeed, some traces of this were yet to be discerned in the 
monstrous image. . . Taylor told the story to Mohammed Al-Yemeni, of Fort 
William; Mohammed informed him that there was no created thing in this 
world which could not take on the properties of Zaheer,28 but that the All-
merciful does not allow two things to be it at the same time, since one alone 
is able to fascinate multitudes. He said that there is always a Zahir; that in 
the Age of Innocence it was an idol named Yaúq; and later, a prophet of 
Jorasán who used to wear a veil embroidered with stones, or a golden 
mask.29 He also said that God is inscrutable.
I read Barlach's monograph—read it and reread it. I hardly need 
describe my feelings. I remember my despair when I realized that nothing 
could save me; the sheer relief of knowing that I was not to blame for my 
predicament; the envy I felt for those whose Zahir was not a coin, but a 
piece of marble, or a tiger. How easy it would be not to think of a tiger! And 
I also remember the odd anxiety with which I studied this paragraph: "A 
28 Such is Taylor's spelling of the word.
29 Barlach observes that Yaúq is mentioned in the Koran (71, 23) and that the Prophet is 
Al-Mokanna (the Veiled One), and that no one except Philip Meadows Taylor's 
surprising informant has identified them with the Zahir.
159

commentator on the Gulshan i Raz says that he who has seen the Zahir will 
soon see the Rose; and he cites a verse interpolated in the  Asrar Nama 
(Book of Things Unknown) of Attar: 'The Zahir is the shadow of the Rose, 
and the Rending of the Veil.' "
That night at Clementina's house I had been surprised not to see her 
younger sister, Mrs. Abascal. In October one of her friends told me about it: 
"Poor Julie! She got awfully queer, and they had to shut her up in the Bosch. 
She's just going to be the death of the nurses who have to spoon-feed her! 
Why, she keeps on talking about a  coin,  just like Morena Sackmann's 
chauffeur."
Time, which generally attenuates memories, only aggravates that of 
the Zahir. There was a time when I could visualize the obverse, and then the 
reverse. Now I see them simultaneously. This is not as though the Zahir 
were crystal, because it is not a matter of one face being superimposed upon 
another; rather, it is as though my eyesight were spherical, with the Zahir in 
the center. Whatever is not the Zahir comes to me fragmentarily, as if from a 
great distance: the arrogant image of Clementina; physical pain. Tennyson 
once said that if we could understand a single flower, we should know what 
we are and what the world is. Perhaps he meant that there is no fact, 
however insignificant, that does not involve universal history and the infinite 
concatenation of cause and effect. Perhaps he meant that the visible world is 
implicit in every phenomenon, just as the will, according to Schopenhauer, 
is implicit in every subject. The Cabalists pretend that man is a microcosm, a 
symbolic mirror of the universe; according to Tennyson, everything would 
be. Everything, even the intolerable Zahir.
Before 1948 Julia's destiny will have caught up with me. They will 
have to feed me and dress me, I shall not know whether it is afternoon or 
morning, I shall not know who Borges was. To call this prospect terrible is a 
fallacy, for none of its circumstances will exist for me. One might as well 
say that an anesthetized man feels terrible pain when they open his cranium. 
I shall no longer perceive the universe: I shall perceive the Zahir. According 
to the teaching of the Idealists, the words "live" and "dream" are rigorously 
synonymous. From thousands of images I shall pass to one; from a highly 
complex dream to a dream of utter simplicity. Others will dream that I am 
mad; I shall dream of the Zahir. When all the men on earth think, day and 
night, of the Zahir, which will be a dream and which a reality—the earth or 
the Zahir?
160

In the empty night hours I can still walk through the streets. Dawn 
may surprise me on a bench in Garay Park, thinking (trying to think) of the 
passage in the Asrar Nama where it says that the Zahir is the shadow of the 
Rose and the Rending of the Veil. I associate that saying with this bit of 
information: In order to lose themselves in God, the Sufis recite their own 
names, or the ninety-nine divine names, until they become meaningless. I 
long to travel that path. Perhaps I shall conclude by wearing away the Zahir 
simply through thinking of it again and again. Perhaps behind the coin I 
shall find God.
To Wally Zenner
Translated by Dudley Fitts
161

The Waiting
he cab left him at number four thousand four on that street in the 
northwest part of Buenos Aires. It was not yet nine in the morning; the 
man noted with approval the spotted plane trees, the square plot of earth at 
the foot of each, the respectable  houses with their little  balconies,  the 
pharmacy alongside, the dull lozenges of the paint and hardware store. A 
long window-less hospital wall backed the sidewalk on the other side of the 
street; the sun reverberated, farther down, from some greenhouses. The man 
thought that these things (now arbitrary and accidental and in no special 
order, like the things one sees in dreams) would in time, if God willed, 
become  invariable,  necessary  and  familiar.  In  the  pharmacy  window 
porcelain letters spelled out the name "Breslauer"; the Jews were displacing 
the Italians, who had displaced the Creoles. It was better that way; the man 
prefered not to mingle with people of his kind.
T
The  cabman  helped  him  take  down  his  trunk;  a  woman  with  a 
distracted or tired air finally opened the door. From his seat, the cabman 
returned one of the coins to him, a Uruguayan twenty-centavo piece which 
had been in his pocket since that night in the hotel at Melo. The man gave 
him forty centavos and immediately felt: "I must act so that everyone will 
forgive me. I have made two errors: I have used a foreign coin and I have 
shown that the mistake matters to me."
Led by the woman, he crossed the entrance hall and the first patio. 
The room they had reserved for him opened, happily, onto the second patio. 
The bed  was of iron,  deformed by  the craftsman  into  fantastic  curves 
representing branches and tendrils; there was also a tall pine wardrobe, a 
bedside table, a shelf with books at floor level, two odd chairs and a 
washstand with its basin, jar, soap dish and bottle of turbid glass. A map of 
the province of Buenos Aires and a crucifix adorned the walls; the wallpaper 
was crimson, with a pattern of huge spread-tailed peacocks. The only door 
opened onto the patio. It was necessary to change the placement of the chairs 
in order to get the trunk in. The roomer approved of everything; when the 
woman asked him his name, he said Villari, not as a secret challenge, not to 
mitigate the humiliation which actually he did not feel, but because that 
name troubled him, because it was impossible for him to think of any other. 
Certainly  he  was  not  seduced  by  the  literary  error  of  thinking  that 
162

assumption of the enemy's name might be an astute maneuver.
Mr. Villari, at first, did not leave the house; after a few weeks, he took 
to going out for a while at sundown. One night he went into the movie 
theater three blocks away. He never went beyond the last row of seats; he 
always got up a little before the end of the feature. He would see tragic 
stories of the underworld; these stories, no doubt, contained errors; these 
stories, no doubt, contained images which were also those of his former life; 
Villari took no notice of them because the idea of a coincidence between art 
and reality was alien to him. He would submissively try to like the things; he 
wanted to anticipate the intention with which they were shown. Unlike 
people who read novels, he never saw himself as a character in a work of 
art.
No letters nor even a circular ever arrived for him, but with vague 
hope he would always read one of the sections of the newspaper. In the 
afternoons, he would put one of the chairs by the door and gravely make and 
drink his maté, his eyes fixed on the vine covering the wall of the several-
storied building next door. Years of solitude had taught him that, in one's 
memory, all days tend to be the same, but that there is not a day, not even in 
jail or in the hospital,  which does not bring surprises,  which is not a 
translucent network of minimal surprises. In other confinements, he had 
given in to the temptation of counting the days and the hours, but this 
confinement was different, for it had no end—unless  one morning the 
newspaper brought news of Alejandro Villari's death. It was also possible 
that Villari  had already died  and in that case this life was a dream. This 
possibility disturbed him, because he could never quite understand whether 
it  seemed  a relief  or  a  misfortune;  he  told  himself  it  was absurd  and 
discounted it. In distant days, less distant because of the passage of time than 
because of two or three irrevocable acts, he had desired many things with an 
unscrupulous passion; this powerful will, which had moved the hatred of 
men and the love of some women, no longer wanted any particular thing: it 
only wanted to endure, not to come to an end. The taste of the maté, the taste 
of black tobacco, the growing line of shadows gradually covering the patio
—these were sufficient incentives.
In the house there was a wolf-dog, now old. Villari made friends with 
him. He spoke to him in Spanish, in Italian, in the few words he still retained 
of the rustic dialect of his childhood. Villari tried to live in the simple 
present, with no memories or anticipation; the former mattered less to him 
163

than the latter. In an obscure way, he thought he could see that the past is the 
stuff time is made of; for that reason, time immediately turns into the past. 
His weariness, one day, was like a feeling of contentment; in moments like 
this, he was not much more complex than the dog.
One  night  he  was  left  astonished  and  trembling  by  an  intimate 
discharge of pain in the back of his mouth. This horrible miracle recurred in 
a few minutes and again towards dawn. Villari, the next day, sent for a cab 
which left him at a dentist's office in the Once section. There he had the 
tooth pulled. In this ordeal he was neither more cowardly nor more tranquil 
than other people.
Another night, returning from the movies, he felt that he was being 
pushed.  With  anger,  with  indignation,  with  secret  relief,  he  faced  the 
insolent person. He spat out a coarse insult; the other man, astonished, 
stammered an excuse. He was tall, young, with dark hair, accompanied by a 
German-looking woman; that night, Villari repeated to himself that he did 
not know them. Nevertheless, four or five days went by before he went out 
into the street.
Amongst the books on the shelf there was a copy of the  Divine 
Comedy, with the old commentary by Andreoli. Prompted less by curiosity 
than by a feeling of duty, Villari undertook the reading of this capital work; 
before dinner, he would read a canto and then, in rigorous order, the notes. 
He did not judge the punishments of hell to be unbelievable or excessive and 
did not think Dante would have condemned him to the last circle, where 
Ugolino's teeth endlessly gnaw Ruggieri's neck.
The peacocks on the crimson wallpaper seemed destined to be food 
for tenacious nightmares, but Mr. Villari never dreamed of a monstrous 
arbor inextricably woven of living birds. At dawn he would dream a dream 
whose substance was the same, with varying circumstances. Two men and 
Villari would enter the room with revolvers or they would attack him as he 
left the movie house or all three of them at once would be the stranger who 
had pushed him or they would sadly wait for him in the patio and seem not 
to recognize him. At the end of the dream, he would take his revolver from 
the drawer of the bedside table (and it was true he kept a revolver in that 
drawer) and open fire on the men. The noise of the weapon would wake him, 
but it was always a dream and in another dream the attack would be repeated 
and in another dream he would have to kill them again.
One murky morning in the month of July, the presence of strange 
164

people (not the noise of the door when they opened it) woke him. Tall in the 
shadows of the room, curiously simplified by those shadows (in the fearful 
dreams they had always been clearer), vigilant, motionless and patient, their 
eyes  lowered  as  if weighted down by the heaviness  of their weapons, 
Alejandro Villari and a stranger had overtaken him at last. With a gesture, 
he asked them to wait and turned his face to the wall, as if to resume his 
sleep. Did he do it to arouse the pity of those who killed him, or because it is 
less difficult to endure a frightful happening than to imagine it and endlessly 
await it, or—and this is perhaps most likely—so that the murderers would be 
a dream, as they had already been so many times, in the same place, at the 
same hour?
He was in this act of magic when the blast obliterated him.
Translated by J.E.I.
165

The God's Script
he prison  is deep  and of stone;  its form, that of a nearly  perfect 
hemisphere, though the floor (also of stone) is somewhat less than a 
great circle, a fact which in some way aggravates the feelings of oppression 
and of vastness. A dividing wall cuts it at the center; this wall, although very 
high, does not reach the upper part of the vault; in one cell am I, Tzinacán, 
magician of the pyramid of Qaholom, which Pedro de Alvarado devastated 
by fire; in the other there is a jaguar measuring with secret and even paces 
the time and space of captivity. A long window with bars, flush with the 
floor, cuts the central wall. At the shadowless hour [midday], a trap in the 
high ceiling opens and a jailer whom the years have gradually been effacing 
maneuvers an iron sheave and lowers for us, at the end of a rope, jugs of 
water and chunks of flesh. The light breaks into the vault; at that instant I 
can see the jaguar.
T
I have lost count of the years I have lain in the darkness; I, who was 
young once and could move about this prison, am incapable of more than 
awaiting, in the posture of my death, the end destined to me by the gods. 
With the deep obsidian knife I have cut open the breasts of victims and now 
I could not, without magic, lift myself from the dust.
On the eve of the burning of the pyramid, the men who got down from 
the towering horses tortured me with fiery metals to force me to reveal the 
location of a hidden treasure. They struck down the idol of the god before 
my very eyes, but he did not abandon me and I endured the torments in 
silence. They scourged me, they broke and deformed me, and then I awoke 
in this prison from which I shall not emerge in mortal life.
Impelled by the fatality of having something to do, of populating time 
in some way, I tried, in my darkness, to recall all I knew. Endless nights I 
devoted to recalling the order and the number of stone-carved serpents or the 
precise form of a medicinal tree. Gradually, in this way, I subdued the 
passing years; gradually, in this way, I came into possession of that which 
was already mine. One night I felt I was approaching the threshold of an 
intimate  recollection;  before  he  sights  the  sea,  the  traveller  feels  a 
quickening in the blood. Hours later I began to perceive the outline of the 
recollection. It was a tradition of the god. The god, foreseeing that at the end 
of time there would be devastation and ruin, wrote on the first day of 
166

Creation a magical sentence with the power to ward off those evils. He 
wrote it in such a way that it would reach the most distant generations and 
not be subject to chance. No one knows where it was written nor with what 
characters, but it is certain that it exists, secretly, and that a chosen one shall 
read it. I considered that we were now, as always, at the end of time and that 
my destiny as the last priest of the god would give me access to the privilege 
of intuiting the script. The fact that a prison confined me did not forbid my 
hope; perhaps I had seen the script of Qaholom a thousand times and needed 
only to fathom it.
This reflection encouraged me, and then instilled in me a kind of 
vertigo. Throughout the earth there are ancient forms, forms incorruptible 
and eternal; any one of them could be the symbol I sought. A mountain 
could be the speech of the god, or a river or the empire or the configuration 
of the stars. But in the process of the centuries the mountain is levelled and 
the river will change its course, empires experience mutation and havoc and 
the configuration of the stars varies. There is change in the firmament. The 
mountain  and  the  star  are  individuals  and  individuals  perish.  I  sought 
something more tenacious, more invulnerable. I thought of the generations 
of cereals, of grasses, of birds, of men. Perhaps the magic would be written 
on my face, perhaps I myself was the end of my search. That anxiety was 
consuming me when I remembered the jaguar was one of the attributes of 
the god.
Then my soul filled with pity. I imagined the first morning of time; I 
imagined my god confiding his message to the living skin of the jaguars, 
who would love and reproduce without end, in caverns, in cane fields, on 
islands, in order that the last men might receive it. I imagined that net of 
tigers, that teeming labyrinth of tigers, inflicting horror upon pastures and 
flocks in order to perpetuate a design. In the next cell there was a jaguar; in 
his vicinity I perceived a confirmation of my conjecture and a secret favor.
I devoted long years to learning the order and the configuration of the 
spots. Each period of darkness conceded an instant of light, and I was able 
thus to fix in my mind the black forms running through the yellow fur. Some 
of them included points, others formed cross lines on the inner side of the 
legs; others, ring-shaped, were repeated. Perhaps they were a single sound or 
a single word. Many of them had red edges.
I shall not recite the hardships of my toil. More than once I cried out 
to the vault that it was impossible to decipher that text. Gradually, the 
167

concrete enigma I labored at disturbed me less than the generic enigma of a 
sentence written by a god. What type of sentence (I asked myself) will an 
absolute mind construct? I considered that even in the human languages 
there is no proposition that does not imply the entire universe; to say the 
tiger is to say the tigers that begot it, the deer and turtles devoured by it, the 
grass on which the deer fed, the earth that was mother to the grass, the 
heaven that gave birth to the earth. I considered that in the language of a god 
every word would enunciate that infinite concatenation of facts, and not in 
an  implicit  but  in  an  explicit  manner,  and  not  progressively  but 
instantaneously. In time, the notion of a divine sentence seemed puerile or 
blasphemous. A god, I reflected, ought to utter only a single word and in that 
word absolute fullness. No word uttered by him can be inferior to the 
universe or less than the sum total of time. Shadows or simulacra of that 
single word equivalent to a language and to all a language can embrace are 
the poor and ambitious human words, all, world, universe.
One day or one night—what difference between my days and nights 
can there be?—I dreamt there was a grain of sand on the floor of the prison. 
Indifferent, I slept again; I dreamt I awoke and that on the floor there were 
two grains of sand. I slept again; I dreamt that the grains of sand were three. 
They went on multiplying in this way until they filled the prison and I lay 
dying beneath that hemisphere of sand. I realized that I was dreaming; with a 
vast  effort  I  roused  myself  and  awoke.  It  was  useless  to  awake;  the 
innumerable sand was suffocating me. Someone said to me: You have not 
awakened to wakefulness, but to a previous dream. This dream is enclosed 
within another, and so on to infinity, which is the number of grains of sand. 
The path you must retrace is interminable and you will die before you ever 
really awake.
I felt lost. The sand burst my mouth, but I shouted: A sand of dreams 
cannot kill me nor are there dreams within dreams. A blaze of light awoke 
me. In the darkness above there grew a circle of light. I saw the face and 
hands of the jailer, the sheave, the rope, the flesh and the water jugs.
A man becomes confused, gradually, with the form of his destiny; a 
man is, by and large, his circumstances. More than a decipherer or an 
avenger, more than a priest of the god, I was one imprisoned. From the 
tireless labyrinth of dreams I returned as if to my home to the harsh prison. I 
blessed its dampness, I blessed its tiger, I blessed the crevice of light, I 
blessed my old, suffering body, I blessed the darkness and the stone.
168

Then there occurred what I cannot forget nor communicate. There 
occurred the union with the divinity, with the universe (I do not know 
whether these words differ in meaning). Ecstasy does not repeat its symbols; 
God has been seen in a blazing light, in a sword or in the circles of a rose. I 
saw an exceedingly high Wheel, which was not before my eyes, nor behind 
me, nor to the sides, but every place at one time. That Wheel was made of 
water, but also of fire, and it was (although the edge could be seen) infinite. 
Interlinked, all things that are, were and shall be formed it, and I was one of 
the fibers of that total fabric and Pedro de Alvarado who tortured me was 
another. There lay revealed the causes and the effects and it sufficed me to 
see  that  Wheel  in  order  to  understand  it  all,  without  end.  O  bliss  of 
understanding, greater than the bliss of imagining or feeling. I saw the 
universe and I saw the intimate designs of the universe. I saw the origins 
narrated in the Book of the Common. I saw the mountains that rose out of 
the water, I saw the first men of wood, the cisterns that turned against the 
men, the dogs that ravaged their faces. I saw the faceless god concealed 
behind the other gods. I saw infinite processes that formed one single felicity 
and, understanding all, I was able also to understand the script of the tiger.
It is a formula of fourteen random words (they appear random) and to 
utter it in a loud voice would suffice to make me all powerful. To say it 
would suffice to abolish this stone prison, to have daylight break into my 
night, to be young, to be immortal, to have the tiger's jaws crush Alvarado, 
to sink the sacred knife into the breasts of Spaniards, to reconstruct the 
pyramid, to reconstruct the empire. Forty syllables, fourteen words, and I, 
Tzinacán, would rule the lands Moctezuma ruled. But I know I shall never 
say those words, because I no longer remember Tzinacán.
May the mystery lettered on the tigers die with me. Whoever has seen 
the universe, whoever has beheld the fiery designs of the universe, cannot 
think in terms of one man, of that man's trivial fortunes or misfortunes, 
though he be that very man. That man has been he and now matters no more 
to him. What is the life of that other to him, the nation of that other to him, if 
he, now, is no one. This is why I do not pronounce the formula, why, lying 
here in the darkness, I let the days obliterate me.
Translated by L. A. Murillo
169

Essays
170

The Argentine Writer and Tradition
 wish to formulate and justify here some skeptical proposals concerning 
the problem of the Argentine writer and tradition. My skepticism does not 
relate to the difficulty or impossibility of solving this problem, but rather to 
its very existence. I believe we are faced with a mere rhetorical topic which 
lends itself to pathetic elaborations; rather than with a true mental difficulty, 
I  take  it  we  are  dealing  with  an  appearance,  a  simulacrum,  a  pseudo 
problem.
I
Before examining it, I want to consider the most commonly offered 
statements and solutions. I shall begin with a solution which has become 
almost instinctive, which appears without the aid of logical reasoning; it 
maintains  that  the  Argentine  literary  tradition  already  exists  in  the 
gauchesque poetry. According to this solution, the vocabulary, devices and 
themes of gauchesque poetry should guide the contemporary writer, and are 
a point of departure and perhaps an archetype. This is the usual solution and 
for that reason I intend to examine it at some length.
This same solution was set forth by Lugones in El payador; there one 
may read that we Argentines possess a classic poem, Martín Fierro, and that 
this poem should be for us what the Homeric poems were for the Greeks. It 
seems difficult to contradict this opinion without slighting Martín Fierro. I 
believe that  Martín Fierro  is the most lasting work we Argentines have 
written; and I believe with the same intensity that we cannot suppose Martín 
Fierro is, as it has sometimes been said, our Bible, our canonical book.
Ricardo  Rojas,  who  has  also  recommended  the  canonization  of 
Martín Fierro,  has a page in his  Historia de la literatura argentina  that 
almost seems to be commonplace and is really quite astute.
Rojas studies the poetry of the gauchesque writers—in other words, 
the poetry of Hidalgo, Ascasubi, Estanislao del Campo and José Hernández
—and sees it as being derived from the poetry of the payadores, from the 
spontaneous poetry of the gauchos. He points out that the meter of popular 
poetry is the octosyllable and that the authors of gauchesque poetry employ 
this meter and ends up by considering the poetry of the gauchesque writers 
as a continuation or enlargement of the poetry of the payadores.
I suspect there is a grave error in this affirmation; we might even say a 
skillful error, for it is evident that Rojas, in order to give the gauchesque 
171

poetry  a  popular  basis  beginning  with  Hidalgo  and  culminating  with 
Hernández, presents this poetry as a continuation or derivation of that of the 
gauchos. Thus, Bartolomé Hidalgo is, not the Homer of this poetry as Mitre 
said, but simply a link in its development.
Ricardo Rojas makes of Hidalgo a payador; however, according to his 
own  Historia de la literatura argentina,  this supposed  payador  began by 
composing hendecasyllabic verses, a meter by nature unavailable to the 
payadores,  who could not perceive its harmony, just as Spanish readers 
could not perceive the harmony of the hendecasyllable when Garcilaso 
imported it from Italy.
I take it there is a fundamental difference between the poetry of the 
gauchos and the poetry of the gauchesque writers. It is enough to compare 
any collection of popular poetry with Martín Fierro, with Paulino Lucero, 
with Fausto, to perceive this difference, which lies no less in the vocabulary 
than in the intent of the poets. The popular poets of the country and the 
suburbs compose their verses on general themes: the pangs of love and 
loneliness, the unhappiness of love, and do so in a vocabulary which is also 
very  general;  on  the  other  hand,  the  gauchesque  poets  cultivate  a 
deliberately  popular  language  never  essayed  by  the  popular  poets 
themselves. I do not mean that the idiom of the popular poets is a correct 
Spanish, I mean that if there are errors they are the result of ignorance. On 
the other hand, in the gauchesque poets there is a seeking out of native 
words, a profusion of local color. The proof is this: a Colombian, Mexican 
or Spaniard can immediately understand the poetry of the payadores, of the 
gauchos,  and  yet  they  need  a  glossary  in  order  to  understand,  even 
approximately, Estanislao del Campo or Ascasubi.
All this can be summed up as follows: gauchesque poetry, which has 
produced—I  hasten  to  repeat—admirable  works,  is  a  literary  genre  as 
artificial as any other. In the first gauchesque compositions, in Bartolomé 
Hidalgo's  trovas,  we already see the intention of presenting the work in 
terms of the gaucho, as uttered by the gaucho, so that the reader will read it 
in a gaucho intonation. Nothing could be further removed from popular 
poetry. The people, while versifying,—and I have observed this not only in 
the country payadores, but also in those from the outskirts of Buenos Aires
—have the conviction that they are executing something important and 
instinctively  avoid  popular  words  and  seek  high-sounding  terms  and 
expressions. It is probable that gauchesque poetry has now influenced the 
172

payadores and that they too now abound in criollismos, but in the beginning 
it was not so, and we have proof of this (which no one has ever pointed out) 
in Martín Fierro.
Martín Fierro is cast in a Spanish of gauchesque intonation, and for a 
long while never lets us forget that it is a gaucho who is singing; it abounds 
in comparisons taken from country life; however, there is a famous passage 
in which the author forgets this preoccupation with local color and writes in 
a general Spanish, and does not speak of vernacular themes, but of great 
abstract themes, of time, of space, of the sea, of the night. I refer to the 
payada between Martín Fierro and the Negro, which comes at the end of the 
second part. It is as if Hernández himself had wanted to show the difference 
between his gauchesque poetry and the genuine poetry of the gauchos. When 
these two gauchos, Fierro and the Negro, begin to sing, they leave behind all 
gauchesque affectation and address themselves to philosophical themes. I 
have observed the same while listening to the payadores of the suburbs; they 
avoid using the dialect of that area and try to express themselves correctly. 
Of course they fail, but their intention is to make their poetry something 
elevated; something distinguished, we might say with a smile.
The  idea  that  Argentine  poetry  should  abound  in  differential 
Argentine traits and Argentine local color seems to me a mistake. If we are 
asked which  book is more  Argentine,  Martín Fierro  or the sonnets in 
Enrique Banchs' La urna, there is no reason to say that it is the first. It will 
be said that in La urna of Banchs we do not find the Argentine countryside, 
Argentine topography, Argentine botany, Argentine zoology; however, there 
are other Argentine conditions in La urna.
I recall now some lines from  La urna  which seem to have been 
written so that no one could say it was an Argentine book, the lines which 
read: ". . . The sun shines on the slanting roofs / and on the windows. 
Nightingales / try to say they are in love."
Here it seems we cannot avoid condemning the phrase "the sun shines 
on the slanting roofs and on the windows." Enrique Banchs wrote these lines 
in a suburb of Buenos Aires, and in the suburbs of Buenos Aires there are no 
slanting roofs, but rather flat roofs. "Nightingales try to say they are in 
love": the nightingale is less a bird of reality than of literature, of Greek and 
Germanic  tradition.  However,  I  would  say  that  in  the  use  of  these 
conventional images, in these anomalous roofs and nightingales, Argentine 
architecture and ornithology are of course absent, but we do find in them the 
173

Argentine's reticence, his constraint; the fact that Banchs, when speaking of 
this great suffering which overwhelms him, when speaking of this woman 
who has left him and has left the world empty for him, should have recourse 
to foreign and conventional images like slanted roofs and nightingales, is 
significant: significant of Argentine reserve, distrust and reticence, of the 
difficulty we have in making confessions, in revealing our intimate nature.
Besides, I do not know if it is necessary to say that the idea that a 
literature must define itself in terms of its national traits is a relatively new 
concept; also new and arbitrary is the idea that writers must seek themes 
from their own countries. Without going any further, I think Racine would 
not even have understood a person who denied him his right to the title of 
poet of France because he cultivated Greek and Roman themes. I think 
Shakespeare would have been amazed if people had tried to limit him to 
English themes, and if they had told him that, as an Englishman, he had no 
right to compose Hamlet, whose theme is Scandinavian, or Macbeth, whose 
theme is Scottish. The Argentine cult of local color is a recent European cult 
which the nationalists ought to reject as foreign.
Some days past I have found a curious confirmation of the fact that 
what is truly native can and often does dispense with local color; I found this 
confirmation in Gibbon's  Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire.  Gibbon 
observes that in the Arabian book par excellence, in the Koran, there are no 
camels; I believe if there were any doubt as to the authenticity of the Koran, 
this absence of camels would be sufficient to prove it is an Arabian work. It 
was written by Mohammed, and Mohammed, as an Arab, had no reason to 
know that camels were especially Arabian; for him they were a part of 
reality, he had no reason to emphasize them; on the other hand, the first 
thing a falsifier, a tourist, an Arab nationalist would do is have a surfeit of 
camels, caravans of camels, on every page; but Mohammed, as an Arab, was 
unconcerned: he knew he could be an Arab without camels. I think we 
Argentines can emulate Mohammed, can believe in the possibility of being 
Argentine without abounding in local color.
Perhaps I may be permitted to make a confession here, a very small 
confession. For many years, in books now happily forgotten, I tried to copy 
down the flavor, the essence of the outlying suburbs of Buenos Aires. Of 
course, I abounded in local words; I did not omit such words as cuchilleros, 
milonga, tapia and others, and thus I wrote those forgettable and forgotten 
books. Then, about a year ago, I wrote a story called  "La muerte y la 
174

brújula"  ("Death  and  the  Compass"),  which  is a  kind  of  nightmare,  a 
nightmare in which there are elements of Buenos Aires, deformed by the 
horror of the nightmare. There I think of the Paseo Colón and call it rue de 
Toulon; I think of the country houses of Adrogue and call them Triste-le-
Roy; when this story was published, my friends told me that at last they had 
found in what I wrote the flavor of the outskirts of Buenos Aires. Precisely 
because I had not set out to find that flavor, because I had abandoned myself 
to a dream, I was able to accomplish, after so many years, what I had 
previously sought in vain.
Now I want to speak of a justly illustrious work which the nationalists 
often invoke. I refer to Güiraldes' Don Segundo Sombra. The nationalists tell 
us that  Don Segundo Sombra  is the model of a national book; but if we 
compare it with the works of the gauchesque tradition, the first thing we 
note are differences. Don Segundo Sombra abounds in metaphors of a kind 
having nothing to do with country speech but a great deal to do with the 
metaphors of the then current literary circles of Montmartre. As for the 
fable, the story, it is easy to find in it the influence of Kipling's Kim, whose 
action is set in India and which was, in turn, written under the influence of 
Mark Twain's Huckleberry Finn, the epic of the Mississippi. When I make 
this observation, I do not wish to lessen the value of Don Segundo Sombra; 
on the contrary, I want to emphasize the fact that, in order that we might 
have this book, it was necessary for Güiraldes to recall the poetic technique 
of the French circles of his time and the work of Kipling which he had read 
many  years  before;  in  other  words,  Kipling  and  Mark  Twain  and  the 
metaphors of French poets were necessary for this Argentine book, for this 
book  which,  I  repeat,  is  no  less  Argentine  for  having  accepted  such 
influences.
I want to point out another contradiction: the nationalists pretend to 
venerate the capacities of the Argentine mind but want to limit the poetic 
exercise  of  that  mind  to  a  few  impoverished  local  themes,  as  if  we 
Argentines could only speak of orillas and estancias and not of the universe.
Let us move on to another solution. It is said that there is a tradition to 
which Argentine writers should adhere and that that tradition is Spanish 
literature. This second recommendation is of course somewhat less limited 
than the first, but it also tends to restrict us; many objections could be raised 
against it, but it is sufficient to mention two. The first is this: Argentine 
history can be unmistakably defined as a desire to become separated from 
175

Spain, as a voluntary withdrawal from Spain. The second objection is this: 
among  us,  the  enjoyment  of  Spanish  literature—an  enjoyment  which I 
personally happen to share—is usually an acquired taste; many times I have 
loaned  French  and  English  works  to  persons  without  special  literary 
preparations, and these works have been enjoyed immediately, with no 
effort. However, when I have proposed to my friends the reading of Spanish 
works, I have evidenced that it was difficult for them to find pleasure in 
these books without special apprenticeship; for that reason, I believe the fact 
that certain illustrious Argentines write like Spaniards is less the testimony 
of an inherited capacity than it is a proof of Argentine versatility.
I now arrive at a third opinion on Argentine writers and tradition 
which I have read recently and which has surprised me very much. It says in 
essence that in Argentina we are cut off from the past, that there has been 
something  like  a  dissolution  of  continuity  between  us  and  Europe. 
According to this singular observation, we Argentines find ourselves in a 
situation like that of the first days of Creation; the search for European 
themes and devices is an illusion, an error; we should understand that we are 
essentially alone and cannot play at being Europeans.
This opinion seems unfounded to me. I find it understandable that 
many people should accept it, because this declaration of our solitude, of our 
loss, of our primeval character, has, like existentialism, the charm of the 
pathetic. Many people can accept this opinion because, once they have done 
so, they feel alone, disconsolate and, in some way or another, interesting. 
However, I have observed that in our country, precisely because it is a new 
country, we have a great sense of time. Everything that has taken place in 
Europe, the dramatic happenings of the last few years in Europe, have had 
profound resonance here. The fact that a person was a sympathizer of 
Franco or of the Republic during the Spanish Civil War, or a sympathizer of 
the Nazis or of the Allies, has in many cases caused very grave quarrels and 
animosity. This would not occur if we were cut off from Europe. As far as 
Argentine history is concerned, I believe we all feel it profoundly; and it is 
natural  that  we  should  feel  it  in  this  way,  because  it  is,  in  terms  of 
chronology and in terms of our own inner being, quite close to us; the 
names, the battles of the civil war, the War of Independence, all of these are, 
both in time and in tradition, very close to us.
What is our Argentine tradition? I believe we can answer this question 
easily and that there is no problem here. I believe our tradition is all of 
176

Western culture, and I also believe we have a right to this tradition, greater 
than that which the inhabitants of one or another Western nation might have. 
I recall here an essay of Thorstein Veblen, the North American sociologist, 
on the pre-eminence of Jews in Western culture. He asks if this preeminence 
allows us to conjecture about the innate superiority of the Jews, and answers 
in the negative; he says that they are outstanding in Western culture because 
they act within that culture and, at the same time, do not feel tied to it by any 
special devotion; "for that reason," he says, "a Jew will always find it easier 
than a non-Jew to make innovations in Western culture"; and we can say the 
same of the Irish in English culture. In the case of the Irish, we have no 
reason to suppose that the profusion of Irish names in British literature and 
philosophy is due to any racial pre-eminence, for many of those illustrious 
Irishmen (Shaw, Berkeley, Swift) were the descendants of Englishmen, were 
people who had no Celtic blood; however, it was sufficient for them to feel 
Irish, to feel different, in order to be innovators in English culture. I believe 
that we Argentines, we South Americans in general, are in an analogous 
situation;  we  can  handle  all  European  themes,  handle  them  without 
superstition, with an irreverence which can have, and already does have, 
fortunate consequences.
This  does  not  mean  that  all  Argentine  experiments  are  equally 
successful; I believe that this problem of tradition and Argentina is simply a 
contemporary and passing form of the eternal problem of determination. If I 
am going to touch the table with one of my hands and I ask myself whether I 
should touch it with my left or my right, as soon as I touch it with my right, 
the determinists will say that I could not act in any other way and that the 
entire previous history of the universe obliged me to touch it with my right 
hand and that touching it with the left would have been a miracle. However, 
if I had touched it with my left hand, they would have said the same: that I 
was obliged to do so. The same thing happens with literary themes and 
devices. Anything we Argentine writers can do successfully will become 
part of our Argentine tradition, in the same way that the treatment of Italian 
themes belongs to the tradition of England through the efforts of Chaucer 
and Shakespeare.
I believe, in addition, that all these a priori discussions concerning the 
intent  of  literary  execution  are  based  on  the  error  of  supposing  that 
intentions and plans matter a great deal. Let us take the case of Kipling: 
Kipling dedicated his life to writing in terms of certain political ideals, he 
177

tried to make his work an instrument of propaganda and yet, at the end of his 
life, he was obliged to confess that the true essence of a writer's work is 
usually unknown to him. He recalled the case of Swift, who, when he wrote 
Gulliver's Travels,  tried to bring an indictment against all humanity but 
actually left a book for children. Plato said that poets are the scribes of a god 
who moves them against their own will, against their intentions, just as a 
magnet moves a series of iron rings.
For that reason I repeat that we should not be alarmed and that we 
should feel that our patrimony is the universe; we should essay all themes, 
and we cannot limit ourselves to purely Argentine subjects in order to be 
Argentine; for either being Argentine is an inescapable act of fate—and in 
that  case  we shall  be  so  in  all  events—or  being  Argentine  is a  mere 
affectation, a mask.
I believe that if we surrender ourselves to that voluntary dream which 
is artistic creation, we shall be Argentine and we shall also be good or 
tolerable writers.
Translated by J.E.I.
178

The Wall and the Books
He, whose long wall the wand'ring Tartar bounds. . .
Dunciad, II, 76
 read, some days past, that the man who ordered the erection of the almost 
infinite wall of China was that first Emperor, Shih Huang Ti, who also 
decreed that all books prior to him be burned. That these two vast operations
—the five to six hundred leagues of stone opposing the barbarians, the 
rigorous abolition of history, that is, of the past—should originate in one 
person and be in some way his attributes inexplicably satisfied and, at the 
same time, disturbed me. To investigate the reasons for that emotion is the 
purpose of this note.
I
Historically speaking, there is no mystery in the two measures. A 
contemporary of the wars of Hannibal, Shih Huang Ti, king of Tsin, brought 
the Six Kingdoms under his rule and abolished the feudal system; he erected 
the wall, because walls were defenses; he burned the books, because his 
opposition invoked them to praise the emperors of olden times. Burning 
books and erecting fortifications is a common task of princes; the only thing 
singular in Shih Huang Ti was the scale on which he operated. Such is 
suggested by certain Sinologists, but I feel that the facts I have related are 
something more than an exaggeration or hyperbole of trivial dispositions. 
Walling in an orchard or a garden is ordinary, but not walling in an empire. 
Nor is it banal to pretend that the most traditional of races renounce the 
memory of its past, mythical or real. The Chinese had three thousand years 
of chronology (and during those years, the Yellow Emperor and Chuang Tsu 
and Confucius and Lao Tzu) when Shih Huang Ti ordered that history begin 
with him.
Shih Huang Ti had banished his mother for being a libertine; in his 
stern justice the orthodox saw nothing but an impiety; Shih Huang Ti, 
perhaps, wanted to obliterate the canonical books because they accused him; 
Shih Huang Ti, perhaps, tried to abolish the entire past in order to abolish 
one single memory: his mother's infamy. (Not in an unlike manner did a 
king of Judea have all male children killed in order to kill one.) This 
conjecture is worthy of attention, but tells us nothing about the wall, the 
second part of the myth. Shih Huang Ti, according to the historians, forbade 
179

that death be mentioned and sought the elixir of immortality and secluded 
himself in a figurative palace containing as many rooms as there are days in 
the year; these facts suggest that the wall in space and the fire in time were 
magic barriers designed to halt death. All things long to persist in their 
being, Baruch Spinoza has written; perhaps the Emperor and his sorcerers 
believed that immortality is intrinsic and that decay cannot enter a closed 
orb. Perhaps the Emperor tried to recreate the beginning of time and called 
himself The First, so as to be really first, and called himself Huang Ti, so as 
to be in some way Huang Ti, the legendary emperor who invented writing 
and the compass. The latter, according to the Book of Rites, gave things their 
true name; in a parallel fashion, Shih Huang Ti boasted, in inscriptions 
which endure, that all things in his reign would have the name which was 
proper to them. He dreamt of founding an immortal dynasty; he ordered that 
his heirs be called Second Emperor, Third Emperor, Fourth Emperor, and so 
on to infinity. . . I have spoken of a magical purpose; it would also be fitting 
to  suppose  that  erecting  the  wall  and  burning  the  books  were  not 
simultaneous acts. This (depending on the order we select) would give us the 
image of a king who began by destroying and then resigned himself to 
preserving,  or that of a disillusioned  king who destroyed  what he had 
previously defended. Both conjectures are dramatic, but they lack, as far as I 
know, any basis in history. Herbert Allen Giles tells that those who hid 
books were branded with a red-hot iron and sentenced to labor until the day 
of their death on the construction of the outrageous wall. This information 
favors or tolerates another interpretation. Perhaps the wall was a metaphor, 
perhaps Shih Huang Ti sentenced those who worshiped the past to a task as 
immense, as gross and as useless as the past itself. Perhaps the wall was a 
challenge and Shih Huang Ti thought: "Men love the past and neither I nor 
my executioners can do anything against that love, but someday there will 
be a man who feels as I do and he will efface my memory and be my 
shadow and my mirror and not know it." Perhaps Shih Huang Ti walled in 
his empire because he knew that it was perishable and destroyed the books 
because he understood that they were sacred books, in other words, books 
that teach what the entire universe or the mind of every man teaches. 
Perhaps  the  burning  of  the  libraries  and  the  erection  of  the  wall  are 
operations which in some secret way cancel each other.
The tenacious wall which at this moment, and at all moments, casts its 
system of shadows over lands I shall never see, is the shadow of a Caesar 
180

who ordered the most reverent of nations to burn its past; it is plausible that 
this idea moves us in itself, aside from the conjectures it allows. (Its virtue 
may lie in the opposition of constructing and destroying on an enormous 
scale.) Generalizing from the preceding case, we could infer that all forms 
have their virtue in themselves and not in any conjectural "content." This 
would concord with the thesis of Benedetto Croce; already Pater in 1877 had 
affirmed that all arts aspire to the state of music, which is pure form. Music, 
states of happiness, mythology, faces belabored by time, certain twilights 
and certain places try to tell us something, or have said something we should 
not  have missed,  or  are  about  to  say  something;  this  imminence  of  a 
revelation which does not occur is, perhaps, the aesthetic phenomenon.
Translated by J.E.I.
181

The Fearful Sphere of Pascal
t may be that universal history is the history of a handful of metaphors. 
The purpose of this note will be to sketch a chapter of this history.
I
Six centuries before the Christian era, the rhapsodist Xenophanes of 
Colophon, wearied of the Homeric verses he recited from city to city, lashed 
out at the poets who attributed anthropomorphic traits to the gods, and 
offered the Greeks a single God, a god who was an eternal sphere. In the 
Timaeus  of Plato we read that the sphere is the most perfect and most 
uniform figure, for all points of its surface are equidistant from its center; 
Olof  Gigon  (Ursprung  der  griechischen  Philosophie,  183)  understands 
Xenophanes to speak analogically: God is spherical because that form is best
—or least inadequate—to represent the Divinity. Parmenides, forty years 
later, rephrased the image: "The Divine Being is like the mass of a well-
rounded sphere, whose force is constant from the center in any direction." 
Calogero and Mondolfo reasoned that Parmenides intuited an infinite, or 
infinitely expanding sphere, and that the words just transcribed possess a 
dynamic meaning (Albertelli: Gli Eleati, 148). Parmenides taught in Italy; a 
few  years  after  his  death,  the  Sicilian  Empedocles  of  Agrigentum 
constructed a laborious cosmogony: a stage exists in which the particles of 
earth, water, air and fire make up a sphere without end, "the rounded 
Sphairos, which exults in its circular solitude."
Universal history continued to unroll, the all-too-human gods whom 
Xenophanes had denounced were demoted to figures of poetic fiction, or to 
demons—although it was reported that one of them, Hermes Trismegistus, 
had dictated  a variable  number  of  books (42  according  to Clement  of 
Alexandria; 20,000 according to Hamblicus; 36,525 according to the priests 
of Thoth—who is also Hermes) in the pages of which are written all things. 
Fragments of this illusory library, compiled or concocted beginning in the 
third century, go to form what is called the Corpus Hermeticum; in one of 
these  fragments,  or  in  the  Asclepius,  which  was  also  attributed  to 
Trismegistus,  the  French  theologian  Alain  de  Lille  (Alanus  de  Insulis) 
discovered, at the end of the twelfth century, the following formula, which 
future ages would not forget: "God is an intelligible sphere, whose center is 
everywhere and whose circumference is nowhere." The Pre-Socratics spoke 
of a sphere without end; Albertelli (as Aristotle before him) thinks that to 
182

speak in this wise is to commit a contradictio in adjecto, because subject and 
predicate cancel each other; this may very well be true, but still, the formula 
of  the  Hermetic  books  allows  us,  almost,  to  intuit  this  sphere.  In  the 
thirteenth century, the image reappeared in the symbolic Roman de la Rose, 
where it is given as a citation from Plato, and in the encyclopedia Speculum 
Triplex;  in  the  sixteenth  century,  the  last  chapter  of  the  last  book  of 
Pantagruel referred to "that intellectual sphere, whose center is everywhere 
and whose circumference is nowhere and which we call God." For the 
medieval mind the sense was clear—God is in each one of His creatures, but 
none of them limits Him. "The heaven and heaven of heavens cannot contain 
thee," said Solomon (I Kings 8:27); the geometric metaphor of the sphere 
seemed a gloss on these words.
Dante's poem preserved the Ptolemaic astronomy which for 1,400 
years reigned in the imagination of mankind. The earth occupies the center 
of the universe. It is an immobile sphere; around it circle nine concentric 
spheres. The first seven are "planetary" skies (the firmaments of the Moon, 
Mercury, Venus, the Sun, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn); the eighth, the firmament 
of the fixed stars; the ninth, the crystal firmament which is also called the 
Primum mobile.  This in turn is surrounded by the Empyrean, which is 
composed of light. All this elaborate apparatus of hollow, transparent and 
gyrating spheres (one system required 55 of them) had come to be an 
intellectual necessity; De hypothesibus motuum coelestium commentariolus 
is the timid title which Copernicus, denier of Aristotle, placed at the head of 
the manuscript that transformed our vision of the cosmos.
For one man, for Giordano Bruno, the rupture of the stellar vaults was 
a liberation. He proclaimed, in the Cena de la ceneri, that the world is the 
infinite effect of an infinite cause, and that divinity is close by, "for it is 
within us even more than we ourselves are within ourselves." He searched 
for words to tell men of Copernican space, and on one famous page he 
inscribed: "We can assert with certitude that the universe is all center, or that 
the center of the universe is everywhere and the circumference nowhere" 
(Delia causa, principio ed uno, V).
This phrase was written with exultation, in 1584, still in the light of 
the Renaissance; seventy years later there was no reflection of that fervor 
left and men felt lost in time and space. In time, because if the future and the 
past are infinite, there can not really be a when; in space, because if every 
being is equidistant from the infinite and the infinitesimal, neither can there 
183

be a where. No one exists on a certain day, in a certain place; no one knows 
the size of his own countenance. In the Renaissance, humanity thought to 
have reached the age of virility, and it declares as much through the lips of 
Bruno, of Campanella, and of Bacon. In the seventeenth century, humanity 
was cowed by a feeling of senescence; in order to justify itself it exhumed 
the belief in a slow and fatal degeneration of all creatures consequent on 
Adam's sin. (We know—from the fifth chapter of Genesis—that "all the 
days of Methuselah were nine hundred sixty and nine years"; from the sixth 
chapter, that "there were giants in the earth in those days.") The First 
Anniversary of John Donne's elegy,  Anatomy of the World,  lamented the 
very  brief  life  and  limited  stature  of  contemporary  men,  who  are  like 
pigmies and fairies; Milton, according to Johnson's biography, feared that 
the appearance on earth of a heroic species was no longer possible; Glanvill 
was of the opinion that Adam, "the medal of God," enjoyed both telescopic 
and microscopic vision; Robert South conspicuously wrote: "An Aristotle 
was but the fragment of an Adam, and Athens the rudiments of Paradise." In 
that dispirited century, the absolute space which had inspired the hexameters 
of  Lucretius,  the  absolute  space  which  had  meant  liberation  to  Bruno, 
became a labyrinth and an abyss for Pascal. He abhorred the universe and 
would have liked to adore God; but God, for him, was less real than the 
abhorred universe. He deplored the fact that the firmament did not speak, 
and he compared our life with that of castaways on a desert island. He felt 
the incessant weight of the physical world, he experienced vertigo, fright 
and solitude, and he put his feelings into these words: "Nature is an infinite 
sphere, whose center is everywhere and whose circumference is nowhere." 
Thus do the words appear in the Brunschvicg text; but the critical edition 
published  by Tourneur  (Paris,  1941), which reproduces  the  crossed-out 
words and variations of the manuscript, reveals that Pascal started to write 
the word  effroyable:  "a fearful sphere, whose center is everywhere and 
whose circumference is nowhere."
It  may  be  that  universal  history  is  the  history  of  the  different 
intonations given a handful of metaphors.
Translated by Anthony Kerrigan
184

Partial Magic in the Quixote
t is plausible that these observations may have been set forth at some time 
and, perhaps, many times; a discussion of their novelty interests me less 
than one of their possible truth.
I
Compared  with  other  classic  books  (the  Iliad,  the  Aeneid,  the 
Pharsalia,  Dante's  Commedia,  Shakespeare's tragedies and comedies), the 
Quixote is a realistic work; its realism, however, differs essentially from that 
practiced by the nineteenth century. Joseph Conrad could write that he 
excluded the supernatural from his work because to include it would seem a 
denial  that  the  everyday  was  marvelous;  I  do  not  know  if  Miguel  de 
Cervantes shared that intuition, but I do know that the form of the Quixote 
made him counterpose a real prosaic world to an imaginary poetic world. 
Conrad and Henry James wrote novels of reality because they judged reality 
to be poetic; for Cervantes the real and the poetic were antinomies. To the 
vast and vague geographies of the Amadis, he opposes the dusty roads and 
sordid wayside inns of Castille; imagine a novelist of our time centering 
attention for purposes of parody on some filling stations. Cervantes has 
created for us the poetry of seventeenth-century Spain, but neither that 
century nor that Spain were poetic for him; men like Unamuno or Azorín or 
Antonio Machado, who were deeply moved by any evocation of La Mancha, 
would have been incomprehensible to him. The plan of his book precluded 
the marvelous; the latter, however, had to figure in the novel, at least 
indirectly, just as crimes and a mystery in a parody of a detective story. 
Cervantes could not resort to talismans or enchantments, but he insinuated 
the supernatural in a subtle—and therefore more effective—manner. In his 
intimate being, Cervantes loved the supernatural. Paul Groussac observed in 
1924: "With a deleble coloring of Latin and Italian, Cervantes' literary 
production derived mostly from the pastoral novel and the novel of chivalry, 
soothing fables of captivity." The  Quixote  is less an antidote for those 
fictions than it is a secret, nostalgic farewell.
Every  novel is an  ideal plane  inserted  into  the realm  of reality; 
Cervantes takes pleasure in confusing the objective and the subjective, the 
world of the reader and the world of the book. In those chapters which argue 
whether the barber's basin is a helmet and the donkey's packsaddle a steed's 
fancy regalia, the problem is dealt with explicity; other passages, as I have 
185

noted, insinuate this. In the sixth chapter of the first part, the priest and the 
barber  inspect  Don  Quixote's  library;  astoundingly,  one  of  the  books 
examined is Cervantes' own  Galatea  and it turns out that the barber is a 
friend of the author and does not admire him very much, and says that he is 
more versed in misfortunes than in verses and that the book possesses some 
inventiveness, proposes a few ideas and concludes nothing. The barber, a 
dream  or  the  form  of  a  dream  of  Cervantes,  passes  judgment  on 
Cervantes. . . It is also surprising to learn, at the beginning of the ninth 
chapter, that the entire novel has been translated from the Arabic and that 
Cervantes acquired the manuscript in the marketplace of Toledo and had it 
translated by a morisco whom he lodged in his house for more than a month 
and a half while the job was being finished. We think of Carlyle, who 
pretended that the Sartor Resartus was the fragmentary version of a work 
published in Germany by Doctor Diogenes Teufelsdroeckh; we think of the 
Spanish rabbi Moses of Leon, who composed the Zohar or Book of Splendor 
and divulged it as the work of a Palestinian rabbi of the second century.
This play of strange ambiguities culminates in the second part; the 
protagonists have read the first part, the protagonists of the Quixote are, at 
the same time, readers of the Quixote. Here it is inevitable to recall the case 
of Shakespeare, who includes on the stage of Hamlet another stage where a 
tragedy  more  or  less  like  that  of  Hamlet  is  presented;  the  imperfect 
correspondence of the principal and secondary works lessens the efficacy of 
this  inclusion.  An  artifice  analogous  to  Cervantes',  and  even  more 
astounding, figures in the Ramayana, the poem of Valmiki, which narrates 
the deeds of Rama and his war with the demons. In the last book, the sons of 
Rama, who do not know who their father is, seek shelter in a forest, where 
an ascetic teaches them to read. This teacher is, strangely enough, Valmiki; 
the book they study, the  Ramayana.  Rama orders a sacrifice of horses; 
Valmiki and his pupils attend this feast. The latter, accompanied by their 
lute, sing the Ramayana. Rama hears his own story, recognizes his own sons 
and then rewards the poet. . . Something similar is created by accident in the 
Thousand and One Nights. This collection of fantastic tales duplicates and 
reduplicates to the point of vertigo the ramifications of a central story in 
later and subordinate stories, but does not attempt to gradate its realities, and 
the effect (which should have been profound) is superficial, like a Persian 
carpet. The opening story of the series is well known: the terrible pledge of 
the king who every night marries a virgin who is then decapitated at dawn, 
186

and the resolution of Scheherazade, who distracts the king with her fables 
until a thousand and one nights have gone by and she shows him their son. 
The  necessity  of  completing  a  thousand  and  one  sections  obliged  the 
copyists of the work to make all manner of interpolations. None is more 
perturbing than that of the six hundred and second night, magical among all 
the nights. On that night, the king hears from the queen his own story. He 
hears the beginning of the story, which comprises all the others and also—
monstrously—itself. Does the reader clearly grasp the vast possibility of this 
interpolation,  the  curious  danger?  That  the  queen  may  persist  and  the 
motionless king hear forever the truncated story of the Thousand and One 
Nights, now infinite and circular. . . The inventions of philosophy are no less 
fantastic than those of art: Josiah Royce, in the first volume of his work The 
World and the Individual  (1899), has formulated the following: "Let us 
imagine that a portion of the soil of England has been levelled off perfectly 
and that on it a cartographer traces a map of England. The job is perfect; 
there is no detail of the soil of England, no matter how minute, that is not 
registered on the map; everything has there its correspondence. This map, in 
such a case, should contain a map of the map, which should contain a map of 
the map of the map, and so on to infinity."
Why does it disturb us that the map be included in the map and the 
thousand and one nights in the book of the Thousand and One Nights? Why 
does it disturb us that Don Quixote be a reader of the Quixote and Hamlet a 
spectator of  Hamlet?  I believe I have found the reason: these inversions 
suggest that if the characters of a fictional work can be readers or spectators, 
we, its readers or spectators, can be fictitious. In 1833, Carlyle observed that 
the history of the universe is an infinite sacred book that all men write and 
read and try to understand, and in which they are also written.
Translated by J.E.I.
187

Valéry as Symbol
ringing together the names of Whitman and Paul Valéry is, at first 
glance, an arbitrary and (what is worse) inept operation. Valéry is a 
symbol of infinite dexterities but, at the same time, of infinite scruples; 
Whitman, of an almost incoherent but titanic vocation of felicity; Valéry 
illustriously  personifies  the  labyrinths  of  the  mind;  Whitman,  the 
interjections of the body. Valéry is a symbol of Europe and of its delicate 
twilight; Whitman, of the morning in America. The whole realm of literature 
would not seem to admit two more antagonistic applications of the word 
"poet." One fact, however, links them: the work of both is less valuable as 
poetry than it is as the sign of an exemplary poet created by that work. Thus, 
the English poet Lascelles Abercrombie could praise Whitman for having 
created "from the richness of his noble experience that vivid and personal 
figure which is one of the few really great things of the poetry of our time: 
the figure of himself." The dictum is vague and superlative, but it has the 
singular virtue of not identifying Whitman, the man of letters and devote of 
Tennyson, with Whitman, the semidivine hero of  Leaves of Grass.  The 
distinction is valid; Whitman wrote his rhapsodies in terms of an imaginary 
identity, formed partly of himself, partly of each of his readers. Hence the 
discrepancies that have exasperated the critics; hence the custom of dating 
his poems in places where he had never been; hence the fact that, on one 
page of his work, he was born in the Southern states, and on another (and 
also in reality) on Long Island.
B
One of the purposes of Whitman's compositions is to define a possible 
man—Walt  Whitman—of  unlimited  and  negligent  felicity;  no  less 
hyperbolic, no less illusory, is the man defined by Valéry's compositions. 
The latter does not magnify, as does the former, the human faculties of 
philanthropy, fervor and joy; he magnifies the virtues of the mind. Valéry 
created Edmond Teste; this character would be one of the myths of our time 
if intimately we did not all judge him to be a mere Doppelgänger of Valéry. 
For us, Valéry is Edmond Teste. In other words, Valéry is a derivation of 
Poe's Chevalier Dupin and the inconceivable God of the theologians. Which 
fact, plausibly enough, is not true.
Yeats, Rilke and Eliot have written verses more memorable than those 
of  Valéry;  Joyce  and  Stefan  George  have  effected  more  profound 
188

modifications in their instrument (perhaps French is less modifiable than 
English and German); but behind the work of these eminent artificers there 
is  no  personality  comparable  to  Valéry's.  The  circumstance  that  that 
personality is, in some way, a projection of the work does not diminish this 
fact. To propose lucidity to men in a lowly romantic era, in the melancholy 
era of Nazism and dialectical materialism, of the augurs of Freudianism and 
the merchants of surréalisms, such is the noble mission Valéry fulfilled (and 
continues to fulfill).
Paul Valéry leaves us at his death the symbol of a man infinitely 
sensitive  to  every  phenomenon  and  for  whom  every  phenomenon  is a 
stimulus capable of provoking an infinite series of thoughts. Of a man who 
transcends the differential traits of the self and of whom we can say, as 
William Hazlitt did of Shakespeare, "he is nothing in himself." Of a man 
whose  admirable  texts  do  not  exhaust,  do  not  even  define,  their  all-
embracing possibilities. Of a man who, in an age that worships the chaotic 
idols of blood, earth and passion, preferred always the lucid pleasures of 
thought and the secret adventures of order.
Translated by J.E.I.
189

Kafka and His Precursors
 once premeditated making a study of Kafka's precursors. At first I had 
considered him to be as singular as the phoenix of rhetorical praise; after 
frequenting his pages a bit, I came to think I could recognize his voice, or 
his practices, in texts from diverse literatures and periods. I shall record a 
few of these here, in chronological order.
I
The first is Zeno's paradox against movement. A moving object at A 
(declares Aristotle) cannot reach point B, because it must first cover half the 
distance between the two points, and before that, half of the half, and before 
that, half of the half of the half, and so on to infinity; the form of this 
illustrious problem is, exactly, that of The Castle, and the moving object and 
the arrow and Achilles are the first Kafkian characters in literature. In the 
second text which chance laid before me, the affinity is not one of form but 
one of tone. It is an apologue of Han Yu, a prose writer of the ninth century, 
and is reproduced in Margouliès' admirable  Anthologie raisonnée de la 
littérature chinoise  (1948). This is the paragraph, mysterious and calm, 
which I marked: "It is universally admitted that the unicorn is a supernatural 
being of good omen; such is declared in all the odes, annals, biographies of 
illustrious men and other texts whose authority is unquestionable. Even 
children and village women know that the unicorn constitutes a favorable 
presage. But this animal does not figure among the domestic beasts, it is not 
always easy to find, it does not lend itself to classification. It is not like the 
horse or the bull, the wolf or the deer. In such conditions, we could be face 
to face with a unicorn and not know for certain what it was. We know that 
such and such an animal with a mane is a horse and that such and such an 
animal with horns is a bull. But we do not know what the unicorn is like."30
The third text derives from a more easily predictable source: the 
writings of Kierkegaard. The spiritual affinity of both writers is something 
of which no one is ignorant; what has not yet been brought out, as far as I 
know, is the fact that Kierkegaard, like Kafka, wrote many religious parables 
on contemporary and bourgeois themes. Lowrie, in his Kierkegaard (Oxford 
30 Non-recognition of the sacred animal and its opprobrious or accidental death at the 
hands of the people are traditional themes in Chinese literature. See the last chapter of 
Jung's  Psychologie  und  Alchemie  (Zürich,  1944),  which  contains  two  curious 
illustrations.
190

University Press, 1938), transcribes two of these. One is the story of a 
counterfeiter who, under constant surveillance, counts banknotes in the Bank 
of England; in the same way, God would distrust Kierkegaard and have 
given him a task to perform, precisely because He knew that he was familiar 
with evil. The subject of the other parable is the North Pole expeditions. 
Danish ministers had declared from their pulpits that participation in these 
expeditions was beneficial to the soul's eternal well-being. They admitted, 
however, that it was difficult, and perhaps impossible, to reach the Pole and 
that  not  all  men  could  undertake  the  adventure.  Finally,  they  would 
announce  that  any  trip—from  Denmark  to  London,  let  us  say,  on  the 
regularly scheduled steamer—was, properly considered, an expedition to the 
North Pole. 
The fourth of these prefigurations I have found is Browning's poem 
"Fears and Scruples," published in 1876. A man has, or believes he has, a 
famous friend. He has never seen this friend and the fact is that the friend 
has so far never helped him, although tales are told of his most noble traits 
and authentic letters of his circulate about. Then someone places these traits 
in doubt and the handwriting experts declare that the letters are apocryphal. 
The man asks, in the last line: "And if this friend were. . . God?"
My notes also register two stories. One is from Léon Bloy's Histoires 
désobligeantes and relates the case of some people who possess all manner 
of globes, atlases, railroad guides and trunks, but who die without ever 
having  managed  to  leave  their  home  town.  The  other  is  entitled 
"Carcassonne" and is the work of Lord Dunsany. An invincible army of 
warriors leaves an infinite castle, conquers kingdoms and sees monsters and 
exhausts the deserts and the mountains, but they never reach Carcassonne, 
though once they glimpse it from afar. (This story is, as one can easily see, 
the strict reverse of the previous one; in the first, the city is never left; in the 
second, it is never reached.)
If I am not mistaken, the heterogeneous pieces I have enumerated 
resemble Kafka; if I am not mistaken, not all of them resemble each other. 
This second fact is the more significant. In each of these texts we find 
Kafka's idiosyncrasy to a greater or lesser degree, but if Kafka had never 
written a line, we would not perceive this quality; in other words, it would 
not exist. The poem "Fears and Scruples" by Browning foretells Kafka's 
work,  but  our  reading  of  Kafka  perceptibly  sharpens  and  deflects  our 
reading of the poem. Browning did not read it as we do now. In the critics' 
191

vocabulary, the word "precursor" is indispensable, but it should be cleansed 
of all connotation of polemics or rivalry. The fact is that every writer 
creates his own precursors. His work modifies our conception of the past, as 
it will modify the future.31 In this correlation the identity or plurality of the 
men involved is unimportant. The early Kafka of  Betrachtung  is less a 
precursor of the Kafka of somber myths and atrocious institutions than is 
Browning or Lord Dunsany.
Translated by J.E.I.
31 See T. S. Eliot: Points of View (1941), pp. 25-26.
192

Avatars of the Tortoise
here is a concept which corrupts and upsets all others. I refer not to 
Evil, whose limited realm is that of ethics; I refer to the infinite. I once 
longed to compile its mobile history. The numerous Hydra (the swamp 
monster  which  amounts  to  a  prefiguration  or  emblem  of  geometric 
progressions)  would lend  convenient  horror  to its portico;  it  would be 
crowned by the sordid nightmares of Kafka and its central chapters would 
not ignore the conjectures of that remote German cardinal—Nicholas of 
Krebs, Nicholas of Cusa—who saw in the circumference of the circle a 
polygon with an infinite number of sides and wrote that an infinite line 
would  be  a  straight  line,  a  triangle,  a  circle  and  a  sphere  (De  docta 
ignorantia,  I, 13). Five or seven years of metaphysical, theological and 
mathematical apprenticeship would allow me (perhaps) to plan decorously 
such a book. It is useless to add that life forbids me that hope and even that 
adverb.
T
The following pages in some way belong to that illusory Biography of 
the Infinite. Their purpose is to register certain avatars of the second paradox 
of Zeno.
Let us recall, now, that paradox.
Achilles runs ten times faster than the tortoise and gives the animal a 
headstart of ten meters. Achilles runs those ten meters, the tortoise one; 
Achilles runs that meter, the tortoise runs a decimeter; Achilles runs that 
decimeter, the tortoise runs a centimeter; Achilles runs that centimeter, the 
tortoise, a millimeter; Fleet-footed Achilles, the millimeter, the tortoise, a 
tenth of a millimeter, and so on to infinity, without the tortoise ever being 
overtaken.  .  .  Such  is  the  customary  version.  Wilhelm  Capelle  (Die 
Vorsokratiker, 1935, page 178) translates the original text by Aristotle: "The 
second argument of Zeno is the one known by the name of Achilles. He 
reasons that the slowest will never be overtaken by the swiftest, since the 
pursuer has to pass through the place the pursued has just left, so that the 
slowest  will  always  have  a  certain  advantage."  The  problem  does  not 
change, as you can see; but I would like to know the name of the poet who 
provided it with a hero and a tortoise. To those magical competitors and to 
the series
193

the argument owes its fame. Almost no one recalls the one preceding it—the 
one about the track—, though its mechanism is identical. Movement is 
impossible (argues Zeno) for the moving object must cover half of the 
distance in order to reach its destination, and before reaching the half, half of 
the half, and before half of the half, half of the half of the half, and 
before. . .32
We owe to the pen of Aristotle the communication and first refutation 
of these arguments. He refutes them with a perhaps disdainful brevity, but 
their recollection served as an inspiration for his famous argument of the 
third man against the Platonic doctrine. This doctrine tries to demonstrate 
that two individuals who have common attributes (for example, two men) 
are mere temporal appearances of an eternal archetype. Aristotle asks if the 
many men and the Man—the temporal individuals and the archetype—have 
attributes in common. It is obvious that they do: the general attributes of 
humanity. In that case, maintains Aristotle, one would have to postulate 
another  archetype to include them all, and then a fourth. . . Patricio de 
Azcárate, in a note to his translation of the  Metaphysics,  attributes this 
presentation  of the problem to one  of Aristotle's disciples:  "If  what  is 
affirmed of many things is at the same time a separate being, different from 
the  things  about  which  the  affirmation  is  made  (and  this  is  what  the 
Platonists pretend), it is necessary that there be a third man.  Man  is a 
denomination applicable to individuals and the idea. There is, then, a third 
man separate and different from individual men and the idea. There is at the 
same time a fourth man who stands in the same relationship to the third and 
to the idea and individual men; then a fifth and so on to infinity." Let us 
postulate two individuals,  a  and  b,  who make up the generic type  c.  We 
would then have:
a + b = c
But also, according to Aristotle:
a + b + c = d 
a + b + c + d = e 
32 A century later, the Chinese sophist Hui Tzu reasoned that a staff cut in two every day 
is interminable (H. A. Giles: Chuang Tzu, 1889, page 453).
194

a + b + c + d + e = f. . .
Rigorously speaking, two individuals are not necessary: it is enough 
to have one individual and the generic type in order to determine the third 
man  denounced by Aristotle. Zeno of Elea resorts to the idea of infinite 
regression against movement and number; his refuter, against the idea of 
universal forms.33
The next avatar of Zeno my disorderly notes register is Agrippa the 
skeptic. He denies that anything can be proven, since every proof requires a 
previous proof (Hypotyposes, I, 166). Sextus Empiricus argues in a parallel 
manner that definitions are in vain, since one will have to define each of the 
words used  and  then define  the  definition  (Hypotyposes,  II,  207). One 
thousand six hundred years later, Byron, in the dedication to Don Juan, will 
write of Coleridge: "I wish he would explain his Explanation."
So far, the regressus in infinitum has served to negate; Saint Thomas 
Aquinas resorts to it (Summa theologica, I, 2, 3) in order to affirm that God 
exists. He points out that there is nothing in the universe without an effective 
cause and that this cause, of course, is the effect of another prior cause. The 
world is an interminable chain of causes and each cause is also an effect. 
Each state derives from a previous one and determines the following, but the 
whole series could have not existed, since its terms are conditional, i.e., 
fortuitous.  However,  the  world  does  exist;  from  this  we  may  infer  a 
noncontingent  first  cause,  which  would  be  the  Divinity.  Such  is  the 
cosmological proof; it is prefigured by Aristotle and Plato; later Leibniz 
33 In the Parmenides—whose Zenonian character is irrefutable—Plato expounds a very 
similar argument to demonstrate that the one is really many. If the one exists, it 
participates in being; therefore, there are two parts in it, which are being and the one, 
but each of these parts is one and exists, so that they enclose two more parts, which in 
turn enclose two more, infinitely. Russell (Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy, 
1919, page 138) substitutes for Plato's geometrical progression an arithmetical one. If 
one exists, it participates in being: but since being and the one are different, duality 
exists; but since being and two are different, trinity exists, etc. Chuang Tzu (Waley: 
Three Ways of Thought in Ancient China, page 25) resorts to the same interminable 
regressus  against  the  monists  who  declared  that  the  Ten  Thousand  Things  (the 
Universe) are one. In the first place—he argues—cosmic unity and the declaration of 
that unity are already two things; these two and the declaration of their duality are 
already three; those three and the declaration of their trinity are already four . . . 
Russell believes that the vagueness of the term being is sufficient to invalidate this 
reasoning. He adds that numbers do not exist, that they are mere logical fictions.
195

rediscovers it.34
Hermann  Lotze  has  recourse  to  the  regressus  in  order  not  to 
understand that an alteration of object A can produce an alteration of object 
B. He reasons that if A and B are independent, to postulate an influence of A 
on B is to postulate a third element C, an element which in order to affect B 
will require a fourth element D, which cannot work its effect without E, 
which  cannot  work  its  effect  without  F.  .  .  In  order  to  elude  this 
multiplication of chimeras, he resolves that in the world there is one sole 
object:  an  infinite  and  absolute  substance,  comparable  to  the  God  of 
Spinoza. Transitive causes are reduced to immanent causes; phenomena, to 
manifestations or modalities of the cosmic substance.35
Analogous, but even more alarming, is the case of F. H. Bradley. This 
thinker (Appearance and Reality, 1897, pages 19-34) does not limit himself 
to combatting the relation of cause; he denies all relations. He asks if a 
relation is related to its terms. The answer is yes and he infers that this 
amounts to admitting the existence of two other relations, and then of two 
more. In the axiom "the part is less than the whole" he does not perceive two 
terms and the relation "less than"; he perceives three ("part," "less than," 
"whole") whose linking implies two more relations, and so on to infinity. In 
the statement "John is mortal," he perceives three invariable concepts (the 
third is the copula) which we can never bring together. He transforms all 
concepts  into  incommunicable,  solidified  objects.  To  refute  him  is  to 
become contaminated with unreality.
Lotze inserts Zeno's periodic chasms between the cause and the effect; 
Bradley, between the subject and the predicate, if not between the subject 
and its attributes; Lewis Carroll (Mind, volume four, page 278), between the 
second premise of the syllogism and the conclusion. He relates an endless 
dialogue, whose interlocutors are Achilles and the tortoise. Having now 
reached the end of their interminable race, the two athletes calmly converse 
about geometry. They study this lucid reasoning:
a) Two things equal to a third are equal to one another.
34 An echo of this proof, now defunct, resounds in the first verse of the Paradiso:
La gloria di Colui che tutto move.
35 I follow the exposition by James  (A Pluralistic Universe,  1909, pages 55-60). Cf. 
Wentscher: Fechner und Lotze, 1924, pages 166-171.
196

b) The two sides of this triangle are equal to MN.
c) The two sides of this triangle are equal to one another.
The tortoise accepts the premises a and b, but denies that they justify 
the conclusion. He has Achilles interpolate a hypothetical proposition:
a) Two things equal to a third are equal to one another.
b) The two sides of this triangle are equal to MN.
c) If a and b are valid, z is valid.
z) The two sides of this triangle are equal to one another.
Having made this brief clarification, the tortoise accepts the validity 
of a, b and c, but not of z. Achilles, indignant, interpolates:
d) if a, b and c are valid, z is valid.
And then, now with a certain resignation: 
e) If a, b, c and d are valid, z is valid.
Carroll observes that the Greek's paradox involves an infinite series of 
distances which diminish, whereas in his, the distances grow.
One final example, perhaps the most elegant of all, but also the one 
differing least from Zeno. William James  (Some Problems of Philosophy, 
1911, page 182) denies that fourteen minutes can pass, because first it is 
necessary for seven to pass, and before the seven, three and a half, and 
before the three and a half, a minute and three quarters, and so on until the 
end, the invisible end, through tenuous labyrinths of time.
Descartes,  Hobbes,  Leibniz,  Mill,  Renouvier,  Georg  Cantor, 
Gomperz, Russell and Bergson have formulated explanations—not always 
inexplicable and vain in nature—of the paradox of the tortoise. (I have 
registered some of them in my book  Discusión,  1932, pages 151-161). 
Applications  abound  as  well,  as  the  reader  has  seen.  The  historical 
applications do not exhaust its possibilities: the vertiginous  regressus in 
infinitum is perhaps applicable to all subjects. To aesthetics: such and such a 
verse moves us for such and such a reason, such and such a reason for such 
and such a reason. . . To the problem of knowledge: cognition is recognition, 
197

but it is necessary to have known in order to recognize, but cognition is 
recognition.  .  .  How  can  we  evaluate  this  dialectic?  Is  it  a  legimate 
instrument of investigation or only a bad habit?
It is venturesome to think that a coordination of words (philosophies 
are nothing more than that) can resemble the universe very much. It is also 
venturesome to think that of all these illustrious coordinations, one of them
—at least in an infinitesimal way—does not resemble the universe a bit 
more than the others. I have examined those which enjoy certain prestige; I 
venture to affirm that only in the one formulated by Schopenhauer have I 
recognized some trait of the universe. According to this doctrine, the world 
is a fabrication of the will. Art—always—requires visible unrealities. Let it 
suffice for me to mention one: the metaphorical or numerous or carefully 
accidental diction of the interlocutors in a drama. . . Let us admit what all 
idealists admit: the hallucinatory nature of the world. Let us do what no 
idealist has done: seek unrealities which confirm that nature. We shall find 
them, I believe, in the antinomies of Kant and in the dialectic of Zeno.
"The greatest magician (Novalis has memorably written) would be the 
one who would cast over himself a spell so complete that he would take his 
own phantasmagorias as autonomous appearances. Would not this be our 
case?" I conjecture that this is so. We (the undivided divinity operating 
within us) have dreamt the world. We have dreamt it as firm, mysterious, 
visible, ubiquitous in space and durable in time; but in its architecture we 
have allowed tenuous and eternal crevices of unreason which tell us it is 
false.
Translated by J.E.I.
198

The Mirror of Enigmas
he idea that the Sacred Scriptures have (aside from their literal value) a 
symbolic value is ancient and not irrational: it is found in Philo of 
Alexandria, in the Cabalists, in Swedenborg. Since the events related in the 
Scriptures are true (God is Truth, Truth cannot lie, etc.), we should admit 
that  men,  in  acting  out  those  events,  blindly  represent  a  secret  drama 
determined and premeditated by God. Going from this to the thought that the 
history of the universe—and in it our lives and the most tenuous detail of 
our lives—has an incalculable, symbolical value, is a reasonable step. Many 
have  taken  that  step;  no  one  so  astonishingly  as  Léon  Bloy.  (In  the 
psychological  fragments  by  Novalis  and  in  that  volume  of  Machen's 
autobiography called The London Adventure there is a similar hypothesis: 
that the outer world—forms, temperatures, the moon—is a language we 
humans have forgotten or which we can scarcely distinguish. . . It is also 
declared by De Quincey:36 "Even the articulate or brutal sounds of the globe 
must be all so many languages and ciphers that somewhere have their 
corresponding keys—have their own grammar and syntax; and thus the least 
things in the universe must be secret mirrors to the greatest.")
T
A verse from St. Paul (I Corinthians, 13:12) inspired Léon Bloy. 
Videmus nunc per speculum in aenigmate: tune autem facie ad faciem. Nunc 
cognosco ex parte: tunc autem cognoscam sicut et cognitus sum.  Torres 
Amat has miserably translated: "At present we do not see God except as in a 
mirror and beneath dark images; but later we shall see him face to face. I 
only know him now imperfectly; but later I shall know him in a clear vision, 
in the same way that I know myself." 49 words do the work of 22; it is 
impossible to be more languid and verbose. Cipriano de Valera is more 
faithful: "Now we see in a mirror, in darkness; but later we shall see face to 
face. Now I know in part; but later I shall know as I am known." Torres 
Amat opines that the verse refers to our vision of the divinity; Cipriano de 
Valera (and Léon Bloy), to our general vision of things.
So far as I know, Bloy never gave his conjecture a definitive form. 
Throughout his fragmentary work (in which there abound, as everyone 
knows, lamentations and insults) there are different versions and facets. 
Here are a few that I have rescued from the clamorous pages of Le mendiant 
36 Writings, 1896, Vol. I, page 129.
199

ingrat, Le Vieux de la Montagne and L'invendable. I do not believe I have 
exhausted them: I hope that some specialist in Léon Bloy (I am not one) may 
complete and rectify them.
The first is from June 1894. I translate it as follows: "The statement 
by St. Paul: Videmus nunc per speculum in aenigmate would be a skylight 
through which one might submerge himself in the true Abyss, which is the 
soul of man. The terrifying immensity of the firmament's abysses is an 
illusion, an external reflection of our own abysses, perceived 'in a mirror.' 
We  should  invert  our  eyes  and  practice  a  sublime  astronomy  in  the 
infinitude of our hearts, for which God was willing to die. . . If we see the 
Milky Way, it is because it actually exists in our souls."
The second is from November of the same year. "I recall one of my 
oldest ideas. The Czar is the leader and spiritual father of a hundred fifty 
million men. An atrocious responsibility which is only apparent. Perhaps he 
is not responsible to God, but rather to a few human beings. If the poor of 
his empire are oppressed during his reign, if immense catastrophies result 
from that reign, who knows if the servant charged with shining his boots is 
not the real and sole person guilty? In the mysterious dispositions of the 
Profundity, who is really Czar, who is king, who can boast of being a mere 
servant?"
The third is from a letter written in December.  "Everything is a 
symbol, even the most piercing pain. We are dreamers who shout in our 
sleep. We do not know whether the things afflicting us are the secret 
beginning of our ulterior happiness or not. We now see, St. Paul maintains, 
per speculum in aenigmate, literally: 'in an enigma by means of a mirror' and 
we shall not see in any other way until the coming of the One who is all in 
flames and who must teach us all things."
The fourth is from May 1904. "Per speculum in aenigmate, says St. 
Paul. We see everything backwards. When we believe we give, we receive, 
etc. Then (a beloved, anguished soul tells me) we are in Heaven and God 
suffers on earth."
The fifth is from May 1908. "A terrifying idea of Jeanne's, about the 
text  Per speculum.  The pleasures of this world would be the torments of 
Hell, seen backwards, in a mirror."
The sixth is from 1912. It is each of the pages of L'Âme de Napoléon, 
a book whose purpose is to decipher the symbol Napoleon, considered as the 
precursor of another hero—man and symbol as well—who is hidden in the 
200

future. It is sufficient for me to cite two passages. One: "Every man is on 
earth to symbolize something he is ignorant of and to realize a particle or a 
mountain of the invisible materials that will serve to build the City of God." 
The other: "There is no human being on earth capable of declaring with 
certitude who he is. No one knows what he has come into this world to do, 
what his acts correspond to, his sentiments, his ideas, or what his real name 
is, his enduring Name in the register of Light. . . History is an immense 
liturgical text where the iotas and the dots are worth no less than the entire 
verses or chapters, but the importance of one and the other is indeterminable 
and profoundly hidden."
The  foregoing  paragraphs  will  perhaps  seem  to  the  reader  mere 
gratuities by Bloy. So far as I know, he never took care to reason them out. I 
venture to judge them verisimilar and perhaps inevitable within the Christian 
doctrine. Bloy (I repeat) did no more than apply to the whole of Creation the 
method which the Jewish Cabalists applied to the Scriptures. They thought 
that a work dictated by the Holy Spirit was an absolute text: in other words, 
a text in which the collaboration of chance was calculable as zero. This 
portentous premise of a book impenetrable to contingency, of a book which 
is a mechanism of infinite purposes, moved them to permute the scriptural 
words,  add  up  the  numerical  value  of  the  letters,  consider  their  form, 
observe the small letters and capitals, seek acrostics and anagrams and 
perform other exegetical rigors which it is not difficult to ridicule. Their 
excuse is that nothing can be contingent in the work of an infinite mind.37 
Léon  Bloy  postulates  this  hieroglyphical  character—this  character  of  a 
divine writing, of an angelic cryptography—at all moments and in all beings 
on earth. The superstitious person believes he can decipher this organic 
writing: thirteen guests form the symbol of death; a yellow opal, that of 
misfortune.
It is doubtful that the world has a meaning; it is even more doubtful 
that  it  has  a  double  or  triple  meaning,  the  unbeliever  will  observe.  I 
understand that this is so; but I understand that the hieroglyphical world 
postulated by Bloy is the one which best befits the dignity of the theologian's 
37 What is a divine mind? the reader will perhaps inquire. There is not a theologian who 
does not define it; I prefer an example. The steps a man takes from the day of his birth 
until  that  of  his  death  trace  in time  an  inconceivable  figure.  The  Divine  Mind 
intuitively grasps that form immediately, as men do a triangle. This figure (perhaps) 
has its given function in the economy of the universe.
201

intellectual God.
No man knows who he is, affirmed Léon Bloy. No one could illustrate 
that  intimate  ignorance  better  than  he.  He  believed  himself  a  rigorous 
Catholic  and  he  was  a  continuer  of  the  Cabalists,  a  secret  brother  of 
Swedenborg and Blake: heresiarchs.
Translated by J.E.I.
202

A Note on (toward) Bernard Shaw
t the end of the thirteenth century, Raymond Lully (Raimundo Lulio) 
was  prepared  to  solve  all  arcana  by  means  of  an  apparatus  of 
concentric, revolving discs of different sizes, subdivided into sectors with 
Latin words; John Stuart Mill, at the beginning of the nineteenth, feared that 
some day the number of musical combinations would be exhausted and there 
would be no place in the future for indefinite Webers and Mozarts; Kurd 
Lasswitz, at the end of the nineteenth, toyed with the staggering fantasy of a 
universal library which would register all the variations of the twenty-odd 
orthographical symbols, in other words, all that it is given to express in all 
languages. Lully's machine, Mill's fear and Lasswitz's chaotic library can be 
the subject of jokes, but they exaggerate a propension which is common: 
making metaphysics and the arts into a kind of play with combinations. 
Those who practice this game forget that a book is more than a verbal 
structure or series of verbal structures; it is the dialogue it establishes with 
its reader and the intonation it imposes upon his voice and the changing and 
durable images it leaves in his memory. This dialogue is infinite; the words 
amica silentia lunae now mean the intimate, silent and shining moon, and in 
the Aeneid they meant the interlunar period, the darkness which allowed the 
Greeks to enter the stronghold of Troy. . .38 Literature is not exhaustible, for 
the sufficient and simple reason that no single book is. A book is not an 
isolated being: it is a relationship, an axis of innumerable relationships. One 
literature differs from another, prior or posterior, less because of the text 
than because of the way in which it is read: if I were granted the possibility 
of reading any present-day page—this one, for example—as it will be read 
in the year two thousand, I would know what the literature of the year two 
A
38 Thus Milton and Dante interpreted them, to judge by certain passages which seem to 
be imitative. In the Commedia (Inferno, I, 60; V, 28) we have: dogni luce muto and 
dove il sol tace to signify dark places; in the Samson Agonistes (86-89):
The Sun to me is dark
And silent as the Moon
When she deserts the night
Hid in her vacant interlunar cave.
Cf. E.M.W. Tillyard: The Miltonic Setting, 101.
203

thousand will be like. The conception of literature as a formalistic game 
leads, in the best of cases, to the fine chiseling of a period or a stanza, to an 
artful  decorum  (Johnson,  Renan,  Flaubert),  and  in  the  worst,  to  the 
discomforts of a work made of surprises dictated by vanity and chance 
(Gracián, Herrera y Reissig).
If literature were nothing more than verbal algebra, anyone could 
produce any book by essaying variations. The lapidary formula "Everything 
flows" abbreviates in two words the philosophy of Heraclitus: Raymond 
Lully would say that, with the first word given, it would be sufficient to 
essay the intransitive verbs to discover the second and obtain, thanks to 
methodical chance, that philosophy and many others. Here it is fitting to 
reply that the formula obtained by this process of elimination would lack all 
value and even meaning; for it to have some virtue we must conceive it in 
terms of Heraclitus, in terms of an experience of Heraclitus, even though 
"Heraclitus" is nothing more than the presumed subject of that experience. I 
have said that a book is a dialogue, a form of relationship; in a dialogue, an 
interlocutor is not the sum or average of what he says: he may not speak and 
still reveal that he is intelligent, he may omit intelligent observations and 
reveal his stupidity. The same happens with literature; d'Artagnan executes 
innumerable feats and Don Quixote is beaten and ridiculed, but one feels the 
valor of Don Quixote more. The foregoing leads us to an aesthetic problem 
never before posed: Can an author create characters superior to himself? I 
would say no and in that negation include both the intellectual and the 
moral. I believe that from us cannot emerge creatures more lucid or more 
noble than our best moments. It is on this opinion that I base my conviction 
of Shaw's pre-eminence. The collective and civic problems of his early 
works will lose their interest, or have lost it already; the jokes in the 
Pleasant Plays run the risk of becoming, some day, no less uncomfortable 
than those of Shakespeare (humor, I suspect, is an oral genre, a sudden favor 
of conversation, not something written); the ideas declared in his prologues 
and his eloquent tirades will be found in Schopenhauer and Samuel Butler;39 
but Lavinia, Blanco Posnet, Keegan, Shotover, Richard Dudgeon and, above 
all, Julius Caesar, surpass any character imagined by the art of our time. If 
39 And  in  Swedenborg.  In  Man  and  Superman  we  read  that  Hell  is  not  a  penal 
establishment but rather a state dead sinners elect for reasons of intimate affinity, just 
as the blessed do with Heaven; the treatise  De Coelo et Inferno  by Swedenborg, 
published in 1758, expounds the same doctrine.
204

we  think  of  Monsieur  Teste  alongside  them  or  Nietzsche's  histrionic 
Zarathustra,  we  can  perceive  with  astonishment  and  even  outrage  the 
primacy  of  Shaw.  In  1911,  Albert  Soergel  could  write,  repeating  a 
commonplace of the time, "Bernard Shaw is an annihilator of the heroic 
concept, a killer of heroes" (Dichtung und Dichter der Zeit, 214); he did not 
understand  that  the  heroic  might  dispense  with  the  romantic  and  be 
incarnated  in Captain Bluntschli  of  Arms and the Man,  not in Sergius 
Saranoff.
The  biography  of  Bernard  Shaw  by  Frank  Harris  contains  an 
admirable letter by the former, from which I copy the following words: "I 
understand everything and everyone and I am nothing and no one." From 
this nothingness (so comparable to that of God before creating the world, so 
comparable to that primordial divinity which another Irishman, Johannes 
Scotus Erigena, called  Nihil),  Bernard Shaw educed almost innumerable 
persons or dramatis personae: the most ephemeral of these is, I suspect, that 
G.B.S. who represented him in public and who lavished in the newspaper 
columns so many facile witticisms.
Shaw's fundamental themes are philosophy and ethics: it is natural 
and inevitable that he should not be valued in this country, or that he be so 
only in terms of a few epigrams. The Argentine feels that the universe is 
nothing  but  a  manifestation  of  chance,  the  fortuitous  concourse  of 
Democritus' atoms; philosophy does not interest him. Nor does ethics: the 
social realm, for him, is reduced to a conflict of individuals or classes or 
nations, in which everything is licit, save being ridiculed or defeated.
Man's character and its variations are the essential theme of the novel 
of  our  time;  lyric  poetry  is  the  complacent  magnification  of  amorous 
fortunes or misfortunes; the philosophies of Heidegger and Jaspers make 
each of us the interesting interlocutor in a secret and continuous dialogue 
with nothingness or the divinity; these disciplines, which in the formal sense 
can  be  admirable,  foment  that  illusion  of  the  ego  which  the  Vedanta 
censures as a capital error. They usually make a game of desperation and 
anguish,  but  at bottom  they  flatter our  vanity;  they  are,  in  this sense, 
immoral. The work of Shaw, however, leaves one with a flavor of liberation. 
The flavor of the stoic doctrines and the flavor of the sagas.
Translated by J.E.I.
205

A New Refutation of Time
Vor mir war keine Zeit, nach mir wird keine seyn, 
Mit mir gebiert sie sich, mit mir geht sie auch ein.
Daniel von Czepko: 
Sexcenta monodisticha sapientum, III, II (1655)
PROLOGUE
f published toward the middle of the eighteenth century, this refutation 
(or its name) would persist in Hume's bibliographies and perhaps would 
have merited a line by Huxley or Kemp Smith. Published in 1947—after 
Bergson—,  it is the anachronistic  reductio  ad absurdum  of a preterite 
system or, what is worse, the feeble artifice of an Argentine lost in the maze 
of metaphysics. Both conjectures are verisimilar and perhaps true; in order 
to correct them, I cannot promise a novel conclusion in exchange for my 
rudimentary dialectic. The thesis I shall divulge is as ancient as Zeno's 
arrow or the Greek king's carriage in the Milinda Panha; the novelty, if any, 
consists in applying to my purpose the classic instrument of Berkeley. Both 
he and his continuer David Hume abound in paragraphs which contradict 
or exclude my thesis; nevertheless, I believe I have deduced the inevitable 
consequences of their doctrine.
I
The first article (A) was written in 1944 and appeared in number 115 
of  the  review  Sur;  the  second,  of  1946,  is  a  reworking  of  the  first. 
Deliberately I did not make the two into one, understanding that the reading 
of two analogous texts might facilitate the comprehension of an indocile 
subject.
A word about the title. I am not unaware that it is an example of the 
monster termed by the logicians contradictio in adjecto, because stating that 
a refutation of time is new (or old) attributes to it a predicate of temporal 
nature which establishes the very notion the subject would destroy. I leave it 
as is, however, so that its slight mockery may prove that I do not exaggerate 
the importance of these verbal games. Besides, our language is so saturated 
and animated by time that it is quite possible there is not one statement in 
these pages which in some way does not demand or invoke the idea of time.
1 dedicate these exercises to my forebear Juan Crisóstomo Lafinur 
206

(1797-1824), who left some memorable endecasyllables to Argentine letters 
and  who  tried  to  reform  the  teaching  of  philosophy,  purifying  it  of 
theological shadows and expounding in his courses the principles of Locke 
and Condillac. He died in exile; like all men, he was given bad times in 
which to live.
Buenos Aires, 
23 December 1946 
J.L.B.
A
1.
In the course of a life dedicated to letters and (at times) to metaphysical 
perplexity, I have glimpsed or foreseen a refutation of time, in which I 
myself do not believe, but which regularly visits me at night and in the 
weary twilight with the illusory force of an axiom. This refutation is found 
in some way or another in all my books: it is prefigured by the poems 
"Inscription on Any Grave" and "The Trick" from my  Fervor of Buenos 
Aires (1923); it is declared by two articles in Inquisitions (1925), page 46 of 
Evaristo Carriego (1930), the narration "Feeling in Death" from my History 
of Eternity (1936) and the note on page 24 of The Garden of Forking Paths 
(1941). None of the texts I have enumerated satisfies me, not even the 
penultimate one, less demonstrative and well-reasoned than it is divinatory 
and pathetic. I shall try to establish a basis for all of them in this essay.
Two arguments led me to this refutation: the idealism of Berkeley and 
Leibniz's principle of indiscernibles.
Berkeley (Principles of Human Knowledge, 3) observed: "That neither 
our thoughts, nor passions,  nor ideas formed by the imagination, exist 
without the mind, is what everybody will allow. And it seems no less 
evident that the various sensations or ideas imprinted on the sense, however 
blended or combined together (that is, whatever objects they compose) 
cannot exist otherwise than in a mind perceiving them. . . The table I write 
on, I say, exists, that is, I see and feel it; and if I were out of my study I 
should say it existed, meaning thereby that if I was in my study I might 
perceive it, or that some other spirit actually does perceive it. . . For as to 
207

what is said of the absolute existence of unthinking things without any 
relation to their being perceived, that seems perfectly unintelligible. Their 
esse is percipi, nor is it possible they should have any existence, out of the 
minds or thinking things which perceive them." In paragraph twenty-three 
he added, forestalling objections: "But say you, surely there is nothing easier 
than to imagine trees, for instance, in a park or books existing in a closet, 
and no body by to perceive them. I answer, you may so, there is no difficulty 
in it: but what is all this, I beseech you, more than framing in your mind 
certain ideas which you call books and trees, and at the same time omitting 
to frame the idea of any one that may perceive them? But do not you your 
self perceive or think of them all the while? This therefore is nothing to the 
purpose: it only shows you have the power of imagining or forming ideas in 
your mind; but it doth not shew that you can conceive it possible, the objects 
of your thought may exist without the mind. . ." In another paragraph, 
number six, he had already declared: "Some truths there are so near and 
obvious to the mind, that a man need only open his eyes to see them. Such I 
take this important one to be, to wit, that all the choir of heaven and 
furniture of the earth, in a word all those bodies which compose the mighty 
frame of the world, have not any substance without a mind, that their being 
is to be perceived or known; that consequently so long as they are not 
actually perceived by me, or do not exist in any mind or that of any other 
created spirit, they must either have no existence at all, or else subsist in the 
mind of some eternal spirit. . ."
Such  is,  in  the  words  of  its  inventor,  the  idealist  doctrine.  To 
understand  it  is  easy;  what  is  difficult  is  to  think  within  its  limits. 
Schopenhauer  himself,  when  expounding  it,  committed  culpable 
negligences. In the first lines of the first volume of his Welt als Wille und 
Vorstellung—from the year 1819—he formulated this declaration which 
makes him worthy of the enduring perplexity of all men: "The world is my 
idea: this is a truth which holds good for everything that lives and knows, 
though man alone can bring it into reflective and abstract consciousness. If 
he really does this, he has attained to philosophical wisdom. It then becomes 
clear and certain to him what he knows is not a sun and an earth, but only an 
eye that sees a sun, a hand that feels an earth. . ." In other words, for the 
idealist Schopenhauer, man's eyes and hands are less illusory or apparent 
than the earth and the sun. In 1844 he published a complementary volume. 
In its first chapter he rediscovers and aggravates the previous error: he 
208

defines the universe as a phenomenon of the brain and distinguishes the 
"world in the head" from "the world outside the head." Berkeley, however, 
had his Philonous say in 1713: "The brain therefore you speak of, being a 
sensible thing, exists only in the mind. Now, I would fain know whether you 
think it reasonable to suppose, that one idea or thing existing in the mind, 
occasions all other ideas. And if you think so, pray how do you account for 
the origin of that primary idea or brain itself?" Schopenhauer's dualism or 
cerebralism may also be licitly opposed by Spiller's monism. Spiller (The 
Mind of Man, chapter VIII, 1902) argues that the retina and the cutaneous 
surface invoked in order to explain visual and tactile phenomena are, in turn, 
two tactile and visual systems and that the room we see (the "objective" one) 
is no greater than the one imagined (the "cerebral" one) and does not contain 
it, since what we have here are two independent visual systems. Berkeley 
(Principles of Human Knowledge, 10 and 116) likewise denied the existence 
of primary qualities—the solidity and extension of things—and of absolute 
space.
Berkeley affirmed the continuous existence of objects, since when no 
individual sees them, God does; Hume, with greater logic, denies such an 
existence  (Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  I,  4,  2).  Berkeley  affirmed  the 
existence of personal identity, "I my self am not my ideas, but somewhat 
else, a thinking active principle that perceives. . ." (Dialogues, 3); Hume, the 
skeptic, refutes this identity and makes of every man "a bundle or collection 
of different perceptions, which succeed each other with an inconceivable 
rapidity" (op. cit., I, 4, 6). Both affirm the existence of time: for Berkeley, it 
is "the succession of ideas in my mind, which flows uniformly, and is 
participated by all beings" (Principles of Human Knowledge, 98); for Hume, 
"a succession of indivisible moments" (op. cit., I, 2, 2).
I have accumulated transcriptions from the apologists of idealism, I 
have abounded in their canonical passages,  I have been reiterative and 
explicit, I have censured Schopenhauer (not without ingratitude), so that my 
reader may begin to penetrate into this unstable world of the mind. A world 
of evanescent impressions; a world without matter or spirit, neither objective 
nor subjective; a world without the ideal architecture of space; a world made 
of time, of the absolute uniform time of the Principia; a tireless labyrinth, a 
chaos, a dream.  This almost  perfect dissolution was reached  by David 
Hume.
Once the idealist argument is admitted, I see that it is possible—
209

perhaps inevitable—to go further. For Hume it is not licit to speak of the 
form of the moon or of its color; the form and color are the moon; neither 
can one speak of the perceptions of the mind, since the mind is nothing other 
than a series of perceptions. The Cartesian "I think, therefore I am" is thus 
invalidated; to say "I think" postulates the self, is a begging of the question; 
Lichtenberg, in the eighteenth century, proposed that in place of "I think" we 
should say, impersonally, "it thinks," just as one would say "it thunders" or 
"it rains." I repeat: behind our faces there is no secret self which governs our 
acts  and  receives  our  impressions;  we  are,  solely,  the  series  of  these 
imaginary acts and these errant impressions. The series? Once matter and 
spirit, which are continuities, are negated, once space too has been negated, I 
do not know what right we have to that continuity which is time. Let us 
imagine a present moment of any kind. During one of his nights on the 
Mississippi, Huckleberry Finn awakens; the raft, lost in partial darkness, 
continues downstream; it is perhaps a bit cold. Huckleberry Finn recognizes 
the soft indefatigable sound of the water; he negligently opens his eyes; he 
sees a vague number of stars, an indistinct line of trees; then, he sinks back 
into his immemorable sleep as into the dark waters.40 Idealist metaphysics 
declares  that  to  add  a  material  substance  (the  object)  and  a  spiritual 
substance (the subject) to those perceptions is venturesome and useless; I 
maintain that it is no less illogical to think that such perceptions are terms in 
a series whose beginning is as inconceivable as its end. To add to the river 
and the bank, Huck perceives the notion of another substantive river and 
another  bank,  to  add  another  perception  to  that  immediate  network  of 
perceptions,  is,  for  idealism,  unjustifiable;  for  myself,  it  is  no  less 
unjustifiable to add a chronological precision: the fact, for example, that the 
foregoing event took place on the night of the seventh of June, 1849, 
between ten and eleven minutes past four. In other words: I deny, with the 
arguments of idealism, the vast temporal series which idealism admits. 
Hume denied the existence of an absolute space, in which all things have 
their place; I deny the existence of one single time, in which all things are 
linked as in a chain. The denial of coexistence is no less arduous than the 
denial of succession.
I deny, in an elevated number of instances, the successive; I deny, in 
40 For the convenience of the reader I have selected a moment between two periods of 
sleep, a literary moment, not a historical one. If anyone suspects a fallacy, he may 
substitute another example, one from his own life if he so chooses.
210

an elevated number of instances, the contemporary as well. The lover who 
thinks "While I was so happy, thinking of the fidelity of my love, she was 
deceiving me" deceives himself: if every state we experience is absolute, 
such happiness was not contemporary to the betrayal; the discovery of that 
betrayal is another state, which cannot modify the "previous" ones, though it 
can modify their recollection. The misfortune of today is no more real than 
the happiness of the past. I shall seek a more concrete example. In the first 
part of August, 1824, Captain Isidore Suárez, at the head of a squadron of 
Peruvian hussars, decided the victory of Junin; in the first part of August, 
1824, De Quincey published a diatribe against Wilhelm Meisters Lehrjahre; 
these events were not contemporary (they are now), since the two men died
—one in the city of Montevideo, the other in Edinburgh—without knowing 
anything  about  each  other.  .  .  Each  moment  is  autonomous.  Neither 
vengeance  nor  pardon  nor  prisons  nor  even  oblivion  can  modify  the 
invulnerable past. To me, hope and fear seem no less vain, for they always 
refer to future events: that is, to events that will not happen to us, who are 
the minutely detailed present. I am told that the present, the specious present 
of the psychologists, lasts from a few seconds to a minute fraction of a 
second; that can be the duration of the history of the universe. In other 
words, there is no such history, just as a man has no life; not even one of his 
nights  exists;  each  moment  we  live  exists,  but  not  their  imaginary 
combination. The universe, the sum of all things, is a collection no less ideal 
than that of all the horses Shakespeare dreamt of—one, many, none?—
between  1592  and  1594.  I  add:  if  time  is  a  mental  process,  how  can 
thousands of men—or even two different men—share it? 
The  argument  of  the  preceding  paragraphs,  interrupted  and 
encumbered with illustrations, may seem intricate. I shall seek a more direct 
method. Let us consider a life in whose course there is an abundance of 
repetitions: mine, for example. I never pass in front of the Recoleta without 
remembering that my father, my grandparents and great-grandparents are 
buried there, just as I shall be some day; then I remember that I have 
remembered the same thing an untold number of times already; I cannot 
walk through the suburbs in the solitude of the night without thinking that 
the night pleases us because it suppresses idle details, just as our memory 
does; I cannot lament the loss of a love or a friendship without meditating 
that one loses only what one really never had; every time I cross one of the 
street corners of the southern part of the city, I think of you, Helen; every 
211

time the wind brings me the smell of eucalyptus, I think of Adrogué in my 
childhood; every time I remember the ninety-first fragment of Heraclitus 
"You shall not go down twice to the same river," I admire its dialectical 
dexterity, because the ease with which we accept the first meaning ("The 
river  is  different")  clandestinely  imposes  upon  us  the  second  ("I  am 
different") and grants us the illusion of having invented it; every time I hear 
a Germanophile vituperate the Yiddish language, I reflect that Yiddish is, 
after all, a German dialect, scarcely colored by the language of the Holy 
Spirit. These tautologies (and others I leave in silence) make up my entire 
life. Of  course,  they  are  repeated  imprecisely;  there  are  differences  of 
emphasis, temperature, light and general physiological condition. I suspect, 
however, that the number of circumstantial variants is not infinite: we can 
postulate, in the mind of an individual (or of two individuals who do not 
know of each other but in whom the same process works), two identical 
moments. Once this identity is postulated, one may ask: Are not these 
identical moments the same? Is not one single repeated term sufficient to 
break down and confuse the series of time? Do not the fervent readers who 
surrender themselves to Shakespeare become, literally, Shakespeare?
As yet I am ignorant of the ethics of the system I have outlined. I do 
not know if it even exists. The fifth paragraph of the fourth chapter of the 
treatise Sanhedrin of the Mishnah declares that, for God's Justice, he who 
kills one man destroys the world; if there is no plurality, he who annihilates 
all men would be no more guilty than the primitive and solitary Cain, which 
fact is orthodox, nor more universal in his destruction, which fact may be 
magical.  I understand that this is so. The  vociferous catastrophes of a 
general  order—fires,  wars,  epidemics—are  one  single  pain,  illusorily 
multiplied in many mirrors. Thus Bernard Shaw sees it (Guide to Socialism, 
86): "What you can suffer is the maximum that can be suffered on earth. If 
you die of starvation, you will suffer all the starvation there has been or will 
be. If ten thousand people die with you, their participation in your lot will 
not make you be ten thousand times more hungry nor multiply the time of 
your agony ten thousand times. Do not let yourself be overcome by the 
horrible sum of human sufferings;  such  a  sum does not exist.  Neither 
poverty nor pain are cumulative." Cf. also The Problem of Pain, VII, by C. 
S. Lewis.
Lucretius  (De rerum natura,  I, 830) attributes to Anaxagoras the 
doctrine that gold consists of particles of gold, fire of sparks, bone of tiny 
212

imperceptible bones; Josiah Royce, perhaps influenced by St. Augustine, 
judges  that  time  is  made  of  time  and  that  "every  now  within  which 
something happens is therefore  also  a succession"  (The World and the 
Individual, II, 139). This proposition is compatible with that of this essay.
2.
All language is of a successive nature; it does not lend itself to a reasoning 
of the eternal, the intemporal. Those who have followed the foregoing 
argumentation with displeasure will perhaps prefer this page from the year 
1928. I have already mentioned it; it is the narrative entitled "Feeling in 
Death":
"I want to set down here an experience which I had some nights ago: a 
trifle too evanescent and ecstatic to be called an adventure, too irrational and 
sentimental to be called a thought. It consists of a scene and its word: a word 
already stated by me, but not lived with complete dedication until then. I 
shall now proceed to give its history, with the accidents of time and place 
which were its declaration.
"I remember it as follows. The afternoon preceding that night, I was in 
Barracas: a locality not visited by my habit and whose distance from those I 
later traversed had already lent a strange flavor to that day. The evening had 
no destiny at all; since it was clear, I went out to take a walk and to recollect 
after dinner. I did not want to determine a route for my stroll; I tried to attain 
a maximum latitude of probabilities in order not to fatigue my expectation 
with the necessary foresight of any one of them. I managed, to the imperfect 
degree of possibility, to do what is called walking at random; I accepted, 
with no other conscious prejudice than that of avoiding the wider avenues or 
streets, the most obscure invitations of chance. However, a kind of familiar 
gravitation led me farther on, in the direction of certain neighborhoods, the 
names of which I have every desire to recall and which dictate reverence to 
my  heart.  I  do  not  mean  by  this  my  own  neighborhood,  the  precise 
surroundings of my childhood, but rather its still mysterious environs: an 
area I have possessed often in words but seldom in reality, immediate and at 
the same time mythical. The reverse of the familiar, its far side, are for me 
those penultimate  streets,  almost as effectively  unknown as the  hidden 
foundations of our house or our invisible skeleton. My progress brought me 
213

to a corner. I breathed in the night, in a most serene holiday from thought. 
The view, not at all complex, seemed simplified by my tiredness. It was 
made unreal by its very typicality. The street was one of low houses and 
though its first meaning was one of poverty, its second was certainly one of 
contentment. It was as humble and enchanting as anything could be. None of 
the houses dared open itself to the street; the fig tree darkened over the 
corner; the little arched doorways—higher than the taut outlines of the walls
—seemed  wrought  from  the  same  infinite  substance  of  the  night.  The 
sidewalk formed an escarpment over the street; the street was of elemental 
earth,  the earth  of  an  as  yet  unconquered  America.  Farther  down,  the 
alleyway, already open to the pampa, crumbled into the Maldonado. Above 
the turbid and chaotic earth, a rose-colored wall seemed not to house the 
moonlight, but rather to effuse an intimate light of its own. There can be no 
better way of naming tenderness than that soft rose color.
"I kept looking at this simplicity. I thought, surely out loud: This is the 
same as thirty years ago. . . I conjectured the date: a recent time in other 
countries but now quite remote in this changeable part of the world. Perhaps 
a bird was singing and for it I felt a tiny affection, the same size as the bird; 
but the most certain thing was that in this now vertiginous silence there was 
no other sound than the intemporal one of the crickets. The easy thought 'I 
am in the eighteen-nineties' ceased to be a few approximate words and was 
deepened into a reality. I felt dead, I felt as an abstract spectator of the 
world; an indefinite fear imbued with science, which is the best clarity of 
metaphysics. I did not think that I had returned upstream on the supposed 
waters of Time; rather I suspected that I was the possessor of a reticent or 
absent sense of the inconceivable word  eternity.  Only later was I able to 
define that imagination.
"I write it now as follows: That pure representation of homogeneous 
objects—the night in serenity, a limpid little wall, the provincial scent of the 
honeysuckle, the elemental earth—is not merely identical to the one present 
on that corner so many years ago; it is, without resemblances or repetitions, 
the very same. Time, if we can intuitively grasp such an identity, is a 
delusion: the difference and inseparability of one moment belonging to its 
apparent past from another belonging to its apparent present is sufficient to 
disintegrate it.
"It is evident that the number of such human moments is not infinite. 
The elemental  ones—those  of physical  suffering and  physical  pleasure, 
214

those of the coming of sleep, those of the hearing of a piece of music, those 
of great intensity or great lassitude—are even more impersonal. Aforehand I 
derive this conclusion: life is too poor not to be immortal as well. But we do 
not even have the certainty of our poverty, since time, which is easily 
refutable in sense experience, is not so in the intellectual, from whose 
essence the concept of succession seems inseparable. Thus shall remain as 
an  emotional  anecdote  the  half-glimpsed  idea  and  as  the  confessed 
irresolution of this page the true moment of ecstasy and possible suggestion 
of eternity with which that night was not parsimonious for me."
B
Of the many doctrines registered by the history of philosophy, perhaps 
idealism is the oldest and most widespread. This observation was made by 
Carlyle  (Novalis, 1829); to the philosophers he alleges it is fitting to add, 
with no hope of completing the infinite census, the Platonists, for whom the 
only reality is that of the archetype (Norris, Judas Abrabanel, Gemistus, 
Plotinus), the theologians, for whom all that is not the divinity is contingent 
(Malebranche, Johannes Eckhart), the monists, who make the universe an 
idle adjective of the Absolute (Bradley, Hegel, Parmenides). . . Idealism is as 
ancient as metaphysical restlessness itself; its most acute apologist, George 
Berkeley,  flourished  in  the  eighteenth  century;  contrary  to  what 
Schopenhauer declares  (Welt als Wille und Vorstellung,  II, i), his merit 
cannot  be  the  intuition  of  that  doctrine  but  rather  the  arguments  he 
conceived in order to reason it; Hume applied them to the mind; my purpose 
is to apply them to time. But first I shall recapitulate the diverse stages of 
this dialectic.
Berkeley denied the existence of matter. This does not mean, one 
should note, that he denied the existence of colors, odors, tastes, sounds and 
tactile sensations; what he denied was that, aside from these perceptions, 
which make up the external world, there was anything invisible, intangible, 
called matter. He denied that there were pains that no one feels, colors that 
no one sees, forms that no one touches. He reasoned that to add a matter to 
our perceptions is to add an inconceivable, superfluous world to the world. 
He  believed  in  the  world  of  appearances  woven  by  our  senses,  but 
215

understood  that the material world (that  of Toland, say) is an illusory 
duplication. He observed (Principles of Human Knowledge, 3): "That neither 
our thoughts, nor passions,  nor ideas formed by the imagination, exist 
without the mind, is what everybody will allow. And it seems no less 
evident that the various sensations or ideas imprinted on the sense, however 
blended or combined together (that is, whatever objects they compose) 
cannot exist otherwise than in a mind perceiving them. . . The table I write 
on, I say, exists, that is, I see and feel it; and if I were out of my study I 
should say it existed, meaning thereby that if I was in my study I might 
perceive it, or that some other spirit actually does perceive it. . . For as to 
what is said of the absolute existence of unthinking things without any 
relation to their being perceived, that seems perfectly unintelligible. Their 
esse is percipi, nor is it possible they should have any existence, out of the 
minds or thinking things which perceive them." In paragraph twenty-three 
he added, forestalling objections: "But say you, surely there is nothing easier 
than to imagine trees, for instance, in a park or books existing in a closet, 
and no body by to perceive them. I answer, you may so, there is no difficulty 
in it: but what is all this, I beseech you, more than framing in your mind 
certain ideas which you call books and trees and at the same time omitting to 
frame the idea of any one that may perceive them? But do not you your self 
perceive or think of them all the while? This therefore is nothing to the 
purpose: it only shows you have the power of imagining or forming ideas in 
your mind; but it doth not shrew that you can conceive it possible, the 
objects  of  your  thought  may  exist  without  the  mind.  .  ."  In  another 
paragraph, number six, he had already declared: "Some truths there are so 
near and obvious to the mind, that a man need only open his eyes to see 
them. Such I take this important one to be, to wit, that all the choir of heaven 
and furniture of the earth, in a word all those bodies which compose the 
mighty frame of the world, have not any substance without a mind, that their 
being is to be perceived or known; that consequently so long as they are not 
actually perceived by me, or do not exist in any mind or that of any other 
created spirit, they must either have no existence at all, or else subsist in the 
mind of some eternal spirit. . ." (The God of Berkeley is a ubiquitous 
spectator whose function is that of lending coherence to the world.)
The doctrine I have just expounded has been interpreted in perverse 
ways. Herbert Spencer thought he had refuted it (Principles of Psychology, 
VIII,  6),  reasoning  that  if  there  is  nothing  outside  consciousness, 
216

consciousness must be infinite in time and space. The first is certain if we 
understand that all time is time perceived by someone, but erroneous if we 
infer that this time must necessarily embrace an infinite number of centuries; 
the second is illicit, since Berkeley (Principles of Human Knowledge, 116; 
Siris, 266) repeatedly denied the existence of an absolute space. Even more 
indecipherable is the error into which Schopenhauer falls  (Welt als Wille 
und Vorstellung, II, i) when he shows that for the idealists the world is a 
phenomenon  of  the  brain;  Berkeley,  however,  had  written  (Dialogues 
between Hylas and Philonous, II): "The brain therefore you speak of, being a 
sensible thing, exists only in the mind. Now, I would fain know whether you 
think it reasonable to suppose, that one idea or thing existing in the mind, 
occasions all other ideas. And if you think so, pray how do you account for 
the origin of this primary idea or brain itself?" The brain, in fact, is no less a 
part of the external world than is the constellation of the Centaur.
Berkeley  denied  that  there  was  an  object  behind  our  sense 
impressions; David Hume, that there was a subject behind the perception of 
changes. The former had denied the existence of matter, the latter denied the 
existence of spirit; the former had not wanted us to add to the succession of 
impressions the metaphysical notion of matter, the latter did not want us to 
add to the succession of mental states the metaphysical notion of self. So 
logical is this extension of Berkeley's arguments that Berkeley himself had 
already foreseen it, as Alexander Campbell Fraser notes, and even tried to 
reject it by means of the Cartesian ergo sum. "If your principles are valid, 
you  your  self  are  nothing  more  than  a  system  of  fluctuating  ideas, 
unsustained by any substance, since it is as absurd to speak of a spiritual 
substance as it is of a material substance," reasons Hylas, anticipating David 
Hume in the third and last of the Dialogues. Hume corroborates (Treatise of 
Human  Nature,  I,  4,  6):  "We  are  a  bundle  or  collection  of  different 
perceptions, which succeed each other with an inconceivable rapidity. . . The 
mind is a kind of theatre, where several perceptions successively make their 
appearance; pass, re-pass, glide away, and mingle in an infinite variety of 
postures and situations. . . The comparison of the theatre must not mislead 
us. They are the successive perceptions only, that constitute the mind; nor 
have  we the most  distant  notion  of  the  place,  where  these  scenes  are 
represented, or of the materials, of which it is compos'd."
Once the idealist argument is admitted, I see that it is possible—
perhaps inevitable—to go further. For Berkeley, time is "the succession of 
217

ideas in my mind, which flows uniformly, and is participated by all beings" 
(Principles  of  Human  Knowledge,  98);  for  Hume,  "a  succession  of 
indivisible moments"  (Treatise of Human Nature,  I, 2, 2). However, once 
matter and spirit—which are continuities—are negated, once space too is 
negated, I do not know with what right we retain that continuity which is 
time. Outside each perception (real or conjectural) matter does not exist; 
outside each mental state spirit does not exist; neither does time exist outside 
each present moment. Let us take a moment of maximum simplicity: for 
example, that of Chuang Tzu's dream (Herbert Allen Giles:  Chuang Tzu, 
1889). Chuang  Tzu,  some  twenty-four centuries  ago,  dreamt he  was a 
butterfly and did not know, when he awoke, if he was a man who had 
dreamt he was a butterfly or a butterfly who now dreamt he was a man. Let 
us not consider the awakening; let us consider the moment of the dream 
itself, or one of its moments. "I dreamt I was a butterfly flying through the 
air and knowing nothing of Chuang Tzu," reads the ancient text. We shall 
never know if Chuang Tzu saw a garden over which he seemed to fly or a 
moving yellow triangle which no doubt was he, but we do know that the 
image was subjective, though furnished by his memory. The doctrine of 
psycho-physical parallelism would judge that the image must have been 
accompanied by some change in the dreamer's nervous system; according to 
Berkeley, the body of Chuang Tzu did not exist at that moment, save as a 
perception in the mind of God. Hume simplifies even more what happened. 
According to him, the spirit of Chuang Tzu did not exist at that moment; 
only the colors of the dream and the certainty of being a butterfly existed. 
They  existed  as  a  momentary  term  in  the  "bundle  or  collection  of 
perceptions" which, some four centuries before Christ, was the mind of 
Chuang Tzu; they existed as a term n in an infinite temporal series, between 
n-1 and  n+1. There is no other reality, for idealism, than that of mental 
processes; adding an objective butterfly to the butterfly which is perceived 
seems a vain duplication; adding a self to these processes seems no less 
exorbitant. Idealism judges that there was a dreaming, a perceiving, but not a 
dreamer or even a dream; it judges that speaking of objects and subjects is 
pure mythology. Now if each psychic state is self-sufficient, if linking it to a 
circumstance or to a self is an illicit and idle addition, with what right shall 
we then ascribe to it a place in time? Chuang Tzu dreamt that he was a 
butterfly and during that dream he was not Chuang Tzu, but a butterfly. 
How, with space and self abolished, shall we link those moments to his 
218

waking moments and to the feudal period of Chinese history? This does not 
mean that we shall never know, even in an approximate fashion, the date of 
that dream; it means that the chronological fixing of an event, of an event in 
the universe, is alien and external to it. In China the dream of Chuang Tzu is 
proverbial; let us imagine that of its almost infinite readers, one dreams that 
he is a butterfly and then dreams that he is Chuang Tzu. Let us imagine that, 
by a not impossible stroke of chance, this dream reproduces point for point 
the master's. Once this identity is postulated, it is fitting to ask: Are not these 
moments  which  coincide  one  and  the  same?  Is  not  one  repeated  term 
sufficient to break down and confuse the history of the world, to denounce 
that there is no such history?
The  denial  of  time  involves  two  negations:  the  negation  of  the 
succession of the terms of a series, negation of the synchronism of the terms 
in two different series. In fact, if each term is absolute, its relations are 
reduced to the consciousness that those relations exist. A state precedes 
another if it is known to be prior; a state of G is contemporary to a state of H 
if it is known to be  contemporary.  Contrary  to what was declared by 
Schopenhauer41 in  his  table  of  fundamental  truths  (Welt  als  Wille  und 
Vorstellung,  II, 4), each fraction of time does not simultaneously fill the 
whole of space; time is not ubiquitous. (Of course, at this stage in the 
argument, space no longer exists.)
Meinong, in his theory of apprehension, admits the apprehension of 
imaginary objects: the fourth dimension, let us say, or the sensitive statue of 
Condillac or the hypothetical animal of Lotze or the square root of minus 
one. If the reasons I have indicated are valid, then matter, self, the external 
world, world history and our lives also belong to this same nebulous orb.
Besides, the phrase "negation of time" is ambiguous. It can mean the 
eternity of Plato or Boethius and also the dilemmas of Sextus Empiricus. 
The latter (Adversus mathematicos, XI, 197) denies the existence of the past, 
that which already was, and the future, that which is not yet, and argues that 
the present is divisible or indivisible. It is not indivisible, for in such a case it 
would have no beginning to link it to the past nor end to link it to the future, 
nor even a middle, since what has no beginning or end can have no middle; 
neither is it divisible, for in such a case it would consist of a part that was 
and another that is not. Ergo, it does not exist, but since the past and the 
41 And, earlier, by Newton, who maintained: "Each particle of space is eternal, each 
indivisible moment of duration is everywhere" (Principia, III, 42).
219

future do not exist either, time does not exist. F. H. Bradley rediscovers and 
improves this perplexity. He observes (Appearance and Reality, IV) that if 
the present is divisible in other presents, it is no less complicated than time 
itself, and if it is indivisible, time is a mere relation between intemporal 
things. Such reasoning, as can be seen, negates the parts in order then to 
negate the whole; I reject the whole in order to exalt each of the parts. Via 
the  dialectics  of  Berkeley  and  Hume  I  have  arrived  at  Schopenhauer's 
dictum: "The form of the phenomenon of will. . . is really only the present, 
not the future nor the past. The latter are only in the conception, exist only in 
the connection of knowledge, so far as it follows the principle of sufficient 
reason. No man has ever lived in the past, and none will live in the future; 
the present alone is the form of all life, and is its sure possession which can 
never be taken from it. . . We might compare time to a constantly revolving 
sphere; the half that was always sinking would be the past, that which was 
always rising would be the future; but the indivisible point at the top, where 
the tangent touches, would be the extensionless present. As the tangent does 
not revolve with the sphere, neither does the present, the point of contact of 
the object, the form of which is time, with the subject, which has no form, 
because it does not belong to the knowable, but is the condition of all that is 
knowable" (Welt als Wille und Vorstellung, I, 54). A Buddhist treatise of the 
fifth century,  the  Visuddhimagga  (Road  to  Purity),  illustrates  the  same 
doctrine with the same figure: "Strictly speaking, the duration of the life of a 
living being is exceedingly brief, lasting only while a thought lasts. Just as a 
chariot wheel in rolling rolls only at one point of the tire, and in resting rests 
only at one point; in exactly the same way the life of a living being lasts only 
for the period of one thought" (Radhakrishnan: Indian Philosophy, I, 373). 
Other Buddhist texts say that the world annihilates itself and reappears six 
thousand five hundred million times a day and that all men are an illusion, 
vertiginously produced by a series of momentaneous and solitary men. "The 
being of a past moment of thought—the Road to Purity tells us—has lived, 
but does not live nor will it live. The being of a future moment will live, but 
has not lived nor does it live. The being of the present moment of thought 
does live, but has not lived nor will it live" (op. cit., I, 407), a dictum which 
we may compare with the following of Plutarch (De E apud Delphos, 18): 
"The man of yesterday has died in that of today, that of today dies in that of 
tomorrow."
And yet, and yet. . . Denying temporal succession, denying the self, 
220

denying the astronomical universe, are apparent desperations and secret 
consolations. Our destiny (as contrasted with the hell of Swedenborg and the 
hell of Tibetan mythology) is not frightful by being unreal; it is frightful 
because it is irreversible and iron-clad. Time is the substance I am made of. 
Time is a river which sweeps me along, but I am the river; it is a tiger which 
destroys me, but I am the tiger; it is a fire which consumes me, but I am the 
fire. The world, unfortunately, is real; I, unfortunately, am Borges.
FOOTNOTE TO THE PROLOGUE
There is no exposition of Buddhism that does not mention the  Milinda 
Panha,  an apologetic work of the second century, which relates a debate 
whose interlocutors are the king of Bactriana, Menander, and the monk 
Nagasena. The latter reasons that just as the king's carriage is neither its 
wheels nor its body nor its axle nor its pole nor its yoke, neither is man his 
matter, form, impressions, ideas, instincts or consciousness. He is not the 
combination of these parts nor does he exist outside of them. . . After a 
controversy of many days, Menander (Milinda) is converted to the Buddhist 
faith.
The Milinda Panha has been translated into English by Rhys Davids 
(Oxford, 1890-1894).
Translated by J.E.I.
221

Parables
222

Inferno, 1, 32
rom the twilight of day till the twilight of evening, a leopard, in the last 
years of the thirteenth century, would see some wooden planks, some 
vertical iron bars, men and women who changed, a wall and perhaps a stone 
gutter filled with dry leaves. He did not know, could not know, that he 
longed for love and cruelty and the hot pleasure of tearing things to pieces 
and the wind carrying the scent of a deer, but something suffocated and 
rebelled within him and God spoke to him in a dream: "You live and will die 
in this prison so that a man I know of may see you a certain number of times 
and not forget you and place your figure and symbol in a poem which has its 
precise place in the scheme of the universe. You suffer captivity, but you 
will have given a word to the poem." God, in the dream, illumined the 
animal's brutishness and the animal understood these reasons and accepted 
his  destiny,  but,  when  he  awoke,  there  was  in  him  only  an  obscure 
resignation, a valorous ignorance, for the machinery of the world is much 
too complex for the simplicity of a beast. Years later, Dante was dying in 
Ravenna, as unjustified and as lonely as any other man. In a dream, God 
declared  to  him  the  secret  purpose  of  his  life  and  work;  Dante,  in 
wonderment, knew at last who and what he was and blessed the bitterness of 
his life. Tradition relates that, upon waking, he felt that he had received and 
lost an infinite thing, something he would not be able to recuperate or even 
glimpse, for the machinery of the world is much too complex for the 
simplicity of men.
F
Translated by J.E.I.
223

Paradiso, XXXI, 108
iodorus Siculus relates the story of a broken and scattered god; who of 
us has never felt, while walking through the twilight or writing a date 
from his past, that something infinite had been lost?
D
Men have lost a face, an irrecoverable face, and all long to be that 
pilgrim (envisioned in the Empyrean, beneath the Rose) who in Rome sees 
the Veronica and faithfully murmurs: "My Lord, Jesus Christ, true God, and 
was this, then, the fashion of thy semblance?"
There is a stone face beside a road with an inscription saying "The 
True Portrait of the Holy Face of the God of Jaén"; if we really knew what it 
was like, the key to all parables would be ours and we would know if the 
carpenter's son was also the Son of God.
Paul saw it as a light which hurled him to the ground; John saw it as 
the sun when it blazes in all its force: Teresa of León saw it many times, 
bathed in a tranquil light, and could never determine the color of its eyes.
We have lost these features, just as one may lose a magic number 
made up of customary  digits, just as one loses forever an image  in a 
kaleidoscope. We may see them and be unaware of it. A Jew's profile in the 
subway is perhaps that of Christ; the hands giving us our change at a ticket 
window perhaps repeat those that one day were nailed to the cross by some 
soldiers.
Perhaps some feature of that crucified countenance lurks in every 
mirror; perhaps the face died, was obliterated, so that God could be all of us.
Who knows whether tonight we shall not see it in the labyrinths of our 
dreams and not even know it tomorrow.
Translated by J.E.I.
224

Ragnarök
n our dreams (writes Coleridge) images represent the sensations we think 
they cause; we do not feel horror because we are threatened by a sphinx; 
we dream of a sphinx in order to explain the horror we feel. If this is so, how 
could a mere chronicle of its forms transmit the stupor, the exaltation, the 
alarm, the menace and the jubilance which made up the fabric of that dream 
that night? I shall attempt such a chronicle, however; perhaps the fact that 
the dream was composed of one single scene may remove or mitigate this 
essential difficulty.
I
The place was the School of Philosophy and Letters; the time, toward 
sundown.  Everything  (as  usually  happens  in  dreams)  was  somewhat 
different; a slight magnification altered things. We were electing officials: I 
was talking with Pedro Henríquez Ureña, who in the world of waking reality 
died  many  years  ago.  Suddenly  we  were  stunned  by  the  clamor  of  a 
demonstration or disturbance. Human and animal cries came from the Bajo. 
A voice shouted "Here they come!" and then "The Gods! The Gods!" Four 
or five individuals emerged from the mob and occupied the platform of the 
main lecture hall. We all applauded, tearfully; these were the Gods returning 
after a centuries-long exile. Made larger by the platform, their heads thrown 
back and their chests thrust forward, they arrogantly received our homage. 
One held a branch which no doubt conformed to the simple botany of 
dreams; another, in a broad gesture, extended his hand which was a claw; 
one of the faces of Janus looked with distrust at the curved beak of Thoth. 
Perhaps aroused by our applause, one of them—I no longer know which—
erupted in a victorious clatter, unbelievably harsh, with something of a 
gargle and of a whistle. From that moment, things changed.
It all began with the suspicion (perhaps exaggerated) that the Gods did 
not know how to talk. Centuries of fell and fugitive life had atrophied the 
human element in them; the moon of Islam and the cross of Rome had been 
implacable with these outlaws. Very low foreheads, yellow teeth, stringy 
mulatto or Chinese mustaches and thick bestial lips showed the degeneracy 
of the Olympian lineage. Their clothing corresponded not to a decorous 
poverty but rather to the sinister luxury of the gambling houses and brothels 
of the Bajo. A carnation bled crimson in a lapel and the bulge of a knife was 
outlined beneath a close-fitting jacket. Suddenly we sensed that they were 
225

playing their last card, that they were cunning, ignorant and cruel like old 
beasts of prey and that, if we let ourselves be overcome by fear or pity, they 
would finally destroy us.
We took out our heavy revolvers (all of a sudden there were revolvers 
in the dream) and joyfully killed the Gods.
Translated by J.E.I.
226

Parable of Cervantes and the Quixote
ired of his Spanish land, an old soldier of the king sought solace in the 
vast geographies of Ariosto, in that valley of the moon where the time 
wasted by dreams is contained and in the golden idol of Mohammed stolen 
by Montalbán.
T
In gentle mockery of himself, he imagined a credulous man who, 
perturbed  by  his  reading  of  marvels,  decided  to  seek  prowess  and 
enchantment in prosaic places called El Toboso or Montiel.
Vanquished by reality, by Spain, Don Quixote died in his native 
village in the year 1614. He was survived but a short time by Miguel de 
Cervantes.
For both of them, for the dreamer and the dreamed one, the whole 
scheme of the work consisted in the opposition of two worlds: the unreal 
world  of  the  books  of  chivalry,  the  ordinary  everyday  world  of  the 
seventeenth century.
They did not suspect that the years would finally smooth away that 
discord, they did not suspect that La Mancha and Montiel and the knight's 
lean figure would be, for posterity, no less poetic than the episodes of 
Sinbad or the vast geographies of Ariosto.
For in the beginning of literature is the myth, and in the end as well.
Translated by J.E.I.
227

The Witness
n a stable which is almost in the shadow of the new stone church, a man 
with gray eyes and gray beard, lying amidst the odor of the animals, 
humbly seeks death as one would seek sleep. The day, faithful to vast and 
secret laws, is shifting and confusing the shadows inside the poor shelter; 
outside are the plowed fields and a ditch clogged with dead leaves and the 
tracks of a wolf in the black mud where the forests begin. The man sleeps 
and dreams, forgotten. He is awakened by the bells tolling the Angelus. In 
the kingdoms of England the ringing of bells is now one of the customs of 
the evening, but this man, as a child, has seen the face of Woden, the divine 
horror and exultation, the crude wooden idol hung with Roman coins and 
heavy clothing, the sacrificing of horses, dogs and prisoners. Before dawn he 
will die and with him will die, and never return, the last immediate images 
of these pagan rites; the world will be a little poorer when this Saxon has 
died.
I
Deeds which populate the dimensions of space and which reach their 
end when someone dies may cause us wonderment, but one thing, or an 
infinite number  of  things,  dies in  every  final  agony,  unless  there  is a 
universal memory as the theosophists have conjectured. In time there was a 
day that extinguished the last eyes to see Christ; the battle of Junín and the 
love of Helen died with the death of a man. What will die with me when I 
die,  what  pathetic  or  fragile  form  will  the  world  lose?  The  voice  of 
Macedonio Fernández, the image of a red horse in the vacant lot at Serrano 
and Charcas, a bar of sulphur in the drawer of a mahogany desk?
Translated by J.E.I.
228

A Problem 
et us imagine that in Toledo a paper is discovered containing a text in 
Arabic which the paleographers declare to be in the handwriting of the 
Cide Hamete Benengeli from whom Cervantes derived the Quixote. In this 
text we read that the hero (who, as is famous, wandered over the roads of 
Spain, armed with sword and lance, and challenged anyone for any reason at 
all) discovers, after one of his many combats, that he has killed a man. At 
that point the fragment ends; the problem is to guess or conjecture how Don 
Quixote would react.
L
As far as I know, there are three possible answers. The first is of a 
negative nature: nothing particular happens, because in the hallucinatory 
world of Don Quixote death is no less common than magic and having killed 
a man should not perturb a person who fights, or believes he fights, with 
fabulous monsters and sorcerers. The second answer is of a pathetic nature.
Don Quixote never managed to forget that he was a projection of 
Alonso Quijano, a reader of fabulous tales; seeing death, understanding that 
a dream has led him to the sin of Cain, awakens him from his pampered 
madness, perhaps forever. The third answer is perhaps the most plausible. 
Once the man is dead, Don Quixote cannot admit that this tremendous act is 
a product of delirium; the reality of the effect makes him presuppose a 
parallel reality of the cause and Don Quixote will never emerge from his 
madness.
There is another conjecture, which is alien to the Spanish orb and 
even to the orb of the Western world and requires a more ancient, more 
complex and more weary atmosphere. Don Quixote—who is no longer Don 
Quixote but a king of the cycles of Hindustan—senses, standing before the 
dead body of his enemy, that killing and engendering are divine or magical 
acts which notably transcend the human condition. He knows that the dead 
man is illusory, the same as the bloody sword weighing in his hand and 
himself and all his past life and the vast gods and the universe.
Translated by J.E.I.
229

Borges and I
he other one, the one called Borges, is the one things happen to. I walk 
through the streets of Buenos Aires and stop for a moment, perhaps 
mechanically now, to look at the arch of an entrance hall and the grillwork 
on the gate; I know of Borges from the mail and see his name on a list of 
professors  or  in  a  biographical  dictionary.  I  like  hourglasses,  maps, 
eighteenth-century  typography,  the  taste  of  coffee  and  the  prose  of 
Stevenson; he shares these preferences, but in a vain way that turns them 
into the attributes of an actor. It would be an exaggeration to say that ours is 
a hostile relationship; I live, let myself go on living, so that Borges may 
contrive his literature, and this literature justifies me. It is no effort for me to 
confess that he has achieved some valid pages, but those pages cannot save 
me, perhaps because what is good belongs to no one, not even to him, but 
rather to the language and to tradition. Besides, I am destined to perish, 
definitively, and only some instant of myself can survive in him. Little by 
little, I am giving over everything to him, though I am quite aware of his 
perverse custom of falsifying and magnifying things. Spinoza knew that all 
things long to persist in their being; the stone eternally wants to be a stone 
and the tiger a tiger. I shall remain in Borges, not in myself (if it is true that I 
am someone), but I recognize myself less in his books than in many others 
or in the laborious strumming of a guitar. Years ago I tried to free myself 
from him and went from the mythologies of the suburbs to the games with 
time and infinity, but those games belong to Borges now and I shall have to 
imagine other things. Thus my life is a flight and I lose everything and 
everything belongs to oblivion, or to him. I do not know which of us has 
written this page.
T
Translated by J.E.I.
230

Everything and Nothing
here was no one in him; behind his face (which even through the bad 
paintings of those times resembles no other) and his words, which were 
copious, fantastic and stormy, there was only a bit of coldness, a dream 
dreamt by no one. At first he thought that all people were like him, but the 
astonishment of a friend to whom he had begun to speak of this emptiness 
showed him his error and made him feel always that an individual should 
not differ in outward appearance. Once he thought that in books he would 
find a cure for his ill and thus he learned the small Latin and less Greek a 
contemporary would speak of; later he considered that what he sought might 
well be found in an elemental rite of humanity, and let himself be initiated 
by Anne Hathaway one long June afternoon. At the age of twenty-odd years 
he went to London. Instinctively he had already become proficient in the 
habit of simulating that he was someone, so that others would not discover 
his condition as no one; in London he found the profession to which he was 
predestined, that of the actor, who on a stage plays at being another before a 
gathering of people who play at taking him for that other person. His 
histrionic tasks brought him a singular satisfaction, perhaps the first he had 
ever known; but once the last verse had been acclaimed and the last dead 
man withdrawn from the stage, the hated flavor of unreality returned to him. 
He ceased to be Ferrex or Tamerlane and became no one again. Thus 
hounded, he took to imagining other heroes and other tragic fables. And so, 
while his flesh fulfilled its destiny as flesh in the taverns and brothels of 
London, the soul that inhabited him was Caesar, who disregards the augur's 
admonition, and Juliet, who abhors the lark, and Macbeth, who converses on 
the plain with the witches who are also Fates. No one has ever been so many 
men as this man, who like the Egyptian Proteus could exhaust all the guises 
of reality. At times he would leave a confession hidden away in some corner 
of his work, certain that it would not be deciphered; Richard affirms that in 
his person he plays the part of many and Iago claims with curious words "I 
am not what I am." The fundamental identity of existing, dreaming and 
acting inspired famous passages of his.
T
For twenty years he persisted in that controlled hallucination, but one 
morning he was suddenly gripped by the tedium and the terror of being so 
many kings who die by the sword and so many suffering lovers who 
231

converge, diverge and melodiously expire. That very day he arranged to sell 
his theater. Within a week he had returned to his native village, where he 
recovered the trees and rivers of his childhood and did not relate them to the 
others his muse had celebrated, illustrious with mythological allusions and 
Latin terms. He had to be someone; he was a retired impresario who had 
made his fortune and concerned himself with loans, lawsuits and petty 
usury. It was in this character that he dictated the arid will and testament 
known to us, from which he deliberately excluded all traces of pathos or 
literature. His friends from London would visit his retreat and for them he 
would take up again his role as poet.
History  adds  that  before  or  after  dying  he  found  himself  in  the 
presence of God and told Him: "I who have been so many men in vain want 
to be one and myself." The voice of the Lord answered from a whirlwind: 
"Neither am I anyone; I have dreamt the world as you dreamt your work, my 
Shakespeare, and among the forms in my dream are you, who like myself 
are many and no one."
Translated by J.E.I.
232

Elegy
Oh destiny of Borges
to have sailed across the diverse seas of the world
or across that single and solitary sea of diverse names,
to have been a part of Edinburgh, of Zurich, of the two Cordobas,
of Colombia and of Texas,
to have returned at the end of changing generations
to the ancient lands of his forbears,
to Andalucia, to Portugal and to those counties
where the Saxon warred with the Dane and they mixed their blood,
to have wandered through the red and tranquil labyrinth of London,
to have grown old in so many mirrors, 
to have sought in vain the marble gaze of the statues, 
to have questioned lithographs, encyclopedias, atlases, 
to have seen the things that men see, 
death, the sluggish dawn, the plains, 
and the delicate stars,
and to have seen nothing, or almost nothing 
except the face of a girl from Buenos Aires 
a face that does not want you to remember it. 
Oh destiny of Borges, 
perhaps no stranger than your own.
(1964)
Translated by D.A.Y.
233

Chronology
1899 Born August 24 in Buenos Aires
1914 Travels with his family to Europe. At the outbreak of the war, the
Borgeses settle in Switzerland where Jorge finishes his secondary
education.
1919 &
1921 Travel  in  Spain—Majorca,  Seville,  Madrid.  Association  with  the
ultraist literary group (Rafael Cansinos Assens, Guillermo de Torre,
Gerardo  Diego,  etc.).  His  first  poem  published  in  the  magazine
Grecia.
1921  Returns to Argentina. Publication with friends (González Lanuza,
Norah Lange, Francisco Piñero, etc.) of the "mural" magazine Prisma
—pasted in poster fashion on fences and walls of the city.
1923  Family travels again to Europe. Publication at home of his first book
of poetry, El fervor de Buenos Aires.
1924  Contributes to the reincarnated Proa and Martín Fierro, two important
literary magazines of the time.
1925  Appearance of his second book of poetry, Luna de enfrente, and his
first book of essays, Inquisiciones.
1926  Another collection of essays: El tamaño de mi esperanza.
1928  El idioma de los argentinos, essays.
1929  Cuaderno San Martín, his third volume of verses.
1930 Evaristo Carriego, an essay which honors this Buenos Aires poet, plus
other pieces. Borges meets Adolfo Bioy Casares, with whom he will
collaborate on various literary undertakings during the next three
decades.
1932 Discusión, essays and film criticism.
1933 Begins to contribute to the literary supplement  of the  newspaper
Crítica, which he will later edit.
1935 Historia universal de la infamia,  a collection of some of his first
tentative efforts at writing prose fiction.
1936 Historia de la eternidad, essays.
1938 His father dies. Borges is appointed librarian of a small municipal
Buenos Aires library.
1941 El jardín de los senderos que se bifurcan, an anthology of his short
234

stories.
1944 Ficciones, his most celebrated collection of stories.
1946 For purely political reasons, he is relieved of his post as municipal
librarian.
1949 El Aleph, a collection of his stories written during the preceding five
years.
1952 Otras inquisiciones, his most important collection of essays.
1954 The first three volumes of Borges's Collected Works are published by
Emecé in Buenos Aires. The first book of literary criticism dedicated
exclusively to his work and its influence appears: Borges y la nueva
generación by Adolfo Prieto.
1955 With the overthrow of the Peronist regime, Borges is named Director
of the National Library in Buenos Aires.
1956 Assumes the chair of English and North American Literature at the
University of Buenos Aires.
1958 &
1959 Period of reduced literary productivity, marked by a return to poetic
composition and the cultivation of extremely short prose forms.
1960 El hacedor,  his most recent collection to date of new pieces (prose
and poetry). . .
1961 Antología personal, Borges's selection of his own preferred prose and
poetry.  He  shares  with  Samuel  Beckett  the  $10,000  International
Publishers' Prize. In the fall he leaves for the University of Texas on
an invitation to lecture on Argentine literature.
1962 Lectures at universities in eastern United States. Returns to Buenos
Aires and the University where he offers a course in Old English.
First book publication in English:  Ficciones  (Grove Press)  and a
selection of his best prose writings, Labyrinths (New Directions).
1963 Leaves for a brief tour of Europe (Spain, Switzerland, and France)
and England where he lectures on English and Spanish American
literary topics. Travels later to Colombia to lecture and receives an
honorary degree from the University of Los Andes.
1964 Occasionally  publishes  poetry  in  Buenos  Aires  newspapers.  Now
blind, he dedicates much of his energy to his classes at the University.
1966 Receives  the  Annual  Literary  Award  of  the  Ingram  Merrill
Foundation, which includes a prize of $5,000.
1971 Made an honorary member of the American Academy of Arts and
235

Letters  and  the  National  Institute  of  Arts  and  Letters.  Awarded
honorary  degrees  by  Columbia  University  and  the  University  of
Oxford. To date, his most recent books are Aleph and Other Stories
(Dutton) and The Book of Imaginary Beings (Avon).
1972  Doctor Brodie's Report is to be published in January.
236

Bibliography
PRINCIPAL WORKS OF BORGES
All works were published in Buenos Aires unless otherwise noted. Those 
marked with an asterisk are now volumes in Borges's Obras completas. 
POETRY
   El fervor de Buenos Aires (Imprenta Serantes, 1923) 
   Luna de enfrente (Proa, 1925) 
   Cuaderno San Martín (Proa, 1929) 
   Poemas, 1922-1943 (Losada, 1943)
* Poemas, 1923-1953 (Emecé, 1953)
* Poemas, 1923-1958 (Emecé, 1958)
* El hacedor (in part) (Emecé, 1960) 
   Antología personal (in part) (Sur, 1961)
ESSAYS
   Inquisiciones (Proa, 1925)
   El tamaño de mi esperanza (Proa, 1926)
   El idioma de los argentinos (Gleizer, 1928)
* Evaristo Carriego (Gleizer, 1930; Emece, 1955)
* Discusion (Gleizer, 1932; Emece, 1957)
* Historia de la eternidad (Viau y Zona, 1936; Emecé, 1953)
  Aspectos de la literatura gauchesca (Número, Montevideo, 1950) 
 Antiguas  literaturas  germánicas  (Fondo  de  Cultura  Económica,
   Mexico City, 1951)
* Otras inquisiciones, 1931-1952 (Sur, 1952; Emecé, 1960) 
   El "Martín Fierro" (Columba, 1953)
   Leopoldo Lugones (Troquel, 1955) 
   Antología personal (in part) (Sur, 1961)
The booklets Las Kenningar (Colombo, 1933) and Nueva refutatión 
del tiempo (Oportet & Haereses, 1947) were later incorporated into Historia 
de la eternidad and Otras inquisiciones, respectively.
237

FICTION AND IMAGINATIVE PROSE
* Historia universal de la infamia (Tor, 1935; Emecé, 1954)
* Ficciones (Sur, 1945; Emecé, 1956) 
* El Aleph (Losada, 1949, 1952; Emecé, 1957)
* El hacedor (in part) (Emecé, 1960) 
   Antología personal (in part) (Sur, 1961)
The narrative collection  El jardín de los senderos que se bifurcan 
(Sur, 1941) was later incorporated into Ficciones. The anthology La muerte 
y la brújula (Emecé, 1951) contains a selection of stories from all the earlier 
volumes.
In  collaboration  with  Adolfo  Bioy  Casares,  using  the  joint 
pseudonyms  of  H.  Bustos  Domecq  or  B.  Suárez  Lynch,  Borges  has 
published the detective narratives  Seis problemas para don Isidro Parodi 
(Sur, 1942) and Un modelo para la muerte (Oportet & Haereses, 1946), and 
the stories  Dos fantasías memorables  (Oportet & Haereses, 1946). With 
Bioy Casares he has also published two film scripts: Los orilleros and El 
paraíso de los creyentes (Losada, 1955). Also with Bioy, Borges has edited 
two  detective  short  story  anthologies:  Los  mejores  cuentos  policiales 
(Emecé, 1943) and Los mejores cuentos policiales, segunda serie (Emecé, 
1951) as well as the anthology Libra del cielo y del infierno (Sur, 1960). In 
collaboration  with  Adolfo Bioy Casares  and Silvina Ocampo he  edited 
Antología de la literatura fantástica (Sudamericana, 1940).
OTHER TRANSLATIONS OF BORGES'S WORKS 
IN ENGLISH
Ficciones, New York, Grove Press, 1962 (translated by Anthony Kerrigan,
Helen Temple, Ruthven Todd, Anthony Bonner, and Alastair Reid).
Dreamtigers,  Austin,  Univ.  of  Texas  Press,  1964  (prose  translated  by
Mildred Boyer; poetry, by Harold Moreland). An English edition of
El hacedor.
"Investigation of the Writings of Herbert Quain," New Directions 11, 1949,
pp. 449-53 (translated by Mary Wells).
"On the Classics,"  Panorama,  Washington, D. C., May 1942 (translator
238

anonymous).
Translations of Borges's early poems may be found in the following 
anthologies:
Dudley Fitts (ed.), Anthology of Contemporary Latin American Poetry, New
Directions, 1942, pp. 64-73 (translated by Robert Stuart Fitzgerald). 
Patricio Gannon and Hugo Manning (eds.), Argentine Anthology of Modern
Verse, Buenos Aires, 1942, pp. 66-71 (translated by the editors). 
H. R. Hays (ed.), Twelve Spanish American Poets, New Haven, 1943, pp.
120-37 (translated by the editor). 
Harriet de Onís (ed.),  The Golden Land,  New York, 1948, pp. 222-23
(translated by the editor).
Certain of the selections in the foregoing volume, here translated by 
the Editors, have been published in other English translations in periodicals 
and books, as follows:
"The Garden  of  Forking  Paths"  translated  by Anthony  Boucher,  Ellery
Queen's Mystery Magazine, August, 1948.
"The Circular Ruins" translated by Mary Wells, New Directions 11, 1949.
"Funes the Memorious"  translated  by Anthony  Kerrigan,  Avon Modern
Writing No. 2, 1954.
"The Shape of the Sword" translated  by Angel Flores,  Spanish Stories
(Bantam Books, 1960) and translated by Harriet de Onís, New World
Writing No. 4, 1953.
"Death and the Compass" translated by Anthony Kerrigan,  New Mexico
Quarterly, Autumn 1954.
"Three Versions of Judas" translated by Anthony Kerrigan, Noonday No. 3,
1959.
"The Immortal" translated by Julian Palley, Portfolio and Art News Annual
No. 2, 1960.
"Emma Zunz" translated by E. C. Villicana,  Partisan Review,  September
1959.
IN OTHER LANGUAGES
Enquêtes, 1937-1952, Paris, Gallimard, 1957 (translated by Paul and Sylvia
239

Bénichou). A somewhat abridged version of Otras inquisiciones.
Fictions,  Paris,  Gallimard,  1951  (translated  by  Néstor  Ibarra  and  Paul
Verdevoye). 
Labyrinthes, Paris, Gallimard, 1953 (translated by Roger Caillois). Contains
four stories from El Aleph. 
L'Aleph, Milan, Feltrinelli, 1959 (translated by Francesco Tentori Montalto). 
Labyrinthe, Munich, Carl Hanser Verlag, 1959 (translated by Karl August
Horst, Eva Hesse, Wolfgang Luchting and Liselott Reger). Contains
all stories from Ficciones and El Aleph.
CRITICAL WRITINGS ON BORGES
There have been few serious considerations of Borges's work written in 
English.  Of  interest  are  "The  Labyrinths  of  Jorge  Luis  Borges,  An 
Introduction to the Stories of El Aleph" by L. A. Murillo (Modern Language 
Quarterly,  Vol. 20, No. 3, September, 1959), and "Borges on Literature," 
(Américas, December, 1961). Readers of Spanish may consult the books by 
Issac  Wolpert  (Jorge  Luis  Borges,  Buenos  Aires,  1961),  Ana  María 
Barrenechea (La expresión de la irrealidad en la obra de Jorge Luis Borges, 
Mexico  City,  1957),  Marcial  Tamayo  and  Adolfo  Ruiz-Díaz  (Borges, 
enigma y clave, Buenos Aires, 1955) and Rafael Gutiérrez Girardot (Jorge 
Luis  Borges,  ensayo  de  interpretatión,  Madrid,  1959).  The  essays  by 
Enrique Pezzoni ("Approximatión al  último libro de Jorge Luis Borges," 
Sur,  Buenos Aires, nos. 217-18, Nov.-Dec. 1952, pp. 101-23) and Emir 
Rodríguez Monegal ("Borges: teoría y práctica," Número, Montevideo, no. 
27, Dec. 1955, pp. 124-57) are of particular interest. Readers of French may 
consult the essays by Paul Bénichou ("Le monde de José [sic] Luis Borges," 
Critique, Paris, nos. 63-64, Aug.-Sept. 1952, pp. 675-87, and "Le monde et 
l'esprit chez Jorge Louis Borges," Les Lettres Nouvelles, Paris, no. 21, Nov. 
1954, pp. 680-99), Marcel Brion ("J. L. Borges et ses Labyrinthes,"  Le 
Monde, Paris, Aug. 9, 1954) and René Etiemble ("Un homme a tuer: Jorge 
Luis Borges, cosmopolite," Les Temps Modernes, Paris, no. 83, Sept. 1952, 
pp. 512-26,  and  in  Etiemble's  Hygiène  des  lettres,  II,  Paris,  1955,  pp. 
120-41). In German, the brief pieces by Karl August Horst ("Die Bedeutung 
des Gaucho bei Jorge Luis Borges," Merkur, Stuttgart, no. 143, Jan. 1960, 
pp.  78-84)  and  Helmut  Heissenbüttel  ("Parabeln  und  Legenden,"  Neue 
240

Deutsche Hefte, Gütersloh, March 1960, pp. 1156-57) are valuable.
Τ Α Δ Ε
ΕΠΟΙΗΣΕΝ
241

