
T H I S
C R A F T O F
V E R S E
The
Charles Eliot
Norton Lectures
–


T H I S
C R A F T O F
V E R S E
J O R G E L U I S B O R G E S
Edited by Calin-Andrei Mihailescu
H A R V A R D U N I V E R S I T Y P R E S S  2000
Cambridge, Massachusetts, and London, England

Copyright © by the President and Fellows of Harvard College
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America
Frontispiece: Borges lecturing at Harvard University, . Photo by
Christopher S. Johnson; courtesy of Harvard Magazine.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Borges, Jorge Luis, –
This craft of verse / Jorge Luis Borges;
edited by Calin-Andrei Mihailescu.
p. cm.—(The Charles Eliot Norton lectures; –)
ISBN ---(alk. paper)
. Poetry—History and criticism. I. Mihailescu, Calin-Andrei, –
II. Title. III. Series.
PN.B
.—dc
-

C O N T E N T S
1 The Riddle of Poetry 
2 The Metaphor 
3 The Telling of the Tale 
4 Word-Music and Translation 
5 Thought and Poetry 
6 A Poet’s Creed 
Notes 
“Of This and That Versatile Craft”
by Calin-Andrei Mihailescu 
Index 


T H E
R I D D L E O F
P O E T R Y
At the outset, I would like to give you fair warning
of what to expect—or rather, of what not to ex-
pect—from me. I ~nd that I have made a slip in the
very title of my ~rst lecture. The title is, if we are not
mistaken, “The Riddle of Poetry,” and the stress of
course is on the ~rst word, “riddle.” So you may think
the riddle is all-important. Or, what might be still
worse, you may think I have deluded myself into
believing that I have somehow discovered the true
reading of the riddle. The truth is that I have no reve-
lations to offer. I have spent my life reading, analyz-
ing, writing (or trying my hand at writing), and
enjoying. I found the last to be the most important
thing of all. “Drinking in” poetry, I have come to a

T H E
R I D D L E
O F
P O E T R Y
2
~nal conclusion about it. Indeed, every time I am
faced with a blank page, I feel that I have to redis-
cover literature for myself. But the past is of no avail
whatever to me. So, as I have said, I have only my per-
plexities to offer you. I am nearing seventy. I have
given the major part of my life to literature, and I can
offer you only doubts.
The great English writer and dreamer Thomas De
Quincey wrote—in some of the thousands of pages of
his fourteen volumes—that to discover a new problem
was quite as important as discovering the solution to
an old one. But I cannot even offer you that; I can offer
you only time-honored perplexities. And yet, why
need I worry about this? What is a history of philoso-
phy, but a history of the perplexities of the Hindus, of
the Chinese, of the Greeks, of the Schoolmen, of
Bishop Berkeley, of Hume, of Schopenhauer, and so
on? I merely wishtosharethoseperplexities with you.
Whenever I have dipped into books of aesthetics, I
have had an uncomfortable feeling that I was reading
the works of astronomers who never looked at the
stars. I mean that they were writing about poetry as if
poetry were a task, and not what it really is: a passion
and a joy. For example, I have read with great respect
Benedetto Croce’s book on aesthetics, and I have been

T H E
R I D D L E
O F
P O E T R Y
3
handed the de~nition that poetry and language are an
“expression.” Now, if we think of an expression of
something, then we land back at the old problem of
form and matter; and if we think about the expression
of nothing in particular, that gives us really nothing. So
we respectfully receive that de~nition, and then we go
on to something else. We go on to poetry; we go on to
life. And life is, I am sure, made of poetry. Poetry is not
alien—poetry is, as we shall see, lurking round the cor-
ner. It may spring on us at any moment.
Now, we are apt to fall into a common confusion.
We think, for example, that if we study Homer, or the
Divine Comedy, or Fray Luis de León, or Macbeth, we
are studying poetry. But books are only occasions for
poetry.
I think Emerson wrote somewhere that a library is
a kind of magic cavern which is full of dead men. And
those dead men can be reborn, can be brought to life
when you open their pages.
Speaking about Bishop Berkeley (who, may I re-
mind you, was a prophet of the greatness of America),
I remember he wrote that the taste of the apple is nei-
ther in the apple itself—the apple cannot taste it-
self—nor in the mouth of the eater. It requires a
contact between them. The same thing happens to a

book or to a collection of books, to a library. For what
is a book in itself? A book is a physical object in a
world of physical objects. It is a set of dead symbols.
And then the right reader comes along, and the
words—or rather the poetry behind the words, for
the words themselves are mere symbols—spring to
life, and we have a resurrection of the word.
I am reminded now of a poem you all know by heart;
but you will never have noticed, perhaps, how strange
it is. For perfect things in poetry do not seem strange;
they seem inevitable. And so we hardly thank the
writer for his pains. I am thinking of a sonnet written
more than a hundred years ago by a young man in Lon-
don (in Hampstead, I think), a young man who died of
lung disease, John Keats, and of his famous and per-
haps hackneyed sonnet “On First Looking into Chap-
man’s Homer.” What is strange about that poem—and
I thought of this only three or four days ago, when I
was pondering this lecture—is the fact that it is a poem
written about the poetic experience itself. You know it
by heart, yet I would like you to hear once more the
surge and thunder of its ~nal lines,
Then felt I like some watcher of the skies
When a new planet swims into his ken;
Or like stout Cortez when with eagle eyes
T H E
R I D D L E
O F
P O E T R Y
4

He stared at the Paci~c—and all his men
look’d at each other with a wild surmise—
Silent, upon a peak in Darien.
Here we have the poetic experience itself. We have
George Chapman, the friend and rival of Shake-
speare, being dead and suddenly coming to life when
John Keats read his Iliad or his Odyssey. I think it was
of George Chapman (but I cannot be sure, as I am not
a Shakespearean scholar) that Shakespeare was think-
ing when he wrote: “Was it the proud full sail of his
great verse, / Bound for the prize of all too precious
you?”1
There is a word that seems to me very important:
“On First Looking into Chapman’s Homer.” This
“~rst” may, I think, prove most helpful to us. At the
very moment I was going over those mighty lines of
Keats’s, I was thinking that perhaps I was only being
loyal to my memory. Perhaps the real thrill I got out of
the verses by Keats lay in that distant moment of my
childhood in Buenos Aires when I ~rst heard my father
reading them aloud. And when the fact that poetry,
language, was not only a medium for communication
but could also be a passion and a joy—when this was
revealed to me, I do not think I understood the words,
but I felt that something was happening to me. It was
T H E
R I D D L E
O F
P O E T R Y
5

happening not to my mere intelligence but to my
whole being, to my _esh and blood.
Going back to the words “On First Looking into
Chapman’s Homer,” I wonder if John Keats felt that
thrill after he had gone through the many books of
the Iliad and the Odyssey. I think the ~rst reading of a
poem is a true one, and after that we delude ourselves
into the belief that the sensation, the impression, is re-
peated. But, as I say, it may be mere loyalty, a mere
trick of the memory, a mere confusion between our
passion and the passion we once felt. Thus, it might
be said that poetry is a new experience every time.
Every time I read a poem, the experience happens to
occur. And that is poetry.
I read once that the American painter Whistler was
in a café in Paris, and people were discussing the way
in which heredity, the environment, the political state
of the times, and so on in_uence the artist. And then
Whistler said, “Art happens.” That is to say, there is
something mysterious about art. I would like to take
his words in a new sense. I shall say: Art happens every
time we read a poem. Now, this may seem to clear
away the time-honored notion of the classics, the idea
of everlasting books, of books where one may always
~nd beauty. But I hope I am mistaken here.
T H E
R I D D L E
O F
P O E T R Y
6

Perhaps I may give a brief survey of the history of
books. So far as I can remember, the Greeks had no
great use for books. It is a fact, indeed, that most of
the great teachers of mankind have been not writers
but speakers. Think of Pythagoras, Christ, Socrates,
the Buddha, and so on. And since I have spoken of
Socrates, I would like to say something about Plato. I
remember Bernard Shaw said that Plato was the dra-
matist who invented Socrates, even as the four evan-
gelists were the dramatists who invented Jesus. This
may be going too far, but there is a certain truth in it.
In one of the dialogues of Plato, he speaks about
books in a rather disparaging way: “What is a book?
A book seems, like a picture, to be a living being; and
yet if we ask it something, it does not answer. Then we
see that it is dead.”2 In order to make the book into a
living thing, he invented—happily for us—the Pla-
tonic dialogue, which forestalls the reader’s doubts
and questions.
But we might say also that Plato was wistful about
Socrates. After Socrates’ death, he would say to him-
self, “Now, what would Socrates have said about this
particular doubt of mine?” And then, in order to hear
once again the voice of the master he loved, he wrote
the dialogues. In some of these dialogues, Socrates
T H E
R I D D L E
O F
P O E T R Y
7

stands for the truth. In others, Plato has dramatized his
many moods. And some of those dialogues come to no
conclusion whatever, because Plato was thinking as he
wrote them; he did not know the last page when he
wrote the ~rst. He was letting his mind wander, and
he was dramatizing that mind into many people. I
suppose his chief aim was the illusion that, despite the
fact that Socrates had drunk the hemlock, Socrates
was still with him. I feel this to be true because I have
had many masters in my life. I am proud to be a disci-
ple—a good disciple, I hope. And when I think of my
father, when I think of the great Jewish-Spanish author
Rafael Cansinos-Asséns,3 when I think of Macedonio
Fernández,4 I would also like to hear their voices. And
sometimes I train my voice into a trick of imitating
their voices, in order that I may think as they would
have thought. They are always around me.
There is another sentence, in one of the Fathers of
the Church. He said that it was as dangerous to put
a book into the hands of an ignorant man as to put a
sword into the hands of children. So books, to the an-
cients, were mere makeshifts. In one of his many let-
ters, Seneca wrote against large libraries; and long
afterwards, Schopenhauer wrote that many people
mistook the buying of a book for the buying of the
T H E
R I D D L E
O F
P O E T R Y
8

contents of the book. Sometimes, looking at the many
books I have at home, I feel I shall die before I come
to the end of them, yet I cannot resist the temptation
of buying new books. Whenever I walk into a book-
store and ~nd a book on one of my hobbies—for ex-
ample, Old English or Old Norse poetry—I say to
myself, “What a pity I can’t buy that book, for I al-
ready have a copy at home.”
After the ancients, from the East there came a dif-
ferent idea of the book. There came the idea of Holy
Writ, of books written by the Holy Ghost; there came
Korans, Bibles, and so on. Following the example of
Spengler in his Untergang des Abendlandes—The De-
cline of the West—I would like to take the Koran as an
example. If I am not mistaken, Muslim theologians
think of it as being prior to the creation of the word.
The Koran is written in Arabic, yet Muslims think of
it as being prior to the language. Indeed, I have read
that they think of the Koran not as a work of God but
as an attribute of God, even as His justice, His mercy,
and His whole wisdom are.
And thus there came into Europe the idea of Holy
Writ—an idea that is, I think, not wholly mistaken.
Bernard Shaw (to whom I am always going back) was
asked once whether he really thought the Bible was
T H E
R I D D L E
O F
P O E T R Y
9

the work of the Holy Ghost. And he said, “I think the
Holy Ghost has written not only the Bible, but all
books.” This is rather hard on the Holy Ghost, of
course—but all books are worth reading, I suppose.
This, I think, is what Homer meant when he spoke to
the muse. And this is what the Hebrews and what
Milton meant when they talked of the Holy Ghost
whose temple is the upright and pure heart of men.
And in our less beautiful mythology, we speak of the
“subliminal self,” of the “subconscious.” Of course,
these words are rather uncouth when we compare
them to the muses or to the Holy Ghost. Still, we have
to put up with the mythology of our time. For the
words mean essentially the same thing.
We come now to the notion of the “classics.” I
must confess that I think a book is really not an im-
mortal object to be picked up and duly worshiped,
but rather an occasion for beauty. And it has to be so,
for language is shifting all the time. I am very fond of
etymologies and would like to recall to you (for I am
sure you know much more about these things than I
do) some rather curious etymologies.
For example, we have in English the verb “to
tease”—a mischievous word. It means a kind of joke.
Yet in Old English tesan meant “to wound with a
T H E
R I D D L E
O F
P O E T R Y
10

sword,” even as in French navrer meant “to thrust a
sword through somebody.” Then, to take a different
Old English word, þreat, you may ~nd out from the
very ~rst verses of Beowulf that it meant “an angry
crowd”—that is to say, the cause of the “threat.” And
thus we might go on endlessly.
But now let us consider some particular verses. I
take my examples from English, since I have a partic-
ular love for English literature—though my knowl-
edge of it is, of course, limited. There are cases where
poetry creates itself. For example, I don’t think the
words “quietus” and “bodkin” are especially beauti-
ful; indeed, I would say they are rather uncouth. But
if we think of “When he himself might his quietus
make / With a bare bodkin,” we are reminded of the
great speech by Hamlet.5 And thus the context cre-
ates poetry for those words—words that no one
would ever dare to use nowadays, because they would
be mere quotations.
Then there are other examples, and perhaps sim-
pler ones. Let us take the title of one of the most fa-
mous books in the world, Historia del ingenioso
hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha. The word hidalgo
has today a peculiar dignity all its own, yet when Cer-
vantes wrote it, the word hidalgo meant “a country
T H E
R I D D L E
O F
P O E T R Y
11

gentleman.” As for the name “Quixote,” it was meant
to be a rather ridiculous word, like the names of many
of the characters in Dickens: Pickwick, Swiveller,
Chuzzlewit, Twist, Squears, Quilp, and so on. And
then you have “de la Mancha,” which now sounds no-
ble in Castilian to us, but when Cervantes wrote it
down, he intended it to sound perhaps (I ask the
apology of any resident of that city who may be here)
as if he had written “Don Quixote of Kansas City.”
You see how those words have changed, how they
have been ennobled. You see a strange fact: that be-
cause the old soldier Miguel de Cervantes poked mild
fun at La Mancha, now “La Mancha” is one of the
everlasting words of literature.
Let us take another example of verses that have
changed. I am thinking of a sonnet by Rossetti, a son-
net that labors under the not-too-beautiful name
“Inclusiveness.” The sonnet begins thus:
What man has bent o’er his son’s sleep to brood,
How that face shall watch his when cold it lies?—
Or thought, as his own mother kissed his eyes,
Of what her kiss was, when his father wooed?6
I think that these lines are perhaps more vivid now
than when they were written, some eighty years ago,
T H E
R I D D L E
O F
P O E T R Y
12

because the cinema has taught us to follow quick se-
quences of visual images. In the ~rst line, “What man
has bent o’er his son’s sleep to brood,” we have the fa-
ther bending over the face of the sleeping son. And
then in the second line, as in a good ~lm, we have the
same image reversed: we see the son bending over the
face of that dead man, his father. And perhaps our re-
cent study of psychology has made us more sensitive to
these lines: “Or thought, as his own mother kissed his
eyes, / Of what her kiss was, when his father wooed.”
Here we have, of course, the beauty of the soft English
vowels in “brood,” “wooed.” And the additional
beauty of “wooed” being by itself—not “wooed her”
but simply “wooed.” The word goes on ringing.
There is also a different kind of beauty. Let us take
an adjective that once was commonplace. I have no
Greek, but I think that the Greek is oinopa pontos,
and the common English rendering is “the wine-dark
sea.” I suppose the word “dark” is slipped in to make
things easier for the reader. Perhaps it would be “the
winy sea,” or something of the kind. I am sure that
when Homer (or the many Greeks who recorded
Homer) wrote it, they were simply thinking of the sea;
the adjective was straightforward. But nowadays, if I
or if any of you, after trying many fancy adjectives,
T H E
R I D D L E
O F
P O E T R Y
13

write in a poem “the wine-dark sea,” this is not a mere
repetition of what the Greeks wrote. Rather, it is a go-
ing back to tradition. When we speak of “the
wine-dark sea,” we think of Homer and of the thirty
centuries that lie between us and him. So that al-
though the words may be much the same, when we
write “the wine-dark sea” we are really writing some-
thing quite different from what Homer was writing.
Thus, the language is shifting; the Latins knew all
about that. And the reader is shifting also. This brings
us back to the old metaphor of the Greeks—the meta-
phor, or rather the truth, about no man stepping twice
into the same river.7 And there is, I think, an element of
fear here. At ~rst we are apt to think of the river as
_owing. We think, “Of course, the river goes on but
the water is changing.” Then, with an emerging sense
of awe, we feel that we too are changing—that we are
as shifting and evanescent as the river is.
However, we need not worry too much about the
fate of the classics, because beauty is always with us.
Here I would like to quote another verse, by Brown-
ing, perhaps a now-forgotten poet. He says:
Just when we’re safest, there’s a sunset-touch,
A fancy from a _ower-bell, some one’s death,
A chorus-ending from Euripides.8
T H E
R I D D L E
O F
P O E T R Y
14

Yet the ~rst line is enough: “Just when we’re saf-
est . . .” That is to say, beauty is lurking all about us. It
may come to us in the name of a ~lm; it may come to
us in some popular lyric; we may even ~nd it in the
pages of a great or famous writer.
And since I have spoken of a dead master of mine,
Rafael Cansinos-Asséns (maybe this is the second
time you’ve heard his name; I don’t quite know why
he is forgotten),9 I remember that Cansinos-Asséns
wrote a very ~ne prose poem wherein he asked God
to defend him, to save him from beauty, because, he
says, “there is too much beauty in the world.” He
thought that beauty was overwhelming it. Although I
do not know if I have been a particularly happy man
(I hope I am going to be happy at the ripe age of
sixty-seven), I still think that beauty is all around us.
As to whether a poem has been written by a great
poet or not, this is important only to historians of lit-
erature. Let us suppose, for the sake of argument, that
I have written a beautiful line; let us take this as a
working hypothesis. Once I have written it, that line
does me no good, because, as I’ve already said, that
line came to me from the Holy Ghost, from the sub-
liminal self, or perhaps from some other writer. I of-
ten ~nd I am merely quoting something I read some
T H E
R I D D L E
O F
P O E T R Y
15

time ago, and then that becomes a rediscovering. Per-
haps it is better that a poet should be nameless.
I spoke of “the wine-dark sea,” and since my
hobby is Old English (I am afraid that, if you have the
courage or the patience to come back to some of my
lectures, you may have more Old English in_icted on
you), I would like to recall some lines that I think
beautiful. I will say them ~rst in English, and then in
the stark and voweled Old English of the ninth cen-
tury.
It snowed from the north;
rime bound the ~elds;
hail fell on earth,
the coldest of seeds.
Norþan sniwde
hrim hrusan bond
hægl feol on eorþan
corna caldast.10
This takes us back to what I said about Homer: when
the poet wrote these lines, he was merely recording
things that had happened. This was of course very
strange in the ninth century, when people thought in
terms of mythology, allegorical images, and so on. He
T H E
R I D D L E
O F
P O E T R Y
16

was merely telling very commonplace things. But
nowadays when we read
It snowed from the north;
rime bound the ~elds;
hail fell on earth,
the coldest of seeds . . .
there is an added poetry. There is the poetry of a
nameless Saxon having written those lines by the
shores of the North Sea—in Northumberland, I
think; and of those lines coming to us so straightfor-
ward, so plain, and so pathetic through the centuries.
So we have both cases: the case (I need hardly dwell
upon it) when time debases a poem, when the words
lose their beauty; and also the case when time en-
riches rather than debases a poem.
I talked at the beginning about de~nitions. To end
up, I would like to say that we make a very common
mistake when we think that we’re ignorant of some-
thing because we are unable to de~ne it. If we are in
a Chestertonian mood (one of the very best moods
to be in, I think), we might say that we can de~ne
something only when we know nothing about it.
For example, if I have to de~ne poetry, and if I feel
rather shaky about it, if I’m not too sure about it, I say
T H E
R I D D L E
O F
P O E T R Y
17

something like: “Poetry is the expression of the beau-
tiful through the medium of words artfully woven to-
gether.” This de~nition may be good enough for a
dictionary or for a textbook, but we all feel that it is
rather feeble. There is something far more impor-
tant—something that may encourage us to go on not
only trying our hand at writing poetry, but enjoying it
and feeling that we know all about it.
This is that we know what poetry is. We know it so
well that we cannot de~ne it in other words, even as
we cannot de~ne the taste of coffee, the color red or
yellow, or the meaning of anger, of love, of hatred, of
the sunrise, of the sunset, or of our love for our coun-
try. These things are so deep in us that they can be ex-
pressed only by those common symbols that we share.
So why should we need other words?
You may not agree with the examples I have cho-
sen. Perhaps tomorrow I may think of better exam-
ples, may think I might have quoted other lines. But
as you can pick and choose your own examples, it is
not needful that you care greatly about Homer, or
about the Anglo-Saxon poets, or about Rossetti. Be-
cause everyone knows where to ~nd poetry. And
when it comes, one feels the touch of poetry, that par-
ticular tingling of poetry.
T H E
R I D D L E
O F
P O E T R Y
18

To end with, I have a quotation from Saint Augus-
tine which comes in very ~tly, I think. He said, “What
is time? If people do not ask me what time is, I know.
If they ask me what it is, then I do not know.”11 I feel
the same way about poetry.
One is hardly troubled about de~nitions. This time
I am rather at sea, because I am no good at all at ab-
stract thinking. But in the following lectures—if you
are good enough to put up with me—we will take
more concrete examples. I will speak about the meta-
phor, about word-music, about the possibility or im-
possibility of verse translation, and about the telling
of a tale—that is to say, about epic poetry, the oldest
and perhaps the bravest kind of poetry. And I will end
with something that I can hardly divine now. I will
end with a lecture called “The Poet’s Creed,” wherein
I will try to justify my own life and the con~dence
some of you may have in me, despite this rather awk-
ward and fumbling ~rst lecture of mine.
T H E
R I D D L E
O F
P O E T R Y
19


T H E
M E T A P H O R
As the subject of today’s talk is the metaphor, I shall
begin with a metaphor. This ~rst of the many meta-
phors I shall try to recall comes from the Far East,
from China. If I am not mistaken, the Chinese call the
world “the ten thousand things,” or—and this de-
pends on the taste and fancy of the translator—“the
ten thousand beings.”
We may accept, I suppose, the very conservative
estimate of ten thousand. Surely there are more than
ten thousand ants, ten thousand men, ten thousand
hopes, fears, or nightmares in the world. But if we ac-
cept the number ten thousand, and if we think that all
metaphors are made by linking two different things
together, then, had we time enough, we might work

out an almost unbelievable sum of possible meta-
phors. I have forgotten my algebra, but I think that
the sum should be ,multiplied by ,, multi-
plied by ,, and so on. Of course the sum of possi-
ble combinations is not endless, but it staggers the
imagination. So we might be led to think: Why on
earth should poets all over the world, and all through
time, be using the same stock metaphors, when there
are so many possible combinations?
The Argentine poet Lugones, way back in the year
, wrote that he thought poets were always using
the same metaphors, and that he would try his hand at
discovering new metaphors for the moon. And in fact
he concocted many hundreds of them. He also said,
in the foreword to a book called Lunario sentimental,1
that every word is a dead metaphor. This statement is,
of course, a metaphor. Yet I think we all feel the dif-
ference between dead and living metaphors. If we
take any good etymological dictionary (I am thinking
of my old unknown friend Dr. Skeat)2 and if we look
up any word, we are sure to ~nd a metaphor tucked
away somewhere.
For example—and you can ~nd this in the very
~rst lines of Beowulf—the word þreat meant “an an-
gry mob,” but now the word is given to the effect and
T H E
M E T A P H O R
22

not to the cause. Then we have the word “king.”
“King” was originally cyning, which meant “a man
who stands for the kin—for the people.” So, etymo-
logically, “king,” “kinsman,” and “gentleman” are the
same word. Yet if I say, “The king sat in his counting
house, counting out his money,” we don’t think of the
word “king” as being a metaphor. In fact, if we go in
for abstract thinking, we have to forget that words
were metaphors. We have to forget, for example, that
in the word “consider” there is a suggestion of astrol-
ogy—“consider” originally meaning “being with the
stars,” “making a horoscope.”
What is important about the metaphor, I should
say, is the fact of its being felt by the reader or the
hearer as a metaphor. I will con~ne this talk to meta-
phors that are felt as metaphors by the reader. Not to
such words as “king,” or “threat”—and we might go
on, perhaps forever.
First, I would like to take some stock patterns of
metaphor. I use the word “pattern” because the meta-
phors I will quote will be to the imagination quite dif-
ferent, yet to the logical thinker they would be almost
the same. So that we might speak of them as equa-
tions. Let us take the ~rst that comes to my mind. Let
us take the stock comparison, the time-honored com-
T H E
M E T A P H O R
23

parison, of eyes and stars, or conversely of stars and
eyes. The ~rst example I remember comes from the
Greek Anthology,3 and I think Plato is supposed to
have written it. The lines (I have no Greek) run more
or less as follows: “I wish I were the night, so that I
might watch your sleep with a thousand eyes.” Here,
of course, what we feel is the tenderness of the lover;
we feel his wish to be able to see his beloved from
many points at once. We feel the tenderness behind
these lines.
Now let us take another, less illustrious example:
“The stars look down.” If we take logical thinking se-
riously, we have the same metaphor here. Yet the ef-
fect on our imagination is quite different. “The stars
look down” does not make us think of tenderness;
rather, it gives the idea of generations and generations
of men toiling on and of the stars looking down with a
kind of lofty indifference.
Let me take a different example—one of the stan-
zas that have most struck me. The lines come from a
poem by Chesterton called “A Second Childhood”:
But I shall not grow too old to see enormous night
arise,
A cloud that is larger than the world
And a monster made of eyes.4
T H E
M E T A P H O R
24

Not a monster full of eyes (we know those monsters
from the Revelation of Saint John) but—and this is far
more awful—a monster made of eyes, as if those eyes
were the living tissue of him.
We have looked at three images which can all be
traced back to the same pattern. But the point I
would like to emphasize—and this is really one of
the two important points in my talk—is that al-
though the pattern is essentially the same, in the ~rst
case, the Greek example “I wish I were the night,”
what the poet makes us feel is his tenderness, his
anxiety; in the second, we feel a kind of divine indif-
ference to things human; and in the third, the famil-
iar night becomes a nightmare.
Let us now take a different pattern: let us take the
idea of time _owing—_owing as a river does. The ~rst
example comes from a poem that Tennyson wrote
when he was, I think, thirteen or fourteen. He de-
stroyed it; but, happily for us, one line survived. I
think you will ~nd it in Tennyson’s biography written
by Andrew Lang.5 The line is: “Time _owing in the
middle of the night.” I think Tennyson has chosen his
time very wisely. In the night all things are silent, men
are sleeping, yet time is _owing noiselessly on. This is
one example.
T H E
M E T A P H O R
25

There is also a novel (I’m sure you’re thinking of it)
called simply Of Time and the River.6 The mere put-
ting together of the two words suggests the metaphor:
time and the river, they both _ow on. And then there
is the famous sentence of the Greek philosopher: “No
man steps twice into the same river.”7 Here we have
the beginning of terror, because at ~rst we think of
the river as _owing on, of the drops of water as being
different. And then we are made to feel that we are
the river, that we are as fugitive as the river.
We also have those lines by Manrique:
Nuestras vidas son los ríos
que van a dar en la mar
qu’es el morir.
Our lives are the rivers
that _ow into that sea
which is death.8
This statement is not too impressive in English; I wish
I could remember how Longfellow translated it in his
“Coplas de Manrique.”9 But of course (and we shall
go into this question in another lecture) behind the
stock metaphor we have the grave music of the words:
Nuestras vidas son los ríos
que van a dar en la mar
T H E
M E T A P H O R
26

qu’es el morir;
allí van los señoríos
derechos a se acabar
e consumir . . .
Yet the metaphor is exactly the same in all these cases.
And now we will go on to something very trite,
something that may cause you to smile: the compari-
son of women to _owers, and also of _owers to
women. Here, of course, there are far too many easy
examples. But there is one I would like to recall (per-
haps it may not be familiar to you) from that
un~nished masterwork, Robert Louis Stevenson’s
Weir of Hermiston. Stevenson tells of his hero going
into a church, in Scotland, where he sees a girl—a
lovely girl, we are made to feel. And one feels that he
is about to fall in love with her. Because he looks at
her, and then he wonders whether there is an immor-
tal soul within that beautiful frame, or whether she is
a mere animal the color of _owers. And the brutality
of the word “animal” is of course destroyed by “the
color of _owers.” I don’t think we need any other ex-
amples of this pattern, which can be found in all ages,
in all tongues, in all literatures.
Now let us go on to another of the essential pat-
terns of metaphor: the pattern of life’s being a
T H E
M E T A P H O R
27

dream—the feeling that comes over us that life is
a dream. The evident example which occurs to us is:
“We are such stuff as dreams are made on.”10 Now,
this may sound like blasphemy—I love Shakespeare
too much to care—but I think that here, if we look at
it (and I don’t think we should look at it too closely;
we should rather be grateful to Shakespeare for this
and his many other gifts), there is a very slight contra-
diction between the fact that our lives are dreamlike
or have a dreamlike essence in them, and the rather
sweeping statement, “We are such stuff as dreams are
made on.” Because if we are real in dreams, or if we
are merely dreamers of dreams, then I wonder if we
can make such sweeping statements. This sentence of
Shakespeare’s belongs rather to philosophy or to
metaphysics than to poetry—though of course it is
heightened, it is lifted up into poetry, by the context.
Another example of the same pattern comes from a
great German poet—a minor poet beside Shake-
speare (but I suppose all poets are minor beside him,
except two or three). It is a very famous piece by
Walther von der Vogelweide. I suppose I should say it
thus (I wonder how good my Middle German is—
you will have to forgive me): “Ist mir mîn leben
getroumet, oder ist es war?” “Have I dreamt my life,
T H E
M E T A P H O R
28

or was it a true one?”11 I think this comes nearer to
what the poet is trying to say, because instead of a
sweeping af~rmation we have a question. The poet is
wondering. This has happened to all of us, but we
have not worded it as Walther von der Vogelweide
did. He is asking himself, “Ist mir mîn leben ge-
troumet, oder ist es war?” and this hesitation gives us
that dreamlike essence of life, I think.
I don’t remember whether in my last lecture (be-
cause this is a sentence I often quote over and over
again, and have quoted all through my life) I gave you
the quotation from the Chinese philosopher Chuan
Tzu. He dreamt that he was a butter_y, and, on wak-
ing up, he did not know whether he was a man who
had had a dream he was a butter_y, or a butter_y who
was now dreaming he was a man. This metaphor is, I
think, the ~nest of all. First because it begins with a
dream, so afterwards, when he awakens, his life has
still something dreamlike about it. And second be-
cause, with a kind of almost miraculous happiness, he
has chosen the right animal. Had he said, “Chuan Tzu
had a dream that he was a tiger,” then there would be
nothing in it. A butter_y has something delicate and
evanescent about it. If we are dreams, the true way to
suggest this is with a butter_y and not a tiger. If
T H E
M E T A P H O R
29

Chuan Tzu had a dream he was a typewriter, it would
be no good at all. Or a whale—that would do him no
good either. I think he has chosen just the right word
for what he is trying to say.
Let us try to follow another pattern—the very com-
mon one that links up the ideas of sleeping and dying.
This is quite common in everyday speech also; yet if
we look for examples, we shall ~nd that they are very
different. I think that somewhere in Homer he speaks
of the “iron sleep of death.”12 Here he gives us two
opposite ideas: death is a kind of sleep, yet that kind
of sleep is made of a hard, ruthless, and cruel
metal—iron. It is a kind of sleep that is unbroken and
unbreakable. Of course, we have Heine here also:
“Der Tod daß ist die frühe Nacht.” And since we are
north of Boston, I think we must remember those
perhaps too-well-known lines by Robert Frost:
The woods are lovely, dark, and deep,
But I have promises to keep,
And miles to go before I sleep,
And miles to go before I sleep.13
These lines are so perfect that we hardly think of a
trick. Yet, unhappily, all literature is made of tricks,
and those tricks get—in the long run—found out.
T H E
M E T A P H O R
30

And then the reader tires of them. But in this case the
trick is so unobtrusive that I feel rather ashamed of
myself for calling it a trick (I call it this merely for
want of a better word). Because Frost has attempted
something very daring here. We have the same line re-
peated word for word, twice over, yet the sense is dif-
ferent. “And miles to go before I sleep”: this is merely
physical—the miles are miles in space, in New Eng-
land, and “sleep” means “go to sleep.” The second
time—“And miles to go before I sleep”—we are
made to feel that the miles are not only in space but in
time, and that “sleep” means “die” or “rest.” Had the
poet said so in so many words, he would have been far
less effective. Because, as I understand it, anything
suggested is far more effective than anything laid
down. Perhaps the human mind has a tendency to
deny a statement. Remember what Emerson said:
arguments convince nobody. They convince nobody
because they are presented as arguments. Then we
look at them, we weigh them, we turn them over, and
we decide against them.
But when something is merely said or—better
still—hinted at, there is a kind of hospitality in our
imagination. We are ready to accept it. I remember
reading, some thirty years ago, the works of Martin
T H E
M E T A P H O R
31

Buber—I thought of them as being wonderful poems.
Then, when I went to Buenos Aires, I read a book by
a friend of mine, Dujovne,14 and I found in its pages,
much to my astonishment, that Martin Buber was a
philosopher and that all his philosophy lay in the
books I had read as poetry. Perhaps I had accepted
those books because they came to me through poetry,
through suggestion, through the music of poetry, and
not as arguments. I think that somewhere in Walt
Whitman the same idea can be found: the idea of rea-
sons being unconvincing. I think he says somewhere
that he ~nds the night air, the large few stars, far more
convincing than mere arguments.
We may think of other patterns of metaphor. Let us
now take the example (this is not as common as the
other ones) of a battle and a ~re. In the Iliad, we ~nd
the image of a battle blazing like a ~re. We have the
same idea in the heroic fragment of Finnesburg.15 In
that fragment we are told of the Danes ~ghting the
Frisians, of the glitter of the weapons, the shields and
swords, and so on. Then the writer says that it seemed
as if all Finnesburg, as if the whole castle of Finn,
were on ~re.
I suppose I have left out some quite common pat-
terns. We have so far taken up eyes and stars, women
T H E
M E T A P H O R
32

and _owers, time and rivers, life and dream, death and
sleeping, ~re and battles. Had we time and learning
enough, we might ~nd half a dozen other patterns, and
perhaps those might give us most of the metaphors in
literature.
What is really important is the fact not that there are
a few patterns, but that those patterns are capable of
almost endless variations. The reader who cares for
poetry and not for the theory of poetry might read, for
example, “I wish I were the night,” and then after-
wards “A monster made of eyes” or “The stars looked
down,” and never stop to think that these can be
traced back to a single pattern. If I were a daring
thinker (but I am not; I am a very timid thinker, I am
groping my way along), I could of course say that only a
dozen or so patterns exist and that all other metaphors
are mere arbitrary games. This would amount to the
statement that among the “ten thousand things” of the
Chinese de~nition, only some twelve essential af~ni-
ties may be found. Because, of course, you can ~nd
other af~nities that are merely astonishing, and aston-
ishment hardly lasts more than a moment.
I remember that I have forgotten quite a good ex-
ample of the dream-and-life equation. But I think I can
recall it now: it is by the American poet Cummings.
T H E
M E T A P H O R
33

There are four lines. I must apologize for the ~rst. Evi-
dently it was written by a young man, writing for young
men, and I can no longer claim the privilege—I am far
too old for that kind of game. But the stanza should be
quoted in full. The ~rst line is: “god’s terrible face,
brighter than a spoon.” I am rather sorry about the
spoon, because of course one feels that he thought at
~rst of a sword, or of a candle, or of the sun, or of a
shield, or of something traditionally shining; and then
he said, “No—after all, I’m modern, so I’ll work in a
spoon.” And so he got his spoon. But we may forgive
him that for what comes afterwards: “god’s terrible
face, brighter than a spoon, / collects the image of one
fatal word.” This second line is better, I think. And as
my friend Murchison said to me, in a spoon we often
have many images collected. I had never thought of
that, because I had been taken aback by the spoon and
did not want to think much about it.
god’s terrible face, brighter than a spoon,
collects the image of one fatal word,
so that my life (which liked the sun and the moon)
resembles something that has not occurred.16
“Resembles something that has not occurred”: this
line carries a kind of strange simplicity. I think it gives
T H E
M E T A P H O R
34

us the dreamlike essence of life better than those
more famous poets, Shakespeare and Walther von der
Vogelweide.
Of course, I have chosen only a few examples. I am
sure your memories are full of metaphors that you
have treasured up—metaphors that you may be hop-
ing I will quote. I know that after this lecture I shall
feel remorse coming over me, thinking of the many
beautiful metaphors I have missed. And of course you
will say to me, in an aside, “But why did you omit that
wonderful metaphor by So-and-So?” And then I will
have to fumble and to apologize.
But now, I think, we might go on to metaphors that
seem to stand outside the old patterns. And since I
have spoken of the moon, I will take a Persian meta-
phor I read somewhere in Brown’s history of Persian
literature. Let us say it came from Farid al-Din Attar
or Omar Khayyám, or Ha~z,17 or another of the great
Persian poets. He speaks of the moon, calling it “the
mirror of time.” I suppose that, from the point of
view of astronomy, the idea of the moon being a mir-
ror is as it should be—but this is quite irrelevant from
the poetic point of view. Whether in fact the moon is
or is not a mirror has no importance whatever, since
poetry speaks to the imagination. Let us look at the
T H E
M E T A P H O R
35

moon as a mirror of time. I think this is a very ~ne
metaphor—~rst, because the idea of a mirror gives us
the brightness and the fragility of the moon, and, sec-
ond, because the idea of time makes us suddenly re-
member that that very clear moon we are looking at is
very ancient, is full of poetry and mythology, is as old
as time.
Since I’ve used the phrase “as old as time,” I must
quote another line—one that perhaps is bubbling up
in your memory. I can’t recall the name of the author.
I found it quoted by Kipling in a not-too-memorable
book of his called From Sea to Sea: “A rose-red city,
half as old as Time.”18 Had the poet written “A
rose-red city, as old as Time,” he would have written
nothing at all. But “half as old as Time” gives it a kind
of magic precision—the same kind of magic precision
that is achieved by that strange and common English
phrase, “I will love you forever and a day.” “Forever”
means “a very long time,” but it is too abstract to ap-
peal to the imagination.
We have the same kind of trick (I apologize for the
use of this word) in the name of that famous book, the
Thousand and One Nights. For “the thousand nights”
means to the imagination “the many nights,” even as
“forty” used to mean “many” in the seventeenth cen-
T H E
M E T A P H O R
36

tury. “When forty winters shall besiege thy brow,”
writes Shakespeare;19 and I think of the common Eng-
lish expression “forty winks” for “a nap.” For “forty”
means “many.” And here you have the “thousand
nights and a night”—like “a rose-red city” and the
fanciful precision of “half as old as Time,” which of
course makes time seem even longer.
In order to consider different metaphors, I will
now go back—inevitably, you might say—to my
favorite Anglo-Saxons. I remember that very com-
mon kenning20 which calls the sea “the whale road.” I
wonder whether the unknown Saxon who ~rst
coined that kenning knew how ~ne it was. I wonder
whether he felt (though this need hardly concern us)
that the hugeness of the whale suggested and empha-
sized the hugeness of the sea.
There is another metaphor—a Norse one, about
blood. The common kenning for blood is “the water
of the serpent.” In this metaphor, you have the no-
tion—which we ~nd also among the Saxons—of a
sword as an essentially evil being, a being that lapped
up the blood of men as if it were water.
Then we have the metaphors for battle. Some of
them are quite trite—for example, “meeting of men.”
Here, perhaps, there is something quite ~ne: the idea
T H E
M E T A P H O R
37

of men meeting to kill each other (as if no other
“meetings” were possible). But we also have “the
meeting of swords,” “the dance of swords,” “the
clash of armor,” “the clash of shields.” All of them
may be found in the “Ode” of Brunanburh. And
there is another ~ne one: þorn æneoht, “a meeting of
anger.” Here the metaphor is impressive perhaps be-
cause, when we think of meeting, we think of fellow-
ship, of friendship; and then there comes the contrast,
the meeting of anger.
But these metaphors are nothing, I should say,
compared to a very ~ne Norse and—strangely
enough—Irish metaphor about the battle. It calls the
battle “the web of men.” The word “web” is really
wonderful here, for in the idea of a web we get the
pattern of a medieval battle: we have the swords,
the shields, the crossing of the weapons. Also, there
is the nightmare touch of a web being made of living
beings. “A web of men”: a web of men who are dying
and killing each other.
There suddenly comes to my mind a metaphor
from Góngora that is rather like the “web of men.”
He is speaking of a traveler who comes to a “bárbara
aldea”—to a “barbarous village”; and then that vil-
lage weaves a rope of dogs around him.
T H E
M E T A P H O R
38

Como suele tejer
Bárbara aldea
Soga de perros
Contra forastero.
So, strangely enough, we have the same image: the
idea of a rope or web made of living beings. Yet even
in those cases that seem to be synonyms, there is quite
a difference. A rope of dogs is somehow baroque and
grotesque, while “web of men” has something terri-
ble, something awful about it.
To end up, I will take a metaphor, or a comparison
(after all, I am not a professor and the difference need
hardly worry me), by the now-forgotten Byron. I read
the poem when I was a boy—I suppose you all read it
at a very tender age. Yet two or three days ago I sud-
denly discovered that that metaphor was a very com-
plex one. I had never thought of Byron as being
especially complex. You all know the words: “She
walks in beauty, like the night.”21 The line is so perfect
that we take it for granted. We think, “Well, we could
have written that, had we cared to.” But only Byron
cared to write it.
I come now to the hidden and secret complexity of
the line. I suppose you have already found out what I
am now going to reveal to you. (Because this always
T H E
M E T A P H O R
39

happens with surprises, no? It happens to us when
we’re reading a detective novel.) “She walks in beauty,
like the night”: at the beginning we have a lovely
woman; then we are told that she walks in beauty. This
somehow suggests the French language—something
like “vous êtes en beauté,” and so on. But: “She walks
in beauty, like the night.” We have, in the ~rst in-
stance, a lovely woman, a lovely lady, likened to the
night. But in order to understand the line, we have to
think of the night as a woman also; if not, the line is
meaningless. So within those very simple words, we
have a double metaphor: a woman is likened to the
night, but the night is likened to a woman. I do not
know and I do not care whether Byron knew this. I
think if he had known it, the verse would hardly be as
good as it is. Perhaps before he died he found it out,
or somebody pointed it out to him.
Now we are led to the two obvious and major con-
clusions of this lecture. The ~rst is, of course, that
though there are hundreds and indeed thousands of
metaphors to be found, they may all be traced back to
a few simple patterns. But this need not trouble us,
since each metaphor is different: every time the pat-
tern is used, the variations are different. And the
second conclusion is that there are metaphors—for
T H E
M E T A P H O R
40

example, “web of men,” or “whale road”—that may
not be traced back to de~nite patterns.
So I think that the outlook—even after my lec-
ture—is quite good for the metaphor. Because, if we
like, we may try our hand at new variations of the ma-
jor trends. The variations would be very beautiful,
and only a few critics like myself would take the trou-
ble to say, “Well, there you have eyes and stars and
there you have time and the river over and over
again.” The metaphors will strike the imagination.
But it may also be given to us—and why not hope for
this as well?—it may also be given to us to invent
metaphors that do not belong, or that do not yet
belong, to accepted patterns.
T H E
M E T A P H O R
41


T H E
T E L L I N G O F
T H E T A L E
Verbal distinctions should be valued, since they stand
for mental—intellectual—distinctions. Yet one feels
it is somehow a pity that the word “poet” should
have been split asunder. For nowadays when we
speak of a poet, we think only of the utterer of such
lyric, birdlike notes as “With ships the sea was sprin-
kled far and nigh, / Like stars in heaven” (Words-
worth),1 or “Music to hear, why hear’st thou music
sadly? / Sweets with sweets war not, joy delights in
joy.”2 Whereas the ancients, when they spoke of a
poet—a “maker”—thought of him not only as the
utterer of those high lyric notes, but also as the teller
of a tale. A tale wherein all the voices of mankind
might be found—not only the lyric, the wistful, the

melancholy, but also the voices of courage and of
hope. This means that I am speaking of what I sup-
pose is the oldest form of poetry: the epic. Let us
consider a few of them.
Perhaps the ~rst which comes to our mind is the
one that Andrew Lang, who so ~nely translated it,
called The Tale of Troy. We will look into it for that
very ancient telling of a tale. In the very ~rst line, we
have something like: “Tell me, muse, of the anger of
Achilles.” Or, as Professor Rouse, I think, has trans-
lated it: “An angry man—that is my subject.”3 Per-
haps Homer, or the man we call Homer (for that is an
old question, of course), thought he was writing his
poem about an angry man, and this somehow discon-
certs us. For we think of anger as the Latins did: “ira
furor brevis”—anger is a brief madness, a ~t of mad-
ness. The plot of the Iliad is really, in itself, not a
charming one—the idea of the hero sulking in his
tent, feeling that the king has dealt unjustly with him,
and then taking up the war as a private feud because
his friend has been killed, and afterwards selling the
dead man he has killed to the man’s father.
But perhaps (I may have said this before; I am sure
I have), perhaps the intentions of the poet are not that
important. What is important nowadays is that al-
T H E
T E L L I N G
O F
T H E
T A L E
44

though Homer might have thought he was telling that
story, he was actually telling something far ~ner: the
story of a man, a hero, who is attacking a city he
knows he will never conquer, who knows he will die
before it falls; and the still more stirring tale of men
defending a city whose doom is already known to
them, a city that is already in _ames. I think this is the
real subject of the Iliad. And, in fact, men have always
felt that the Trojans were the real heroes. We think of
Virgil, but we may also think of Snorri Sturluson,4
who, in his younger era, wrote that Odin—the Odin
of the Saxons, the god—was the son of Priam and the
brother of Hector. Men have sought kinship with the
defeated Trojans, and not with the victorious Greeks.
This is perhaps because there is a dignity in defeat
that hardly belongs to victory.
Let us take a second epic, the Odyssey. The Odys-
sey may be read in two ways. I suppose the man (or
the woman, as Samuel Butler thought)5 who had writ-
ten it felt that there were really two stories: the home-
coming of Ulysses, and the marvels and perils of the
sea. If we take the Odyssey in the ~rst sense, then we
have the idea of homecoming, the idea that we are in
banishment, that our true home is in the past or in
heaven or somewhere else, that we are never at home.
T H E
T E L L I N G
O F
T H E
T A L E
45

But of course the seafaring and the homecoming had
to be made interesting. So the many marvels were
worked in. And already, when we come to the Ara-
bian Nights, we ~nd that the Arabian version of the
Odyssey, the Seven Voyages of Sindbad the Sailor, is
not a story of homecoming but a story of adventure;
and I think we read it thus. When we read the Odys-
sey, I think that what we feel is the glamour, the magic
of the sea; what we feel is what we ~nd in the seafarer.
For example, he has no heart for the harp, nor for the
giving of rings, nor for the delight of a woman, nor for
the greatness of the world. He thinks only of the long
sea salt streams. So that we have both stories in one:
we can read it as a homecoming, and we can read it as
a tale of adventure—perhaps the ~nest that has ever
been written or sung.
We come now to a third “poem” that looms far
above them: the four Gospels. The Gospels may also
be read in two ways. By the believer, they are read as
the strange story of a man, of a god, who atones for
the sins of mankind. A god who condescends to suf-
fering—to death on the “bitter cross,” as Shakespeare
has it.6 There is a still stranger interpretation, which I
found in Langland:7 the idea that God wanted to
know all about human suffering, and that it was not
T H E
T E L L I N G
O F
T H E
T A L E
46

enough for Him to know it intellectually, as a god
might; he wanted to suffer as a man, and with the lim-
itations of a man. However, if you are an unbeliever
(many of us are) then you can read the story in a dif-
ferent way. You can think of a man of genius, of a man
who thought he was a god and who at the end found
out that he was merely a man, and that god—his
god—had forsaken him.
It might be said that for many centuries, those
three stories—the tale of Troy, the tale of Ulysses, the
tale of Jesus—have been suf~cient for mankind. Peo-
ple have been telling and retelling them over and over
again; they have been set to music; they have been
painted. People have told them many times over, yet
the stories are still there, illimitable. You might think
of somebody, in a thousand years or ten thousand
years, writing them over again. But in the case of the
Gospels, there is a difference: the story of Christ, I
think, cannot be told better. It has been told many
times over, yet I think the few verses where we read,
for example, of Christ being tempted by Satan are
stronger than all four books of Paradise Regained.
One feels that Milton perhaps had no inkling as to
what kind of a man Christ was.
Well, we have these stories and we have the fact
T H E
T E L L I N G
O F
T H E
T A L E
47

that men did not need many stories. I don’t suppose
Chaucer ever thought of inventing a story. I don’t
think people were less inventive in those days than
they are today. I think they felt that the new shadings
brought into the story—the ~ne shadings brought
into it—were enough. Besides, it made things easier
for the poet. His hearers or his readers knew what he
was going to say. And so they could take in all the dif-
ferences.
Now, in the epic—and we might think of the Gos-
pels as a kind of divine epic—all things could be
found. But poetry, as I said, has fallen asunder; or
rather, on the one hand we have the lyrical poem and
the elegy, and on the other we have the telling of a
tale—we have the novel. One is almost tempted to
think of the novel as a degeneration of the epic, in
spite of such writers as Joseph Conrad or Herman
Melville. For the novel goes back to the dignity of the
epic.
If we think of the novel and the epic, we are
tempted to fall into thinking that the chief difference
lies in the difference between verse and prose, in the
difference between singing something and stating
something. But I think there is a greater difference.
The difference lies in the fact that the important thing
T H E
T E L L I N G
O F
T H E
T A L E
48

about the epic is a hero—a man who is a pattern for
all men. While, as Mencken pointed out, the essence
of most novels lies in the breaking down of a man, in
the degeneration of character.
This brings us to another question: What do we
think of happiness? What do we think of defeat, and
of victory? Nowadays when people talk of a happy
ending, they think of it as a mere pandering to the
public, or they think it is a commercial device; they
think of it as arti~cial. Yet for centuries men could
very sincerely believe in happiness and in victory,
though they felt the essential dignity of defeat. For ex-
ample, when people wrote about the Golden Fleece
(one of the ancient stories of mankind), readers and
hearers were made to feel from the beginning that the
treasure would be found at the end.
Well, nowadays if an adventure is attempted, we
know that it will end in failure. When we read—I
think of an example I admire—The Aspern Papers,8
we know that the papers will never be found. When
we read Franz Kafka’s The Castle, we know that the
man will never get inside the castle. That is to say, we
cannot really believe in happiness and in success. And
this may be one of the poverties of our time. I suppose
Kafka felt much the same when he wanted his books
T H E
T E L L I N G
O F
T H E
T A L E
49

to be destroyed: he really wanted to write a happy and
victorious book, and he felt that he could not do it.
He might have written it, of course, but people would
have felt that he was not telling the truth. Not the
truth of facts but the truth of his dreams.
At the end of the eighteenth or the beginning of the
nineteenth century, let’s say (we need hardly go into a
discussion of dates), man began to invent stories. Per-
haps one might say that the attempt began with Haw-
thorne and with Edgar Allan Poe, but of course there
are always forerunners. As Rubén Darío pointed out,
nobody is the literary Adam. Still, it was Poe who
wrote that a story should be written for the sake of the
last sentence, and a poem for the sake of the last line.
This degenerated into the trick story, and in the nine-
teenth and twentieth centuries people have invented
all kinds of plots. Those plots are sometimes very
clever. Those plots, if merely told, are cleverer than
the plots of the epics. Yet somehow we feel that there
is something arti~cial about them—or rather, that
there is something trivial about them. If we take two
cases—let us suppose the story of Dr. Jekyll and Mr.
Hyde, then a novel or a ~lm like Psycho—perhaps the
plot of the second is cleverer, but we feel that there is
more behind Stevenson’s plot.
T H E
T E L L I N G
O F
T H E
T A L E
50

Regarding the idea I spoke about at the beginning,
the idea about there being only a few plots: perhaps
we should mention those books where the interest lies
not in the plot but in the shifting, in the changing, of
many plots. I am thinking of the Arabian Nights, of
Orlando Furioso, and so on. One might also add the
idea of an evil treasure. We get that in the Völsunga
Saga,9 and perhaps at the end of Beowulf—the idea of
a treasure bringing evil to the people who ~nd it.
Here we may come to the idea I tried to work out in
my last lecture, on metaphor—the idea that perhaps
all plots belong to only a few patterns. Of course,
nowadays people are inventing so many plots that we
are blinded by them. But perhaps this ~t of inventive-
ness may _icker, and then we may ~nd that those
many plots are but appearances of a few essential
plots. This, however, is not for me to discuss.
There is another fact to be noticed: poets seem to
forget that, at one time, the telling of a tale was essen-
tial, and the telling of the tale and the uttering of the
verse were not thought of as different things. A man
told a tale; he sang it; and his hearers did not think of
him as a man attempting two tasks, but rather as a
man attempting one task that had two sides to it. Or
perhaps they did not feel that there were two sides to
T H E
T E L L I N G
O F
T H E
T A L E
51

it, but rather thought of the whole thing as one essen-
tial thing.
We come now to our own time, and we ~nd this
very strange circumstance: we have had two world
wars, yet somehow no epic has come from them—ex-
cept perhaps the Seven Pillars of Wisdom.10 In the
Seven Pillars of Wisdom I ~nd many epic qualities.
But the book is hampered by the fact that the hero is
the teller, and so sometimes he has to belittle himself,
he has to make himself human, he has to make himself
far too believable. In fact, he has to fall into the trick-
ery of a novelist.
There is another book, quite forgotten now, which
I read, I think, in —a novel called Le Feu, by
Henri Barbusse.11 The author was a paci~st; it was a
book written against war. Yet somehow epic thrust it-
self through the book (I remember a very ~ne bayonet
charge in it). Another writer who had the epic sense
was Kipling. We get this in such a wonderful story as
“A Sahib’s War.” But in the same way that Kipling
never attempted the sonnet, because he thought that
this might estrange him from his readers, he never at-
tempted the epic, though he might have done it. I am
also reminded of Chesterton, who wrote “The Ballad
of the White Horse,” a poem about King Alfred’s
T H E
T E L L I N G
O F
T H E
T A L E
52

wars with the Danes. Therein we ~nd very strange
metaphors (I wonder how I forgot to quote them last
time!)—for example, “marble like solid moonlight,”
“gold like frozen ~re,” where marble and gold are
compared to two things that are even more elemen-
tary.12 They are compared to moonlight and to
~re—and not to ~re itself, but to a magic frozen ~re.
In a way, people are hungering and thirsting for
epic. I feel that epic is one of the things that men
need. Of all places (and this may come as a kind of an-
ticlimax, but the fact is there), it has been Hollywood
that has furnished epic to the world. All over the
globe, when people see a Western—beholding the
mythology of a rider, and the desert, and justice, and
the sheriff, and the shooting, and so on—I think they
get the epic feeling from it, whether they know it or
not. After all, knowing the thing is not important.
Now, I do not want to prophesy, because such
things are dangerous (though they may come true in
the long run), but I think that if the telling of a tale
and the singing of a verse could come together again,
then a very important thing might happen. Perhaps
this will come from America—since, as you all know,
America has an ethical sense of a thing being right or
wrong. It may be felt in other countries, but I do not
T H E
T E L L I N G
O F
T H E
T A L E
53

think it can be found in such an obvious way as I ~nd
it here. If this could be achieved, if we could go back
to the epic, then something very great would have
been accomplished. When Chesterton wrote “The
Ballad of the White Horse,” it got good reviews and
so on, but readers did not take kindly to it. In fact,
when we think of Chesterton, we think of the Father
Brown saga and not of that poem.
I have been thinking about the subject only rather
late in life; and besides, I do not think I could attempt
the epic (though I might have worked in two or three
lines of epic). This is for younger men to do. And I
hope they will do it, because of course we all feel that
the novel is somehow breaking down. Think of the
chief novels of our time—say, Joyce’s Ulysses. We are
told thousands of things about the two characters, yet
we do not know them. We have a better knowledge of
characters in Dante or Shakespeare, who come to
us—who live and die—in a few sentences. We do not
know thousands of circumstances about them, but we
know them intimately. That, of course, is far more im-
portant.
I think that the novel is breaking down. I think that
all those very daring and interesting experiments with
the novel—for example, the idea of shifting time, the
T H E
T E L L I N G
O F
T H E
T A L E
54

idea of the story being told by different charac-
ters—all those are leading to the moment when we
shall feel that the novel is no longer with us.
But there is something about a tale, a story, that
will be always going on. I do not believe men will ever
tire of telling or hearing stories. And if along with the
pleasure of being told a story we get the additional
pleasure of the dignity of verse, then something great
will have happened. Maybe I am an old-fashioned
man from the nineteenth century, but I have opti-
mism, I have hope; and as the future holds many
things—as the future, perhaps, holds all things—I
think the epic will come back to us. I believe that the
poet shall once again be a maker. I mean, he will tell a
story and he will also sing it. And we will not think of
those two things as different, even as we do not think
they are different in Homer or in Virgil.
T H E
T E L L I N G
O F
T H E
T A L E
55


W O R D - M U S I C
A N D
T R A N S L A T I O N
For the sake of clarity, I shall con~ne myself now to the
problem of verse translation. A minor problem but
also a very relevant one. This discussion should pave
us a way to the topic of word-music (or perhaps
word-magic), of sense and sound in poetry.
According to a widely held superstition, all transla-
tions betray their matchless originals. This is expressed
by the too-well-known Italian pun, “Traduttore,
traditore,” which is supposed to be unanswerable.
Since this pun is very popular, there must be a kernel
of truth, a core of truth, hidden somewhere in it.
We will go into a discussion of the possibilities (or
otherwise) and the success (or otherwise) of verse
translation. According to my habit, we will begin with

a few examples, for I do not think that any discussion
can be carried on without examples. Since my mem-
ory is sometimes quite akin to oblivion, I should
choose brief examples. It would be beyond our time
and my capacity to analyze whole stanzas or poems.
We will begin with the Ode of Brunanburh and
Tennyson’s translation of it. This ode (my dates are al-
ways rather shaky) was composed at the beginning of
the tenth century to celebrate the victory of the Wes-
sex men against the Dublin Vikings, the Scotsmen,
and the Welsh. Let us go into the examination of a
line or so. In the original, we ~nd something that runs
more or less like this: “sunne up æt morgentid mære
tungol.” That is to say, “the sun at morning-tide” or
“at morning-time,” and then “that famous star” or
“that mighty star”—but here “famous” would be a
better translation (“mære tungol”). The poet goes on
to speak of the sun as “godes candel beorht”—“a
bright candle of God.”
This ode was done into English prose by Tenny-
son’s son; it was published in a magazine.1 The son
probably explained to his father some essentials of
the rules of Old English verse—about its beat, its use
of alliteration instead of rhyme, and so on. Then Ten-
nyson, who was very fond of experiments, tried his
W O R D - M U S I C
A N D
T R A N S L A T I O N
58

hand at writing Old English verse in modern English.
It is noteworthy to remark that, although the experi-
ment was quite successful, he never came back to it
again. So if we were looking for Old English verse in
Lord Alfred Tennyson’s works, we would have to be
content with that one outstanding example, the Ode
of Brunanburh.
Those two fragments—“the sun, that famous star”
and “the sun, the bright candle of God” (“godes
candel beorht”)—came to be translated by Tennyson
thus: “when ~rst the great / Sun-star of morning-
tide.”2 Now, “sun-star of morning-tide” is, I think, a
very striking translation. It is even more Saxon than
the original, since we have two compound German-
ic words: “sun-star” and “morning-tide.” And of
course, though “morning-tide” can be easily ex-
plained as “morning-time,” we may also think that
Tennyson wanted to suggest to us the image of the
dawn as over_owing the sky. So what we have is a very
strange phrase: “when ~rst the great / Sun-star of
morning-tide.” And then a line later, when Tennyson
comes to the “bright candle of God,” he translates it
as “Lamp of the Lord God.”
Let us now take another example, not only a
blameless but also a ~ne translation. This time we will
W O R D - M U S I C
A N D
T R A N S L A T I O N
59

consider a translation from the Spanish. It is the won-
derful poem “Noche oscura del alma,” “Dark Night
of the Soul,” written in the sixteenth century by one
of the greatest—we may safely say the greatest—of
Spanish poets, of all men who have used the Spanish
language for the purposes of poetry. I am speaking, of
course, of San Juan de la Cruz. The ~rst stanza runs
thus:
En una noche oscura
con ansias en amores in_amada
¡o dichosa ventura!
salí sin ser notada
estando ya mi casa sosegada.3
This is a wonderful stanza. But if we consider the last
line torn from its context and taken by itself (to be
sure, we are not allowed to do that), it is an undistin-
guished line: “estando ya mi casa sosegada,” “when
my house was quiet.” We have the rather hissing
sound of the three s’s in “casa sosegada.” And
“sosegada” is hardly a striking word. I am not trying
to disparage the text. I am merely pointing out (and in
a short time you will see why I am doing this) that the
line taken by itself, torn from its context, is quite un-
remarkable.
W O R D - M U S I C
A N D
T R A N S L A T I O N
60

This poem was translated into English by Arthur
Symons at the end of the nineteenth century. The
translation is not a good one, but if you care to look at
it, you can ~nd it in Yeats’s Oxford Book of Modern
Verse.4 Some years ago a great Scottish poet who is
also a South African, Roy Campbell, attempted a
translation of “Dark Night of the Soul.” I wish I had
the book by me; but we will con~ne ourselves to the
line I have just quoted, “estando ya mi casa soseg-
ada,” and we will see what Roy Campbell made of it.
He translated it thus: “When all the house was
hushed.”5 Here we have the word “all,” which gives a
sense of space, a sense of vastness, to the line. And
then the beautiful, the lovely English word “hushed.”
“Hushed” seems to give us somehow the very music
of silence.
I will add to these two very favorable examples of
the art of translation a third one. This I will not discuss,
since it is a case not of verse rendered into verse but
rather of prose being lifted up into verse, into poetry.
We have that common Latin tag (done from the Greek,
of course), “Ars longa, vita brevis”—or, as I suppose
we ought to pronounce it, “wita brewis.” (This is cer-
tainly very ugly. Let us go back to “vita brevis”—to
“Virgil” and not to “Wirgilius.”) Here we have a plain
W O R D - M U S I C
A N D
T R A N S L A T I O N
61

statement, a statement of opinion. This is quite plain
sailing; this is straightforward. It strikes no deep
chord. In fact, it is a kind of prophecy of the telegram
and of the literature evolved by it. “Art is long, life is
short.” This tag was repeated ever so many times.
Then, in the fourteenth century, “un grand trans-
lateur,”6 “a great translator”—Master Geoffrey Chau-
cer—needed that line. Of course, he wasn’t thinking
about medicine; he was thinking perhaps about po-
etry. But perhaps (I don’t have the text with me, so we
can choose), perhaps he was thinking of love and
wanted to work in that line. He wrote: “The life so
short, the craft so long to learn”—or, as you may sup-
pose he pronounced it, “The lyf so short, the craft so
long to lerne.”7 Here we get not only the statement but
also the very music of wistfulness. We can see that the
poet is not merely thinking of the arduous art and of
the brevity of life; he is also feeling it. This is given by
the apparently invisible, inaudible keyword—the
word “so.” “Thelyfsoshort,thecraft solong to lerne.”
Let us go back to the ~rst two examples: the fa-
mous Ode of Brunanburh and Tennyson, and the
“Noche oscura del alma” of San Juan de la Cruz. If
we consider the two translations I have quoted, they
are not inferior to the original, yet we feel that there is
W O R D - M U S I C
A N D
T R A N S L A T I O N
62

a difference. The difference is beyond what the trans-
lator can do; it depends, rather, on the way we read
poetry. For if we look back on the Ode of Brunan-
burh, we know that it came from deep emotion. We
know that the Saxons had been beaten many times
over by the Danes, and that they hated this. And we
must think of the joy the West Saxons felt when, after
a long day’s struggle—the battle of Brunanburh, one
of the greatest battles in the medieval history of Eng-
land—they defeated Olaf, the king of the Dublin Vi-
kings, and the hated Scotsmen and Welshmen. We
think of what they felt; we think of the man who
wrote the ode. Perhaps he was a monk. But the fact
remains that instead of thanking God (in the ortho-
dox fashion), he thanked the sword of his king and
the sword of Prince Edmund for the victory. He does
not say that God vouchsafed the victory to them; he
says that they won it “swordda edgiou”—“by the
edge of their swords.” The whole poem is ~lled with a
~erce, ruthless joy. He mocks those who have been
defeated. He is very happy that they have been de-
feated. He talks of the king and his brother going
back to their own Wessex—to their own “West-
Saxonland,” as Tennyson has it (each “went to his
own West-Saxonland, glad of the war”).8 After that,
W O R D - M U S I C
A N D
T R A N S L A T I O N
63

he goes far back into English history; he thinks of the
men who came over from Jutland, of Hengist and
Horsa.9 This is very strange—I do not suppose many
men had that historical sense in the Middle Ages. So
we have to think of the poem as coming out of deep
emotion. We have to think of it as an onrush of great
verse.
When we come to Tennyson’s version, much as we
may admire it (and I knew it before I knew the Saxon
original), we think of it as a successful experiment in
Old English verse wrought by a master of modern
English verse; that is to say, the context is different.
Of course, the translator is not to be blamed for this.
The same thing happens in the case of San Juan de la
Cruz and Roy Campbell: we may think (as I suppose
we are allowed to think) that “when all the house was
hushed” is verbally—from the point of view of mere
literature—superior to “estando ya mi casa sosegada.”
But that is of no avail as regards our judgment of the
two pieces, the Spanish original and the English ren-
dering. In the ~rst case, San Juan de la Cruz, we think
that he reached the highest experience of which the
soul of a man is capable—the experience of ecstasies,
the blending together of a human soul with the soul of
divinity, with the soul of the godhead, of God. After
W O R D - M U S I C
A N D
T R A N S L A T I O N
64

he had had that unutterable experience, he had to
communicate it somehow in metaphors. Then he
found ready to hand the “Song of Songs,” and he took
(many mystics have done this) he took the image of
sexual love as an image for mystical union between
man and his god, and he wrote the poem. Thus, we are
hearing—we are overhearing, we may say, as in the
case of the Saxon—the very words that he uttered.
Then we come to Roy Campbell’s translation. We
~nd it good, but we are perhaps apt to think, “Well,
the Scotsman made, after all, quite a good job of it.”
This, of course, is different. That is to say, the differ-
ence between a translation and the original is not a
difference in the texts themselves. I suppose if we did
not know which was the original and which was the
translation, we could judge them fairly. But, unhap-
pily, we cannot do this. And so the translator’s work is
always supposed to be inferior—or, what is worse, is
felt to be inferior—even though, verbally, the render-
ing may be as good as the text.
Now we come to another problem: the problem of
literal translation. When I speak of “literal” transla-
tions, I am using a wide metaphor, since, if a trans-
lation cannot be true word for word to the original, it
can still less be true letter for letter. In the nineteenth
W O R D - M U S I C
A N D
T R A N S L A T I O N
65

century, a quite forgotten Greek scholar, Newman, at-
tempted a literal hexameter translation of Homer.10 It
was his purpose to publish a translation “against”
Pope’s Homer. He used phrases such as “wet waves,”
“wine-dark sea,” and so on. Now, Matthew Arnold
had his own theories on translating Homer. When
Mr. Newman’s book came out, he reviewed it. New-
man answered him; Matthew Arnold answered him
back. We can read that very lively and very intelligent
discussion in the essays of Matthew Arnold.
Both men had much to say on the two sides of the
question. Newman supposed that literal translation
was the most faithful one. Matthew Arnold began
with a theory about Homer. He said that in Homer
several qualities were to be found—clarity, nobility,
simplicity, and so on. He thought that a translator
should always convey the impression of those quali-
ties, even when the text did not bear them out. Mat-
thew Arnold pointed out that a literal translation
made for oddity and for uncouthness.
For example, in the Romance languages we do not
say “It is cold”—we say “It makes cold”: “Il fait
froid,” “Fa freddo,” “Hace frío,” and so on. Yet I
don’t think anybody should translate “Il fait froid” by
“It makes cold.” Another example: in English one
W O R D - M U S I C
A N D
T R A N S L A T I O N
66

says “Good morning,” and in Spanish one says “Bue-
nos días” (“Good days”). If “Good morning” were
translated as “Buena mañana,” we should feel that
this was a literal translation but hardly a true one.
Matthew Arnold pointed out that if a text be trans-
lated literally, then false emphases are created. I do
not know whether he came across Captain Burton’s
translation of the Arabian Nights; perhaps he did so
too late. For Burton translates Quitab alif laila wa
laila as Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night, in-
stead of Book of the Thousand and One Nights. This
translation is a literal one. It is true word for word to
the Arabic. Yet it is false in the sense that the words
“book of the thousand nights and a night” are a com-
mon form in Arabic, while in English we have a slight
shock of surprise. And this, of course, has not been
intended by the original.
Matthew Arnold advised the translator of Homer
to have a Bible at his elbow. He said that the Bible in
English might be a kind of standard for a translation
of Homer. Yet if Matthew Arnold had looked closely
into his Bible, he might have seen that the English
Bible is full of literal translations, and that part of the
great beauty of the English Bible lies in those literal
translations.
W O R D - M U S I C
A N D
T R A N S L A T I O N
67

For example, in the English Bible we have “a tower
of strength.” This is the phrase translated, as sup-
posed, by Luther as “ein feste Burg”—“a mighty (or a
~rm) stronghold.” Then we have “the song of songs.”
I read in Fray Luis de León that the Hebrews had no
superlatives, so they could not say “the highest song”
or “the best song.” They said “the song of songs,”
even as they might have said “the king of kings” for
“the emperor” or “the highest king”; or “the moon of
moons” for “the highest moon”; or “the night of
nights” for the most hallowed of nights. If we com-
pare the English rendering “song of songs” to the
German by Luther, we see that Luther, who had no
care for beauty, who merely wanted Germans to un-
derstand the text, translated it as “das hohe Lied,”
“the high lay.” So we ~nd that these two literal trans-
lations make for beauty.
In fact, it might be said that literal translations
make not only, as Matthew Arnold pointed out, for
uncouthness and oddity, but also for strangeness and
beauty. This, I think, is felt by all of us; for if we look
into a literal version of some outlandish poem, we ex-
pect something strange. If we do not ~nd it, we feel
somehow disappointed.
Now we come to one of the ~nest and most famous
W O R D - M U S I C
A N D
T R A N S L A T I O N
68

English translations. I am speaking, of course, of Fitz-
Gerald’s Rubáiyát by Omar Khayyám.11 The ~rst
stanza runs thus:
Awake! For morning in the bowl of night
Has _ung the stone that puts the stars to _ight;
And, lo! the hunter of the East has caught
The Sultan’s turret in a daze of light.
As we know, the book was discovered in a book-
store by Swinburne and Rossetti. They were over-
whelmed by its beauty. They knew nothing whatso-
ever of Edward FitzGerald, a quite unknown man of
letters. He had tried his hand at translating Calderón,
and Farid al-Din Attar’s Parliament of Birds; these
books were not too good. And then there came this
famous book, now a classic.
Rossetti and Swinburne felt the beauty of the trans-
lation, yet we wonder if they would have felt this
beauty had FitzGerald presented the Rubáiyát as an
original (partly it was original) rather than as a trans-
lation. Would they think FitzGerald should have
been allowed to say, “Awake! For morning in the
bowl of night / Has _ung the stone that puts the stars
to _ight”? (The second line sends us to a footnote,
which explains that to _ing a stone into a bowl is the
W O R D - M U S I C
A N D
T R A N S L A T I O N
69

sign for the departing of the caravan.) And I wonder
if FitzGerald would have been allowed the “noose of
light” and the “sultan’s turret” in a poem of his own.
But I think that we can safely dwell on a single
line—a line which is to be found in one of the other
stanzas:
Dreaming when dawn’s left hand was in the sky
I heard a voice within the tavern cry,
“Awake my little ones, and ~ll the cup
Before life’s liquor in its cup be dry.”
Let us dwell on the ~rst line: “Dreaming when dawn’s
left hand was in the sky.” Of course, the keyword in
this line is the word “left.” Had any other adjective
been used, the line would have been meaningless. But
“left hand” makes us think of something strange, of
something sinister. We know that the right hand is as-
sociated with “right”—in other words with “righ-
teousness,” with “direct,” and so on—while here we
have the ominous word “left.” Let us remember the
Spanish phrase “lanzada de modo izquierdo que
atraviese el corazón,” (“launched leftwards to cross
through the heart”)—the idea of something sinister.
We feel that there is something subtly wrong about
“dawn’s left hand.” If the Persian was dreaming when
W O R D - M U S I C
A N D
T R A N S L A T I O N
70

dawn’s left hand was in the sky, then his dream could
become a nightmare at any moment. And of this we
are slightly aware; we don’t have to dwell on the word
“left.” For the word “left” makes all the differ-
ence—so delicate and so mysterious is the art of verse.
We accept “Dreaming when dawn’s left hand was in
the sky” because we suppose that there is a Persian
original behind it. As far as I am aware, Omar
Khayyám does not bear FitzGerald out. This brings
us to an interesting problem: a literal translation has
created a beauty all its own.
I have always wondered about the origin of literal
translations. Nowadays we are fond of literal transla-
tions; in fact, many of us accept only literal trans-
lations, because we want to give every man his due.
That would have seemed a crime to translators in ages
past. They were thinking of something far worthier.
They wanted to prove that the vernacular was as ca-
pable of a great poem as the original. And I suppose
that Don Juan de Jáuregui when he rendered Lucan
into Spanish, thought of that also. I don’t think any
contemporary of Pope thought about Homer and
Pope. I suppose that readers, the best readers any-
how, thought of the poem in itself. They were inter-
ested in the Iliad and in the Odyssey, and they had no
W O R D - M U S I C
A N D
T R A N S L A T I O N
71

care for verbal tri_es. All throughout the Middle
Ages, people thought of translation not in terms of a
literal rendering but in terms of something being
re-created. Of a poet’s having read a work and then
somehow evolving that work from himself, from his
own might, from the possibilities hitherto known of
his language.
How did literal translations begin? I do not think
they came out of scholarship; I do not think they came
out of scruples. I think they had a theological origin.
For although people thought of Homer as the greatest
of poets, still they knew that Homer was human
(“quandoque dormitat bonus Homerus,” and so on),12
and so they could reshape his words. But when it came
to translating the Bible, that was something quite dif-
ferent, because the Bible was supposed to have been
written by the Holy Ghost. If we think of the Holy
Ghost, if we think of the in~nite intelligence of God
undertaking a literary task, then we are not allowed to
think of any chance elements—of any haphazard ele-
ments—in his work. No—if God writes a book, if God
condescends to literature, then every word, every let-
ter, as the Kabbalists said, must have been thought
out. And it might be blasphemy to tamper with the
text written by an endless, eternal intelligence.
W O R D - M U S I C
A N D
T R A N S L A T I O N
72

Thus, I think the idea of a literal translation came
from translations of the Bible. This is merely my guess
(I suppose there are many scholars here who can cor-
rect me if I make a mistake), but I think it is highly
probable. When very ~ne translations of the Bible
were undertaken, men began to discover, began to
feel, that there was a beauty in alien ways of expres-
sion. Now everybody is fond of literal translations be-
cause a literal translation always gives us those small
jolts of surprise that we expect. In fact, it might be
said that no original is needed. Perhaps a time will
come when a translation will be considered as some-
thing in itself. We may think of Elizabeth Barrett
Browning’s Sonnets from the Portuguese.
Sometimes I have attempted a rather bold meta-
phor, but have seen that no one would accept it if it
came from me (I am a mere contemporary), and so I
have attributed it to some out-of-the-way Persian or
Norseman. Then my friends have said that it was
quite ~ne; and of course I have never told them that I
invented it, because I was fond of the metaphor. After
all, the Persians or Norsemen may have invented that
metaphor, or far better ones.
Thus, we go back to what I said at the beginning:
that a translation is never judged verbally. It should be
W O R D - M U S I C
A N D
T R A N S L A T I O N
73
73

judged verbally, but it never is. For example (and I
hope you won’t think that I am uttering a blasphemy),
I have looked very carefully (but that was forty years
ago, and I can plead the mistakes of youth) into
Baudelaire’s Fleurs du mal and into Stefan George’s
Blumen des Böse. I think that of course Baudelaire was
a greater poet than Stefan George, but Stefan George
was a far more skillful craftsman. I think that if we
compare them line by line, we should ~nd that Stefan
George’s Umdichtung (this is a ~ne German word that
means not a poem translated from another, but a poem
woven around another; we also have Nachdichtung, an
“after-poem,” a translation; and Übersetzung, a mere
translation)—I think that Stefan George’s translation
is perhaps better than Baudelaire’s book. But of course
this will do Stefan George no good, since people who
are interested in Baudelaire—and I have been very
much interested in Baudelaire—think of his words as
coming from him; that is to say, they think of the con-
text of his whole life. While in the case of Stefan George
we have an ef~cient but rather priggish twentieth-
century poet turning Baudelaire’s very words into an
alien language, into German.
I have spoken of the present. I say that we are bur-
dened, overburdened, by our historical sense. We
W O R D - M U S I C
A N D
T R A N S L A T I O N
74

cannot look into an ancient text as the men of the
Middle Ages or the Renaissance or even the eigh-
teenth century did. Now we are worried by circum-
stances; we want to know exactly what Homer meant
when he wrote about the “wine-dark sea” (if
“wine-dark sea” be the right translation; I do not
know). But if we are historically minded, I think we
may perhaps suppose that a time will come when men
will be no longer as aware of history as we are. A time
will come when men shall care very little about the ac-
cidents and circumstances of beauty; they shall care
for beauty itself. Perhaps they shall not even care
about the names or the biographies of the poets.
This is all to the good, when we think that there are
whole nations who think this way. For example, I do
not think that in India people have the historical
sense. One of the thorns in the _esh of Europeans
who write or have written histories of Indian philoso-
phy is that all philosophy is seen as contemporary by
the Indians. That is to say, they are interested in the
problems themselves, not in the mere biographical
fact or historical, chronological fact. That So-and-So
was What’s-His-Name’s master, that he came before,
that he wrote under that in_uence—all those things
are nothing to them. They care about the riddle of the
W O R D - M U S I C
A N D
T R A N S L A T I O N
75

universe. I suppose, in a time to come (and I hope this
time is around the corner), men will care for beauty,
not for the circumstances of beauty. Then we will
have translations not only as good (we have them
already) but as famous as Chapman’s Homer, as
Urquhart’s Rabelais, as Pope’s Odyssey.13 I think this
is a consummation devoutly to be wished.
W O R D - M U S I C
A N D
T R A N S L A T I O N
76

T H O U G H T
A N D
P O E T R Y
Walter Pater wrote that all art aspires to the condition
of music.1 The obvious reason (I speak as a layman of
course) would be that, in music, form and substance
cannot be torn asunder. Melody, or any piece of mu-
sic, is a pattern of sounds and pauses unwinding itself
in time, a pattern that I do not suppose can be torn.
The melody is merely the pattern, and the emotions it
sprang from, and the emotions it awakens. The Aus-
trian critic Hanslick2 wrote that music is a language
that we can use, that we can understand, but that we
are unable to translate.
In the case of literature, and especially of poetry,
the case is supposed to be quite the opposite. We
might tell the plot of The Scarlet Letter to a friend of

ours who had not read it, and I suppose we could
even tell the pattern, the framework, the plot of, say,
Yeats’s sonnet “Leda and the Swan.” So that we fall to
thinking of poetry as being a bastard art, as being
something of a mongrel.
Robert Louis Stevenson has also spoken of this
supposed dual nature of poetry. He says that, in a
sense, poetry is nearer to the common man, the man
in the street. For the materials of poetry are words,
and those words are, he says, the very dialect of life.
Words are used for everyday humdrum purposes
and are the material of the poet, even as sounds are
the material of the musician. Stevenson speaks of
words as being mere blocks, mere conveniences.
Then he wonders at the poet, who is able to weave
those rigid symbols meant for everyday or abstract
purposes into a pattern, which he calls “the web.”3 If
we accept what Stevenson says, we have a theory of
poetry—a theory of words’ being made by literature
to serve for something beyond their intended use.
Words, says Stevenson, are meant for the common
everyday commerce of life, and the poet somehow
makes of them something magic. I suppose I agree
with Stevenson, yet I think he may perhaps be
proved wrong. We know that those lonely and admi-
T H O U G H T
A N D
P O E T R Y
78

rable Norsemen, in their elegies, were able to convey
to us their loneliness, their courage, their loyalty,
their feeling for the bleak seas and the bleak wars.
Yet I suppose those men who wrote those poems
which seem so near to us and come through the cen-
turies—we know that those men would have been
hard put to it, had they been made to reason out
something in prose. This is the case even with King
Alfred. His prose is straightforward; it is ef~cient for
its purposes; but it rings no deep note. He tells us a
story—the story may or may not be interesting, but
that is all; while there were contemporaries who
wrote poetry that still rings, poetry that is still very
much living.
Pursuing a historical argument (of course I have
taken this example at random; it might be paralleled
all over the world), we ~nd that words began not by
being abstract, but rather by being concrete—and I
suppose “concrete” means much the same thing as
“poetic” in this case. Let us consider a word such
as “dreary”: the word “dreary” meant “bloodstained.”
Similarly, the word “glad” meant “polished,” and the
word “threat” meant “a threatening crowd.” Those
words that now are abstract once had a strong mean-
ing.
T H O U G H T
A N D
P O E T R Y
79

We might go on to other examples. Let us take the
word “thunder” and look back at the god Thunor, the
Saxon counterpart of the Norse Thor. The word
þunor stood for thunder and for the god; but had we
asked the men who came to England with Hengist
whether the word stood for the rumbling in the sky or
for the angry god, I do not think they would have
been subtle enough to understand the difference. I
suppose that the word carried both meanings without
committing itself very closely to either one of them. I
suppose that when they uttered or heard the word
“thunder,” they at the same time felt the low rumbling
in the sky and saw the lightning and thought of the
god. The words were packed with magic; they did not
have a hard and fast meaning.
Therefore, when speaking of poetry we may say
that poetry is not doing what Stevenson thought—
poetry is not trying to take a set of logical coins and
work them into magic. Rather, it is bringing language
back to its original source. Remember that Alfred
North Whitehead wrote that, among the many falla-
cies, there is the fallacy of the perfect dictionary—the
fallacy of thinking that for every perception of the
senses, for every statement, for every abstract idea,
one can ~nd a counterpart, an exact symbol, in the
T H O U G H T
A N D
P O E T R Y
80

dictionary. And the very fact that languages are differ-
ent makes us suspect that this does not exist.
For example, in English (or rather in the Scots) we
have such words as “eerie” and “uncanny.” These
words cannot be found in other languages. (Well, of
course, we do have the German unheimlich.) Why is
this so? Because men who spoke other languages had
no need for these words—I suppose a nation evolves
the words it needs. This observation, made by
Chesterton (I think in his book on Watts),4 amounts
to saying that language is not, as we are led to suppose
by the dictionary, the invention of academicians or
philologists. Rather, it has been evolved through time,
through a long time, by peasants, by ~shermen, by
hunters, by riders. It did not come from the libraries;
it came from the ~elds, from the sea, from rivers, from
night, from the dawn.
Thus, we have in language the fact (and this seems
obvious to me) that words began, in a sense, as magic.
Perhaps there was a moment when the word “light”
seemed to be _ashing and the word “night” was dark.
In the case of “night,” we may surmise that it at ~rst
stood for the night itself—for its blackness, for its
threats, for the shining stars. Then, after ever so long a
time, we come to the abstract sense of the word
T H O U G H T
A N D
P O E T R Y
81

“night”—the period between the twilight of the raven
(as the Hebrews had it) and the twilight of the dove,
the beginning of day.
Since I have spoken of the Hebrews, we might ~nd
an additional example in Jewish mysticism, in the
Kabbalah. To the Jews, it seemed obvious there lay a
power in words. This is the idea behind all those sto-
ries of talismans, of Abracadabras—stories to be
found in the Arabian Nights. They read in the ~rst
chapter of the Torah: “God said, ‘Let there be light,’
and there was light.” So it seemed obvious to them
that in the word “light” there lay a strength suf~cient
to cause light to shine all over the world, a strength
suf~cient to engender, to beget light. I have done
some thinking about this problem of thought and
meaning (a problem that of course I will not solve).
We spoke earlier about the fact that in music the
sound, the form, and the substance cannot be torn
asunder—that they are in fact the same thing. And it
may be suspected that to a certain degree the same
thing happens in poetry.
Let us consider two fragments by two great poets.
The ~rst comes from a short piece by the great Irish
poet William Butler Yeats: “Bodily decrepitude is
wisdom; young / We loved each other and were igno-
T H O U G H T
A N D
P O E T R Y
82

rant.”5 Here we ~nd at the beginning a statement:
“Bodily decrepitude is wisdom.” This, of course,
could be read ironically. Yeats knew quite well that
we might attain bodily decrepitude without attaining
wisdom. I suppose that wisdom is more important
than love; love, than mere happiness. There is some-
thing trivial about happiness. We get a statement
about happiness in the other part of the stanza.
“Bodily decrepitude is wisdom; young / We loved
each other and were ignorant.”
Now I will take a verse by George Meredith. It
runs thus: “Not till the ~re is dying in the grate / Look
we for any kinship with the stars.”6 This statement,
taken at its face value, is false. The idea that we are all
interested in philosophy only when we are through
with bodily lusts—or when the lusts of the body are
through with us—is, I think, false. We know of many
passionate young philosophers; think of Berkeley, of
Spinoza, and of Schopenhauer. Yet this is quite irrele-
vant. What is really important is the fact that both
fragments—“Bodily decrepitude is wisdom; young /
We loved each other and were ignorant,” and Mere-
dith’s “Not till the ~re is dying in the grate / Look we
for any kinship with the stars”—taken in the abstract
way, mean much the same thing. Yet they strike quite
T H O U G H T
A N D
P O E T R Y
83

different chords. When we are told—or when I now
tell you—that they mean the same thing, you all in-
stinctively and rightly feel that this is irrelevant, that
the verses are really different.
I have suspected many a time that meaning is really
something added to verse. I know for a fact that we
feel the beauty of a poem before we even begin to
think of a meaning. I do not know whether I have al-
ready quoted an example from one of the sonnets of
Shakespeare. It runs thus:
The mortal moon hath her eclipse endured,
And the sad augurs mock their own presage;
Incertainties now crown themselves assured,
And peace proclaims olives of endless age.7
Now, if we look at the footnotes, we ~nd that the ~rst
two lines—“The mortal moon hath her eclipse en-
dured, / And the sad augurs mock their own pres-
age”—are supposed to be an allusion to Queen Eliza-
beth—the Virgin Queen, the famous queen compared
by the court poets to Diana the chaste, the maiden. I
suppose that when Shakespeare wrote these lines, he
had both moons in mind. He had that metaphor of
“the moon, the Virgin Queen”; and I do not think he
could help thinking of the moon in the sky. The point I
T H O U G H T
A N D
P O E T R Y
84

would like to make is that we do not have to commit
ourselves to a meaning—to any one of the meanings.
We feel the verses before we adopt one, the other, or
both of these hypotheses. “The mortal moon hath her
eclipse endured, / And the sad augurs mock their own
presage” has, at least to me, a beauty far beyond the
mere fact of how it is interpreted.
There are, of course, verses that are beautiful and
meaningless. Yet they still have a meaning—not to the
reason but to the imagination. Let me take a very sim-
ple example: “Two red roses across the moon.”8 Here
it might be said that the meaning is the image given by
the words; but to me, at least, there is no de~nite im-
age. There is a pleasure in the words, and of course in
the lilt of the words, in the music of the words. And
let us take another example from William Morris:
“‘Therefore,’ said fair Yoland of the _owers” (fair
Yoland is a witch) “‘This is the tune of Seven Tow-
ers.’”9 These verses have been torn from their con-
text, and yet I think they stand.
Somehow, though I love English, when I am recall-
ing English verse I ~nd that my language, Spanish, is
calling to me. I would like to quote a few lines. If you
do not understand them, you may console yourselves
by thinking that I do not understand them either, and
T H O U G H T
A N D
P O E T R Y
85

that they are meaningless. They are beautifully, in a
quite lovely way meaningless; they are not meant to
mean anything. They come from that too-forgotten
Bolivian poet Ricardo Jaimes Freire—a friend of
Darío and of Lugones. He wrote them in the last de-
cade of the nineteenth century. I wish I could remem-
ber the whole sonnet—I think that something of its
sonorous quality would come through to you. But
there is no need. I think that these lines should be
suf~cient. They run thus:
Peregrina paloma imaginaria
Que enardeces los últimos amores
Alma de luz, de música y de _ores
Peregrina paloma imaginaria.10
They do not mean anything, they are not meant
to mean anything; and yet they stand. They stand as
a thing of beauty. They are—at least to me—inex-
haustible.
And now, since I have quoted Meredith, I will take
another example. This example is different from the
others, since it bears a meaning; we feel a conviction
that it corresponds to an experience of the poet. And
yet, had we to put our ~nger on that experience, or if
the poet were to tell us how he came to these lines,
T H O U G H T
A N D
P O E T R Y
86

how he attained them, we should be at a loss. The
lines are:
Love, that had robbed us of immortal things,
This little movement mercifully gave,
Where I have seen across the twilight wave
The swan sail with her young beneath her wings.11
We ~nd in the ~rst line a re_ection that may strike us
as strange: “Love, that had robbed us of immortal
things”—not (as we might fairly suppose) “love that
had made us a gift of immortal things.” No —“Love,
that had robbed us of immortal things, / This little
movement mercifully gave.” We are made to feel that
he is speaking of himself and of his beloved. “Where I
have seen across the twilight wave / The swan sail
with her young beneath her wings”: here we have the
threefold beat of the line—we do not need any anec-
dotes about the swan, about how she sailed into a
river and then into Meredith’s poem, and then forever
into my memory. We know, or at least I know, that I
have heard something unforgettable. And I may say
of this what Hanslick said of music: I can recall it, I
can understand it (not with the mere reason—with a
deeper imagination); but I cannot translate it. And
I do not think it needs any translation.
T H O U G H T
A N D
P O E T R Y
87

Since I have used the word “threefold,” I am re-
minded of a metaphor by a Greek poet of Alexandria.
He wrote about “the lyre of the threefold night.” This
strikes me as being a mighty line. When I looked into
the notes, I found that the lyre was Hercules, and that
Hercules had been begotten by Jupiter in a night that
had the length of three nights, so that the pleasure of
the god might be vast. This explanation is quite irrele-
vant; in fact, perhaps it rather does damage to the
verse. It provides us with a small anecdote and takes
away something from that wonderful riddle, “the lyre
of the threefold night.” This should be enough—the
riddle. We have no need to read it. The riddle is there.
I have spoken of words standing out at the begin-
ning, when men invented them. I have thought that
the word “thunder” might mean not only the sound
but the god. And I have spoken of the word “night.”
When I speak of night, I am inevitably—and happily
for us, I think—reminded of the last sentence of the
~rst book in Finnegans Wake, wherein Joyce speaks of
“the rivering waters of, hitherandthithering waters of.
Night!”12 This is an extreme example of an elaborate
style. We feel that such a line could have been written
only after centuries of literature. We feel that the line
is an invention, a poem—a very complex web, as
T H O U G H T
A N D
P O E T R Y
88

Stevenson would have had it. And yet I suspect there
was a moment when the word “night” was quite as
impressive, was quite as strange, was quite as
awe-striking as this beautiful winding sentence:
“rivering waters of, hitherandthithering waters of.
Night!”
Of course, there are two ways of using poetry—at
least, two opposite ways (there are many others, of
course). One of the ways of the poet is to use common
words and somehow make them uncommon—to
evolve magic from them. Quite a good example
would be that very English poem, made of under-
statement, by Edmund Blunden:
I have been young and now am not too old;
And I have seen the righteous forsaken,
His health, his honour and his quality taken.
This is not what we formerly were told.13
Here we have plain words; we have a plain meaning,
or at least a plain feeling—and this is more important.
But the words do not stand out as they did in that last
example from Joyce.
And in this one, which will be mere quotation. It
will be three words. They run thus: “Glittergates of
el~nbone.”14 “Glittergates” is Joyce’s gift to us. And
T H O U G H T
A N D
P O E T R Y
89

then we have “el~nbone.” Of course, when Joyce
wrote this, he was thinking of the German for “ivory,”
Elfenbein. Elfenbein is a distortion of Elephantenbein,
“elephant bone.” But Joyce saw the possibilities of
that word, and he translated it into English; and then
we have “el~nbone.” I think “el~n” is more beautiful
than “elfen.” Besides, as we have heard Elfenbein so
many times, it does not come to us with the shock of
surprise, with the shock of amazement, that we ~nd in
that new and elegant word “el~nbone.”
So we have two ways of writing poetry. People
speak generally of a plain style and an elaborate style.
I think this is wrong, because what is important, what
is all-meaning, is the fact that poetry should be living
or dead, not that the style should be plain or elabo-
rate. That depends on the poet. We may have, for ex-
ample, very striking poetry written plainly, and such
poetry is, to me, no less admirable—in fact, I some-
times think it is more admirable—than the other. For
example, when Stevenson (and as I have disagreed
with Stevenson, I want to worship him now) wrote his
“Requiem”:
Under the wild and starry sky
Dig the grave and let me lie
Glad did I live and gladly die,
T H O U G H T
A N D
P O E T R Y
90

And I laid me down with a will.
This be the verse you ’grave for me:
“Here he lies where he longed to be;
Home is the sailor, home from the sea,
And the hunter home from the hill.”
This verse is plain language; it is plain and living. But
also, the poet must have worked very hard to get it. I
do not think that such lines as “Glad did I live and
gladly die” come except in those very rare moments
when the muse is generous.
I think that our idea of words’ being a mere algebra
of symbols comes from dictionaries. I do not want to
be ungrateful to dictionaries—my favorite reading
would be Dr. Johnson, Dr. Skeat, and that composite
author, the Shorter Oxford.15 Yet I think the fact of
having long catalogues of words and explanations
makes us think that the explanations exhaust the
words, and that any one of those coins, of those
words, can be exchanged for another. But I think we
know—and the poet should feel—that every word
stands by itself, that every word is unique. And we get
this feeling when a writer uses a little-known word.
For example, we think of the word “sedulous” as be-
ing a rather far-fetched but interesting word. Yet
when Stevenson—I greet him again—wrote that he
T H O U G H T
A N D
P O E T R Y
91

“played the sedulous ape” to Hazlitt, then suddenly
the word comes to life.16 So this theory (it is not mine,
of course—I’m sure it can be found in other authors),
this idea of words’ beginning as magic and being
brought back to magic by poetry, is, I think, a true
one.
Now we come to another, quite important ques-
tion: that of conviction. When we read an author (and
we may be thinking of verse, we may be thinking of
prose—it is all one), it is essential that we should be-
lieve in him. Or rather, that we should attain that
“willing suspension of disbelief” of which Coleridge
spoke.17 When I spoke of elaborate verses, of words’
standing out, I should have remembered of course:
Weave a circle round him thrice,
And close your eyes with holy dread,
For he on honey-dew hath fed,
And drunk the milk of Paradise.18
Let us now—and this will be our last subject—
speak about this conviction that is needed both in
prose and in verse. In the case of a novel, for example
(and why should we not speak of the novel when we
are speaking of poetry?), our conviction lies in the
fact that we believe in the central character. If we be-
T H O U G H T
A N D
P O E T R Y
92

lieve in him, all is well. I am not—and I hope this will
not come as a heresy to you—I am not quite sure
about the adventures of Don Quixote. I may disbe-
lieve in some of them. I think some of them may be
exaggerated. I feel quite sure that when the knight
spoke to the squire, he was not weaving those long set
speeches. Yet such things are not important; what is
really important is the fact that I believe in Don Qui-
xote himself. This is why books such as Azorín’s La
ruta de Don Quijote, or even Unamuno’s Vida de Don
Quijote y Sancho,19 strike me as somehow irrelevant,
for they take the adventures too much in earnest.
While I really believe in the knight himself. Even if
somebody told me that those things had never hap-
pened, I would still go on believing in Don Quixote
as I believe in the character of a friend.
I have had the luck to possess many admirable
friends, and there are many anecdotes told of them.
Some of those anecdotes have—I am sorry to say, I am
proud to say—been coined by myself. But they are
not false; they are essentially true. De Quincey said
that all anecdotes are apocryphal. I think that had he
cared to go deeper into the matter, he would have said
that they are historically apocryphal but essentially
true. If a story is told of a man, then that story resem-
T H O U G H T
A N D
P O E T R Y
93

bles him; that story is his symbol. When I think of
such dear friends of mine as Don Quixote, Mr. Pick-
wick, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, Dr. Watson, Huckleberry
Finn, Peer Gynt, and so on (I’m not sure I have many
more friends), I feel that the men who wrote their his-
tories were drawing the longbow,20 but that the ad-
ventures they evolved were mirrors or adjectives or
attributes of those men. That is to say, if we believe in
Mr. Sherlock Holmes, then we may look with derision
on the hound of the Baskervilles; we need not fear
him. So I say that what is important is our believing in
a character.
In the case of poetry, there might seem to be a dif-
ference—for a writer works with metaphors. The
metaphors need not be believed in. What is really im-
portant is the fact that we should think they corre-
spond to the writer’s emotion. This is, I should say,
quite suf~cient. For example, when Lugones wrote
about the sunset’s being “un violento pavo real verde,
deliriado en oro,”21 there is no need to worry about
the likeness—or rather the unlikeness—of a sunset to
a green peacock. What is important is that we are
made to feel that he was stirred by the sunset, that he
needed that metaphor to convey his feelings to us.
This is what I mean by conviction in poetry.
T H O U G H T
A N D
P O E T R Y
94

This has, of course, little to do with plain or elabo-
rate language. When Milton writes, for example (and
I am sorry to say, perhaps to reveal to you, that these
are the last lines of Paradise Regained), “hee un-
observ’d / Home
to
his
Mothers
house
private
return’d,”22 the language is plain enough, but at the
same time it is dead. While when he writes “When I
consider how my light is spent / Ere half my days, in
this dark world,”23 the language he uses may be elabo-
rate, but it is a living language. In that sense, I think
writers like Góngora, John Donne, William Butler
Yeats, and James Joyce are justi~ed. Their words,
their stanzas may be far-fetched; we may ~nd strange
things in them. But we are made to feel that the emo-
tion behind those words is a true one. This should be
suf~cient for us to tender them our admiration.
I have spoken of several poets today, and I am sorry
to say that in the last lecture I shall be speaking of a
lesser poet—a poet whose works I never read, but a
poet whose works I have to write. I shall speak of my-
self. And I hope that you will forgive me this quite af-
fectionate anticlimax.
T H O U G H T
A N D
P O E T R Y
95


A
P O E T ’ S
C R E E D
My purpose was to speak about the poet’s creed, but,
looking into myself, I have found that I have only a
faltering kind of creed. This creed may perhaps be
useful to me, but hardly to others.
In fact, I think of all poetic theories as being mere
tools for the writing of a poem. I suppose there
should be as many creeds, as many religions, as
there are poets. Though at the end I will say some-
thing about my likes and dislikes as to the writing of
poetry, I think I will begin with some personal mem-
ories, the memories not only of a writer but also of
a reader.
I think of myself as being essentially a reader. As
you are aware, I have ventured into writing; but I

think that what I have read is far more important than
what I have written. For one reads what one likes—
yet one writes not what one would like to write, but
what one is able to write.
My memory carries me back to a certain evening
some sixty years ago, to my father’s library in Buenos
Aires. I see him; I see the gaslight; I could place my
hand on the shelves. I know exactly where to ~nd
Burton’s Arabian Nights and Prescott’s Conquest of
Peru, though the library exists no longer. I go back to
that already ancient South American evening, and I
see my father. I am seeing him at this moment; and I
hear his voice saying words that I understood not, but
yet I felt. Those words came from Keats, from his
“Ode to a Nightingale.” I have reread them ever so
many times, as you have, but I would like go over
them once more. I think this might please my father’s
ghost, if he is around.
The lines I remember are those that you are recall-
ing at this moment:
Thou wast not born for death, immortal Bird!
No hungry generations tread thee down;
The voice I hear this passing night was heard
In ancient days by emperor and clown:
Perhaps the self-same song that found a path
A
P O E T ’ S
C R E E D
98

Through the sad heart of Ruth, when, sick for home,
She stood in tears amid the alien corn.1
I thought I knew all about words, all about language
(when one is a child, one feels that one knows many
things), but those words came as a revelation to me.
Of course, I did not understand them. How could
I understand those lines about birds’—about ani-
mals’—being somehow eternal, timeless, because they
live in the present? We are mortal because we live in
the past and in the future—because we remember a
time when we didnotexist,andforeseeatime when we
shall be dead. Those verses came to me through their
music. I had thought of language as being a way of say-
ing things, of uttering complaints, of saying that one
was glad, or sad, and so on. Yet when I heard those
lines (and I have been hearing them, in a sense, ever
since), I knew that language could also be a music and
a passion. And thus was poetry revealed to me.
I have toyed with an idea—the idea that although a
man’s life is compounded of thousands and thou-
sands of moments and days, those many instants and
those many days may be reduced to a single one: the
moment when a man knows who he is, when he sees
himself face to face. I suppose that when Judas kissed
Jesus (if indeed he did so), he felt at that moment that
A
P O E T ’ S
C R E E D
99

he was a traitor, that to be a traitor was his destiny,
and that he was being loyal to that evil destiny. We all
remember The Red Badge of Courage, the story of a
man who does not know whether he is a coward or a
brave man. Then the moment comes and he knows
who he is. When I heard those lines of Keats’s, I sud-
denly felt that that was a great experience. I have been
feeling it ever since. And perhaps from that moment
(I suppose I may exaggerate for the purposes of a lec-
ture) I thought of myself as being “literary.”
That is to say, many things have happened to me, as
to all men. I have found joy in many things—in swim-
ming, in writing, in looking at a sunrise or a sunset, in
being in love, and so on. But somehow the central fact
of my life has been the existence of words and the
possibility of weaving those words into poetry. At
~rst, certainly, I was only a reader. Yet I think the hap-
piness of a reader is beyond that of a writer, for a
reader need feel no trouble, no anxiety: he is merely
out for happiness. And happiness, when you are a
reader, is frequent. Thus, before I go on to speak of
my literary output, I would like to say a few words
about books that have been important to me. I know
that this list will abound in omissions, as all lists do. In
fact, the danger of making a list is that the omissions
A
P O E T ’ S
C R E E D
100

stand out and that people think of you as being insen-
sitive.
I spoke a few moments ago about Burton’s Arabian
Nights. When I really think about the Arabian Nights,
I am thinking not of those many, and ponderous, and
pedantic (or rather stilted) volumes, but of what I
may call the true Arabian Nights—the Arabian Nights
of Galland and, perhaps, of Edward William Lane.2 I
have done most of my reading in English; most books
have come to me through the English language, and
I am deeply grateful for that privilege.
When I think of the Arabian Nights, the ~rst feel-
ing I have is one of vast freedom. Yet at the same time
I know that the book, though vast and free, is limited
to a few patterns. For example, the number three oc-
curs in it very frequently. And we have no characters,
or rather _at characters (except perhaps for the silent
barber). Then we have evil men and good men, re-
wards and punishments, magic rings and talismans,
and so on.
Though we are apt to think of mere size as being
somehow brutal, I think there are many books whose
essence lies in their being lengthy. For example, in the
case of the Arabian Nights, we need to think that the
book is a large one, that the story goes on, that we
A
P O E T ’ S
C R E E D
101

may never come to the end of it. We may never have
gone through all the thousand and one nights, but the
fact that they are there somehow lends wideness to
the whole thing. We know that we can delve deeper,
that we can roam on, and that the marvels, the magi-
cians, the three beautiful sisters, and so on will always
be there, awaiting us.
There are other books I would like to recall—
Huckleberry Finn, for instance, which was one of the
very ~rst I read. I have reread it ever so many times
since, and also Roughing It (the ~rst days in Califor-
nia), Life on the Mississippi, and so on. Had I to ana-
lyze Huckleberry Finn, I would say that, in order to
create a great book, perhaps only one central and very
simple fact is needed: there should be something
pleasing to the imagination in the very framework of
the book. In the case of Huckleberry Finn, we feel that
the idea of the black man, of the boy, of the raft, of the
Mississippi, of the long nights—that these ideas are
somehow agreeable to the imagination, are accepted
by the imagination.
I would also like to say something about Don Qui-
xote. It was one of the ~rst books I ever read through.
I remember the very engravings. One knows so little
about oneself that, when I read Don Quixote, I
A
P O E T ’ S
C R E E D
102

thought I read it because of the pleasure I found in
the archaic style and in the adventures of the knight
and the squire. Now I think that my pleasure lay else-
where—that it came from the character of the knight.
I am not sure now that I believe in the adventures, or
in the conversations between the knight and the
squire; but I know that I believe in the knight’s char-
acter, and I suppose that the adventures were in-
vented by Cervantes in order to show us the character
of the hero.
The same might be said of another book that one
may call a minor classic. The same might be said of
Mr. Sherlock Holmes and Dr. Watson. I am not sure I
believe in the hound of the Baskervilles. I am sure I
do not believe in being terri~ed by a dog painted over
with luminous paint. But I am sure that I believe in
Mr. Sherlock Holmes and in the strange friendship
between him and Dr. Watson.
Of course, one never knows what the future might
bring. I suppose the future will bring all things in the
long run, and so we may imagine a moment when
Don Quixote and Sancho, Sherlock Holmes and Dr.
Watson will still exist, though all their adventures may
have been blotted out. Yet men, in other languages,
may still go on inventing stories to ~t those charac-
A
P O E T ’ S
C R E E D
103

ters—stories that should be as mirrors to the charac-
ters. This, for all I know, may happen.
Now I will jump over the years and go to Geneva. I
was then a very unhappy young man. I suppose young
men are fond of unhappiness; they do their best to be
unhappy, and they generally achieve it. Then I discov-
ered an author who doubtless was a very happy man.
It must have been in that I came to Walt Whit-
man, and then I felt ashamed of my unhappiness. I
felt ashamed, for I had tried to be still more unhappy
by reading Dostoevsky. Now that I have reread Walt
Whitman, and also biographies of him, I suppose that
perhaps when Walt Whitman read his Leaves of Grass
he may have said to himself: “Oh! if only I were Walt
Whitman, a kosmos, of Manhattan the son!”3 Because
doubtless he was a very different kind of man. Doubt-
less he evolved “Walt Whitman” from himself—a
kind of fantastic projection.
At the same time, I also discovered a very differ-
ent writer. I also discovered—and I was also over-
whelmed by—Thomas Carlyle. I read Sartor Resartus,
and I can recall many of its pages; I know them by
heart. Carlyle sent me to the study of German. I re-
member I bought Heine’s Lyrisches Intermezzo and a
German-English dictionary. After a while, I found I
A
P O E T ’ S
C R E E D
104

could dispense with the dictionary and could go on
reading about his nightingales, his moons, his pine
trees, his love, and so on.
But what I really wanted and did not ~nd at the
time was the idea of Germanism. The idea, I suppose,
was evolved not by the Germanic people themselves
but by a Roman gentleman, Tacitus. I was led by Car-
lyle to think that I could ~nd it in German literature. I
found many other things; I am very grateful to Carlyle
for having sent me to Schopenhauer, to Hölderlin, to
Lessing, and so on. But the idea I had—the idea of
men not at all intellectual but given over to loyalty, to
bravery, to a manly submission to fate—this I did not
~nd, for example, in the Nibelungenlied. All of that
seemed too romantic for me. I was to ~nd it years and
years afterwards in the Norse sagas and in the study of
Old English poetry.
There I found at last what I had been looking for
when I was a young man. In Old English I discovered
a harsh language, but a language whose harshness
made for a certain kind of beauty and also for very
deep feeling (even if, perhaps, not very deep think-
ing). In poetry, feeling is enough, I suppose. If the
feeling comes through to you, it should be suf~cient. I
was led to the study of Old English by my inclination
A
P O E T ’ S
C R E E D
105

to the metaphor. I had read in Lugones that the meta-
phor was the essential element of literature, and I ac-
cepted that dictum. Lugones wrote that all words
were originally metaphors. This is true, but it is also
true that in order to understand most words, you have
to forget about the fact of their being metaphors. For
example, if I say, “Style should be plain,” then I don’t
think we should remember that “style” (stylus) meant
“pen,” and that “plain” means “_at,” because in that
case we would never understand it.
Allow me to go back again to my boyhood days
and remember other authors who struck me. I won-
der if it has been often remarked that Poe and Oscar
Wilde are really writers for boys. At least, the stories
of Poe impressed me when I was a boy, yet now I can
hardly reread them without feeling rather uncomfort-
able over the style of the author. In fact, I can quite
understand what Emerson meant when he called Ed-
gar Allan Poe the “jingle” man. I suppose that this
fact of being a writer for boys might be applied to
many other writers. In some cases, such a description
is unjust—in the case of Stevenson, for example, or of
Kipling; for although they write for boys, they also
write for men. But there are other writers whom one
must read when one is young, because if one comes to
A
P O E T ’ S
C R E E D
106

them when one is old and gray and full of days, then
the reading of those writers can hardly be pleasant. It
may be blasphemy to say that in order to enjoy
Baudelaire and Poe we should be young. Afterwards
it is dif~cult. One has to put up with so many things;
one has to think of history, and so on.
As to the metaphor, I should add that I now
see that metaphor is a far more complicated thing
than I thought. It is not merely a comparing of one
thing to another—saying, “the moon is like . . . ,” and
so on. No—it may be done in a more subtle way.
Think of Robert Frost. You of course remember the
lines:
For I have promises to keep
And miles to go before I sleep
And miles to go before I sleep.
If we take the last two lines, the ~rst—“And miles to
go before I sleep”—is a statement: the poet is think-
ing of miles and of sleep. But when he repeats it,
“And miles to go before I sleep,” the line becomes a
metaphor; for “miles,” stands for “days,” for “years,”
for a long stretch of time, while “sleep” presumably
stands for “death.” Perhaps I am doing no good for
us by pointing this out. Perhaps the pleasure lies not
A
P O E T ’ S
C R E E D
107

in our translating “miles” into “years” and “sleep”
into “death,” but rather in feeling the implication.
The same thing might be said of that other very ~ne
poem of his, “Acquainted with the Night.” In the be-
ginning, “I have been one acquainted with the night”
may mean literally what he is telling us. But the line
comes again at the end:
O luminary clock against the sky,
Proclaimed the time was neither wrong nor right.
I have been one acquainted with the night.
Then we are made to think of the night as an image of
evil—of sexual evil, I suppose.
I spoke a moment ago about Don Quixote, and
about Sherlock Holmes; I said that I could believe in
the characters but not in their adventures, and hardly
in the words that the authors put in their mouths.
Now we wonder whether we could ~nd a book where
the exact contrary occurred. Could we ~nd a book in
whose characters we disbelieved but where we might
believe the story? Here I remember another book
that struck me: I remember Melville’s Moby-Dick. I
am not sure if I believe in Captain Ahab, I am not sure
that I believe in his feud with the white whale; I can
hardly tell the characters apart. Yet I believe in the
A
P O E T ’ S
C R E E D
108

story—that is, I believe in it as in a kind of parable
(though I don’t exactly know what it’s a parable
of—perhaps a parable of the struggle against evil, of
the wrong way of ~ghting evil). I wonder if there are
any books of which this might be said. In The Pil-
grim’s Progress, I think I believe both in the allegory
and in the characters. This should be looked into.
Remember that the Gnostics said the only way to
be rid of a sin is to commit it, because afterwards you
repent it. In regard to literature, they were essentially
right. If I have attained the happiness of writing four
or ~ve tolerable pages, after writing ~fteen intolerable
volumes, I have come to that feat not only through
many years but also through the method of trial and
error. I think I have committed not all the possible
mistakes—because mistakes are innumerable—but
many of them.
For example, I began, as most young men do, by
thinking that free verse is easier than the regular forms
of verse. Today I am quite sure that free verse is far
more dif~cult than the regular and classic forms. The
proof—if proof be needed—is that literature begins
with verse. I suppose the explanation would be that
once a pattern is evolved—a pattern of rhymes, of as-
sonances, of alliterations, of long and short syllables,
A
P O E T ’ S
C R E E D
109

and so on—you only have to repeat the pattern. While,
if you attempt prose (and prose, of course, comes long
after verse), then you need, as Stevenson pointed out, a
more subtle pattern. Because the ear is led to expect
something, and then it does not get what it expects.
Something else is given to it; and that something else
should be, in a sense, a failure and also a satisfaction.
So that unless you take the precaution of being Walt
Whitman or Carl Sandburg, then free verse is more
dif~cult. At least I have found, now when I am near my
journey’s end, that the classic forms of verse are easier.
Another facility, another easiness, may lie in the fact
that once you have written a certain line, once you have
resigned yourself to a certain line, then you have com-
mitted yourself to a certain rhyme. And since rhymes
are not in~nite, your work is made easier for you.
Of course, what is important is what is behind the
verse. I began by trying—as all young men do—to
disguise myself. At ~rst, I was so mistaken that at the
time I read Carlyle and Whitman, I thought that
Carlyle’s way of writing prose was the only possible
one, and that Whitman’s way of writing verse was the
only possible one. I made no attempt whatever to rec-
oncile the very strange fact that two opposite men had
attained the perfection of prose and of verse.
A
P O E T ’ S
C R E E D
110

When I began writing, I always said to myself that
my ideas were very shallow—that if a reader saw
through them, he would despise me. And so I dis-
guised myself. In the beginning, I tried to be a
seventeenth-century Spanish writer with a certain
knowledge of Latin. My knowledge of Latin was quite
slight. I do not think of myself now as a seventeenth-
century Spanish writer, and my attempts to be Sir
Thomas Browne in Spanish failed utterly. Or perhaps
they evolved quite a dozen ~ne-sounding lines. Of
course, I was out for purple patches. Now I think that
purple patches are a mistake. I think they are a mistake
because they are a sign of vanity, and the reader thinks
of them as being signs of vanity. If the reader thinks
that you have moral defect, there is no reason whatever
why he should admire you or put up with you.
Then I fell into a very common mistake: I did my
best to be—of all things—modern. There is a charac-
ter in Goethe’s Wilhelm Meisters Lehrjahre who says:
“Well, you may say of me what you like, but nobody
will deny that I am a contemporary.” I see no differ-
ence between that quite absurd character in Goethe’s
novel and the wish to be modern. Because we are
modern; we don’t have to strive to be modern. It is
not a case of subject matter or of style.
A
P O E T ’ S
C R E E D
111

If you look into Sir Walter Scott’s Ivanhoe or (to
take
a
very
different
example)
into
Flaubert’s
Salammbô, you may tell the date when those books
were written. Though Flaubert spoke of Salammbô as
a “roman cartaginois,” any reader worth his salt will
know after reading the ~rst page that the book was
not written in Carthage, but was written by a very in-
telligent Frenchman of the nineteenth century. As for
Ivanhoe, we are not taken in by the castles and the
knights and the Saxon swineherds and so on. All the
time, we know that we are reading an eighteenth- or
nineteenth-century author.
Besides, we are modern by the very simple fact that
we live in the present. Nobody has yet discovered the
art of living in the past, and not even the futurists
have discovered the secret of living in the future. We
are modern whether we want to be or not. Perhaps
the very fact of my attacking modernity now is a way
of being modern.
When I began writing stories, I did my best to trick
them out. I labored over the style, and sometimes
those stories were hidden under the many over-
layings. For example, I thought of a quite good plot;
then I wrote the story “El inmortal.”4 The idea behind
that story—and the idea might come as a surprise to
A
P O E T ’ S
C R E E D
112

any of you who have read the story—is that if a man
were immortal, then in the long run (and the run
would be long, of course), he would have said all
things, done all things, written all things. I took as my
example Homer; I thought of him (if indeed he ex-
isted) as having written his Iliad. Then Homer would
go on living, and he would change as the generations
of men have changed. Eventually, of course, he would
forget his Greek, and in due time he would forget that
he had been Homer. A moment may come when we
will think of Pope’s translation of Homer as being not
only a ~ne work of art (indeed it is), but as being true
to the original. This idea of Homer forgetting that he
was Homer is hidden under the many structures I
wove around the book. In fact, when I reread that
story a couple of years ago, I found it a weariness of
the _esh, and I had to go back to my old plan to see
that the story would have been quite good had I been
content to write it down simply and not permit so
many purple patches and so many strange adjectives
and metaphors.
I think I have come not to a certain wisdom but
perhaps to a certain sense. I think of myself as a
writer. What does being a writer mean to me? It
means simply being true to my imagination. When I
A
P O E T ’ S
C R E E D
113
113

write something, I think of it not as being factually
true (mere fact is a web of circumstances and acci-
dents), but as being true to something deeper. When
I write a story, I write it because somehow I believe in
it—not as one believes in mere history, but rather as
one believes in a dream or in an idea.
I think perhaps we may be led astray by one of the
studies I value most: the study of the history of litera-
ture. I wonder (and I hope this is not blasphemy) if
we are not too aware of history. Being aware of the
history of literature—or of any other art, for that mat-
ter—is really a form of unbelieving, a form of skepti-
cism. If I say to myself, for example, that Wordsworth
and Verlaine were very good nineteenth-century po-
ets, then I may fall into the danger of thinking that
time has somehow destroyed them, that they are not
as good now as they were. I think the ancient
idea—that we might allow perfection to art without
taking into account the dates—was a braver one.
I have read several histories of Indian philosophy.
The authors (Englishmen, Germans, Frenchmen,
Americans, and so on) always wonder at the fact that in
India people have no historical sense—that they treat
all thinkers as if they were contemporary. They trans-
late the words of ancient philosophy into the modern
A
P O E T ’ S
C R E E D
114
114

jargon of today’s philosophy. But this stands for some-
thing brave. This stands for the idea that one believes
in philosophy or that one believes in poetry—that
things beautiful once can go on being beautiful still.
Though I suppose I am being quite unhistorical
when I say this (since of course the meanings and con-
notations of words are changing), still I think there are
lines—for example, when Virgil wrote “Ibant obscuri
sola sub nocte per umbram”5 (I wonder if I am scan-
ning this as I should—my Latin is very rusty), or when
an old English poet wrote “Norþan sniwde . . . ,”6 or
when we read “Music to hear, why hear’st thou music
sadly? / Sweets with sweets war not, joy delights in
joy”7—where somehow we are beyond time. I think
that there is an eternity in beauty; and this, of course, is
what Keats had in mind when he wrote “A thing of
beauty is a joy forever.”8 We accept this verse, but we
accept it as a kind of right, as a kind of formula. Some-
times I am courageous and hopeful enough to think
that it may be true—that though all men write in time,
are involved in circumstances and accidents and fail-
ures of time, somehow things of eternal beauty may be
achieved.
When I write, I try to be loyal to the dream and not
to the circumstances. Of course, in my stories (people
A
P O E T ’ S
C R E E D
115

tell me I should speak about them) there are true
circumstances, but somehow I have felt that those cir-
cumstances should always be told with a certain
amount of untruth. There is no satisfaction in telling a
story as it actually happened. We have to change
things, even if we think them insigni~cant; if we don’t,
we should think of ourselves not as artists but per-
haps as mere journalists or historians. Though I sup-
pose all true historians have known that they can be
quite as imaginative as novelists. For example, when
we read Gibbon, the pleasure we get from him is
quite akin to the pleasure we get from reading a great
novelist. After all, he knew very little about his char-
acters. I suppose he had to imagine the circum-
stances. He must have thought of himself as having
created, in a sense, the decline and fall of the Roman
Empire. And he did it so wonderfully that I do not
care to accept any other explanation.
Had I to give advice to writers (and I do not think
they need it, because everyone has to ~nd out things
for himself), I would tell them simply this: I would ask
them to tamper as little as they can with their own
work. I do not think tinkering does any good. The mo-
ment comes when one has found out what one can
do—when one has found one’s natural voice, one’s
A
P O E T ’ S
C R E E D
116
116

rhythm. Then I do not think that slight emendations
should prove useful.
When I write, I do not think of the reader (because
the reader is an imaginary character), and I do not
think of myself (perhaps I am an imaginary character
also), but I think of what I am trying to convey and I do
my best not to spoil it. When I was young, I believed in
expression. I had read Croce, and the reading of Croce
did me no good. I wanted to express everything. I
thought, for example, that if I needed a sunset I should
~nd the exact word for a sunset—or rather, the most
surprising metaphor. Now I have come to the conclu-
sion (and this conclusion may sound sad) that I no lon-
ger believe in expression: I believe only in allusion.
After all, what are words? Words are symbols for
shared memories. If I use a word, then you should have
some experience of what the word stands for. If not,
the word means nothing to you. I think we can only al-
lude, we can only try to make the reader imagine. The
reader, if he is quick enough, can be satis~ed with our
merely hinting at something.
This makes for ef~ciency—and in my own case it
also makes for laziness. I have been asked why I have
never attempted a novel. Laziness, of course, is the
~rst explanation. But there is another one. I have
A
P O E T ’ S
C R E E D
117

never read any novel without feeling a certain weari-
ness. Novels include padding; I think padding may be
an essential part of the novel, for all I know. Yet I have
read many short stories over and over again. I ~nd
that in a short story by, for example, Henry James or
Rudyard Kipling you get quite as much complexity,
and in a more pleasurable way, as you may get out of
a long novel.
I think that this is what my creed comes to. When
I promised “a poet’s creed,” I thought, very credu-
lously, that once I had given ~ve lectures I would, in
the process, have evolved a creed of some kind. But I
think I owe it to you to say that I have no particular
creed, except those few precautions and misgivings I
have been talking to you about.
When I am writing something, I try not to under-
stand it. I do not think intelligence has much to do
with the work of a writer. I think that one of the sins
of modern literature is that it is too self-conscious.
For example, I think of French literature as being one
of the great literatures in the world (I don’t suppose
anybody could doubt this). Yet I have been made to
feel that French authors are generally too self-con-
scious. A French writer begins by de~ning himself be-
fore he quite knows what he is going to write. He says:
A
P O E T ’ S
C R E E D
118

What should (for example) a Catholic born in
such-and-such province, and being a bit of a socialist,
write? Or: How should we write after the Second
World War? I suppose there are many people all over
the world who labor under those illusory problems.
When I write (of course, I may not be a fair exam-
ple, but merely an awful warning), I try to forget all
about myself. I forget about my personal circum-
stances. I do not try, as I tried once, to be a “South
American writer.” I merely try to convey what the
dream is. And if the dream be a dim one (in my case,
it usually is), I do not try to beautify it, or even to un-
derstand it. Maybe I have done well, for every time I
read an article about me—and somehow there seem
to be quite a lot of people doing that sort of thing—I
am generally amazed and very grateful for the deep
meanings that have been read into those quite hap-
hazard jottings of mine. Of course, I am grateful to
them, for I think of writing as being a kind of collabo-
ration. That is to say, the reader does his part of the
work; he is enriching the book. And the same thing
happens when one is lecturing.
You may think now and then that you have heard a
good lecture. In that case, I must congratulate you, be-
cause, after all, you have been working with me. Had it
A
P O E T ’ S
C R E E D
119

not been for you, I don’t think the lectures would have
seemed particularly good, or even tolerable. I hope
that you have been collaborating with me tonight. And
since this night is different from other nights, I would
like to say something about myself.
I came to America six months ago. In my country I
am practically (to repeat the title of a famous book by
Wells) the Invisible Man.9 Here, I am somehow visible.
Here, people have read me—they have read me so
much that they cross-examine me on stories I have for-
gotten all about. They ask me why So-and-So was si-
lent before he answered, and I wonder who So-and-So
was, why he was silent, what he answered. I hesitate to
tell them the truth. I say that So-and-So was silent be-
fore he answered because generally one is silent before
one answers. And yet, all these things have made me
happy. I think you are quite mistaken if you admire (I
wonder if you do) my writing. But I think of it as a very
generous mistake. I think that one should try to believe
in things even if they let you down afterwards.
If I am joking now, I do so because I feel something
within me. I am joking because I really feel what this
means to me. I know that I shall look back on this
night. I will wonder: Why did not I say what I should
have said? Why did not I say what these months in
A
P O E T ’ S
C R E E D
120

America have meant to me—what all these unknown
and known friends have meant to me? But I suppose
that somehow my feeling is coming through to you.
I have been asked to say some verses of mine; so I
will go over a sonnet, the sonnet on Spinoza. The fact
that many of you may have no Spanish will make it a
~ner sonnet. As I have said, meaning is not impor-
tant—what is important is a certain music, a certain
way of saying things. Maybe, though the music may
not be there, you will feel it. Or rather, since I know
you are very kind, you will invent it for me.
Now we come to the sonnet, “Spinoza”:
Las traslúcidas manos del judío
Labran en la penumbra los cristales
Y la tarde que muere es miedo y frío.
(Las tardes a las tardes son iguales.)
Las manos y el espacio de jacinto
Que palidece en el confín del Ghetto
Casi no existen para el hombre quieto
Que está soñando un claro laberinto.
No lo turba la fama, ese re_ejo
De sueños en el sueño de otro espejo
Y el temeroso amor de las doncellas.
Libre de la metáfora y del mito,
Labra un arduo o cristal: el in~nito
Mapa de Aquél que es todas Sus estrellas.10
A
P O E T ’ S
C R E E D
121


N O T E S
“ O F T H I S A N D T H A T V E R S A T I L E C R A F T ”
I N D E X


N O T E S
Unless otherwise stated, all translations used in this book
are by the editor.
. The Riddle of Poetry
. William Shakespeare, Sonnet .
. Borges is no doubt thinking of Plato’s Phaedrus (sec-
tion d), where Socrates says: “I cannot help feeling,
Phaedrus, that writing is unfortunately like painting; for the
creations of the painter have the attitude of life, and yet if
you ask them a question they preserve a solemn silence”
(trans. Benjamin Jowett). According to Socrates, things
should be taught and communicated orally; this is “the true
way of writing” (b). To write with pen and ink is to write
“in water,” since the words cannot defend themselves. The
spoken word—“the living word of knowledge, which has a
soul”—is thus superior to the written word, which is noth-
ing more than its image. The words written with pen and
ink are as defenseless as those who trust them.

N O T E S
T O
P A G E
8
126
. Rafael Cansinos-Asséns is the Andalusian writer of
whose “magni~cent memories” Borges never tired of speak-
ing. While in Madrid in the early s, the young Argentine
frequented his literary circle (tertulia). “Meeting him, I
seemed to encounter the libraries of the Orient and of the
West” (Roberto Alifano, Conversaciones con Borges [Bue-
nos Aires: Debate, ], –). Cansinos-Asséns, who
boasted that he could salute the stars in fourteen languages
(or seventeen, as Borges says on another occasion)—both
classical and modern—did translations from French, Ara-
bic, Latin, and Hebrew. See Jorge Luis Borges and Oswaldo
Ferrari, Diálogos (Barcelona: Seix Barral, ), .
. Macedonio Fernández (–) was a proponent
of absolute idealism who exerted a steady fascination upon
Borges. He was one of the two authors whom Borges com-
pared to Adam for their sense of a beginning (the other was
Whitman). This most unconventional Argentine declared,
“I write only because writing helps me think.” He pro-
duced a large number of poems (collected in Poesías
completas, ed. Carmen de Mora [Madrid: Visor, ]) and
a great deal of prose, including Una novela que comienza (A
Novel That Begins), Papelas de recienvenido: Continuación
de la nada (Papers of the Recently Arrived: A Continua-
tion of Nothing), Museo de la novela de la eterna: Primera
novela buena (Museum of the Novel of the Eternal: The
First Good Novel), Manera de una psique sin cuerpo (Man-
ner of a Bodiless Psyche), and Adriana Buenos Aires:
Última novela mala (Adriana Buenos Aires: The Last Bad

Novel). Borges and Fernández cofounded the literary jour-
nal Proa in .
. Shakespeare, Hamlet, Act , scene , lines –.
. Dante Gabriel Rossetti, “Inclusiveness,” Sonnet , in
Rossetti, Poems, st ed. (London: Ellis, ), .
. Heraclitus, Fragment , in The Fragments of the
Work of Heraclitus of Ephesus on Nature, trans. Ingram
Bywater (Baltimore: N. Murray, ). See also Plato,
Cratylus, a; and Aristotle, Metaphysics, a, n.
. Robert Browning (–), “Bishop Blougram’s
Apology,” lines –.
. Borges’ poem “To Rafael Cansinos-Asséns” runs thus:
Long and ~nal passage over the breathtaking height of the
trestle’s span.
At our feet the wind gropes for sails and the stars throb in-
tensely.
We relish the taste of the night, trans~xed by
darkness-night become now, again, a habit of our _esh.
The ~nal night of our talking before the sea-miles part us.
Still ours is the silence
where, like meadows, the voices glitter.
Dawn is still a bird lost in the most distant vileness of the
world.
This last night of all, sheltered from the great wind of ab-
sence.
The inwardness of Good-bye is tragic,
like that of every event in which Time is manifest.
It is bitter to realize that we shall not even have the stars in
common.
N O T E S
T O
P A G E S
1 1 – 1 5
127

When evening is quietness in my patio,
from your pages morning will rise.
Your winter will be the shadow of my summer,
and your light the glory of my shadow.
Still we persist together.
Still our two voices achieve understanding
like the intensity and tenderness of sundown.
Translated by Robert Fitzgerald, in Jorge Luis Borges, Se-
lected Poems, –, ed. Norman Thomas di Giovanni
(New York: Delacorte, ), , .
. The Seafarer, ed. Ida Gordon (Manchester: Man-
chester University Press, ), , lines b–a. Borges’
translation “rime bound the ~elds” avoids the repetition of
“earth” present in the original. A literal translation would
be: “rime bound the earth.”
. This famous quotation (“Quid est ergo tempus? Si
nemo ex me quaerat scio; si quaerenti explicare velim,
nescio”) is from Augustine’s Confessions, ..
. The Metaphor
. Leopoldo Lugones (–), a major Argentine
writer of the early twentieth century, was initially a modern-
ist. His Lunario sentimental (Sentimental Moonery) (Bue-
nos Aires: Moen, ) is an eclectic volume of poetry, short
stories, and plays that revolve around the theme of the
moon; it caused a scandal when it came out, both for break-
ing with the already established highbrow modernismo and
for mocking the audiences of this trend. Lugones is often
N O T E S
T O
P A G E S
1 6 – 2 2
128

N O T E S
T O
P A G E S
2 2 – 2 6
129
quoted and commented on in Borges’ works. See, for exam-
ple, Borges, “Leopoldo Lugones, El imperio jesuítico,” Bib-
lioteca personal, in Obras completas, vol. (Buenos Aires:
Emecé Editores, ), –, where Lugones is de-
scribed as “a man of elemental convictions and passions.”
. Borges is referring to An Etymological Dictionary of
the English Language, by the Reverend Walter W. Skeat,
which was ~rst published in Oxford, England, –.
. What we know today as the Greek Anthology consists
of about ,short poems by some authors, repre-
senting Greek literature from the seventh century B.C. to
the tenth century A.D. These are preserved mainly in two
overlapping collections, the Palatine Anthology (which was
compiled in the tenth century and takes its name from the
Palatine Library in Heidelberg) and the Planudean Anthol-
ogy (which dates from the fourteenth century and is named
for the rhetorician and compiler Maximus Planudes). The
Planudean Anthology was ~rst printed in Florence in ;
the Palatine Anthology was rediscovered in .
. G. K. Chesterton (–), “A Second Child-
hood,” in The Collected Poems of G. K. Chesterton (Lon-
don: Cecil Palmer, ), (stanza ).
. Andrew Lang, Alfred Tennyson, nd ed. (Edinburgh:
Blackwood, ), . Lang actually says that the line is
from Tennyson’s poem “The Mystic,” published in 1830.
. Of Time and the River, by Thomas Wolfe, was ~rst
published in .
. Heraclitus, Fragment , in The Fragments of the

Work of Heraclitus of Ephesus on Nature, trans. Ingram
Bywater (Baltimore: N. Murray, ). See also Plato,
Cratylus, a; and Aristotle, Metaphysics, a, n.
. Jorge Manrique (–), “Coplas de Don Jorge
Manrique por la muerte de su padre,” stanza , lines –.
For a reprint, see Manrique, Poesía, ed. Jesús-Manuel Alda
Tesán, th ed. (Madrid: Cátedra, ).
. Longfellow’s translation runs:
Our lives are rivers, gliding free
To that unfathomed, boundless sea,
The silent grave!
Thither all earthly pomp and boast
Roll, to be swallowed up and lost
In one dark wave.
. Shakespeare, The Tempest, Act , scene , lines –
: “We are such stuff / As dreams are made on, and our
little life / Is rounded with a sleep.”
. Walther von der Vogelweide was a German medieval
poet (c.–c.), one of the twelve “apostles” of the
bards (zwöllf Schirmherrenden Meistersängers). The ~rst
three lines of his poem “Die Elegie” (The Elegy) read:
Owêr sint verswunden
ist mir mîn leben getroumet,
daz ich ie wânde ez wære.
In Walther von der Vogelweide, Gedichte: Mittelhoch-
deutscher Text und Übertragung, ed. Peter Wapnewski
N O T E S
T O
P A G E S
2 6 – 2 9
130

N O T E S
T O
P A G E S
3 0 – 3 6
131
(Frankfurt: Fischer, ), . Borges’ version of the quote
is half in Middle High German, half in modern German.
. There is no reference to “iron sleep” among the
ninety-one occurrences of “sleep” listed in a concordance
to Homer. Borges may be thinking of Virgil’s Aeneid, in
John Dryden’s translation: “Dire dreams to thee, and iron
sleep, he bears” (Book , line ); “An iron sleep his stu-
pid eyes oppress’d” (Book , line ).
. Robert Frost, “Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Eve-
ning,” stanza , lines –.
. Among other achievements, León Dujovne trans-
lated the Sepher Ietzirah from Hebrew into Spanish.
. See “Beowulf” and the Finnesburg Fragment, trans-
lated into modern English by John R. Clark Hall (London:
Allen and Unwin, ).
. From Poem of E. E. Cummings’ collection W
(ViVa), published in (when Cummings was thirty-
seven). Borges quotes the ~rst four lines of the third stanza.
. Farid al-Din Attar (died ca. ) was the author of
Mantiq al-tayr, in English The Conference of the Birds,
trans. Afkham Darbandi and Dick Davis (Harmonds-
worth: Penguin, ). Omar Khayyám (_. eleventh cen-
tury) was the author of the Rubáiyát, translated in by
Edward FitzGerald, whose version subsequently went
through many editions. Ha~z of Shiraz (died –)
was the author of Divan, translated from the Persian by
Gertrude Lowthian Bell (London: Octagon Press, ).
. Rudyard Kipling, From Sea to Sea (Garden City, N.Y.:

Doubleday Page, ), . The quote is from Dean Bur-
gon’s poem “Petra” (), which echoes Samuel Rogers’
“Italy: A Farewell” (): “many a temple half as old as
Time.”
. Shakespeare, Sonnet .
. A kenning (plural kenningar) is a multi-noun para-
phrase used in place of a single noun. Kenningar are com-
mon in Old Germanic verse, especially in skaldic poetry,
and to a lesser extent in Eddic literature. Borges discussed
such phrases in his essay “Las kenningar,” part of La
historia de la eternidad (The History of Eternity; ), and
in Literaturas germánicas medievales (Germanic Medieval
Literatures; ), written with María Esther Vázquez.
. This is the ~rst line of Byron’s eighteen-line poem
“She Walks in Beauty, Like the Night,” ~rst published in
his collection Hebrew Melodies (), a series of songs to
be set to adaptations of traditional Jewish tunes by the mu-
sician Isaac Nathan.
. The Telling of the Tale
. William Wordsworth, “With Ships the Sea Was Sprin-
kled Far and Nigh,” collected in his volume Poems, .
. William Shakespeare, Sonnet .
. Homer, The Iliad: The Story of Achillês, trans. William
H. D. Rouse (New York: New American Library, ).
. See Borges, “Las kenningar,” in La historia de la
eternidad (Buenos Aires: Emecé Editores, ), which
deals extensively with Snorri Sturluson (–), the Ice-
N O T E S
T O
P A G E S
3 7 – 4 5
132

landic master of the Edda. Borges’ poem dedicated to him
runs thus:
You, who bequeathed a mythology
Of ice and ~re to ~lial recall,
Who chronicled the violent glory
Of your de~ant Germanic stock,
Discovered in amazement one night
Of swords that your untrustworthy _esh
Trembled. On that night without sequel
You realized you were a coward. . . .
In the darkness of Iceland the salt
Wind moves the mounting sea. Your house is
Surrounded. You have drunk to the dregs
Unforgettable dishonor. On
Your head, your sickly face, falls the sword,
As it fell so often in your book.
Translated by Richard Howard and César Rennert, in Jorge
Luis Borges, Selected Poems, –(bilingual edition),
ed. Norman Thomas di Giovanni (New York: Delacorte,
), .
. See Samuel Butler (–), The Authoress of the
“Odyssey,” Where and When She Wrote, Who She Was, the
Use She Made of the “Iliad,” and How the Poem Grew under
Her Hands, ed. David Grene (Chicago: University of Chi-
cago Press, ).
. Shakespeare, King Henry the Fourth, Part I, Act ,
scene , lines –: “those blessed feet / Which fourteen
hundred years ago were nail’d / For our advantage on the
bitter cross.”
N O T E S
T O
P A G E S
4 5 – 4 6
133

. William Langland (?–?), The Vision of Piers
the Plowman, ed. Kate M. Warren (London: T. Fisher
Unwin, ).
. Henry James, The Aspern Papers (London: Martin
Secker, ).
. Völsunga Saga: The Story of the Volsungs and Nib-
lungs, ed. H. Halliday Sparling, translated from the Icelan-
dic by Eiríkr Magnússon and William Morris (London: W.
Scott, ).
. T. E. Lawrence, Seven Pillars of Wisdom: A Triumph
(London: J. Cape, ).
. Henri Barbusse, Le Feu: Journal d’une escouade
(Paris: Flammarion, ).
. G. K. Chesterton, “The Ballad of the White Horse”
(), in The Collected Poems of G. K. Chesterton (London:
Cecil Palmer, ), . This is a long poem of some 
stanzas. Borges quotes from Book , stanza .
. Word-Music and Translation
. That prose translation was published in the Contem-
porary Review (London), November .
. Tennyson, “The Battle of Brunanburh,” in The Com-
plete Poetical Works of Tennyson (Boston: Houghton
Mif_in, ), (stanza , lines –).
. This is the ~rst of the eight stanzas of San Juan’s
“Noche oscura del alma,” or, as the Golden Age Castilian
has it, “Canciones de el alma que se goza de aver llegado al
alto estado de la perfectión, que es la unión con Dios, por
N O T E S
T O
P A G E S
4 6 – 6 0
134

el camino de la negación espiritual.” E. Allison Peers trans-
lates it as:
Upon a darksome night,
Kindling with love in _ame of yearning keen
—O moment of delight!—
I went by all unseen,
New-hush’d to rest in the house where I had been.
Saint John of the Cross (–), The Spiritual Canticle
and Poems, trans. E. Allison Peers (London: Burns and
Oates, ), . Willis Barnstone’s translation runs:
On a black night,
starving for love and dark in _ames,
Oh lucky turn and _ight!
unseen I slipped away,
my house at last was calm and safe.
Saint John of the Cross, The Poems of Saint John of the
Cross, trans. Willis Barnstone (New York: New Directions,
), .
. Symons translated it as “The Obscure Night of the
Soul.” See William Butler Yeats, ed., The Oxford Book of
Modern Verse, –(New York: Oxford University
Press, ), –.
. Roy Campbell, Collected Poems (London: Bodley
Head, ; rpt. ), –. Campbell takes the ~rst
phrase of the Spanish original as the title of his translation:
“En una noche oscura.”
N O T E S
T O
P A G E
6 1
135

N O T E S
T O
P A G E S
6 2 – 7 6
136
. The phrase “grand translateur” comes from a bal-
lade by Eustache Deschamps, Chaucer’s French contem-
porary. The refrain is: “et translateur, noble Geoffroy
Chaucier.”
. This is the ~rst line of Chaucer’s “Parlement of
Fowles.”
. Tennyson, “The Battle of Brunanburh,” in The Com-
plete Poetical Works, (stanza , lines –).
. According to tradition, Hengist and Horsa were
brothers who led the Jutish invasion of Britain in the
mid-~fth century and founded the kingdom of Kent.
. Francis William Newman (–) not only was a
classical scholar and translator, but wrote extensively on re-
ligion, politics, philosophy, economics, morality, and other
social issues. His translation of the Iliad was published in
(London: Walton and Maberly).
. Omar Khayyám (?–), Rubáiyát, trans. Ed-
ward FitzGerald (–), ed. Carl J. Weber (Waterville,
Maine: Colby College Press, ). FitzGerald’s version
was ~rst published in London in .
. The line is from Horace, Ars poetica, : “Indignor
quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus” (“I’m aggrieved
when sometimes even excellent Homer nods”).
. George Chapman’s translation of the Iliad was
published in ; his Odyssey, in –. Thomas
Urquhart (or Urchard) published his translation of the ~ve
volumes of Rabelais between and . Alexander
Pope’s translation of the Odyssey appeared in –.

N O T E S
T O
P A G E S
7 7 – 8 5
137
. Thought and Poetry
. “All art constantly aspires towards the condition of
music.” Walter Pater, “The School of Giorgione,” in Pater,
Studies in the History of the Renaissance ().
. Eduard Hanslick (–), Austrian music critic,
was the author of Vom Musikalisch-Schönen, ~rst published
in . In English: The Beautiful in Music, trans. Gustav
Cohen (London: Novello, ).
. See Stevenson’s essay “On Some Technical Elements of
Style in Literature” (section , “The Web”), in Robert Louis
Stevenson, Essays of Travel and in the Art of Writing (New
York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, ), –, esp. and
: “The motive and end of any art whatever is to make a
pattern. . . . The web, then, or the pattern: a web at once sen-
suous and logical, an elegant and pregnant texture: that is
style, that is the foundation of the art of literature.”
. G. K. Chesterton, G. F. Watts (London: Duckworth,
). Borges may be thinking of pp. –, where Chester-
tondiscussessigns,symbols,andthemutabilityof language.
. William Butler Yeats, “After Long Silence,” in W. B.
Yeats, The Poems, ed. Richard J. Finneran (New York:
Macmillan, ), (lines –).
. George Meredith, Modern Love (), Sonnet .
. Shakespeare, Sonnet .
. William Morris, “Two Red Roses across the Moon,”
in Morris, “The Defence of Guenevere” and Other Poems
(London: Longmans, Green, ), –. This line is the
refrain to each of the nine stanzas.

. William Morris, “The Tune of Seven Towers,” in “The
Defence of Guenevere” and Other Poems, –. Again,
Borges quotes the refrain. The poem was written in ,
and was inspired by Dante Gabriel Rossetti’s painting The
Tune of Seven Towers ().
. The lines could be translated as follows:
Wandering imaginary dove
That in_ames the last loves,
Soul of light, music, and _owers,
Wandering imaginary dove.
. Meredith, Modern Love, Sonnet .
. James Joyce, Finnegans Wake (Harmondsworth:
Penguin, ; rpt. ), (end of Book ). The whole
passage runs: “Who were Shem and Shaun the living sons
or daughters of? Night now! Tell me, tell me, tell me, elm!
Night night! Telmetale of stem or stone. Beside the
rivering waters of, hitherandthithering waters of. Night!”
Borges’ attitude toward Joyce’s last novel is ambiguous:
“The justi~cation for the whole period lies in the two
works by Joyce, . . . of which Finnegans Wake, whose pro-
tagonist is the English language, is ineluctably unread-
able, and certainly untranslatable into Spanish.” See
Roberto Alifano, Conversaciones con Borges (Madrid: De-
bate, ), .
. These lines from “Report on Experience,” by Ed-
mund Blunden (–), gain power from the fact that
they echo, in inverted form, a passage from the King James
N O T E S
T O
P A G E S
8 5 – 8 9
138

N O T E S
T O
P A G E S
8 9 – 9 3
139
version of the Bible: “I have been young, and now am old;
yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed beg-
ging bread” (Psalms :).
. “Luck! In the house of breathings lies that word, all
fairness. The walls are of rubinen and the glittergates of
el~nbone. The roof herof is of massicious jasper and a can-
opy of Tyrian awning rises and still descends to it.” James
Joyce, Finnegans Wake, (Book ).
. Samuel Johnson’s Dictionary of the English Language
was published in London in . Walter W. Skeat’s Etymo-
logical Dictionary of the English Language was ~rst pub-
lished in Oxford, England, –. The Shorter Oxford
English Dictionary (based on the twelve-volume OED) was
~rst published in Oxford in .
. Robert Louis Stevenson, Memories and Portraits
(), Chapter : “I have thus played the sedulous ape to
Hazlitt, to Lamb, to Wordsworth, to Sir Thomas Browne,
to Defoe, to Hawthorne, to Montaigne, to Baudelaire, and
to Obermann.”
. Samuel Taylor Coleridge, Biographia Literaria, Chap-
ter : “that willing suspension of disbelief for the moment,
which constitutes poetic faith.”
. These are the last four lines of Samuel Taylor
Coleridge’s “Kubla Khan.”
. Azorín (–), La ruta de Don Quijote (Buenos
Aires: Losada, ). Miguel de Unamuno (–),
Vida de Don Quijote y Sancho según Miguel de Cervantes
Saavedra, nd ed. (Madrid: Renacimiento, ).

. “To draw the longbow” means “to tell tall tales,” “to
make exaggerated statements.”
. “A violent green peacock, deliriated/unlillied in
gold.”
. Paradise Regained, Book , lines –; in The
Complete Works of John Milton, ed. John T. Shawcross
(New York: Doubleday, ), .
. From Milton’s sonnet on his blindness, “When I
Consider How My Light Is Spent” ().
. A Poet’s Creed
. John Keats, “Ode to a Nightingale,” lines –
(stanza ).
. Borges had dealt extensively with this issue in “Los
traductores de las noches” (The Translators of the
Thousand and One Nights), included in his volume La
historia de la eternidad. The scholar Antoine Galland
(–) published his French translation of the Thou-
sand and One Nights in the years –. The British
orientalist Edward William Lane (–) published his
English translation in –.
. The phrase is from Whitman’s Leaves of Grass (
edition), “Song of Myself,” section , line .
. “El inmortal” (The Immortal) was ~rst published in
, in Borges’ collection El Aleph.
. Virgil, Aeneid, Book , line . In John Dryden’s
translation the line runs: “Obscure they went thro’ dreary
shades” (Book , line ). Robert D. Williams renders it
N O T E S
T O
P A G E S
9 4 – 1 1 5
140

as: “They walked exploring the unpeopled night” (Book ,
line ).
. From The Seafarer, ed. Ida Gordon (Manchester,
England: Manchester University Press, ), . See
Borges’ discussion in Chapter of this volume.
. Shakespeare, Sonnet .
. This is the ~rst line of Keats’s “Endymion” ().
. Borges, in conversation with Willis Barnstone, ex-
pressed a desire for anonymity. “‘If the Bible is peacock
feathers, what kind of bird are you?’ I asked. ‘I am,’
Borges answered, ‘the bird’s egg, in its Buenos Aires nest,
unhatched, gladly unseen by anyone with discrimination,
and I emphatically hope it will stay that way!’” Willis
Barnstone, With Borges on an Ordinary Evening in Buenos
Aires: A Memoir (Urbana: University of Illinois Press,
), .
. “Spinoza” was published in a volume dedicated to
Leopoldo Lugones, El otro, el mismo (The Self and the
Other) (Buenos Aires: Emecé Editores, ). The transla-
tion runs thus:
The Jew’s hands, translucent in the dusk,
Polish the lenses time and again.
The dying afternoon is fear, is
Cold, and all afternoons are the same.
The hands and the hyacinth-blue air
That whitens at the ghetto edges
Do not quite exist for this silent
Man who conjures up a clear labyrinth,
Undisturbed by fame—that re_ection
N O T E S
T O
P A G E S
1 1 5 – 1 2 1
141

Of dreams in the dream of another
Mirror—or by maidens’ timid love.
Free of metaphor and myth, he grinds
A stubborn crystal: the in~nite
Map of the One who is all His stars.
Translated by Richard Howard and César Rennert, in Jorge
Luis Borges, Selected Poems, –, ed. Norman
Thomas di Giovanni (New York: Delacorte Press, ),
. A second sonnet devoted to the philosopher, “Baruch
Spinoza,” was published in La moneda de hierro (The Iron
Coin) in , and translated by Willis Barnstone:
A haze of gold, the Occident lights up
The window. Now, the assiduous manuscript
Is waiting, weighed down with the in~nite.
Someone is building God in a dark cup.
A man engenders God. He is a Jew
With saddened eyes and lemon-colored skin;
Time carries him the way a leaf, dropped in
A river, is borne off by waters to
Its end. No matter. The magician moved
Carves out his God with ~ne geometry;
From his disease, from nothing, he’s begun
To construct God, using the word. No one
Is granted such prodigious love as he:
The love that has no hope of being loved.
Barnstone, With Borges on an Ordinary Evening in Buenos
Aires, . For the original, see Borges, Obras completas, vol. 
(Buenos Aires: Emecé Editores, ), .
N O T E S
T O
P A G E
1 2 1
142

O F T H I S A N D T H A T
V E R S A T I L E C R A F T
Calin-Andrei Mihailescu
When Borges came to Harvard in the fall of to
deliver the Norton Lectures, he had long been
deemed precious capital. In his self-deprecating way,
he claimed to be something of an Invisible Man in his
own country, yet his North American contemporaries
seemed certain (polite enthusiasm apart) that his was
one of the names destined to survive through time’s
long run. We know that thus far they were not mis-
taken: Borges has resisted the usual effacement of
I would like to thank Melitta Adamson, Sherri Clendinning, Rich-
ard Green, Christina Johnson, Gloria Koyounian, Thomas Orange,
Andrew Szeib, Jane Toswell, and Marek Urban. Without their help,
my efforts to get these lectures into book form would have been more
painful. I am most indebted to Maria Ascher, senior editor at Harvard
University Press, whose professionalism and utter devotion to Borges
made this book possible.

time,* and the charm and power of this forget-
ting-dodger’s work are undiminished. For more than
thirty years the six lectures never made it into print,
the tapes gathering dust in the quiet ever-after of a li-
brary vault. When they had gathered enough, they
were found. The spectacular precedent of Igor Stra-
vinsky’s Poetics of Music in the Form of Six Lessons,
delivered as Norton Lectures in –and pub-
lished by Harvard University Press in , shows
that a long delay in the transition to print need not de-
prive lectures of their relevance. Borges’ have as
much appeal now as they had three decades ago.
This Craft of Verse is an introduction to literature,
to taste, and to Borges himself. In the context of his
complete works, it compares only with Borges, oral
(), which contains the ~ve lectures—somewhat
narrower in scope than these—that he gave May–June
at the University of Belgrano in Buenos Aires.†
O F
T H I S
A N D
T H A T
V E R S A T I L E
C R A F T
144
* With his customary irony, Borges declared that he was not as
good at mocking himself as other writers—his great friend Adolfo
Bioy Casares among them. “It consoles me to know that I will be dis-
solved by forgetfulness. Forgetting will make me anonymous, will it
not?” Borges—Bioy: Confesiones, confesiones, ed. Rodolfo Braceli
(Buenos Aires: Sudamericana, ), –.
† Borges, oral contains the “personal part” of those Belgrano lec-
tures. The topics include (in chronological order) the book, immor-

These Norton Lectures, which precede Borges, oral by
a decade, are a treasury of literary riches that come to
us in essayistic, unassuming, often ironic, and always
stimulating forms.
The ~rst lecture, “The Riddle of Poetry,” delivered
on October , , deals with the ontological status
of poetry and effectively leads us into the volume as a
whole. “The Metaphor” (delivered November ) dis-
cusses, on the model of Leopoldo Lugones, the way in
which poets through the centuries have used and re-
used the same metaphorical patterns, which, Borges
suggests, can be reduced to twelve “essential af~n-
ities,” the rest being merely designed to astonish and
therefore ephemeral. In “The Telling of the Tale” (De-
cember ), devoted to epic poetry, Borges comments
on the modern world’s neglect of the epic, speculates
about the death of the novel, and looks at the way the
contemporary human condition is re_ected in the ide-
ology of the novel: “We do not really believe in happi-
O F
T H I S
A N D
T H A T
V E R S A T I L E
C R A F T
145
tality, Swedenborg, the detective story, and time. Borges, oral was first
published by Emecé Editores in Buenos Aires in , and was re-
printed in Borges, Obras completas, vol. (Buenos Aires: Emecé
Editores, ), –. Since its publication, it has become a stan-
dard reference for Borges scholars and for readers in the Hispanic
world.

ness, and this is one of the poverties of our time.” Here
he shows af~nities with Walter Benjamin and Franz
Kafka (the latter of whom he considered a lesser writer
than G. B. Shaw or G. K. Chesterton): he advocates the
immediacy of storytelling and seems something of an
anti-novelist, invoking laziness as the main reason for
not having written novels. “Word-Music and Trans-
lation” (February , ) is a virtuoso meditation
on the translation of poetry. “Thought and Poetry”
(March ) illustrates his essayistic rather than theo-
retical take on the status of literature. While holding
that magical, musical truth is more potent than rea-
son’s stable ~ctions, Borges argues that meaning in po-
etry is a fetish, and that powerful metaphors unsettle
hermeneutic frameworks rather than enhancing mean-
ing. Finally, “A Poet’s Creed” (April ) is a confes-
sional text, a kind of literary testament that he
composed “in the middle of life’s way.” In 1968 Borges
was still at the height of his powers and would yet pub-
lish ~rst-rate works, such as El informe de Brodie (Dr.
Brodie’s Report; )—which contains “La Intrusa”
(The Intruder), the story he claimed was his best—and
El libro de arena (The Book of Sand; ).
These Norton Lectures were delivered by a seer
who has often been ranked with the other “great blind
O F
T H I S
A N D
T H A T
V E R S A T I L E
C R A F T
146

men of the West.” Borges’ unfailing admiration for
Homer, his high but complex praise for Joyce, and his
thinly disguised doubt of Milton say much about this
tradition. His progressive blindness had become
nearly total by the s, when he was able to see noth-
ing more than an amorphous ~eld of yellow. He dedi-
cated El oro de los tigres (The Gold of the Tigers; )
to this last and most loyal color of his world. Borges’
style of delivery was as singular as it was compelling:
while speaking, he would look upward with a gentle
and shy expression on his face, seeming to materially
touch the world of the texts—their colors, fabric, mu-
sic. Literature, for him, was a mode of experience.
Unlike the brusque and idiosyncratic tone that
characterizes most of his Spanish interviews and pub-
lic lectures, Borges’ manner in This Craft of Verse is
that of a versatile and soft-spoken guest of honor. Yet
this book, though wonderfully accessible, does not
offer easy-to-munch-on teachings; rather, it is full
of deeply personal re_ections, and is neither naive
norcynical. It preserves the immediacy of its oral de-
livery—its _ow, humor, and occasional hesitations.
(Borges’ syntax has been altered here only as much as
is necessary to make the prose grammatical and read-
able. Also, occasional misquotations on his part have
O F
T H I S
A N D
T H A T
V E R S A T I L E
C R A F T
147

been corrected.) This spoken-written text addresses
its audience with informality and much warmth.
Borges’ facility with English is charming. He
learned the language in his early childhood from his
paternal grandmother, who had come to Buenos
Aires from Staffordshire. Both his parents knew
English well (his father was a professor of psychology
and modern languages; his mother, a translator).
Borges spoke it _uidly, musically, with delicate conso-
nants, and took particular delight in the “stark and
voweled” sound of Old English.
One cannot quite take at face value Borges’ claim
that he is “groping” his way along, that he is a “timid
thinker rather than a daring one,” and that his cul-
tural background is “a series of unfortunate miscella-
nies.”* Borges was immensely learned, and one of the
chief themes of his work—the theme of the world as
an in~nite library—has clear autobiographical conno-
tations. His memory was extraordinary: he delivered
these six lectures without the help of notes, since his
poor eyesight made it impossible for him to read.†
O F
T H I S
A N D
T H A T
V E R S A T I L E
C R A F T
148
* See Chapter ; also Borges—Bioy: Confesiones, confesiones, .
† Borges’ memory was legendary. An American professor of
Romanian origin reports that, during a chat with Borges in at
the University of Indiana, the Argentine writer recited to him an

Aided by this remarkable mnemonic capacity, Borges
enriches his lectures with myriad textual exam-
ples—his aesthetics is always rooted in the primary
ground of literature. For literary theorists, he does
not have much use; for critics, he has just a little; and
philosophers interest him only to the extent that their
ideas do not forsake the world for pure abstraction.
Thus, his remembering of world literature lives the
belles lettres as he speaks.
In This Craft of Verse, Borges converses with au-
thors and texts he never lost the pleasure of requoting
and discussing, sources ranging from Homer, Virgil,
Beowulf, the Norse Eddas, the Thousand and One
Nights, the Koran, and the Bible, to Rabelais, Cer-
vantes, Shakespeare, Keats, Heine, Poe, Stevenson,
Whitman, Joyce, and of course himself.
Borges’ greatness is due in part to a wit and polish
that characterize not only his works but his life as
well. Asked whether he had ever been visited in his
dreams by Juan Perón (the Argentine dictator, and
O F
T H I S
A N D
T H A T
V E R S A T I L E
C R A F T
149
eight-stanza Romanian poem which he had learned from its author, a
young refugee, in Geneva in . Borges did not know Romanian.
The power of his memory was also peculiar in that he tended to re-
member words and works by others, while claiming to have com-
pletely forgotten texts that he himself had written.

widower of Evita), Borges retorted: “My dreams have
their style—there is no way I will have him in my
dreams.”*
O F
T H I S
A N D
T H A T
V E R S A T I L E
C R A F T
150
* Borges—Bioy: Confesiones, confesiones, . Other collections of
interviews with Borges include Dos palabras antes de morir y otras
entrevistas, ed. Fernando Mateo (Buenos Aires: LC Editor, );
Borges, el memorioso: Conversaciones de Jorge Luis Borges con Anto-
nio Carrizo (Mexico City: Fondo de Cultura Económica, );
Borges: Imágenes, memorias, diálogos, ed. María Esther Vázquez, nd
ed. (Caracas: Monte Ávila, ); and Jorge Luis Borges and Osvaldo
Ferrari, Diálogos últimos (Buenos Aires: Sudamericana, ).

I N D E X
Alfred, King, , 
America, , 
Anglo-Saxon. See Old English
Arabian Nights, , , , , ,
, –, 
Ariosto, Ludovico: Orlando
Furioso, 
Arnold, Matthew, –
Augustine, Saint, 
Azorín: La ruta de Don Quijote,

Barbusse, Henri: Le Feu, 
“Battle of Brunanburh,” , –,
–
Baudelaire, Charles, ; Les
Fleurs du mal, 
Benjamin, Walter, 
Beowulf, , –, , 
Berkeley, George, –, 
Bible, , –, , –, –,
–, , 
Blunden, Edmund, 
Borges, oral, –
Browne, Thomas, 
Browning, Elizabeth Barrett: Son-
nets from the Portuguese, 
Browning, Robert, –
Buber, Martin, –
Buddha, 
Buenos Aires, , , , 
Bunyan, John: The Pilgrim’s Prog-
ress, 
Burton, Richard, , , 
Butler, Samuel, 
Byron, George Gordon, Lord:
“She Walks in Beauty,”
–
Calderón de la Barca, Pedro,

Campbell, Roy, , –
Cansinos-Asséns, Rafael, , 
Carlyle, Thomas: Sartor Resartus,
–, 
Cervantes, Miguel de, ; Don
Quixote, –, , –,

Chapman, George, –, 
Chaucer, Geoffrey, , 

Chesterton, G. K., , , ;
“The Ballad of the White
Horse,” –; “A Second
Childhood,” 
China, , , 
Christianity, 
Chuan Tzu, –
Coleridge, Samuel Taylor, 
Conrad, Joseph, 
Crane, Stephen: The Red Badge of
Courage, 
Croce, Benedetto, , 
Cummings, E. E., –
Dante Alighieri, ; Divine Com-
edy, 
Darío, Rubén, , 
De Quincey, Thomas, , 
Dickens, Charles, 
Donne, John, 
Dostoevsky, Feodor, 
Doyle, Arthur Conan: Adventures
of Sherlock Holmes, , ,

Dujovne, León, 
Elizabeth, Queen, 
Emerson, Ralph Waldo, , , 
England, , , 
English language, –, , –,
, , 
Farid al-Din Attar, ; Parliament
of Birds, 
Fernández, Macedonio, 
Finnesburg, fragment of, 
FitzGerald, Edward, –
Flaubert, Gustave: Salammbô, 
Freire, Ricardo Jaimes, 
French language, , , 
Frost, Robert: “Acquainted with
the Night,” ; “Stopping by
Woods on a Snowy Evening,”
–, –
Galland, Antoine, 
Geneva, 
George, Stefan: Blumen des Böse,

German language, , , –
Gibbon, Edward, 
Gnosticism, 
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von:
Wilhelm Meisters Lehrjahre, 
Góngora y Argote, Luis de, –,

Gospels, , –
Greece, , –, –, –, ,

Greek Anthology, 
Hafiz of Shiraz, 
Hanslick, Eduard, , 
Harvard University, 
Hawthorne, Nathaniel: The Scar-
let Letter, 
Hazlitt, William, 
Hebrews, , , 
Heine, Heinrich, , ; Lyrisches
Intermezzo, 
Hengist of Ephesus, , 
Heraclitus, 
Hölderlin, Friedrich, 
Holy Ghost, –, , 
Homer, –, , –, , , ,
, , , –, , ; Iliad,
–, , –, , ; Odyssey,
–, –, , 
I N D E X
152

Horsa, 
Hume, David, 
India, , , 
Islam, 
James, Henry, ; The Aspern Pa-
pers, 
Jáuregui, Juan de, 
Jesus, , , 
Jews, , , 
John, Saint, 
John of the Cross, Saint, –,

Johnson, Samuel, 
Joyce, James, , , ;
Finnegans Wake, –; Ulys-
ses, 
Judas, –
Kabbalah, , 
Kafka, Franz, ; The Castle,
–
Keats, John, , ; “Ode to a
Nightingale,” –; “On
First Looking into Chapman’s
Homer,” –
Khayyám, Omar: Rubáiyát, ,
–
Kipling, Rudyard, , ; From
Sea to Sea, ; “A Sahib’s War,”

Koran, , 
Lane, Edward William, 
Lang, Andrew, , 
Langland, William, 
Latin, , 
Lawrence, T. E.: Seven Pillars of
Wisdom, 
León, Fray Luis de, , 
Lessing, Gotthold, 
London, 
Longfellow, Henry Wadsworth, 
Lucan, 
Lugones, Leopoldo, , , ,
; Lunario sentimental, 
Luther, Martin, 
Manrique, Jorge, 
Melville, Herman, ; Moby-Dick,
–
Mencken, H. L., 
Meredith, George, , –
Milton, John, , ; Paradise Re-
gained, , 
Morris, William, 
Muslims, 
Newman, Francis William, 
Nibelungenlied, 
Norton Lectures, –
Old English, –, –, –,
–, –, –, , ,
, –
Old Norse, , –, 
Oxford Book of Modern Verse,
The, 
Paris, 
Pater, Walter, 
Perón, Juan, –
Persian language, , –, 
Plato, ; Phaedrus, –
Poe, Edgar Allan, , –, 
Pope, Alexander, , , , 
I N D E X
153
153

Prescott, William: History of the
Conquest of Peru, 
Psycho (film), 
Pythagoras, 
Rabelais, François, , 
Revelation, Book of, 
Rome, 
Rossetti, Dante Gabriel, –, ,

Rouse, W. H. D., 
Sandburg, Carl, 
Scholasticism, 
Schopenhauer, Arthur, , , ,

Scots, 
Scott, Walter: Ivanhoe, 
Seneca, 
Shakespeare, William, , , , ,
, , –, ; Hamlet, ;
Macbeth, 
Shaw, Bernard, , , 
Shorter Oxford English Dictionary,

Skeat, Walter W., , 
Socrates, –
“Song of Songs,” , 
Spanish language, , –, ,
, , 
Spengler, Oswald: The Decline of
the West, 
Spinoza, Baruch, , 
Stevenson, Robert Louis, , ,
, –, , , ; Dr. Je-
kyll and Mr. Hyde, ; “Re-
quiem,” –; Weir of
Hermiston, 
Stravinsky, Igor: Poetics of Music
in the Form of Six Lessons, 
Sturluson, Snorri, 
Swinburne, Algernon Charles, 
Symons, Arthur, 
Tacitus, 
Tennyson, Alfred, , –,
–
Twain, Mark: Adventures of
Huckleberry Finn, ; Life on
the Mississippi, ; Roughing
It, 
Unamuno, Miguel de: Vida de
Don Quijote y Sancho, 
University of Belgrano, 
Urquhart, Thomas, 
Verlaine, Paul, 
Virgil, , , , 
Vogelweide, Walther von der,
–, 
Völsunga Saga, 
Watts, G. F., 
Wells, H. G.: The Invisible Man,

Whistler, James McNeill, 
Whitehead, Alfred North, 
Whitman, Walt, , , ;
Leaves of Grass, 
Wilde, Oscar, 
Wolfe, Thomas: Of Time and the
River, 
Wordsworth, William, , 
Yeats, William Butler, , –,
; “Leda and the Swan,” 
I N D E X
154

