
Penguin Books
A Universal History of Infamy
Jorge Luis Borges was born in Buenos Aires in  
and was educated in Europe. One of the major 
writers of our time, he has published many 
collections of poems, essays, and short stories. In 
, Borges shared the International Publishers’ 
Prize with Samuel Beckett. The Ingram Merrill 
Foundation granted him its Annual Literary Award 
in  for his ‘outstanding contribution to 
literature’. Recently, he was awarded the degree of 
Doctor of Letters, honoris causa, from both Columbia 
and Oxford, and the same year won the fifth biennial 
Jerusalem Prize. Time has called him ‘the greatest 
living writer in the Spanish language today’, while 
the New York Herald Tribune has described him as 
‘unquestionably the most brilliant South American 
writing today’. He is former Director of the 
Argentine National Library. The Book of Imaginary 
Beings and Labyrinths are also available in Penguins
Norman Thomas di Giovanni is an American now 
living in Scotland. He worked with Borges in Buenos 
Aires from  to , and, to date, has produced 
six volumes of Borges’s verse and prose in English.


jorge luis borges
a universal
history of infamy
Translated by Norman Thomas di Giovanni
penguin books

Penguin Books Ltd, Harmondsworth, Middlesex, England 
Penguin Books Australia Ltd, Ringwood, Victoria, Australia 
Penguin Books (N.Z.) Ltd, - Wairau Road,
Auckland , New Zealand
Copyright © Emecé Editores, S.A., and 
Norman Thomas di Giovanni, , , 
The original title of this book is Historia universal de la infamia, 
Copyright © Emecé Editores, S.A., Buenos Aires, .
First published in the United States of America by
E. P. Dutton & Co. Inc., New York,  and simultaneously
in Canada by Clarke, Irwin & Co. Ltd, Toronto and Vancouver
Published in Great Britain by Allen Lane  
Published in Penguin Books  
Made and printed in Great Britain by 
Hazell Watson & Viney Ltd, Aylesbury, Bucks 
Set in Monotype Garamond
This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by 
way of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out, or otherwise 
circulated without the publisher’s prior consent in any form of 
binding or cover other than that in which it is published and 
without a similar condition including this condition being 
imposed on the subsequent purchaser

Assistance for the translation of this 
volume was given by the Ingram 
Merrill Foundation
Grateful acknowledgement is made to 
Seymour Lawrence/Delacorte Press 
for permission to reprint ‘The 
Generous Enemy’, Copyright © 
Emecé Editores, S.A., and Norman 
Thomas di Giovanni, , , and 
to Jonathan Cape Ltd, publishers of 
The Aleph and Other Stories -, 
for permission to print ‘Streetcorner 
Man’, which appears here in a new 
translation.
Parts of this book have appeared in 
the following places:
The Antioch Review: ‘Of Exactitude in 
Science’;

Esquire: ‘The Widow Ching, Lady 
Pirate’;
Harper’s Magazine: ‘Tom Castro, the 
Implausible Impostor’;
Intellectual Digest: ‘The Disinterested 
Killer Bill Harrigan’;
New York: ‘Monk Eastman, Purveyor 
of Iniquities’ (under the title ‘Old 
New York’s Classic Yegg’);
The New Yorker: ‘The Wizard 
Postponed’, ‘A Theologian in 
Death’, ‘The Mirror of Ink’, ‘The 
Chamber of Statues’, ‘Tale of the 
Two Dreamers’ (collected under the 
title ‘Twice-told Tales’);
TriQuarterly: ‘The Masked Dyer, 
Hakim of Merv’;
Western Humanities Review:
‘ Streetcorner Man’;
‘The Generous Enemy’ first 
appeared in Selected Translations 
- by W. S. Merwin 
(Athenaeum Publishers); the preface 
to the  edition, in TriQuarterly.

I inscribe this book to S.D.: English, 
innumerable and an Angel. Also: I offer her 
that kernel of myself that I have saved, 
somehow - the central heart that deals not 
in words, traffics not with dreams and is 
untouched by time, by joy, by adversities.


Contents
Preface to the  Edition    
Preface to the First Edition   
a u n i v e r s a l h i s t o r y o f i n f a m y
The Dread Redeemer Lazarus Morell    
Tom Castro, the Implausible Impostor    
The Widow Ching, Lady Pirate    
Monk Eastman, Purveyor of Iniquities    
The Disinterested Killer Bill Harrigan    
The Insulting Master of Etiquette Kôtsuké 
no Suké    
The Masked Dyer, Hakim of Merv   
s t r e e t c o r n e r m a n     
e t c e t e r a
A Theologian in Death   

The Chamber of Statues    
Tale of the Two Dreamers    
The Wizard Postponed    
The Mirror of Ink    
A Double for Mohammed    
The Generous Enemy    
Of Exactitude in Science   
List of Sources    
Bibliographical Note   

Preface to the  Edition
I should define as baroque that style which deliberately 
exhausts (or tries to exhaust) all its possibilities and 
which borders on its own parody. It was in vain that 
Andrew Lang, back in the eighteen-eighties, attempted 
a burlesque of Pope’s Odyssey; that work was already 
its own parody, and the would-be parodist was unable 
to go beyond the original text. ‘Baroque’ is the name 
of one of the forms of the syllogism; the eighteenth 
century applied it to certain excesses in the architecture 
and painting of the century before. I would say that 
the final stage of all styles is baroque when that style 
only too obviously exhibits or overdoes its own tricks. 
The baroque is intellectual, and Bernard Shaw has 
stated that all intellectual labour is essentially humorous. 
Such humour is not deliberate in the work of Baltasar 
Gracian, but is deliberate, or self-conscious, in John 
Donne’s.
The very tide of these pages flaunts their baroque 
character. To curb them would amount to destroying


them; that is why I now prefer to invoke the pronounce- 
ment ‘What I have written I have written’  (John  :) 
and to reprint them, twenty year later, as they stand. 
They are the irresponsible game of a shy young man 
who dared not write stories and so amused himself by 
falsifying and distorting (without any aesthetic justi- 
fication whatever) the tales of others. From these 
ambiguous exercises, he went on to the laboured 
composition of a straightforward story - ‘ Streetcorner 
Man’ - which he signed with the name of one of his 
great grandfathers, Francisco Bustos, and which has 
enjoyed an unusual and somewhat mystifying success.
In that story, which is about life on the outer edge of 
old-time Buenos Aires, it will be noted that I have 
introduced a few cultivated words - ‘intestines’, 
‘involutions’, and so forth. I did so because the hood- 
lum aspires to refinement, or (this reason invalidates 
the other but is perhaps the true one) because hoodlums 
are individuals and do not always speak like The 
Hoodlum, who is a platonic type.
The theologians of the Great Vehicle point out that 
the essence of the universe is emptiness. Insofar as they 
refer to that particle of the universe which is this book, 
they are entirely right. Scaffolds and pirates populate it, 
and the word ‘infamy’ in the title is thunderous, but 
behind the sound and fury there is nothing. The book 
is no more than appearance, than a surface of images; 
for that very reason, it may prove enjoyable. Its author


was a somewhat unhappy man, but he amused himself 
writing it; may some echo of that pleasure reach the 
reader.
In the ‘Etcetera’ section, I have added three new 
pieces.
j. l. b.


Preface to the First Edition
The exercises in narrative prose that make up this book 
were written in  and . They stem, I believe, 
from my rereadings of Stevenson and Chesterton, and 
also from Sternberg’s early films, and perhaps from a 
certain biography of Evaristo Carriego. They overly 
exploit certain tricks: random enumerations, sudden 
shifts of continuity, and the paring down of a man’s 
whole life to two or three scenes. (A similar concern 
with visual aims gives shape to the story “Streetcorner 
Man”) They are not, they do not try to be, psychological.
As for the examples of magic that close the volume, 
I have no other rights to them than those of translator 
and reader. Sometimes I suspect that good readers 
are even blacker and rarer swans than good writers. 
Will anyone deny that the pieces attributed by Valery 
to his pluperfect Edmond Teste are, on the whole, less 
admirable than those of Teste’s wife and friends? 
Reading, obviously, is an activity which comes after 
that of writing; it is more modest, more unobtrusive, 
more intellectual.
j. l. b
Buenos Aires,  May 



A UNIVERSAL
HISTORY OF INFAMY


The Dread Redeemer 
Lazarus Morell
The Remote Cause
In , the Spanish missionary Bartolomé de las Casas, 
taking greaty pity on the Indians who were languishing 
in the hellish workpits of Antillean gold mines, 
suggested to Charles V, king of Spain, a scheme for 
importing blacks, so that they might languish in the 
hellish workpits of Antillean gold mines. To this odd 
philanthropic twist we owe, all up and down the 
Americas, endless things - W. C. Handy’s blues; the 
Parisian success of the Uruguayan lawyer and painter of 
Negro genre, don Pedro Figari; the solid native prose 
of another Uruguayan, don Vicente Rossi, who traced 
the origin of the tango to Negroes; the mythological 
dimensions of Abraham Lincoln; the five hundred 
thousand dead of the Civil War and its three thousand 
three hundred millions spent in military pensions; the 
entrance of the verb ‘to lynch’ into the thirteenth 
edition of the dictionary of the Spanish Academy; King 
Vidor’s impetuous film Hallelujah; the lusty bayonet 
charge led by the Argentine captain Miguel Soler, at


the head of his famous regiment of ‘Mulattoes and 
Blacks’, in the Uruguayan battle of Cerrito; the Negro 
killed by Martín Fierro; the deplorable Cuban rumba 
‘The Peanut Vender’; the arrested, dungeon-ridden 
Napoleonism of Toussaint L’Ouverture; the cross and 
the snake of Haitian voodoo rites and the blood of 
goats whose throats were slit by the papaloi’s machete; 
the habanera, mother of the tango; another old Negro 
dance, of Buenos Aires and Montevideo, the candombe.
And, further, the great and blameworthy life of the 
nefarious redeemer Lazarus Morell.
The Place
The Father of Waters, the Mississippi, the largest river 
in the world, was the worthy theatre of this peerless 
scoundrel. (Alvarez de Pineda discovered the river, and 
its earliest explorer was Captain Hernando de Soto, the 
old conqueror of Peru, who helped while away the Inca 
chief Atahualpa’s months of prison, teaching him the 
game of chess. When de Soto died, he was given the 
Mississippi’s waters for a grave.)
The Mississippi is a broad-bosomed river, an 
immense, dim brother of the Paraná, the Uruguay, the 
Amazon, and the Orinoco. It is a river of muddy waters; 
each year, disgorged by it, over four hundred million 
tons of silt profane the Gulf of Mexico. From time 
immemorial, so much muck has built up a delta, where


gigantic swamp cypresses grow out of the debris of a 
continent in perpetual dissolution, and where labyrinths 
of mud and rushes and dead fish extend the bounds and 
the peace of this foul-smelling alluvial domain. Up- 
stream, between the Arkansas and the Ohio, is another 
stretch of lowlands. Living there is a sallow race of 
squalid men, prone to fever, who avidly gape at stone 
and iron, for in their environs there is little but sand, 
timber, and muddy water.
The Men
At the beginning of the nineteenth century (the date 
that concerns us), the vast cotton plantations along the 
river were worked, from sunup to sundown, by blacks. 
These blacks slept on dirt floors in wooden cabins. 
Apart from mother-child relations, kinships were casual 
and unclear. They had first names, but they made do 
without family names. Nor could they read. Their soft 
falsetto voices intoned an English of drawled vowels. 
They worked in rows, bent under the overseer’s lash. 
When they ran away, full-bearded men, springing onto 
beautiful horses, tracked them down with snarling 
packs of hounds.
To successive layers of animal hopes and African 
fears there had been added the words of the Bible. 
Their faith, therefore, lay in Christ, They sang deeply 
and in chorus, ‘Go down, Moses.’ The Mississippi


served them as a magnificent image of the paltry Jordan.
The owners of this hard-worked land and of these 
black gangs were idle, greedy gentlemen with flowing 
locks, who lived in big mansions that overlooked the 
river - always with a white pine, Greek Revival portico. 
A good slave was worth a thousand dollars and did not 
last long. Some of them were thankless enough to fall 
ill and die. Out of such uncertainties, one had to wring 
the greatest return. This is why slaves were kept in 
the fields from first light to last; this is why plantations 
required yearly crops, such as cotton or tobacco or 
sugarcane. The soil, overworked and mismanaged by 
this greedy cultivation, was left exhausted within a short 
time, and tangled, miry wastes encroached upon the 
land. On abandoned farms, on the outskirts of towns, 
among the thick canebrakes, and in the abject bayous 
lived the poor whites. They were fishermen, occasional 
hunters, and horse thieves. They often begged bits of 
stolen food from the blacks, and even in their lowly 
condition these poor whites kept up a certain pride - 
that of their untainted, unmixed blood. Lazarus Morell 
was one of them.
The Man
The daguerreotypes of Morell usually published in 
American magazines are not authentic. This lack of 
genuine representations of so memorable and famous


a man cannot be accidental. We may suppose that 
Morell resisted the camera, essentially, so as not to 
leave behind pointless clues, and, at the same time, to 
foster the mystery that surrounded him. We know, 
however, that as a young man he was not favoured 
with looks, and that his eyes, which were too close 
together, and his straight lips were not prepossessing. 
Thereafter, the years conferred upon him that majesty 
peculiar to white-haired scoundrels and daring, un- 
punished criminals. He was an old Southern gentleman, 
despite a miserable childhood and an inglorious life. 
Versed in Scripture, he preached with unusual con- 
viction ; ‘I saw Lazarus Morell in the pulpit,’ noted the 
proprietor of a Baton Rouge gambling house, ‘and 
I listened to his edifying words and I saw the tears 
gather in his eyes. I knew that in God’s sight he was an 
adulterer, a Negro-stealer, and a murderer, but my eyes 
wept, too.’
Another fair record of these holy effusions is furnished 
by Morell himself. ‘I opened my Bible at random,’ he 
wrote, ‘and came upon a fitting verse from Saint Paul, 
and I preached an hour and twenty minutes. Nor was 
this time misspent by my assistant Crenshaw and his 
confederates, for they were outside rounding up all the 
hearers’ horses. We sold them on the Arkansas side of 
the river, except for one spirited chestnut that I reserved 
for my own private use. He pleased Crenshaw as well, 
but I made him see that the animal was not for him.’


The Method
The stealing of horses in one state and selling them in 
another were barely more than a digression in Morell’s 
criminal career, but they foreshadowed the method 
that now assures him his rightful place in a Universal 
History of Infamy. This method is unique not only for 
the peculiar circumstances that distinquished it but also 
for the sordidness it required, for its deadly manipula- 
tion of hope, and for its step by step development, so 
like the hideous unfolding of a nightmare. Al Capone 
and Bugs Moran were later to operate in a great city, 
with dazzling sums of money and lowly submachine 
guns, but their affairs were vulgar. They merely vied 
for a monopoly. As to numbers of men, Morell came 
to command some thousand - all sworn confederates. 
Two hundred of them made up the Heads, or Council, 
and they gave the orders that the remaining eight 
hundred carried out. All the risks fell upon these active 
agents, or strikers, as they were called. In the event of 
trouble, it was they who were handed over to justice or 
thrown into the Mississippi with a stone fixed securely 
about their feet. A good many of them were mulattoes. 
Their diabolical mission was the following:
Flashing rings on their fingers to inspire respect, they 
travelled up and down the vast plantations of the South. 
They would pick out a wretched black and offer him 
freedom. They would tell him that if he ran away from 
his master and allowed them to sell him, he would


receive a portion of the money paid for him, and they 
would then help him escape again, this second time 
sending him to a free state. Money and freedom, the 
jingle of silver dollars together with his liberty - what 
greater temptation could they offer him? The slave 
became emboldened for his first escape.
The river provided the natural route. A canoe; the 
hold of a steamboat; a scow; a great raft as big as the 
sky, with a cabin at the point or three or four wigwams 
- the means mattered little, what counted was feeling 
the movement and the safety of the unceasing river. 
The black would be sold on some other plantation, 
then run away again to the canebrakes or the morasses. 
There his terrible benefactors (about whom he now 
began to have serious misgivings) cited obscure 
expenses and told him they had to sell him one final 
time. On his return, they said, they would give him 
part of both sales and his freedom. The man let himself 
be sold, worked for a while, and on his final escape 
defied the hounds and the whip. He then made his way 
back bloodied, sweaty, desperate, and sleepy.
Final Release
The legal aspect of these doings must now be reviewed. 
The runaway slave was not put up for sale by Morell’s 
gang until his first master had advertised and offered a 
reward to any man who would catch him. An advertise-


ment of this kind warranted the person to take the 
property, if found. The black then became a property 
in trust, so that his subsequent sale was only a breach 
of trust, not stealing. Redress by a civil action for such 
a breach was useless, as the damages were never 
paid.
All this was very reassuring - but not entirely fool- 
proof. The black, out of sheer gratitude or misery, 
might open his mouth. A jug of rye whisky in some 
Cairo brothel, where the son of a bitch, born a slave, 
would squander those good dollars that they had no 
business letting him have, and their secret was spilled. 
Throughout these years, abolitionist agitators roamed 
the length and breadth of the North - a mob of danger- 
ous madmen who opposed private property, preached 
the emancipation of slaves, and incited them to run 
away. Morell was not going to let himself be taken in 
by those anarchists. He was no Yankee, he was a 
Southern white, the son and grandson of whites, and 
he hoped one day to retire from business and become 
a gentleman and have his own miles of cotton fields 
and rows of bent-over slaves. He was not about to 
take pointless risks - not with his experience.
The runaway expected his freedom. Lazarus Morell’s 
shadowy mulattoes would give out an order among 
themselves that was sometimes barely more than a nod 
of the head, and the slave would be freed from sight, 
hearing, touch, day, infamy, time, his benefactors, pity,


the air, the hound packs, the world, hope, sweat, 
and himself. A bullet, a knife, or a blow, and the 
Mississippi turtles and catfish would receive the last 
evidence.
The Cataclysm
In the hands of reliable men, the business had to 
prosper. At the beginning of , Morell had already 
‘emancipated’ some seventy blacks, and many others 
were ready to follow the lead of these lucky forerunners. 
The field of operations grew wider, and it became 
essential to take on new associates. Among those who 
swore to the oath was a young man from Arkansas, 
one Virgil Stewart, who very soon made himself 
conspicuous for his cruelty. Stewart was the nephew 
of a gentleman who had had many slaves decoyed away. 
In August  this young man broke his oath and 
exposed Morell and his whole gang. Morell’s house in 
New Orleans was surrounded by the authorities. Only 
due to their negligence, or perhaps through a bribe, 
was Morell able to make good an escape.
Three days passed. During this time, Morell remained 
hidden on Toulouse Street in an old house with court- 
yards that were filled with vines and statues. It seems 
that he took to eating little and would stalk up and 
down the dim, spacious rooms in his bare feet, smoking 
thoughtful cigars. By a slave of the place, he sent two


letters to Natchez and a third to Red River. On the 
fourth day, three men joined him, and they stayed until 
dawn, arguing over plans. On the fifth day, Morell got 
out of bed as it was growing dusk and, asking for a 
razor, carefully shaved off his beard. Then he dressed 
and left. At an easy pace, he made his way across the 
city’s northern suburbs. Once in the country, skirting 
the Mississippi flats, he walked more briskly.
His scheme was foolhardy. He planned to enlist the 
services of the last men still to owe him honour - the 
South’s obliging blacks. They had watched their 
companions run off and never seen them reappear. 
Their freedom, therefore, was real. Morell’s object was 
to raise the blacks against the whites, to capture and 
sack New Orleans, and to take possession of the 
territory. Morell, brought down and nearly destroyed 
by Stewart’s betrayal, contemplated a nationwide 
response - a response in which criminal elements would 
be exalted to the point of redemption and a place in 
history. With this aim, he started out for Natchez, 
where he enjoyed greater strength. I copy his account 
of that journey:
I walked four days, and no opportunity offered for me to 
get a horse. The fifth day, about twelve, I stopped at a 
creek to get some water and rest a little. While I was 
sitting on a log, looking down the road the way that I 
had come, a man came in sight riding on a good-looking 
horse. The very moment I saw him, I was determined to


have his horse. I arose and drew an elegant rifle pistol on 
him and ordered him to dismount. He did so, and I took 
his horse by the bridle and pointed down the creek, and 
ordered him to walk before me. He went a few hundred 
yards and stopped. I made him undress himself. He said, 
‘If you are determined to kill me, let me have time to 
pray before I die.’ I told him I had no time to hear him 
pray. He dropped on his knees, and I shot him through 
the back of the head. I ripped open his belly and took 
out his entrails, and sunk him in the creek. I then searched 
his pockets, and found four hundred dollars and thirty- 
seven cents, and a number of papers that I did not take 
time to examine. His boots were brand-new, and fitted 
me genteelly. I put them on and sunk my old shoes in 
the creek.
That was how I obtained the horse I needed, and 
directed my course for Natchez in much better style than 
I had been for the last five days.
The Disruption
Morell leading rebellions of blacks who dreamed of 
lynching him; Morell lynched by armies of blacks he 
dreamed of leading - it hurts me to confess that 
Mississippi history took advantage of neither of these 
splendid opportunities. Nor, contrary to all poetic 
justice (or poetic symmetry), did the river of his crimes 
become his grave. On the second of January  
Lazarus Morell died of a lung ailment in the Natchez


hospital, where he had been interned under the name 
Silas Buckley. A fellow patient on the ward recognized 
him. On the second and on the fourth, the slaves of 
certain plantations attempted an uprising, but they 
were put down without a great deal of bloodshed.

Tom Castro, 
the Implausible Impostor
Tom Castro is what I call him, for this was the name he 
was known by, around , in the streets and houses 
of Talcahuano, Santiago, and Valparaiso, and it is only 
fitting now that he comes back to these shores - even 
if only as a ghost and as mere light reading - that he go 
by this name again. The registry of births in Wapping 
lists him as Arthur Orton, and enters the name under 
the date  June . It is known that he was a butcher’s 
son, that his childhood suffered the drabness and 
squalor of London slums, and that he felt the call of the 
sea. This last fact is not uncommon. Running away to 
sea is, for the English, the traditional break from 
parental authority - the road to adventure; Geography 
fosters it, and so does the Bible (Psalms, ): ‘They 
that go down to the sea in ships, that do business in 
great waters; These see the works of the Lord, and his 
wonders in the deep.’
Orton ran away from his familiar, dirty, brick-red 
streets, went down to the sea in a ship, gazed at the


Southern Cross with the usual disappointment, and 
deserted in the Chilean port of Valparaiso. As an 
individual, he was at once quiet and dull. Logically, 
he might (and should) have starved to death, but his 
dim-witted good humour, his fixed smile, and his un- 
relieved meekness brought him under the wing of a 
family called Castro, whose name he came to adopt. Of 
this South American episode no other traces are left, 
but his gratefulness does not seem to have flagged, 
since, in , he reappears in Australia still using that 
name - Tom Castro. There, in Sydney, he made the 
acquaintance of a certain Ebenezer Bogle, a Negro 
servant. Bogle, without being especially handsome, 
had about him that air of authority and assurance, that 
architectural solidity typical of certain Negroes well 
along in years, in flesh, and in dignity. He had another 
quality, which most anthropology textbooks have 
denied his race - a capacity for sudden inspiration. In 
due time, we shall see proof of this. He was a well- 
mannered, upright person, whose primeval African 
lusts had been carefully channelled by the uses and 
misuses of Calvinism. Apart from receiving divine 
visitations (which will presently be described), Bogle 
was no different from other men, with nothing more 
distinctive about him than a longstanding, shamefaced 
fear that made him linger at street crossings - glancing 
east, west, south, and north - in utter dread of the 
vehicle that might one day take his life.


Orton first saw him early one evening on a deserted 
Sydney street corner, steeling himself against this quite 
unlikely death. After studying him for a long while, 
Orton offered the Negro his arm, and, sharing the 
same amazement, the two men crossed the harmless 
street. From that moment of a now dead and lost 
evening, a protectorate came into being - that of the 
solid, unsure Negro over the obese dimwit from 
Wapping. In September  Bogle read a forlorn 
advertisement in the local paper.
The Idolized Dead Man
Toward the end of April  (while Orton was enjoy- 
ing the effusions of Chilean hospitality), the steamer 
Mermaid, sailing from Rio de Janeiro to Liverpool, 
went down in the waters of the Atlantic. Among those 
lost was Roger Charles Tichborne, an army officer 
brought up in France and heir of one of the leading 
Roman Catholic families of England. Incredible as it 
may seem, the death of this Frenchified young man - 
who spoke English with the most refined Parisian 
accent and awoke in others that incomparable resent- 
ment which only French intelligence, French wit, and 
French pedantry can touch off - was a fateful event in 
the life of Arthur Orton, who had never laid eyes on 
Tichborne. Lady Tichborne, Roger’s anguished mother, 
refused to give credence to her son’s death and had


heartrending advertisements published in newspapers 
the world over. One of these notices fell into the soft, 
black hands of Ebenezer Bogle, and a masterly scheme 
was evolved.
The Virtues of Disparity
Tichborne was a gentleman, slight in build, with a 
trim, buttoned-up look, sharp features, darkish skin, 
straight black hair, lively eyes, and a finicky, precise 
way of speaking. Orton was an enormously fat, out- 
and-out boor, whose features could hardly be made 
out; he had somewhat freckled skin, wavy brown hair, 
heavy-lidded eyes, and his speech was dim or non- 
existent. Bogle got it into his head that Orton’s duty 
was to board the next Europe-bound steamer and to 
satisfy Lady Tichborne’s hopes by claiming to be her 
son. The plan was outrageously ingenious. Let us draw 
a simple parallel. If an impostor, in , had under- 
taken to pass himself off as the German emperor, what 
he would immediately have faked would have been the 
turned-up moustache, the withered arm, the authori- 
tarian frown, the grey cape, the illustriously bemedalled 
chest, and the pointed helmet. Bogle was more subtle. 
He would have put forward a clean-shaven kaiser, 
lacking in military traits, stripped of glamorous decora- 
tions, and whose left arm was in an unquestionable 
state of health. We can lay aside the comparison. It is


on record that Bogle put forward a flabby Tichborne, 
with an imbecile’s amiable smile, brown hair, and an 
invincible ignorance of French. He knew that an exact 
likeness of the long-lost Roger Charles Tichborne was 
an outright impossibility. He also knew that any 
resemblances, however successfully contrived, would 
only point up certain unavoidable disparities. Bogle 
therefore steered clear of all likeness. Intuition told 
him that the vast ineptitude of the venture would serve 
as ample proof that no fraud was afoot, since an 
impostor would hardly have overlooked such flagrant 
discrepancies. Nor must the all-important collaboration 
of time be forgotten: fourteen years of Southern 
Hemisphere, coupled with the hazards of chance, can 
wreak change in a man.
A further assurance of success lay in Lady Tich- 
borne’s unrelenting, harebrained advertisements, which 
showed how unshakably she believed that Roger 
Charles was not dead and how willing she was to 
recognize him,
The Meeting
Tom Castro, always ready to oblige, wrote to Lady 
Tichborne. To confirm his identity, he cited the un- 
impeachable proof of two moles located close to the 
nipple of his left breast and that childhood episode - 
so painful, but at the same time so unforgettable - of


his having been attacked by a nest of hornets. The 
letter was short and, in keeping with Tom Castro and 
Bogle, was wanting in the least scruples of orthography. 
In the imposing seclusion of her Paris hotel, the lady 
read and reread the letter through tears of joy, and in 
a few days’ time she came up with the memories her 
son had asked for.
On the sixteenth of January  Roger Charles 
Tichborne announced his presence in that same hotel. 
He was preceded by his respectful manservant, 
Ebenezer Bogle. The winter day was bright with 
sunshine; Lady Tichborne’s weary eyes were veiled 
with tears. The Negro threw open wide the window 
blinds, the light created a mask, and the mother, 
recognizing her prodigal son, drew him into her eager 
embrace. Now that she really had him back, she could 
relinquish his diary and the letters he had sent from 
Brazil - those cherished reflections that had nourished 
her through fourteen years of solitude. She handed 
them back with pride. Not a scrap was missing.
Bogle smiled to himself. Now he had a way to flesh 
out the compliant ghost of Roger Charles.
Ad Majorem Dei Gloriam
This glad reunion - which seems somehow to belong 
to a tradition of the classical stage - might well have 
crowned our story, rendering certain, or at least prob-


able, the happiness of three parties: the real mother, 
the spurious son, the successful plotter. Fate (such is 
the name we give the infinite, ceaseless chain of 
thousands of intertwined causes) had another end in 
store. Lady Tichborne died in , and her relatives 
brought suit against Arthur Orton for false impersona- 
tion. Unburdened by solitude or tears - though not by 
greed - they had never believed in the obese and nearly 
illiterate prodigal son who appeared, straight out of 
the blue, from the wilds of Australia. Orton counted 
on the support of his numerous creditors who, anxious 
to be paid what was owed them, were determined that 
he was Tichborne.
He also counted on the friendship of the family 
solicitor, Edward Hopkins, and of Francis J. Baigent, 
an antiquary intimately acquainted with the Tich- 
borne family history. This, however, was not enough. 
Bogle reasoned that, to win the game, public opinion 
would have to be marshalled in their favour. Assuming 
a top hat and rolled umbrella, he went in search of 
inspiration along the better streets of London. It was 
early evening. Bogle perambulated about until a 
honey-coloured moon repeated itself in the rectangular 
basins of the public fountains. The expected visitation 
was paid him. Hailing a cab, he asked to be driven to 
Baigent’s flat. Baigent sent a long letter to the Times. 
certifying that the supposed Tichborne was a shameless 
impostor. He signed it with the name of Father


Goudron of the Society of Jesus. Other equally papist 
accusations soon followed. Their effect was immediate: 
decent people everywhere were quick to discover that 
Sir Roger Charles was the target of an unscrupulous 
Jesuitical plot.
The Hansom Cab
The trial lasted one hundred and ninety days. Some- 
thing like a hundred witnesses swore that the defendant 
was Tichborne - among them, four fellow officers in 
the th Dragoon Guards. The claimant’s supporters 
kept on repeating that he was not an impostor, for, 
had he been one, he would have made some effort to 
ape his model’s youthful portraits. Furthermore, Lady 
Tichborne had identified him, and obviously a mother 
cannot be wrong. All went well, or more or less well, 
until a former sweetheart of Orton’s took the stand to 
testify. Bogle was unshaken by this treacherous man- 
oeuvre on the part of the ‘relatives’; assuming top hat 
and umbrella, he once again took to the London streets 
in search of a visitation. We will never know whether 
he found it. Shortly before reaching Primrose Hill, 
there loomed out of the dark the dreaded vehicle that 
had been in pursuit of him down through the years. 
Bogle saw it coming, he cried out, but salvation eluded 
him. Dashed violently against the stone pavement, 
his skull was split by the dizzying hoofs.


The Spectre
Tom Castro was the ghost of Roger Charles Tichborne, 
but he was a sorry ghost animated by someone else’s 
genius. On hearing the news of Bogle’s death, he 
collapsed. He went on lying, but with failing conviction 
and obvious discrepancies. It was not hard to foresee 
the end.
On the twenty-seventh of February  Arthur 
Orton, alias Tom Castro, was sentenced to fourteen 
years’ penal servitude. In prison, he got himself liked; 
this was Orton’s calling. Good behaviour won him 
a four-year reduction of sentence. When this last touch 
of hospitality - prison - was behind him, he toured 
the hamlets and centres of the United Kingdom, giving 
little lectures in which he alternately pleaded his 
innocence or his guilt. Modesty and ingratiation were 
so deep-seated in him that many a night he would begin 
by exoneration and end by confession, always disposed 
to the leanings of his audience.
On  April , he died.


The Widow Ching, 
Lady Pirate
Any mention of pirates of the fair sex runs the immedi- 
ate risk of awakening painful memories of the neigh- 
bourhood production of some faded musical comedy, 
with its chorus line of obvious housewives posing as 
pirates and hoofing it on a briny deep of unmistakable 
cardboard. Nonetheless, lady pirates there have been - 
women skilled in the handling of ships, in the captaincy 
of brutish crews, and in the pursuit and plunder of 
sea-going vessels. One such was Mary Read, who once 
declared that the profession of pirate was not for 
everyone, and that to engage in it with dignity one had, 
like her, to be a man of courage. At the flamboyant 
outset of her career, when as yet she captained no crew, 
one of her lovers was wronged by the ship’s bully. 
Challenging the fellow to a duel, Mary took him on 
with both hands, according to the time-honoured 
custom of the West Indies - unwieldy and none-too- 
sure flintlock in the left, trusty cutlass in the right. The 
pistol misfired, but the sword behaved as it should . . .


Along about , Mary Read’s daring career was cut 
short by a Spanish gallows at St Jago de la Vega, in 
Jamaica.
Another lady buccaneer of those same seas was Anne 
Bonney, a good-looking, boisterous Irishwoman, with 
high breasts and fiery red hair, who was always among 
the first to risk her neck boarding a prize. She was a 
shipmate and, in the end, gallowsmate of Mary Read; 
Anne’s lover, Captain John Rackam, sported a noose 
on that occasion, too. Contemptuous of him, Anne 
came up with this harsh variant of Aisha’s reproach 
of Boabdil: ‘If you had fought like a Man, you need 
not have been hang’d like a Dog.’
A third member of this sisterhood, more venturesome 
and longer-lived than the others, was a lady pirate who 
operated in Asian waters, all the way from the Yellow 
Sea to the rivers of the Annam coast. I speak of the 
veteran widow Ching.
The Apprentice Years
Around , the shareholders of the many pirate 
squadrons of the China seas formed a combine, to 
which they named as admiral a man altogether tried 
and true - a certain Ching. So severe was this Ching, 
so exemplary in his sacking of the coasts, that the 
terror-stricken inhabitants of eighty seaboard towns, 
with gifts and tears, implored imperial assistance. Their 
pitiful appeal did not go unheard: they were ordered to


put their villages to the torch, forget their fishing 
chores, migrate inland, and there take up the unfamiliar 
science of agriculture. All this they did, so that the 
thwarted invaders found nothing but deserted coasts. 
As a result, the pirates were forced to switch to preying 
on ships, a form of depredation which, since it seriously 
hampered trade, proved even more obnoxious to the 
authorities than the previous one. The imperial govern- 
ment was quick to act, ordering the former fishermen to 
abandon plough and yoke and mend their nets and 
pars. True to their old fears, however, these fishermen 
rose up in revolt, and the authorities set upon another 
course - that of pardoning Ching by appointing him 
Master of the Royal Stables. Ching was about to accept 
the bribe. Finding this out in time, the shareholders 
made their righteous indignation evident in a plate of 
poisoned greens, cooked with rice. The morsel proving 
deadly, the onetime admiral and would-be Master of 
the Royal Stables gave up his ghost to the gods of the 
sea. His widow, transfigured by this twofold double- 
dealing, called the pirate crews together, explained to 
them the whole involved affair, and urged them to 
reject both the emperor’s deceitful pardon and the 
unpleasant service rendered by the poison-dabbling 
shareholders. She proposed, instead, the plundering 
of ships on their own account and the election of a 
new admiral.
The person chosen was the widow Ching. She was


a slinking woman, with sleepy eyes and a smile full of 
decayed teeth. Her blackish, oiled hair shone brighter 
than her eyes. Under her sober orders, the ships 
embarked upon danger and the high seas.
The Command
Thirteen years of systematic adventure ensued. Six 
squadrons made up the fleet, each flying a banner of a 
different colour - red, yellow, green, black, purple, 
and one (the flagship’s) emblazoned with a serpent. 
The captains were known by such names as ‘Bird and 
Stone’, ‘Scourge of the Eastern Sea’, ‘Jewel of the 
Whole Crew’, ‘Wave with Many Fishes’, and ‘Sun on 
High’. The code of rules, drawn up by the widow 
Ching herself, is of an unappealable severity, and its 
straightforward, laconic style is utterly lacking in the 
faded flowers of rhetoric that lend a rather absurd 
loftiness to the style of Chinese officialdom, of which 
we shall presently offer an alarming specimen or two. 
For now, I copy out a few articles of the widow’s code:
All goods transshipped from enemy vessels will be 
entered in a register and kept in a storehouse. Of this 
stock, the pirate will receive for himself out of ten parts, 
only two; the rest shall belong to the storehouse, called 
the general fund. Violation of this ordinance will be 
punishable by death.
The punishment of the pirate who abandons his post 
without permission will be perforation of the ears in the


presence of the whole fleet; repeating the same, he will 
suffer death.
Commerce with captive women taken in the villages is 
prohibited on deck; permission to use violence against any 
woman must first be requested of the ship’s purser, and 
then carried out only in the ship’s hold. Violation of this 
ordinance will be punishable by death.
Information extracted from prisoners affirms that the 
fare of these pirates consisted chiefly of ship biscuits, 
rats fattened on human flesh, and boiled rice, and that, 
on days of battle, crew members used to mix gun- 
powder with their liquor. With card games and loaded 
dice, with the metal square and bowl of fan-tan, with 
the little lamp and the pipe dreams of opium, they 
whiled away the time. Their favourite weapons were 
a pair of short swords, used one in each hand. Before 
seizing another ship, they sprinkled their cheekbones 
and bodies with an infusion of garlic water, which they 
considered a certain charm against shot.
Each crewman travelled with his wife, but the 
captain sailed with a harem, which was five or six in 
number and which, in victory, was always replenished.
Kia-king, the Young Emperor, Speaks
Somewhere around the middle of , there was made 
public an imperial decree, of which I transcribe the first 
and last parts. Its style was widely criticized. It ran:


Men who are cursed and evil, men capable of profaning 
bread, men who pay no heed to the clamour of the tax 
collector or the orphan, men in whose undergarments are 
stitched the phoenix and the dragon, men who deny the 
great truths of printed books, men who allow their tears 
to run toward the North - all these are disrupting the 
commerce of our rivers and the age-old intimacy of our 
seas. In unsound, unseaworthy craft, they are tossed by 
storms both night and day. Nor is their object one of 
benevolence: they are not and never were the true friends 
of the seafarer. Far from lending him their aid, they swoop 
down on him most viciously, inviting him to wrack and 
ruin, inviting him to death. In such wise do they violate 
the natural laws of the Universe that rivers overflow their 
banks, vast acreages are drowned, sons are pitted against 
fathers, and even the roots of rain and drought are 
altered . . .
. . . I n  consequence, Admiral Kwo-lang, I leave to your 
hand the administration of punishment. Never forget that 
clemency is a prerogative of the throne and that it would 
be presumptuous of a subject to endeavour to assume such 
a privilege. Therefore, be merciless, be impartial, be obeyed, 
be victorious.
The incidental reference to unseaworthy vessels was, 
of course, false. Its aim was to encourage Kwo-lang’s 
expedition. Some ninety days later, the forces of the 
widow Ching came face to face with those of the 
Middle Kingdom. Nearly a thousand ships joined 
battle, fighting from early morning until late evening.


A mixed chorus of bells, drums, curses, gongs, and 
prophecies, along with the report of the great ordnance, 
accompanied the action. The emperor’s forces were 
sundered. Neither the proscribed clemency nor the 
recommended cruelty had occasion to be exercised. 
Kwo-lang observed a rite that our present-day military, 
in defeat, choose to ignore - suicide.
The Terrorized Riverbanks
The proud widow’s six hundred war junks and forty 
thousand victorious pirates then sailed up the mouths 
of the Si-kiang, and to port and starboard they 
multiplied fires and loathsome revels and orphans. 
Entire villages were burned to the ground. In one of 
them alone, the number of prisoners passed a thousand. 
A hundred and twenty women who sought the confused 
refuge of neighbouring reedfields and paddies were 
betrayed by a crying baby and later sold into slavery in 
Macao. Although at some remove, the tears and 
bereavement wreaked by this depredation came to the 
attention of Kia-king, the Son of Heaven. Certain 
historians contend that this outcry pained him less 
than the disaster that befell his punitive expedition. 
The truth is that he organized a second expedition, 
awesome in banners, in sailors, in soldiers, in the 
engines of war, in provisions, in augurs, and in astro- 
logers. The command this time fell upon one Ting-


kwei. The fearful multitude of ships sailed into the 
delta of the Si-kiang, closing off passage to the pirate 
squadron. The widow fitted out for battle. She knew 
it would be difficult, even desperate; night after night 
and month after month of plundering and idleness 
had weakened her men. The opening of battle was 
delayed. Lazily, the sun rose and set upon the rippling 
reeds. Men and their weapons were waiting. Noons 
were heavy, afternoons endless.
The Dragon and the Fox
And yet, each evening, high, shiftless flocks of airy 
dragons rose from the ships of the imperial squadron 
and came gently to rest on the enemy decks and sur- 
rounding waters. They were lightweight constructions 
of rice paper and strips of reed, akin to comets, and 
their silvery or reddish sides repeated identical 
characters. The widow anxiously studied this regular 
stream of meteors and read in them the long and 
perplexing fable of a dragon which had always given 
protection to a fox, despite the fox’s long ingratitude 
and repeated transgressions. The moon grew slender 
in the sky, and each evening the paper and reed figures 
brought the same story, with almost imperceptible 
variants. The widow was distressed, and she sank deep 
into thought. When the moon was full in the sky and 
in the reddish water, the story seemed to reach its end.


Nobody was able to predict whether limitless pardon 
or limitless punishment would descend upon the fox, 
but the inexorable end drew near. The widow came to 
an understanding. She threw her two short swords into 
the river, kneeled in the bottom of a small boat, and 
ordered herself rowed to the imperial flagship.
It was dark; the sky was filled with dragons - this 
time, yellow ones. On climbing aboard, the widow 
murmured a brief sentence. ‘ The fox seeks the dragon’s 
wing’, she said.
The Apotheosis
It is a matter of history that the fox received her pardon 
and devoted her lingering years to the opium trade. 
She also left off being the widow, assuming a name 
which in English means ‘Luster of Instruction’.
From this period [wrote one Chinese chronicler lyrically], 
ships began to pass and repass in tranquillity. All became 
quiet on the rivers and tranquil on the four seas. Men sold 
their weapons and bought oxen to plough their fields. They 
buried sacrifices, said prayers on the tops of hills, and 
rejoiced themselves by singing behind screens during the 
day-time.


Monk Eastman, 
Purveyor of Iniquities
Those of This America
Standing out sharply against a background of blue walls 
or open sky, two hoodlums dressed in close-fitting 
suits of sober black and wearing thick-heeled shoes 
dance a deadly dance - a ballet of matching knives - 
until a carnation starts from the ear of one of them as 
a knife finds its mark in him, and he brings the un- 
accompanied dance to a close on the ground with his 
death. Satisfied, the other adjusts his high-crowned hat 
and spends his final years recounting the story of this 
clean duel. That, in sum and substance, is the history 
of our old-time Argentine underworld. The history of 
New York’s old underworld is both more dizzying and 
more clumsy.
Those of the Other
The history of the gangs of New York (revealed in 
 by Herbert Asbury in a solid volume of four 
hundred octavo pages) contains all of the confusion


and cruelty of the barbarian cosmogonies, and much 
of their giant-scale ineptitude - cellars of old breweries 
honeycombed into Negro tenements; a ramshackle 
New York of three-storey structures; criminal gangs 
like the Swamp Angels, who rendezvoused in a laby- 
rinth of sewers; criminal gangs like the Daybreak Boys, 
who recruited precocious murderers of ten and eleven; 
loners, like the bold and gigantic Plug Uglies, who 
earned the smirks of passersby with their enormous 
plug hats, stuffed with wool and worn pulled down 
over their ears as helmets, and their long shirttails, 
worn outside the trousers, that flapped in the Bowery 
breeze (but with a huge bludgeon in one hand and a 
pistol peeping out of a pocket); criminal gangs like 
the Dead Rabbits, who entered into battle under the 
emblem of a dead rabbit impaled on a pike; men like 
Dandy Johnny Dolan, famous for the oiled forelock 
he wore curled and plastered against his forehead, for 
his cane whose handle was carved in the likeness of a 
monkey, and for the copper device he invented and 
used on the thumb for gouging out an adversary’s 
eyes; men like Kit Burns, who for twenty-five cents 
would decapitate a live rat with a single bite; men like 
Blind Danny Lyons, young and blond and with 
immense dead eyes, who pimped for three girls, all of 
whom proudly walked the streets for him; rows of 
houses showing red lanterns in the windows, like those 
run by seven sisters from a small New England village,


who always turned their Christmas Eve proceeds over 
to charity; rat pits, where wharf rats were starved and 
sent against terriers; Chinese gambling dives; women 
like the repeatedly widowed Red Norah, the vaunted 
sweetheart of practically the entire Gopher gang; 
women like Lizzie the Dove, who donned widow’s 
weeds when Danny Lyons was executed for murder, 
and who was stabbed in the throat by Gentle Maggie 
during an argument over whose sorrow for the departed 
blind man was the greater; mob uprisings like the 
savage week of draft riots in , when a hundred 
buildings were burned to the ground and the city was 
nearly taken over; teeming street fights in which a man 
went down as at sea, trampled to death; a thief and 
horse poisoner like Yoske Nigger. All these go to 
weave underworld New York’s chaotic history. And 
its most famous hero is Edward Delaney, alias William 
Delaney, alias Joseph Marvin, alias Joseph Morris, 
alias Monk Eastman - boss of twelve hundred men.
The Hero
These shifts of identity (as distressing as a masquerade, 
in which one is not quite certain who is who) omit his 
real name - presuming there is such a thing as a real 
name. The recorded fact is that he was born in the 
Williamsburg section of Brooklyn as Edward Osterman, 
a name later Americanized to Eastman. Oddly enough,


this stormy underworld character was Jewish. He was 
the son of the owner of a kosher restaurant, where men 
wearing rabbinical beards could safely partake of the 
bloodless and thrice-cleansed flesh of ritually slaugh- 
tered calves. At the age of nineteen, about , his 
father set him up in business with a bird store. A 
fascination for animals, an interest in their small 
decisions and inscrutable innocence, turned into a life- 
long hobby. Years afterwards, in a period of opulence, 
when he scornfully refused the Havana cigars of freckle- 
faced Tammany sachems or when he paid visits to the 
best houses of prostitution in that new invention, the 
automobile (which seemed the bastard offspring of a 
gondola), he started a second business, a front, that 
accommodated a hundred cats and more than four 
hundred pigeons - none of which were for sale to 
anyone. He loved each one, and often he strolled 
through his neighbourhood with a happy cat under an 
arm, while several others trailed eagerly behind.
He was a battered, colossal man. He had a short, 
bull neck; a barrel chest; long, scrappy arms; a broken 
nose; a face, although plentifully scarred, less striking 
than his frame; and legs bowed like a cowboy’s or a 
sailor’s. He could usually be found without a shirt or 
coat, but not without a derby hat several sizes too small 
perched on his bullet-shaped head. Mankind has 
conserved his memory. Physically, the conventional 
moving-picture gunman is a copy of him, not of the


pudgy, epicene Capone. It is said of Louis Wolheim 
that Hollywood employed him because his features 
suggested those of the lamented Monk Eastman. 
Eastman used to strut about his underworld kingdom 
with a great blue pigeon on his shoulder, just like a 
bull with a cowbird on its rump.
Back in the mid-nineties, public dance halls were a 
dime a dozen in the city of New York. Eastman was 
employed in one of them as a bouncer. The story is 
told that a dance-hall manager once refused to hire 
him, whereupon Monk demonstrated his capacity for 
the work by wiping the floor with the pair of giants 
who stood between him and the job. Single-handed, 
universally feared, he held the position until . For 
each troublemaker he quelled, he cut a notch in his 
brutal bludgeon. One night, his attention drawn to a 
shining bald pate minding its own business over a 
bock beer, he laid its bearer out with a blow. ‘I needed 
one more notch to make fifty,’ he later explained.
The Territory
From  on, Eastman was not only famous but, 
during elections, he was captain of an important ward. 
He also collected protection money from the houses 
of prostitution, gambling dives, streetwalkers, pick- 
pockets, and burglars of his sordid domain. Tammany 
politicians hired him to stir up trouble; so did private 
individuals. Here are some of his prices:


Ear chawed off      $ 
Leg or arm broke     
Shot in leg 
 
Stab 
 
Doing the big job    and up
Sometimes, to keep his hand in, Eastman personally 
carried out a commission.
A question of boundaries (as subtle and thorny as 
any cramming the dockets of international law) brought 
Eastman into confrontation with Paul Kelly, the well- 
known chief of a rival gang. Bullets and rough-and- 
tumble fighting of the two gangs had set certain 
territorial limits. Eastman crossed these bounds alone 
one early morning and was assailed by five of Kelly’s 
men. With his flailing, apelike arms and blackjack, 
Monk knocked down three of the attackers, but he was 
ultimately shot twice in the stomach and left for dead. 
Eastman closed the hot wounds with thumb and index 
finger and staggered to Gouverneur Hospital. There, 
for several weeks, life, a high fever, and death vied for 
him, but his lips refused to name his would-be killer. 
When he left the hospital, the war was on, and, until 
the nineteenth of August, , it flowered in one 
shoot-out after another.
The Battle of Rivington Street
A hundred heroes, each a bit different from his photo- 
graph fading in police files; a hundred heroes reeking


of tobacco smoke and alcohol; a hundred heroes 
wearing straw boaters with gaily coloured bands; a 
hundred heroes afflicted, some more, some less, with 
shameful diseases, tooth decay, complaints of the 
respiratory tracts or kidneys; a hundred heroes as 
insignificant or splendid as those of Troy or Bull Run - 
these hundred let loose this black feat of arms under 
the shadows of the arches of the Second Avenue 
elevated. The cause was the attempted raid by Kelly’s 
gunmen on a stuss game operated by a friend of 
Eastman’s on Rivington Street. One of the gunmen 
was killed, and the ensuing flurry of shots swelled into 
a battle of uncounted revolvers. Sheltered behind the 
pillars of the elevated structure, smooth-shaven men 
quietly blazed away at each other and became the focus 
of an awesome ring of rented automobiles loaded with 
eager reinforcements, each bearing a fistful of artillery.
What did the protagonists of this battle feel? First 
(I believe), the brutal conviction that the senseless din 
of a hundred revolvers was going to cut them down at 
any moment; second (I believe), the no less mistaken 
certainty that if the first shots did not hit them they 
were invulnerable. What is without doubt, however, 
is that, under cover of the iron pillars and the night, 
they fought with a vengeance. Twice the police 
intervened, and twice they were driven off. At the first 
glimmer of dawn, the battle petered out - as if it were 
obscene or ghostly. Under the great arches of the


elevated were left seven critically wounded men, four 
corpses, and one dead pigeon.
The Creakings
The local politicians, in whose ranks Monk Eastman 
served, always publicly denied that such gangs existed, 
or else claimed that they were mere sporting clubs. The 
indiscreet battle of Rivington Street now alarmed them. 
They arranged a meeting between Eastman and Kelly 
in order to suggest to them the need for a truce. Kelly 
(knowing very well that Tammany Hall was more 
effective than any number of Colts when it came to 
obstructing police action) agreed at once; Eastman 
(with the pride of his great, brutish hulk) hungered for 
more blasting and further frays. He began to refuse, 
and the politicians had to threaten him with prison. In 
the end, the two famous gangsters came face to face 
in an unsavoury dive, each with a huge cigar between 
his teeth, a hand on his revolver, and his watchful 
thugs surrounding him. They arrived at a typically 
American decision: they would settle their dispute in 
the ring by squaring off with their fists. Kelly was an 
experienced boxer. The fight took place in a barn up in 
the Bronx, and it was an extravagant affair. A hundred 
and forty spectators looked on, among them mobsters 
with rakish derbies and their molls with enormous 
coiffures in which weapons were sometimes concealed.


The pair fought for two hours and it ended in a draw. 
Before a week was out, the shooting started up again. 
Monk was arrested for the nth time. With great relief 
Tammany Hall washed their hands of him; the judge 
prophesied for him, with complete accuracy, ten years 
in prison.
Eastman vs Germany
When the still puzzled Monk was released from Sing 
Sing, the twelve hundred members of his gang had 
broken up into warring factions. Unable to reorganize 
them, he took to operating on his own. On the eighth 
of September , he was arrested for creating a 
disturbance in a public thoroughfare. The next day, 
deciding to take part in an even larger disturbance, he 
enlisted in the th Infantry of the New York National 
Guard. Within a few months, he was shipped overseas 
with his regiment.
We know about various aspects of his campaign. We 
know that he violently disapproved of taking prisoners 
and that he once (with just his rifle butt) interfered 
with that deplorable practice. We know that he managed 
to slip out of the hospital three days after he had been 
wounded and make his way back to the front, lines. We 
know that he distinguished himself in the fighting 
around Montfaucon. We know that he later held that 
a number of little dance halls around the Bowery were 
a lot tougher than the war in Europe.


The Mysterious, Logical End
On Christmas Day, , Monk Eastman’s body was 
found at dawn on one of the downtown streets of New 
York. It had five bullet wounds in it. Happily unaware 
of death, an alley cat hovered around the corpse with 
a certain puzzlement.

The Disinterested Killer 
Bill Harrigan
An image of the desert wilds of Arizona, first and fore- 
most, an image of the desert wilds of Arizona and New 
Mexico - a country famous for its silver and gold 
camps, a country of breathtaking open spaces, a country 
of monumental mesas and soft colours, a country of 
bleached skeletons picked clean by buzzards. Over this 
whole country, another image - that of Billy the Kid, 
the hard rider firm on his horse, the young man with 
the relentless six-shooters, sending out invisible bullets 
which (like magic) kill at a distance.
The desert veined with precious metals, arid and 
blinding-bright. The near child who on dying at the 
age of twenty-one owed to the justice of grown men 
twenty-one deaths - ‘not counting Mexicans’.
The Larval Stage
Along about , the man who would become known 
to terror and glory as Billy the Kid was born in a cellar


room of a New York City tenement. It is said that he 
was spawned by a tired-out Irish womb but was 
brought up among Negroes. In this tumult of lowly 
smells and woolly heads, he enjoyed a superiority that 
stemmed from having freckles and a mop of red hair. 
He took pride in being white; he was also scrawny, 
wild, and coarse. At the age of twelve, he fought in the 
gang of the Swamp Angels, that branch of divinities 
who operated among the neighbourhood sewers. On 
nights redolent of burnt fog, they would clamber out 
of that foul-smelling labyrinth, trail some German 
sailor, do him in with a knock on the head, strip him 
to his underwear, and afterward sneak back to the filth 
of their starting place. Their leader was a grey-haired 
Negro, Gas House Jonas, who was also celebrated as 
a poisoner of horses.
Sometimes, from the upper window of a waterfront 
dive, a woman would dump a bucket of ashes upon the 
head of a prospective victim. As he gasped and choked, 
Swamp Angels would swarm him, rush him into a 
cellar, and plunder him.
Such were the apprentice years of Billy Harrigan, the 
future Billy the Kid. Nor did he scorn the offerings of 
Bowery playhouses, enjoying in particular (perhaps 
without an inkling that they were signs and symbols 
of his destiny) cowboy melodramas.


Go West!
If the jammed Bowery theatres (whose top-gallery 
riffraff shouted ‘Hoist that rag!’ when the curtain 
failed to rise promptly on schedule) abounded in these 
blood and thunder productions, the simple explanation 
is that America was then experiencing the lure of the Far 
West. Beyond the sunset lay the goldfields of Nevada 
and California. Beyond the sunset were the redwoods, 
going down before the axe; the buffalo’s huge Baby- 
lonian face; Brigham Young’s beaver hat and plural 
bed; the red man’s ceremonies and his rampages; the 
clear air of the deserts; endless-stretching range land; 
and the earth itself, whose nearness quickens the heart 
like the nearness of the sea. The West beckoned. A 
slow, steady rumour populated those years - that of 
thousands of Americans taking possession of the West. 
On that march, around , was Bill Harrigan, 
treacherous as a bull rattler, in flight from a rectangular 
cell.
The Demolition of a Mexican
History (which, like certain film directors, proceeds 
by a series of abrupt images) now puts forward the 
image of a danger-filled saloon, located - as if on the 
high seas - out in the heart of the all-powerful desert. 
The time, a blustery night of the year ; the place, 
the Staked Plains of New Mexico. All around, the land


is almost uncannily flat and bare, but the sky, with its 
storm-piled clouds and moon, is full of fissured cavities 
and mountains. There are a cow’s skull, the howl and 
the eyes of coyotes in the shadows, trim horses, and 
from the saloon an elongated patch of light. Inside, 
leaning over the bar, a group of strapping but tired 
men drink a liquor that warms them for a fight; at the 
same time, they make a great show of large silver coins 
bearing a serpent and an eagle. A drunk croons to 
himself, poker-faced. Among the men are several who 
speak a language with many s’s, which must be 
Spanish, for those who speak it are looked down on. 
Bill Harrigan, the red-topped tenement rat, stands 
among the drinkers. He has downed a couple of 
aguardientes and thinks of asking for one more, maybe 
because he hasn’t a cent left. He is somewhat over- 
whelmed by these men of the desert. He sees them as 
imposing, boisterous, happy, and hatefully wise in the 
handling of wild cattle and big horses. All at once there 
is dead silence, ignored only by the voice of the drunk, 
singing out of tune. Someone has come in - a big, 
burly Mexican, with the face of an old Indian squaw. 
He is endowed with an immense sombrero and with 
a pair of six-guns at his side. In awkward English, he 
wishes a good evening to all the gringo sons of bitches 
who are drinking. Nobody takes up the challenge. 
Bill asks who he is, and they whisper to him, in fear, 
that the Dago - that is, the Diego - is Belisario


Villagrán, from Chihuahua. At once, there is a resound- 
ing blast. Sheltered by that wall of tall men, Bill has 
fired at the intruder. The glass drops from Villagrán’s 
hand; then the man himself drops. He does not need 
another bullet. Without deigning to glance at the 
showy dead man, Bill picks up his end of the conversa- 
tion. ‘Is that so?’ he drawled. ‘Well, I’m Billy the Kid, 
from New York.’ The drunk goes on singing, unheeded.
One may easily guess the apotheosis. Bill gives out 
handshakes all around and accepts praises, cheers, and 
whiskies. Someone notices that there are no notches 
on the handle of his revolver and offers to cut one to 
stand for Villagrán’s death. Billy the Kid keeps this 
someone’s razor, though he says that ‘ It’s hardly worth- 
while noting down Mexicans.’ This, perhaps, is not 
quite enough. That night, Bill lays out his blanket 
beside the corpse and - with great show - sleeps till 
daybreak.
Deaths for Deaths’ Sake
Out of that lucky blast (at the age of fourteen), Billy 
the Kid the hero was born, and the furtive Bill Harrigan 
died. The boy of the sewer and the knock on the head 
rose to become a man of the frontier. He made a 
horseman of himself, learning to ride straight in the 
saddle - Wyoming- or Texas-style - and not with his 
body thrown back, the way they rode in Oregon and


California. He never completely matched his legend, 
but he kept getting closer and closer to it. Something 
of the New York hoodlum lived on in the cowboy; 
he transferred to Mexicans the hate that had previously 
been inspired in him by Negroes, but the last words he 
ever spoke were (swear) words in Spanish. He learned 
the art of the cowpuncher’s maverick life. He learned 
another, more difficult art - how to lead men. Both 
helped to make him a good cattle rustler. From time 
to time, Old Mexico’s guitars and whorehouses pulled 
on him.
With the haunting lucidity of insomnia, he organized 
populous orgies that often lasted four days and four 
nights. In the end, glutted, he settled accounts with 
bullets. While his trigger finger was unfailing, he was 
the most feared man (and perhaps the most anonymous 
and most lonely) of that whole frontier. Pat Garrett, 
his friend, the sheriff who later killed him, once told 
him, ‘I’ve had a lot of practice with the rifle shooting 
buffalo.’
‘I’ve had plenty with the six-shooter,’ Billy replied 
modestly. ‘Shooting tin cans and men.’
The details can never be recovered, but it is known 
that he was credited with up to twenty-one killings - 
‘not counting Mexicans’. For seven desperate years, 
he practised the extravagance of utter recklessness.
The night of the twenty-fifth of July , Billy the 
Kid came galloping on his piebald down the main, or


only, street of Fort Sumner. The heat was oppressive 
and the lamps had not been lighted; Sheriff Garrett, 
seated on a porch in a rocking chair, drew his revolver 
and sent a bullet through the Kid’s belly. The horse 
kept on; the rider tumbled into the dust of the road. 
Garrett got off a second shot. The townspeople 
(knowing the wounded man was Billy the Kid) locked 
their window shutters tight. The agony was long and 
blasphemous. In the morning, the sun by then high 
overhead, they began drawing near, and they disarmed 
him. The man was gone. They could see in his face 
that used-up look of the dead.
He was shaved, sheathed in ready-made clothes, and 
displayed to awe and ridicule in the window of Fort 
Sumner’s biggest store. Men on horseback and in 
buckboards gathered for miles and miles around. On 
the third day, they had to use make-up on him. On 
the fourth day, he was buried with rejoicing.


The Insulting Master 
of Etiquette 
Kôtsuké no Suké
The infamous subject of this tale is the insulting master 
of etiquette Kira Kôtsuké no Suké, the unfortunate 
court official who brought on the degradation and 
death of the lord of the castle of Akô and later refused 
to perform hara-kiri (which, as a nobleman, was his 
duty) when menaced by the vengeance he deserved. 
He is a man worthy of the thanks of all humankind, 
for he awakened keen loyalties and provided the 
necessary black occasion for an immortal undertaking. 
A hundred or so novels, studies, doctoral dissertations, 
and operas commemorate the deed - to say nothing of 
the effusions in porcelain, spangled lapis lazuli, and 
lacquer work. The story is served even by the versatile 
silver screen, since ‘The Learned History of the Forty- 
seven Retainers’ - such is its name - is the Japanese 
film’s most frequently recurring inspiration. The pains- 
takingly documented renown which these burning 
attentions confirm is something more than justified - 
it strikes any person at once as just.


I follow A. B. Mitford’s account, which, in leaving 
out distracting intrusions of local colour, is more 
concerned with the glorious episode’s whole narrative 
sweep. These missing Oriental touches lead me to 
suspect that we are dealing with a version straight 
from the Japanese.
The Untied Ribbon
Sometime in the vanished spring of , it happened 
that Asano Takumi no Kami, the distinguished lord 
of the castle of Akô, was appointed to receive and feast 
an imperial envoy. Twenty-three hundred years (some 
of them mythological) of polished manners had 
nervously defined the ceremonies to be observed upon 
the occasion. The envoy represented the Mikado, but 
by way of allusion or symbol - a subtlety one has to be 
careful neither to overdo nor to neglect. In order to 
prevent blunders that could easily prove fatal, a high 
official from the court of Yedo preceded the envoy in 
the capacity of master of etiquette. At a remove from 
the comfort of the court and condemned to a rustic 
holiday which must have seemed to him a form of exile, 
Kira Kôtsuké no Suké took no pains in the instruction 
of his charge. Sometimes he exaggerated his lofty tone 
to the point of insolence. His pupil, the lord of the 
castle, tried to ignore this ridicule. He did not know 
how to reply to it, and a strict sense of duty held him


back from all violence. Nevertheless, one day the 
ribbon of the master’s sock had come untied and he 
asked the lord to tie it up for him. Although burning 
with rage, Takumi no Kami patiently submitted. The 
rude master of etiquette told him that, in truth, he was 
unteachable and that only a boor could tie a knot so 
clumsily. The lord of the castle drew his dirk and aimed 
a blow at the master’s head. Kôtsuké no Suké ran away, 
his forehead barely marked with a faint thread of 
blood.
A few days later, the deliberations of the military 
council were completed, and Takumi no Kami was 
sentenced to commit suicide. In the central courtyard 
of the castle of Akô, a platform covered in red felt was 
erected, and on it the doomed man appeared. Having 
been handed a golden dagger with a jewelled handle, 
he publicly confessed his guilt, stripped to the waist, 
and, disembowelling himself with the two ritual 
wounds, died like a samurai. Because of the red felt 
the more distant spectators were unable to see blood. 
A grey-haired, painstaking man - he was the councillor 
Oishi Kuranosuke, the condemned man’s second - 
severed the head with a stroke of his sword.
The Simulator of Infamy
Takumi no Kami’s castle was confiscated, his retainers 
were disbanded, his family was brought to ruin, and


his tarnished name became the object of curses. Rumour 
has it that on the very night that he killed himself, 
forty-seven of his retainers, forming a league, met in 
a mountain fastness and planned to the last detail what 
eventually came to pass a year later. The truth is that 
they were forced to proceed step by step and with 
great caution, and some of their meetings took place 
not on an inaccessible mountaintop but in a chapel in 
a small forest - a kind of shabby pavilion of white 
wood, with no other adornment than a rectangular 
box containing a mirror. They craved vengeance, 
and vengeance must have seemed to them beyond 
reach.
Kira Kôtsuké no Suké, the hated master of etiquette, 
had fortified his house, and a crowd of archers and 
swordsmen guarded his palanquin. He could also count 
on his spies, who were incorruptible, scrupulous, and 
stealthy. They watched and spied on no one as much 
as they did on the presumed ringleader of the avengers, 
the councillor Kuranosuke. It was only by chance that 
he found out, but he built his scheme for vindication 
upon this fact.
Kuranosuké moved to Kyoto, a city unmatched in 
all the empire for its autumn colours. He gave himself 
up to gambling dens, taverns, and houses of the worst 
repute. In spite of greying hair, he rubbed elbows 
with harlots and poets, and with even sorrier sorts. 
Once, thrown out of some low haunt, he fell down and


spent the night asleep in the street, his head wallowing 
in his own vomit.
It happened that a Satsuma man saw this, and he said 
sadly and angrily: ‘Is not this, by chance, Oishi 
Kuranosuké, who was a councillor of Asano Takumi 
no Kami, who assisted his lord in death, and who, not 
having the heart to avenge him, gives himself up to 
pleasure and shame? You are unworthy the name of a 
samurai!’
And he trod on Kuranosuké’s sleeping face, and spat 
upon it. When the spies reported this bit of debauchery, 
Kôtsuké no Suké was greatly relieved.
Things did not come to rest there. The councillor 
sent away his wife and younger son, and he bought 
himself a concubine in a brothel. This famous act of 
infamy gladdened his enemy’s heart and made him relax 
in watchfulness. So it was that Kôtsuké no Suké packed 
off half his guard.
On one of the bitterest nights of the winter of , 
the forty-seven retainers met in a bare, windswept 
garden on the outskirts of Yedo, next to a bridge and 
a playing-card factory. From there, they marched forth 
with the banners of their lord. But before launching 
their raid, they sent a message to their enemy’s neigh- 
bours, announcing that they were neither night robbers 
nor ruffians but were engaged in a military action in 
the name of strict justice.


The Scar
Two bands attacked Kira Kôtsuké no Suké’s palace. 
The councillor led the first, which assaulted the front 
gate; the second was led by his older son, who was 
about to turn sixteen and who died that night. All 
history knows the different moments of that vivid 
nightmare; the tricky, dangling descent into the court- 
yard on rope ladders; the drum signalling the attack; 
the rush of the defenders; the archers posted on the 
four sides of the roof; the arrows’ swift mission to a 
man’s vital organs; the porcelains smeared with blood; 
death, burning and then icy; the wantonness and 
turmoil of the slaughter. Nine retainers laid down their 
lives; the defenders were no less brave, and they 
refused to give ground. Shortly after midnight, how- 
ever, all resistance came to an end.
Kira Kôtsuké no Suké, the despicable root of this 
display of loyalty, did not turn up. Every nook and 
cranny of the palace was searched for him, but women 
and children weeping were all to be seen. At this, when 
the retainers began to despair of ever finding him, the 
councillor noticed that the quilts of the master’s bed 
were still warm. Renewing their search, they discovered 
a narrow window hidden under a bronze mirror. From 
down below in a gloomy little courtyard, a man dressed 
in white stared up at them. In his right hand, he held 
a trembling sword. When they climbed down, the man 
gave himself up without a struggle. His forehead still


bore a scar - the old etching of Takumi no Kami’s 
dirk.
The bloodstained band then went down on their 
knees before their hated adversary, and they told him 
they were the retainers of the lord of the castle of Akô, 
for whose loss and end the master of etiquette was to 
blame, and they entreated him to commit suicide, as a 
samurai was obliged to do.
Offering this honour to such a cringing spirit was 
pointless. Kôtsuké no Suké was a man to whom honour 
was inaccessible. As the day dawned, they were forced 
to cut his throat.
Testimony
Their vengeance now satisfied (but without anger or 
commotion or pity), the retainers make their way to 
the temple that holds their lord’s remains.
In a bucket they carry Kira Kôtsuké no Suké’s 
unbelievable head, taking turns looking after it. They 
cross the countryside and the province by the full light 
of day. Along the way, people flock to them with 
blessings and tears. The Prince of Sendai invites them 
to his table, but they decline, replying that their lord 
has been waiting for nearly two years. They come to 
his obscure tomb and lay their enemy’s head before it 
as an offering.
The Supreme Court passes sentence. It is what the


retainers expect - they are granted the privilege of 
committing suicide. They all do so, some with ardent 
serenity, and they are laid to rest at their lord’s side. 
Men, women, and children gather to pray at the graves 
of these faithful men.
The Satsuma Man
Among those who come is a boy, dusty and weary, 
who must have travelled a long way. He prostrates 
himself before Oishi Kuranosuké’s tombstone and says 
aloud: ‘I saw you lying drunk by the door of a brothel 
in Kyoto, and I did not think you were plotting to 
avenge your lord; I thought you to be a faithless 
soldier, and I spat in your face. Now I have come to 
offer atonement.’ So saying, he performed hara-kiri.
The abbot of the temple, feeling sympathy for his 
deed, buried him alongside the retainers.
This is the end of the story of the forty-seven loyal 
men - except that it has no end, for the rest of us, who 
are not loyal perhaps but will never wholly give up 
the hope of being so, will go on honouring them with 
words.

The Masked Dyer, 
Hakim of Merv
To Angélica Ocampo
If I am not mistaken, the chief sources of information 
concerning Mokanna, the Veiled (or, literally, Masked) 
Prophet of Khurasan, are only four in number: a) those 
passages from the History of the Caliphs culled by 
Baladhuri; b) the Giant's Handbook, or Book of Precision 
and Revision, by the official historian of the Abbasids, 
Ibn abi Tahir Taifur; c) the Arabic codex entitled The 
Annihilation of the Rose, wherein we find a refutation of 
the abominable heresies of the Dark Rose, or Hidden 
Rose, which was the Prophet’s holy book; and d) some 
barely legible coins unearthed by the engineer Andrusov 
during excavations for the Trans-Caspian Railway. 
These coins, now on deposit in the Numismatic 
Collection at Tehran, preserve certain Persian distichs 
which abridge or emend key passages of the Annihilation. 
The original Rose is lost, for the manuscript found in 
 and published all too hastily by the Morgenlandisches 
Archiv has been pronounced a forgery - first by Horn, 
and afterwards by Sir Percy Sykes.


The Prophet’s fame in the West is owed to a long- 
winded poem by Thomas Moore, laden with all the 
sentimentality of an Irish patriot.
The Scarlet Dye
Along about the year  of the Hegira (a.d. ), the 
man Hakim, whom the people of that time and that 
land were later to style the Prophet of the Veil, was 
born in Turkestan. His home was the ancient city of 
Merv, whose gardens and vineyards and pastures sadly 
overlook the desert. Midday there, when not dimmed 
by the clouds of dust that choke its inhabitants and 
leave a greyish film on the clusters of black grapes, 
is white and dazzling.
Hakim grew up in that weary city. We know that 
a brother of his father apprenticed him to the trade of 
dyer - that craft of the ungodly, the counterfeiter, and 
the shifty, who were to inspire him to the first impreca- 
tions of his unbridled career. In a famous page of the 
Annihilation, he is quoted as saying:
My face is golden but I have steeped my dyes, dipping 
uncarded wool on second nights and soaking treated wool 
on third nights, and the emperors of the islands still com- 
pete for this scarlet cloth. Thus did I sin in the days of 
my youth, tampering with the true colours of God’s 
creation. The Angel told me that the ram was not the 
colour of the tiger, the Satan told me that the Almighty 
wanted them to be, and that He was availing Himself of


my skill and my dye stuffs. Now I know that the Angel 
and the Satan both strayed from the truth, and that all 
colours are abominable.
In the year  of the Hegira, or Flight, Hakim was 
seen no more in Merv. His caldrons and dipping vats, 
along with a Shirazi scimitar and a bronze mirror, 
were found destroyed.
The Bull
At the end of the moon of Sha’ban, in the year , the 
desert air was very clear, and from the gate of a caravan 
halting place on the way to Merv a group of men sat 
gazing at the evening sky in search of the moon of 
Ramadan, which marks the period of continence and 
fasting. They were slaves, beggars, horse dealers, camel 
thieves, and butchers of livestock. Huddled solemnly 
on the ground, they awaited the sign. They looked at 
the sunset, and the colour of the sunset was the colour 
of the sand.
From the other end of the shimmering desert (whose 
sun engenders fever, just as its moon engenders chills), 
they saw three approaching figures, which seemed to 
be of gigantic size. They were men, and the middle 
one had the head of a bull. When they drew near, it 
was plain that this man was wearing a mask and that 
his companions were blind.


Someone (as in the tales of the Arabian Nights) 
pressed him for the meaning of this wonder. ‘They are 
blind,’ the masked man said, ‘because they have looked 
upon my face.’
The Leopard
It is recorded by the Abbasids’ official chronicler that 
the man from the desert (whose voice was singularly 
sweet, or so it seemed in contrast to his brutish mask) 
told the caravan traders that they were awaiting the 
sign of a month of penance, but that he was the preacher 
of a greater sign - that of a lifetime of penance and a 
death of martyrdom. He told them that he was Hakim, 
son of Osman, and that in the year  of the Flight 
a man had made his way into his house and, after 
purification and prayer, had cut off his head with a 
scimitar and taken it to heaven. Held in the right hand 
of the stranger (who was the angel Gabriel), his head 
had been before the Lord - in the highest heaven - who 
entrusted it with the mission of prophesying, taught it 
words so ancient that their mere utterance could burn 
men’s mouths, and endowed it with a radiance that 
mortal eyes could not bear. Such was his justification 
of the mask. When all men on earth professed the new 
law, the Face would be revealed to them and they 
could worship it openly - as the angels already 
worshipped it. His mission proclaimed, Hakim exhorted


them to a holy war - a jihad - and to their forthcoming 
martyrdom.
The slaves, beggars, horse dealers, camel thieves, and 
butchers of livestock shunned his call. One voice 
shouted out ‘Sorcerer!’ and another ‘Impostor!’
Someone had a leopard with him - a specimen, 
perhaps, of that sleek, bloodthirsty breed that Persian 
hunters train - and it happened that the animal broke 
free of its bonds. Except for the masked prophet and 
his two acolytes, the rest of them trampled each other 
to escape. When they flocked back, the prophet had 
blinded the beast. Before its luminous dead eyes, the 
men worshipped Hakim and acknowledged his super- 
natural powers.
The Veiled Prophet
It is with scant enthusiasm that the historian of the 
Abbasid caliphs records the rise of the Veiled Hakim 
in Khurasan. That province - much disturbed by the 
failure and crucifixion of its most famous chieftain - 
embraced the teachings of the Shining Face with fervour 
and desperation, and it laid down in tribute its blood and 
gold. (By then, Hakim had set aside his brutish effigy, 
replacing it with a fourfold veil of white silk embossed 
with precious stones. The symbolic colour of the 
ruling dynasty, the Banu Abbas, was black; for his 
Protective Veil, for his banners and turbans, Hakim


chose the very opposite colour - white.) The campaign 
began well. In the Book of Precision, of course, the 
armies of the Caliph are everywhere victorious; but as 
the invariable result of these victories is the removal of 
generals or the withdrawal from impregnable fortresses, 
the chary reader can surmise actual truth. At the end 
of the moon of Rajab, in the year , the famed city of 
Nishapur opened its metal gates to the Masked One; 
at the beginning of , the city of Asterabad did the 
same. Hakim’s military activity (like that of a more 
fortunate prophet) was limited to praying in a tenor 
voice, elevated toward the Divinity on the back of a 
reddish camel, in the very thick of battle. Arrows 
whistled all around without ever once striking him. 
He seemed to court danger. On the night a group of 
hated lepers gathered around his palace, he had them 
let in, kissed them, and given them silver and gold.
The petty tasks of government were delegated to six 
or seven devotees. Ever mindful of serenity and 
meditation, the Prophet kept a harem of a hundred and 
fourteen blind women, who did their best to satisfy 
the needs of his divine body.
The Abominable Mirrors
However indiscreet or threatening they may be, so 
long as their words are not in conflict with orthodox 
faith, Islam is tolerant of men who enjoy an intimacy


with God. The Prophet himself, perhaps, might not 
have scorned this leniency, but his followers, his many 
victories, and the outspoken wrath of the Caliph - who 
was Mohammed al-Mahdi - drove him at last into 
heresy. This discord, though it led to his undoing, 
also made him set down the tenets of a personal creed, 
in which borrowings from old Gnostic beliefs are 
nonetheless detectable.
At the root of Hakim’s cosmogony is a spectral god. 
This godhead is as majestically devoid of origin as of 
name or face. It is an unchanging god, but its image 
cast nine shadows which, condescending to creation, 
conceived and presided over a first heaven. Out of this 
first demiurgic crown there issued a second, with its 
own angels, powers, and thrones, and these founded a 
lower heaven, which was the symmetrical mirror of the 
first. This second conclave, in its turn, was mirrored in 
a third, and this in a lower one, and so on to the 
number . The lord of this lowermost heaven is he 
who rules us - shadow of shadows of still other 
shadows - and his fraction of divinity approaches 
zero.
The world we live in is a mistake, a clumsy parody. 
Mirrors and fatherhood, because they multiply and 
confirm the parody, are abominations. Revulsion is the 
cardinal virtue. Two ways (whose choice the Prophet 
left free) may lead us there: abstinence or the orgy, 
excess of the flesh or its denial.


Hakim’s personal heaven and hell were no less 
hopeless:
Those who deny the Word, those who deny the Veil 
and the Face [runs a curse from the Hidden Rose], are 
promised a wondrous Hell: for each lost soul shall hold 
sway over  empires of fire; and in each empire, over 
 mountains of fire; and in each mountain, over  
castles of fire; and in each castle, over  chambers of 
fire; and in each chamber, over  beds of fire; and in 
each bed he will find himself everlastingly tormented by 
 shapes of fire, which will have his face and his voice.
This is confirmed in another surviving versicle:
In this life, ye suffer in a single body; in death and Retri- 
bution, in numberless numbers of bodies.
Heaven is less dearly drawn:
Its darkness is never-ending, there are fountains and 
pools made of stone, and the happiness of this Heaven is 
the happiness of leave-taking, of self-denial, and of those 
who know they are asleep.
The Face
In the year  of the Flight (and fifth year of the 
Shining Face), Hakim was besieged at Sanam by the 
Caliph’s army. There was no lack of provisions or 
martyrs, and the arrival of a host of golden angels was


imminent. It was at this point that an alarming rumour 
made its way through the fortress. An adultress in the 
harem, as she was strangled by the eunuchs, had cried 
out that the ring finger of the Prophet’s right hand was 
missing and that all his other fingers lacked nails. This 
rumour spread among the faithful. From the top of a 
terrace, in the midst of his people, Hakim was praying 
to the Lord for a victory or for a special sign. Two 
captains, their heads bowed down, slavish - as if 
beating into a driving rain - tore away the Veil
At first, there was a shudder. The Apostle’s promised 
face, the face that had been to the heavens, was indeed 
white - but with that whiteness peculiar to spotted 
leprosy. It was so bloated and unbelievable that to the 
mass of onlookers it seemed a mask. There were no 
brows; the lower lid of the right eye hung over the 
shrivelled cheek; a heavy cluster of tubercles ate away 
the lips; the flattened, inhuman nose was like a lion’s.
Hakim’s voice attempted one final stratagem. ‘Your 
unforgivable sins do not allow you to see my splendour
-’ it began to say.
Paying no heed, the captains ran him through with 
spears.


STREETCORNER MAN
To Enrique Amorim


Streetcorner Man
Fancy your coming out and asking me, of all people, 
about the late Francisco Real. Yes, I knew him, even if 
he wasn’t from around here. His stamping ground was 
the Northside - that whole stretch from the Guadalupe 
pond to the old Artillery Barracks. I never laid eyes on 
him above three times, and they were all on the same 
night, but nights like that you don’t forget. It was 
when La Lujanera decided to come around to my place 
and bed down with me, and when Rosendo Juárez 
disappeared from the Maldonado for good. Of course, 
you’re not the sort of person that name would mean 
much to. But around Villa Santa Rita, Rosendo Juárez
- or, as we called him, the Slasher - had quite a 
reputation. He was one of don Nicolás Paredes’ boys, 
just as Paredes was one of Morel’s gang, and he was 
admired for the way he handled a knife. Sharp dresser, 
too. He always rode up to the whorehouse on a dark 
horse, his riding gear decked out in silver. There wasn’t 
a man or dog around that didn’t respect him - and that


goes for the women as well. Everyone knew that he 
had at least a couple of killings to his credit. He usually 
wore a soft hat with a narrow brim and tall crown, and 
it would sit in a cocky way on his long hair, which he 
slicked straight back. Lady luck smiled on him, as they 
say, and around Villa all of us who were younger used 
to ape him - even as to how he spit. But then one night 
we got a good look at what this Rosendo was made of.
All this may seem made-up, but what took place on 
that particular night started when a flashy red-wheeled 
buggy, jamful of men, came barrelling down one of those 
hard-packed dirt roads out between the brick kilns and 
the empty lots. Two men in black were making a lot 
of noise twanging on guitars, and the driver kept 
cracking his whip at the stray dogs that snapped at the 
horse’s legs. Sitting quiet, directly in the middle, was 
a man wrapped in a poncho. This was the famous 
Butcher - he had picked up the name working in the 
stockyards - and it seemed he was out for a fight and 
maybe even a killing.
The night was cool and welcome. Two or three of 
the men sat on the folded hood as though they were 
parading along some downtown avenue in Carnival. 
Much more happened that night, but it was only later 
that we learned about those first doings. Our gang was 
there at Julia’s fairly early. Her dance hall, between the 
Gauna road and the river, was really a big shed built 
of corrugated sheet iron. You could spot the place


from several blocks off by the noise or by the red lamp 
hanging out front. Julia was a darky, but she was careful 
to see that things ran well. There were always plenty 
of musicians and good booze, not to mention dancing 
partners who were ready to go all night. But La 
Lujanera, who was Rosendo’s woman, had the rest 
beat by a mile. She’s dead now, and I can tell you that 
years go by when I don’t give her a thought any 
more, but you should have seen her in her day - what 
eyes! One look at her could cause a man to lose 
sleep.
The rum, the music, the women, Rosendo talking 
tough and slapping each of us on the back, which to 
me was a sign of real friendship - well, I was as happy 
as could be. I had a good partner, too, who was having 
an easy time following my steps. The tango took hold 
of us, driving us along, splitting us up, then bringing 
us together again. All at once, in the middle of this, 
I seemed to feel the music growing louder. It turned out 
that the two guitar players riding in the buggy were 
coming closer and closer, and their music was mixing 
with ours. Then the breeze shifted, you couldn’t hear 
them anymore, and my thoughts went back to myself 
and my partner and to the involutions of the dance. 
A half hour or so later there were blows at the door, 
and a big voice called out. Since it might have been the 
police, everything went silent. The next thing we knew, 
somebody began shouldering the door, and a moment


later a man burst in. Oddly enough, he looked exactly 
like his voice.
To us he wasn’t Francisco Real - not yet - but just 
a big lout. He was in black from head to toe, except 
for a reddish-brown scarf he wore draped over one 
shoulder. I remember his face, which had something 
Indian and bony about it.
The door had come flying in, striking me. Before 
I knew what I was doing, I was on top of the intruder, 
leading with a left while my right hand fished inside 
my vest for my knife. But I never got a chance. 
Steadying himself, Real put out an arm and brushed 
me aside. There I was, down on the floor - behind 
him now - my hand still inside the jacket groping for 
the knife. And there he was, wading forward as though 
nothing had happened. Just wading forward, a whole 
head taller than any of us, and acting as though we 
didn’t exist. Our boys - that pack of gaping wops - 
backed out of his way. But only the first of them. Next 
in line, the Redhead was waiting, and before the 
newcomer could lay a hand on his shoulder, Red’s 
knife was out and the flat of the blade was slapping 
Real across the face. When the others saw that, they 
jumped him. The hall was long, maybe more than 
nine or ten yards, and they drove the Butcher from one 
end almost to the other, roughing him up, hooting, 
and spitting all over him. First they hit him with their 
fists, then, seeing that he didn’t bother to ward off


the blows, they began slapping him openhanded and 
flicking the fringes of their scarves at him. Of course, 
they were also saving him for Rosendo, who stood this 
whole time with his back against the far wall, neither 
moving a muscle nor uttering a word. All Rosendo did 
was puff on his cigarette, a little troubled-looking and 
maybe already aware of what came clear to the rest of 
us only later on. The Butcher stayed on his feet, but 
blood showed on him in one or two places. The whole 
hooting pack was behind him now, driving him closer 
and closer to Rosendo. Only when the two of them 
came together did Real speak. He glared at Rosendo 
and, wiping his face on his sleeve, said something like 
this:
‘I’m Francisco Real and I come from the Northside. 
I let these fools lay their hands on me because what 
I’m looking for is a man. Word is going around that 
there’s someone out here in mudville who’s good with 
a knife. They call him the Slasher. He’s supposed to be 
tough, and I’d sure like to meet him. Maybe a nobody 
like me could learn something from him.’
He had his say looking straight at Rosendo, and 
suddenly a long knife, which he must have had up his 
sleeve, flashed in his hand. Now, instead of pressing in, 
everyone opened up space for a fight - at the same 
time, staring at the two of them in dead silence. Even 
the thick lips of the blind nigger playing the fiddle 
were turned their way.


It was then that I heard a commotion behind me, and 
in the frame of the door I caught a glimpse of six or 
seven men who must have been part of the Butcher’s 
gang. The oldest, a leathery-faced man with a big grey 
moustache and a country look about him, came in a 
few steps, and awed by the women and the lights, took 
off his hat in respect. The rest of them kept their eyes 
peeled, on the lookout for anything underhanded.
What was the matter with Rosendo, not moving to 
throw the loudmouth out? He was still quiet, still kept 
his eyes down. I don’t know if he spit out his cigarette 
or whether it fell from his lips. He finally managed a 
few words, but they were so low that those of us at the 
other end of the dance floor didn’t hear what he said. 
Francisco Real challenged him again, and again 
Rosendo refused to budge. At this point, the youngest 
of the newcomers let out a whistle. La Lujanera gave 
him a look that cut right through him and, with her 
hair swinging loose over her shoulders, she wedged 
through the crowd. Reaching her man, she slipped his 
knife out and handed it to him.
‘Rosendo,’ she said, ‘I think you’re going to need 
this.’
Up under the roof was a long window that opened 
out over the river. Rosendo took the blade in both 
hands and turned it over as though he’d never seen it 
before. Then, raising his arms up over his head, he 
suddenly flipped the knife behind him - out the window


and into the Maldonado. I felt a chill go through me.
‘The only reason I don’t carve you up is because you 
sicken me,’ the Butcher said to Rosendo, threatening 
to strike him. That same moment, La Lujanera threw 
her arms around the Butcher’s neck, fixed those eyes 
of hers on him, and said in a fury, ‘Let him alone - 
making us think he was a man.’
For a minute or so, Fransisco Real was bewildered. 
Then, wrapping his arms around La Lujanera, he called 
to the musicians to play loud and strong, and he 
ordered the rest of us to dance. From one end of the 
hall to the other, the music ran like wildfire. Real 
danced stiffly, but he held his partner close, and in no 
time he had her under his spell. When they drew near 
the door, he shouted, ‘Make way, boys, she’s all mine 
now!’ And out they went, cheek to cheek, as though 
floating off on the tango.
I must have coloured with shame. I took a turn or so 
with some woman or other, then dropped her. I said 
it was because of the heat and the crowd, and I edged 
around the room.
It was a nice night out, but nice for whom? The 
buggy stood at the alley corner. Inside it, the pair of 
guitars sat straight up on the seat like men - which was 
as much as to say that we weren’t good enough even 
for walking off with a cheap guitar. That thought, that 
we were nobodies, really burned me. I snatched the 
carnation from behind my ear, threw it into a puddle,


and stared at it a long time trying to take my mind off 
things. How I wished it were another day and that that 
night were over! The next thing I knew - it came to me 
almost as a relief - an elbow was shoving me aside. It 
was Rosendo, skulking off alone.
‘You’re always in the way, kid,’ he snarled. Maybe 
he was getting something off his chest; I couldn’t tell. 
He disappeared into the dark down toward the 
Maldonado. That was the last I ever saw of him.
I remained there looking at the things I’d seen all 
my life - the wide sky, the river flowing on blindly, a 
horse half asleep, the dirt roads, the kilns - and I began 
to realize that, in the middle of the ragweed and the 
dump heaps and that whole forsaken neighbourhood, 
I had sprouted up no more than a weed myself. With 
our big mouths and no guts, what else would grow 
there but trash like us? Then I thought no, that the 
worse the place the tougher it had to be.
At the dance hall the music was still going strong, 
and on the breeze came a smell of honeysuckle. It was 
a nice night, all right, with so many stars - some on 
top of others - that looking at them made you dizzy. 
I tried to convince myself that what had happened 
meant nothing to me. Still, I couldn’t get over Rosendo’s 
cowardice and the newcomer’s sheer bravery. Real had 
even managed to get hold of a woman for the night - 
for that night, for the next night, and maybe forever. 
God knows which way the two had headed; they


couldn’t have wandered far. By then they were prob- 
ably going at it in some ditch.
When I got back, the dance was in full swing. I 
slipped quietly into the crowd, noticing that a few of 
our boys had left and that some of the Northsiders 
were dancing along with everyone else. But there was 
no pushing or shoving. The music sounded sleepy, 
and the girls tangoing with the outsiders appeared to 
have little to say.
I was on the lookout, but not for what happened. 
From outdoors, sounds came to us of a woman crying, 
followed by that voice that we all knew by then - but 
now it was low, somehow too low.
‘Go on in,’ it told her.
There was more wailing.
‘Open the door, you hear?’ Now the voice sounded 
desperate. ‘ Open it, you bitch - open it.’
The battered door swung open and in came La 
Lujanera, alone and almost as though she were being 
herded.
‘There must be a ghost out there,’ said the Redhead.
‘A dead man, friend.’ It was the Butcher staggering in, 
his face looking like a drunk’s. In the space we opened 
for him he took a couple of blind, reeling steps, then 
all at once he fell like a log. One of his friends rolled 
him over and propped up his head with his scarf, but 
that only got him smeared with blood. We could see 
a great gash in Real’s chest. The blood was welling up


and blackening the bright red neckerchief he wore 
under his scarf. One of the women brought rum and 
some scorched rags.
He was in no condition to explain. La Lujanera 
stared at him in a daze, her arms dangling by her sides. 
There was a single question on every face, and finally 
she got out the answer. She said that after leaving the 
hall they had gone to a little field and at that point a 
man appeared out of nowhere, challenged the Butcher 
to fight, and stabbed him. She swore she didn’t know 
who the man was, but she said that he wasn’t Rosendo. 
I wondered whether anyone would believe her.
The man at our feet was dying. It looked to me as 
though whoever had done the job had done it well. 
But the man hung on. When he knocked that second 
time, Julia had been brewing mate. The cup went clear 
around the circle and back to me before he breathed 
his last. As the end came, he said in a low voice, ‘Cover 
my face.’ All he had left was his pride; he didn’t want 
us watching while his face went through its agony. 
Someone laid his hat over him, and that’s how he died - 
not uttering a sound - under that high black crown. 
It was only when his chest stopped heaving that they 
dared uncover him. He had that exhausted look of the 
dead. In his day, from the Artillery Barracks all the 
way to the Southside, he’d been one of the bravest men 
around. As soon as I knew he was dead and couldn’t 
talk, I stopped hating him.


‘All dying takes is being alive,’ one of the girls in the 
crowd said. And another said, ‘A man’s so full of pride, 
and now look - all he’s good for is gathering flies.’ 
The Northside gang began talking among themselves 
in low voices. Then two of them spoke out together, say- 
ing, ‘The woman killed him.’ After that, one of them 
loudly flung the accusation in her face, and the rest 
swarmed around her. Forgetting I had to be careful, 
I leaped in. What kept me from reaching for my knife 
I don’t know. Almost everyone was gaping at me, and 
I said, putting them down, ‘Look at this woman’s 
hands. Where would she get the strength or the nerve 
to knife a man?’
Then, coolly, I added, ‘Whoever would have 
dreamed that the deceased, who’d made a big name 
for himself in his own backyard, would end up like 
this? Especially out here where nothing ever happens?’ 
Nobody offered his hide for a whipping.
At that moment, in the dead silence, came the sound 
of approaching riders. It was the police. Everyone - 
some more, some less - had his own good reason for 
staying clear of the law. The best thing was to dump the 
body into the Maldonado. You remember the long 
window the knife had flown out of? Well, that’s where 
the man in black went. Several of them lifted him up. 
Hands stripped him of every cent and trinket he had, 
and somebody even hacked off one of his fingers to 
steal his ring. They were very daring with a helpless


corpse once a better man had laid him out. One good 
heave and the current did the rest. To keep him from 
floating, they may have cut out his intestines. I don’t 
know - I didn’t want tq look. The old-timer with the 
grey moustache wouldn’t take his eyes off me. Making 
the best of the commotion, La Lujanera slipped away.
When the police came in for a look around, the dance 
was going again. That blind fiddler could scrape some 
lively numbers on that violin of his - the kind of thing 
you never hear anymore. It was growing light outside. 
The fence posts on a nearby slope seemed to stand 
alone, the strands of wire still invisible in the early 
dawn.
Easy as can be, I walked the two or three blocks 
back to my own place. A candle was burning in the 
window, then all at once it went out. Let me tell you, 
I hurried when I saw that. Then, Borges, I put my 
hand inside my vest - here by the left armpit, where 
I always carry it - and took my knife out again. I turned 
the blade over, slowly. It was as good as new, innocent- 
looking, and there wasn’t the slightest trace of blood 
on it.

ETCETERA
To Néstor Ibarra


A Theologian in Death
The angels told me that when Melancthon died he was 
provided with a house deceptively like the one in which 
he lived in this world. (This happens to most newcomers 
in eternity upon their first arrival - it is why they are 
ignorant of their death, and think they are still in the 
natural world.) All the things in his room were similar 
to those he had had before - the table, the desk with its 
drawers, the shelves of books. As soon as Melancthon 
awoke in this new abode, he sat at his table, took up 
his literary work, and spent several days writing - as 
usual - on justification by faith alone, without so much 
as a single word on charity. This omission being 
remarked by the angels, they sent messengers to 
question him. ‘I have proved beyond refutation,’ 
Melancthon replied to them, ‘that there is nothing in 
charity essential to the soul, and that to gain salvation 
faith is enough.’ He spoke with great assurance, 
unsuspecting that he was dead and that his lot lay 
outside Heaven. When the angels heard him say these 
things, they departed.


After a few weeks, the furnishings in his room began 
to fade away and disappear, until at last there was 
nothing left but the armchair, the table, the paper, and 
his inkstand. What is more, the walls of the room 
became encrusted with lime, and the floor with a 
yellow glaze. Melancthon’s own clothes were now much 
coarser. He wondered at these changes, but he went 
on writing about faith while denying charity, and was 
so persistent in this exclusion that he was suddenly 
transported underground to a kind of workhouse, 
where there were other theologians like him. Locked 
up for a few days, Melancthon fell to doubting his 
doctrine, and was allowed to return to his former 
room. He was now clad in a hairy skin, but he tried 
hard to convince himself that what had just happened 
to him was no more than a hallucination, and he went 
back to extolling faith and belittling charity.
One evening, Melancthon felt cold. He began exam- 
ining the house, and soon discovered that the other 
rooms no longer matched those of his old house in the 
natural world. One was cluttered with instruments 
whose use he did not understand; another had shrunk 
so small that entrance was impossible; a third had not 
changed, but its doors and windows opened onto vast 
sandbanks. One of the rooms at the back of the house 
was full of people who worshipped him and who kept 
telling him that no theologian was ever as wise as he. 
These praises pleased him, but since some of the


visitors were faceless and others seemed dead he ended 
up hating and distrusting them. It was at this point that 
he decided to write something concerning charity. 
The only difficulty was that what he wrote one day he 
could not see the next. This was because the pages had 
been written without conviction.
Melancthon received many visits from persons 
newly dead, but he felt shame at being found in so run- 
down a lodging. In order to have them believe he was 
in Heaven, he hired a neighbouring magician, who 
tricked the company with appearances of peace and 
splendour. The moment his visitors had gone - and 
sometimes a little before - these adornments vanished, 
leaving the former plaster and draughtiness.
The last I heard of Melancthon was that the magician 
and one of the faceless men had taken him away into 
the sand hills, where he is now a kind of servant of 
demons.
From the Arcana Coelestia (-) 
by Emanuel Swedenborg


The Chamber of Statues
This tale, taken from an Arab source, is of uncertain 
authorship. From internal evidence, we may infer that 
the writer was a Spanish Muslim:
In ages long gone, in the kingdom of the Andalusians, 
there was a city, whose name was Lebtit or Ceuta or 
Jaén, where the kings had their dwelling place. In 
this city stood a strong castle with leafed gates meant 
neither for going in nor for coming out but only to 
be kept locked. Whenever a king died and another king 
took the high throne after him, he set with his own 
hands a new lock to the gates, until these locks 
numbered twenty-four - one for each of the kings.
After this time, it befell the kingdom that an evil 
man, who was not of the royal house, usurped the 
throne and rather than add a new lock, had a mind to 
open the twenty-four old locks so that he might see 
what lay within the castle. The vizier and the emirs 
beseeched him not to do this, and they hid the iron 
key ring from him and told him it was easier to add one


lock than to force twenty-four. But the king persisted 
with wondrous craft, saying, ‘I want to look upon the 
contents of this castle.’ They then offered him all the 
wealth their hands could gather - in flocks, in Christian 
idols, in silver and gold. Still he would not be denied, 
and, with his own right hand (may it bum forever!), 
he prized off the locks.
Inside the castle, they found figures of Arabs - in 
metalwork and in wood - mounted on their swift 
camels and horses, with turbans hanging down over 
their shoulders and scimitars dangling from their belts 
and bearing long lances in their hands. All these figures 
were sculptured, and they threw shadows over the 
floor. The forelegs of the horses, as if they were rearing 
up, did not touch the ground, and yet the mighty steeds 
did not topple or fall. Great fear was implanted in the 
king by these skilful figures, the more so for their 
discipline and perfect silence, since they all faced the 
same way - which was toward the west - and not a 
word or a trumpet blast could be heard from them. 
This was in the first chamber. In the second, they found 
the table set for Solomon, son of David - peace be on 
them both! It was carved from a single emerald, whose 
colour, as everyone knows, is green, and whose hidden 
virtues are real yet indescribable, for they quiet tem- 
pests, protect the chastity of the owner, dispel dysentery 
and evil spirits, assure a favourable outcome in litiga- 
tions, and bring great relief in childbearing.


In the third chamber, two books were found. One 
was black, and it set forth the properties of metals, the 
use of talismans, and the planetary laws of the days, as 
well as the preparation of poisons and antidotes. The 
other book was white, and although its letters were 
quite clear, no one could decipher its teaching. In the 
fourth chamber, they found a map of the world, 
figuring all its kingdoms and cities and seas and castles 
and perils - each one with its true name and exact shape.
In the fifth chamber, they came upon a circular 
mirror, made for Solomon, son of David - peace be on 
the twain! - whose worth was priceless, for it was of 
mixed metals, and he who looked into it could see the 
faces of his fathers and his sons from the first Adam 
down to those who shall hear the Trumpet. The sixth 
chamber was filled with an elixir, a single dram of 
which was enough to turn three thousand ounces of 
silver into three thousand ounces of fine gold. The 
seventh chamber appeared to be empty. It was so long 
that even the most skilled of archers could not have 
shot an arrow from the entrance and hit the opposite 
wall. On that wall, they found carved a dire inscription. 
The king read it and understood it, and its words were 
these: ‘If any hand dare open the door of this castle, 
living warriors after the likeness of the figures here 
depicted will conquer the kingdom.’
These things came to pass in the year  of the Hegira. 
Before this twelve-month was out, Tariq ibn-Ziyad


overpowered the fortress, defeated the king, sold his 
women and children into slavery, and laid waste the 
land. So it was that the Arabs spread over the kingdom 
of Andalusia, with its fig trees and watered meadows 
in which no thirst is suffered. As to the treasures, it is 
widely known that Tariq, son of Ziyad, sent them to 
his lord the caliph, who hoarded them in the heart of 
a pyramid.
From the Thousand and One Nights, Nos.  & 

Tale of the Two Dreamers
The Arabic historian al-Ishaqi tells this story in the 
reign of the caliph al-Ma’mun (a.d. -):
Men worthy of trust have recorded (but Allah alone 
is All-Knowing and All-Powerful and All-Merciful 
and does not sleep) that there once lived in Cairo a 
man who possessed great wealth, but so freehanded 
and liberal was he that he lost all he had, save his 
father’s house, and in time was forced to earn his 
living by his own hands. He worked so hard that one 
night sleep overcame him at the foot of a fig tree in his 
garden, and in a dream he was visited by a man, drenched 
through and through, who took a gold coin out of his 
mouth and said to him, ‘Your fortune lies in Persia, in 
Isfahan; go thither and seek it.’
Early the next morning, the man awoke and set out 
on the long journey, facing the dangers of desert wastes, 
of ships, of pirates, of idolaters, of rivers, of wild beasts, 
and of men. At last, he found his way to Isfahan, but 
within the gates of that city night overtook him, and


he lay down to sleep in the courtyard of a mosque. 
Close by the mosque there was a house, and, by decree 
of Allah Almighty, a band of robbers entered the 
mosque and made its way thence to the adjoining 
house. But the owners of the house, aroused by the 
noise of the thieves, awoke and cried out for help. The 
neighbours, too, shouted for help, until the captain 
of the police arrived with his officers, and the robbers 
fled over the rooftops. The captain ordered a search 
of the mosque, and, finding there the man from Cairo, 
dealt him such a whipping with bamboo lashes that he 
was well-nigh dead.
Two days later, he came to his senses in jail. The 
captain sent for him and asked, ‘Who are you, and 
where are you from?’
The man said, ‘I am from the famed city of Cairo, 
and my name is Mohammed al-Maghribi.’ The captain 
asked him, ‘And what brought you to Isfahan?’ The 
man chose the truth, and he said to the captain, ‘I was 
ordered by one in a dream to go to Isfahan, for my 
fortune awaited me there. But when I came to Isfahan, 
the fortune he promised me proved to be the lashing 
that you so generously dealt me.’
Hearing this, the captain laughed until he showed 
his wisdom teeth, and at last he said, ‘O man of little 
wit, thrice have I dreamed of a house in Cairo in whose 
yard is a garden, at the lower end of which is a sundial 
and beyond the sundial a fig tree and beyond the fig


tree a fountain and beneath the fountain a great sum 
of money. Yet I have not paid the least heed to this 
lie; but you, offspring of a mule and a devil, have jour- 
neyed from place to place on the faith of a dream. 
Don’t show your face again in Isfahan. Take these 
coins and leave.’
The man took the money and set out upon his home- 
ward march. Beneath the fountain in his garden (which 
was the one in the captain’s dream), he dug up a great 
treasure. And thus Allah brought abundant blessing 
upon him and rewarded him and exalted him. Allah 
is the Beneficent, the Unseen.
From the Thousand and One Nights, No. 


The Wizard Postponed
In the city of Santiago, there was a dean who had a 
burning desire to learn the art of magic. Hearing that 
don Illán of Toledo knew more about magic than 
anyone else, the dean went to Toledo in search of 
him.
The very morning he arrived, he went straight to 
don Illán’s and found him reading in a room at the 
back of his house. Don Illán received the dean cordially 
and asked him to postpone telling him the object of 
his visit until after they had eaten. Showing his guest 
into pleasant quarters, don Illán said he felt very happy 
about the dean’s visit. After their meal, the dean told 
don Illán why he had come, and he begged to be taught 
the craft of magic. Don Illán said that he already knew 
that his guest was a dean, a man of good standing and 
of good prospects, but that were he to teach him all his 
knowledge, the day might come when the dean would 
fail to repay his services - as men in high places are 
often wont to do. The dean swore that he would never


forget Don Illán’s bounty and that he would always be 
at his call. Once they came to an agreement, don Illán 
explained that the magic arts could not be learned save 
in a place of deep seclusion, and, taking the dean by 
the hand, he led him to the next room, in whose floor 
there was a large iron ring. Before this, however, he 
told the serving maid to prepare partridges for supper 
but not to put them on to roast until he so ordered.
Don Illán and his guest lifted the ring and went down 
a well-worn, winding stairway until it seemed to the 
dean they had gone down so far that the bed of the 
Tagus must now be above them. At the foot of the 
staircase was a cell, and in it were a library of books 
and a kind of cabinet with magic instruments. They 
were leafing through the books, when suddenly two 
men appeared bearing a letter for the dean, written by 
the bishop, his uncle, in which the bishop informed 
him that he was gravely ill, and that if the dean wanted 
to find him alive he should not tarry. The news was 
very upsetting to the dean - for one thing, because of 
his uncle’s illness; for another, because he would be 
forced to interrupt his studies. In the end, choos- 
ing to stay, he wrote an apology and sent it to the 
bishop.
Three days passed, and there arrived several men in 
mourning bearing further letters for the dean, in which 
he read that the bishop had died, that a successor was 
being chosen, and that they hoped by the grace of God


that the dean would be elected. The letters advised him 
to remain where he was, it seeming better that he be 
absent during his election.
Ten days elapsed, and two finely dressed squires 
came, throwing themselves down at the dean’s feet and 
kissing his hands and greeting him as bishop. When 
don Illán saw these things, he turned to the new prelate 
with great joy and said that he thanked the Lord that 
such good news should have come to his house. He 
then asked for the now vacant deanery for his son. 
The bishop answered that he had already set aside the 
deanery for his own brother but that he would find the 
son some post in the Church, and he begged that they 
all three leave together for Santiago.
They made their way to the city of Santiago, where 
they were received with honours. Six months passed, 
and messengers from the pope came to the bishop, 
offering him the archbishopric of Toulouse and leaving 
in his hands the naming of a successor. When don Illán 
heard this, he reminded the archbishop of his old 
promise and asked for the vacated title for his son. The 
archbishop told him that he had already set aside the 
bishopric for his own uncle, his father’s brother, but 
that as he had given his word to shed favour on don 
Illán, they should, together with the son, all leave for 
Toulouse. Don Illán had no recourse but to agree.
The three set out for Toulouse, where they were 
received with honours and Masses. Two years passed,


and messengers from the pope came to the archbishop, 
elevating him to the cardinalate and leaving in his 
hands the naming of a successor. When don Illán 
learned this, he reminded the cardinal of his old promise 
and asked for the vacant title for his son. The cardinal 
told him that he had already set aside the archbishopric 
for his own uncle, his mother’s brother - a good old 
man - but that if don Illán and his son were to accom- 
pany him to Rome, surely some favourable opportunity 
would present itself. Don Illán protested, but in the 
end he was forced to agree.
The three then set out for Rome, where they were 
received with honours, Masses, and processions. Four 
years elapsed, and the pope died, and our cardinal was 
elected to the papacy by all the other cardinals. Learn- 
ing of this, don Illán kissed His Holiness’s feet, 
reminded him of his old promise, and asked for the 
vacant cardinal’s office for his son. The pope told don 
Illán that by now he was weary of his continued 
requests and that if he persisted in importuning him 
he would clap him in gaol, since he knew full well that 
don Illán was no more than a wizard and that in Toledo 
he had been a teacher of the arts of magic.
Poor don Illán could only answer that he was going 
back to Spain, and he asked the pope for something 
to eat during the long sea journey. Once more the pope 
refused him, whereupon don Illán (whose face had 
changed in a strange fashion) said in an unwavering


voice, ‘In that case, I shall have to eat the partridges 
that I ordered for tonight.’
The serving maid came forward, and don Illán 
ordered the partridges roasted. Immediately the pope 
found himself in the underground cell in Toledo, no 
more than dean of Santiago, and so taken aback with 
shame that he did not know what to say. Don Illán 
said that this test was sufficient, refused the dean his 
share of the partridges, and saw him to the door, 
where, taking leave of him with great courtesy, he 
wished him a safe journey home.
From the Libro de los enxiemplos 
del Conde Lucanor et de Patronio () 
by Juan Manuel


The Mirror of Ink
All history knows that the cruellest of the rulers of the 
Sudan was Yaqub the Ailing, who delivered his country 
to the rapacity of Egyptian tax collectors and died in 
a palace chamber on the fourteenth day of the moon of 
Barmahat, in the year . There are those who hold 
that the wizard Abd-er-Rahman al-Masmudi (whose 
name may be translated as the ‘Servant of the All- 
MercifuF) slew him by means of a dagger or poison. 
That he died a natural death is more likely, however, 
since he was called the Ailing. Captain Richard F. 
Burton spoke to the wizard in , and recounts the 
tale I quote here:
It is true that as a consequence of the conspiracy 
woven by my brother Ibrahim, with the treacherous 
and useless support of the black chiefs of Kordofan, 
who betrayed him, I suffered captivity in the castle of 
Yaqub the Ailing. My brother perished by the sword, 
on the blood-red skin of Justice, but I flung myself at 
the hated feet of the Ailing, telling him that I was a


wizard, and that if he spared my life I would show him 
shapes and appearances still more wonderful than those 
of the magic lantern. The tyrant demanded an im- 
mediate proof. I asked for a reed pen, a pair of scissors, 
a large leaf of Venetian paper, an inkhorn, a chafing 
dish with some live coals in it, some coriander seeds, 
and an ounce of benzoin. I cut up the paper into six 
strips, wrote charms and invocation on the first five, 
and on the remaining one wrote the following words, 
taken from the glorious Koran: ‘And we have removed 
from thee thy veil; and thy sight today is piercing.’ 
Then I drew a magic square in the palm of Yaqub’s 
right hand, told him to make a hollow of it, and into 
the centre I poured a pool of ink. I asked him if he saw 
himself clearly reflected in it, and he answered that he 
did. I told him not to raise his head. I dropped the 
benzoin and coriander seeds into the chafing dish, and 
I burned the invocations upon the glowing coals. I 
next asked him to name the image he desired to see. 
He thought a moment and said, ‘A wild horse, the 
finest of those that graze along the borders of the 
desert.’ Looking, he saw a quiet, green pasture, and 
a minute later a horse drawing near, lithe as a leopard, 
with a white spot on its face. He asked me for a drove 
of horses as handsome as the first one, and on the 
horizon he saw a cloud of dust, and then the drove. It 
was at this point that I knew my life was spared.
From that day on, with the first streak of light in the


eastern sky, two soldiers would enter my cell and lead 
me to the Ailing’s bedchamber, where the incense, the 
chafing dish, and the ink were already laid out. So it 
was that he demanded of me, and I showed him, all the 
visible things of this world. This man, whom I still 
hate, had in his palm everything seen by men now dead 
and everything seen by the living: the cities, the 
climates, the kingdoms into which the earth is divided; 
the treasures hidden in its bowels; the ships that ply 
its seas; the many instruments of war, of music, of 
surgery; fair women; the fixed stars and the planets; 
the colours used by the ungodly to paint their odious 
pictures; minerals and plants, with the secrets and 
properties they hold locked up in them; the silvery 
angels, whose only food is the praise and worship of 
the Lord; the awarding of prizes in schools; the idols 
of birds and kings buried in the heart of the pyramids; 
the shadow cast by the bull that holds up the world and 
by the fish that lies under the bull; the sandy wastes of 
Allah the All-Merciful. He saw things impossible to 
tell, like gaslit streets and the whale that dies on hearing 
the cry of a man. Once, he ordered me to show him 
the city called Europe. I let him see its main thorough- 
fare, and it was there, I believe, in that great stream of 
men - all wearing black and many using spectacles - 
that he first set eyes on the Man with the Mask.
This figure, at times in Sudanese garments and at 
times in uniform, but always with a veil over his face,


from then on haunted the things we saw. He was 
never absent, and we dared not divine who he was. 
The images in the mirror of ink, at first fleeting or 
fixed, were more intricate now; they obeyed my 
commands without delay, and the tyrant saw them 
quite plainly. Of course, the growing cruelty of the 
scenes left us both in a state of exhaustion. We witnessed 
nothing but punishments, garrottings, mutilations - 
the pleasures of the executioner and of the merciless.
In this way, we came to the dawn of the fourteenth 
day of the moon of Barmahat. The circle of ink had 
been poured into the tyrant’s hand, the benzoin and 
coriander cast into the chafing dish, the invocations 
burned. The two of us were alone. The Ailing ordered 
me to show him a punishment both lawful and 
unappealable, for that day his heart hungered to view 
an execution. I let him see the soldiers with their drums, 
the spread calfskin, the persons lucky enough to be 
onlookers, the executioner wielding the sword of 
Justice. Marvelling at the sight of him, Yaqub told me, 
‘That’s Abu Kir, he who dealt justice to your brother 
Ibrahim, he who will seal your fate when it’s given me 
to know the science of bringing together these images 
without your aid.’
He asked me to have the doomed man brought 
forward. When this was done, seeing that the man to 
be executed was the mysterious man of the veil, the 
tyrant paled. I was ordered to have the veil removed


before justice was carried out. At this, I threw myself 
at his feet, beseeching, ‘O king of time and sum and 
substance of the age, this figure is not like any of the 
others, for we do not know his name or the name of 
his fathers or the name of the city where he was born. 
I dare not tamper with the image, for fear of incurring 
a sin for which I shall be held to account.’
The Ailing laughed, and when he finished he swore 
that he would take the guilt on his own head - if guilt 
there were. He swore this by his sword and by the 
Koran. I then commanded that the prisoner be stripped 
and that he be bound on the calfskin, and that the mask 
be torn from his face. These things were done. At last, 
Yaqub’s stricken eyes could see the face - it was his 
own. He was filled with fear and madness. I gripped 
his trembling hand in mine, which was steady, and 
I ordered him to go on witnessing the ceremony of 
his death. He was possessed by the mirror, so much so 
that he attempted neither to avert his eyes nor to spill 
the ink. When in the vision the sword fell on the guilty 
head, Yaqub moaned with a sound that left my pity 
untouched, and he tumbled to the floor, dead.
Glory be to Him, who endureth forever, and in 
whose hand are the keys of unlimited Pardon and 
unending Punishment.
From The Lake Regions of Central Africa () 
by Richard F. Burton


A Double for Mohammed
Since the idea of Mohammed is so closely associated 
with religion in the minds of Muslims, the Lord has 
ordained that they should be presided over in Heaven 
by someone impersonating Mohammed. This delegate 
is not always the same person. A native of Saxony who 
in earthly life was taken prisoner by the Algerines and 
became a Muslim once held this position. Having been 
a Christian, he was moved to speak to them of the 
Lord, and to say that He was not Joseph’s son but the 
Son of God; it was found advisable to have this man 
replaced. The office of the representative Mohammed 
is marked by a torchlike flame, visible only to Muslims.
The real Mohammed, who wrote the Koran, is no 
longer visible to his followers. I have been informed 
that at first he presided over them, but that because he 
strove to rule like God he was deposed and sent away 
to the south. A certain community of Muslims was once 
instigated by evil spirits to acknowledge Mohammed 
as God. To allay the disturbance, Mohammed was


brought up from the nether earth and shown to 
them, and on this occasion I also saw him. He resembled 
the bodily spirits who have no interior perception, and 
his face was very dark. I heard him utter these words: 
‘I am your Mohammed’; and thereupon he sank down 
again.
From Vera Christiana Religio () 
by Emanuel Swedenborg

The Generous Enemy
In the year , Magnus Barford undertook the general 
conquest of the Irish kingdoms; it is said that on the eve of 
his death he received this greeting from Muirchertach, the 
King of Dublin:
May gold and the storm fight on your side, Magnus 
Barfod.
May your fighting meet with good fortune, tomorrow, 
on the fields of my kingdom.
May your royal hands strike awe, weaving the sword’s 
web.
May those who oppose your sword be food for the 
red swan.
May your many gods sate you with glory, may they 
sate you with blood.
May you be victorious in the dawn, King who tread 
upon Ireland.
May tomorrow shine the brightest of all your many 
days.


Because it will be your last. That I swear to you, King 
Magnus.
Because before its light is blotted out I will defeat you 
and blot you out, Magnus Barfod.
From the Anhang zur Heimskringla () 
by H. Gering [Translated by W. S. Merwin]

Of Exactitude in Science
. . . In that Empire, the craft of Cartography attained 
such Perfection that the Map of a Single province 
covered the space of an entire City, and the Map of 
the Empire itself an entire Province. In the course of 
Time, these Extensive maps were found somehow 
wanting, and so the College of Cartographers evolved 
a Map of the Empire that was of the same Scale as the 
Empire and that coincided with it point for point. Less 
attentive to the Study of Cartography, succeeding 
Generations came to judge a map of such Magnitude 
cumbersome, and, not without Irreverence, they 
abandoned it to the Rigours of sun and Rain. In the 
western Deserts, tattered Fragments of the Map are 
still to be found, Sheltering an occasional Beast or 
beggar; in the whole Nation, no other relic is left of the 
Discipline of Geography.
From Travels of Praiseworthy Men () 
by J. A. Suárez Miranda


List of Sources
the dread redeemer lazarus morell
Life on the Mississippi by Mark Twain, New York, . 
Mark Twain’s America by Bernard De Voto, Boston, .
tom castro, the implausible impostor
The Encyclopaedia Britannica (Eleventh Edition), Cambridge, 
.
the widow ching, lady pirate
The History of Piracy by Philip Gosse. London, New York, 
and Toronto, .
monk eastman, purveyor of iniquities
The Gangs of New York by Herbert Asbury, New York, 
.
the disinterested killer bill harrigan
A Century of Gunmen by Frederick Watson, London, . 
The Saga of Billy the Kid by Walter Noble Burns, Garden 
City, .


the insulting master of etiquette kôtsuké
no suké
Tales of Old Japan by A. B. Mitford, London, .
the masked dyer, hakim of merv
A History of Persia by Sir Percy Sykes, London, .
Die Vernichtung der Rose, nach dem arabischen Urtext 
übertragen von Alexander Schulz, Leipzig, .

Bibliographical Note
The original tides and first newspaper or magazine appear- 
ances of the pieces in this volume are as follows (place of 
publication, throughout, is Buenos Aires):
the dread redeemer lazarus morell: ‘El espan- 
toso redentor Lazarus Morell’ (entitled ‘historia 
universal de la infamia [:] El Espantoso Redentor 
Lázarus Morell’), Crítica ( August ).
monk eastman, purveyor of iniquities: ‘El 
proveedor de iniquidades Monk Eastman’ (entitled 
‘historia universal de la infamia [:] Eastman, 
el Proveedor de Iniquidades’), Crítica ( August ).
the 
widow 
ching, 
lady 
pirate: 
‘La viuda 
Ching, pirata’ (entitled ‘Historia Universal de la Infamia 
[:] La Viuda Ching’ and later, when first collected, 
‘La viuda Ching, pirata puntual’), Crítica ( August
).
the 
wizard 
postponed: 
‘El brujo postergado’ 
(entitled ‘El Brujo Postergado’ and unsigned), Crítica 
( September ).


Streetcorner man: ‘Hombre de la esquina rosada’ 
(entitled ‘Hombres de las orillas’ and signed ‘F. Bustos’), 
Crítica ( September ).
t o m c a s t r o, t h e i m p l a u s i b l e i m p o s t o r: ‘El
impostor inverosímil Tom Castro’ (entitled ‘Historia 
Universal de la Infamia [:] El Impostor Inverosímil Tom 
Castro’), Crítica ( September ).
the mirror of ink: ‘El espejo de tinta’ (unsigned), 
Crítica ( September ).
the chamber of statues: ‘La cámara de lag estatuas’ 
(entitled ‘La Cámara de las Estatuas [:] (Traducido de un 
texto árabe del siglo XIII)’ and unsigned), Crítica ( De- 
cember ).
the insulting master of etiquette kôtsuké 
no suké: ‘El incivil maestro de ceremonias Kôtsuké no 
Suké’ (entitled ‘historia universal de la infamia 
[:] El Incivil Maestro de Ceremonias Kôtsuké no Suké’), 
Crítica ( December ).
the masked dyer, hakim of merv: ‘El tintorero 
enmascarado Hákim de Merv’ (entitled ‘El Rostro del 
Profeta’), Crítica ( January ).
a theologian in death: ‘Un teólogo en la muerte’ 
(entitled ‘El Teólogo’ and unsigned), Crítica ( June
).
tale of the two dreamers: ‘Historia de los dos que 
soñaron’ (entitled ‘ Que Soñaron’ and unsigned), Crítica 
( June ).
of exactitude in science: ‘Del rigor en la ciencia’ 


(attributed, as an excerpt from ‘Viajes de Varones 
Prudentes, libro cuarto, cap. XIV, Lérida, .’ to one 
‘Suárez Miranda’, the piece was written by Borges with 
Adolfo Bioy Casares, and was collected by them under the 
heading ‘museo’), Los Anales de Buenos Aires ([March 
]).
a double for mohammed: ‘Un doble de Mahoma’ 
(collected, under the heading ‘museo’, by ‘B. Lynch 
Davis’, a pseudonym for Jorge Luis Borges and Adolfo 
Bioy Casares), Los Anales de Buenos Aires (May ).
the generous enemy: ‘El enemigo generoso’ (collected 
in B. Lynch Davis’ museo), Los Anales de Buenos Aires 
(October ).
All of the pieces listed above, except for the last three, were 
first collected in Historia universal de la infamia (Tor, ); 
‘Del rigor en la ciencia’, ‘Un doble de Mahoma’, and 
‘ El enemigo generoso’ were collected in the book’s second 
edition (Emecé, ).
‘El asesino desinteresado Bill Harrigan’ (the 
dis- 
interested killer bill harrigan) did not appear 
anywhere before its publication in book form in the first 
edition.
Historia universal de la infamia was originally published by 
Editorial Tor as the third volume in the ‘Colección 
Megáfono’ and printed in July .

