
DOCTOR BRODIE’S REPORT
“A never-ending source of surprise.”
—Saturday Review
Two men are pointlessly and inexorably drawn 
into a duel in which the weapons take over . . . 
the queen of the Yahoos expresses the royal 
good by pricking her favorite subjects with pins 
. . . the new king of the Yahoos submits to the 
customary emasculation and blinding . . . per- 
sistent rivals are forced into a footrace after their 
throats are slit . . .
“A fine collection . . . Translated with distinction.”
—Newsweek
“Each tale has its own excellence.”
—Publishers Weekly

Bantam Books by Jorge Luis Borges
THE ALEPH AND OTHER STORIES 1933-1969 
DOCTOR BRODIE’S REPORT

DOCTOR
BRODIE’S
REPORT
JORGE LUIS BORGES
Translated by 
Norman Thomas di Giovanni 
in collaboration 
with the author

This low-priced Bantam Book 
has been completely reset in a type face 
designed for easy reading, and was printed 
from new plates. It contains the complete 
text of the original hard-cover edition. 
not one word has been omitted.
The translations in this volume made their first appearances in the 
following periodicals: 
   the atlantic monthly: “Doctor Brodie’s Report” 
   buenos aires herald: “The Intruder” 
   harper’s magazine: “The Unworthy Friend”
   mundus artium: “The Duel” 
   new american review: “Guayaquil”
   the new yorker: “The Meeting,” “The End of the Duel,” “Juan 
Muraña,” “The Elder Lady,” “The Gospel According to Mark,”
“Rosendo’s Tale” was first published in The Aleph and Other 
Stories 1933-1969, E. P. Dutton & Co., New York, 1970.
The Preface, under the title “Borges on Borges,” first appeared in 
the new york review of books.
All rights reserved.
Copyright 1970, 1971, 1972 by Emecé Editores, S.A. and 
Norman Thomas di Giovanni.
This book may not be reproduced in whole or in part, by 
mimeograph or any other means, without permission.
For information address: E. P. Dutton & Company, Inc.
201 Park Avenue South, New York, N.Y. 10003.
Published simultaneously in the United States and Canada
Bantam Books are published by Bantam Books, Inc., a National 
General company. Its trade-mark, consisting of the words “Bantam 
Books” and the portrayal of a bantam, is registered in the United 
States Patent Office and in other countries. Marca Registrada. 
Bantam Books, Inc., 666 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10019.
printed in the united states of america
doctor brodie’s report 
A Bantam Book / published by arrangement with 
E. P. Dutton & Company, Inc.
PRINTING HISTORY 
The original title of this book is El informe de Brodie, 
copyright © 1970 by Emecé Editores, S.A., Buenos Aires. 
Dutton edition published January 1972
2nd printing..............February 1972
Bantam edition published April 1973

Contents
Foreword 
vii
Preface to the First Edition 
ix
The Gospel According to Mark 
3
The Unworthy Friend 
17
The Duel 
31
The End of the Duel 
43
Rosendo’s Tale 
53
The Intruder 
67
The Meeting 
77
Juan Muraña 
91
The Elder Lady 
103
Guayaquil 
117
Doctor Brodie’s Report 
133
Afterword 
149
Bibliographical Note 
153


Foreword
The principle we have followed in translating 
this book is, of course, the same used in our 
previous Dutton volume, The Aleph and Other 
Stories 1933-1969. There our guiding aim had 
been to make the text read as though it had 
been written in English; in so doing, we quite 
soon discovered that the English and Spanish 
languages are not, as is often taken for granted, 
a set of interchangeable synonyms but are two 
possible ways of viewing and ordering reality. 
We have also continued in the present volume 
to supply the American reader with historical 
and geographical details not necessarily known 
to him.
One difference between this volume and the 
last lies in the fact that the writing and the 
translation were, except in one case, more or 
less simultaneous. In this way our work was 
easier for us, since, as we were always under
vii

Foreword
the spell of the originals, we stood in no need 
of trying to recapture past moods. This seems 
to us to be the best possible condition under 
which to practice the craft of translation.
The Afterword, written directly in English, 
was prepared especially for this volume.
J. L. B.
N. T. di G.
Buenos Aires, December 29, 1970
viii

Preface to the First Edition
Kipling’s last stories were no less tormented and 
mazelike than the stories of Kafka or Henry 
James, which they doubtless surpass; but in 
1885, in Lahore, the young Kipling began a series 
of brief tales, written in a straightforward man- 
ner, that he was to collect in 1890. Several of 
them—“In the House of Suddhoo,” “Beyond the 
Pale,” “The Gate of the Hundred Sorrows”— 
are laconic masterpieces. It occurred to me that 
what was conceived and carried out by a young 
man of genius might modestly be attempted by 
a man on the borders of old age who knows 
his craft Out of that idea came the present 
volume, which I leave to the reader to judge.
I have done my best—I don’t know with 
what success—to write straightforward stories. 
I do not dare state that they are simple; there 
isn’t anywhere on earth a single page or single 
word that is, since each thing implies the uni- 
ix

verse, whose most obvious trait is complexity. 
I want to make it quite clear that I am not, nor 
have I ever been, what used to be called a 
preacher of parables or a fabulist and is now 
known as a committed writer. I do not aspire 
to be Aesop. My stories, like those of the Thou- 
sand and One Nights, try to be entertaining 
or moving but not persuasive. Such an intention 
does not mean that I have shut myself up, ac- 
cording to Solomon’s image, in an ivory tower. 
My political convictions are quite well known; 
I am a member of the Conservative Party—this 
in itself is a form of skepticism—and no one 
has ever branded me a Communist, a nationalist, 
an anti-Semite, a follower of Billy the Kid or 
of the dictator Rosas. I believe that some day 
we will deserve not to have governments. I have 
never kept my opinions hidden, not even in try- 
ing times, but neither have I ever allowed them 
to find their way into my literary work, except 
once when I was buoyed up in exultation over 
the Six-Day War. The art of writing is mysteri- 
ous; the opinions we hold are ephemeral, and 
I prefer the Platonic idea of the Muse to that 
of Poe, who reasoned, or feigned to reason, that 
the writing of a poem is an act of the intelli- 
gence. It never fails to amaze me that the clas- 
sics hold a romantic theory of poetry, and a 
romantic poet a classical theory. 
x
Preface to the First Edition

Apart from the text that gives this book its 
title and that obviously derives from Lemuel 
Gulliver’s last voyage, my stories are—to use 
the term in vogue today—realistic. They follow, 
I believe, all the conventions of that school, 
which is as conventional as any other and of 
which we shall soon grow tired if we have not 
already done so. They are rich in the required 
invention of circumstances. Splendid examples 
of this device are to be found in the tenth- 
century Old English ballad of Maldon and in 
the later Icelandic sagas. Two stories—I will 
not give their names—hold the same fantastic 
key. The curious reader will notice certain 
dose affinities between them. The same few 
plots, I am sorry to say, have pursued me down 
through the years; I am decidedly monotonous.
I owe to a dream of Hugo Rodríguez Moroni 
the general outline of the story—perhaps the 
best of this collection—called “The Gospel Ac- 
cording to Mark.” I fear having spoiled it with 
the changes that my fancy or my reason judged 
fitting. But after all, writing is nothing more 
than a guided dream.
I have given up the surprises inherent in a 
baroque style as well as the surprises that lead 
to an unforeseen ending. I have, in short, pre- 
ferred to satisfy an expectation rather than to 
provide a startling shock. For many years, I
Preface to the First Edition
xi

thought it might be given me to achieve a good 
page by means of variations and novelties; now, 
having passed seventy, I believe I have found 
my own voice. Slight rewording neither spoils 
nor improves what I dictate, except in cases of 
lightening a clumsy sentence or toning down an 
exaggeration. Each language is a tradition, each 
word a shared symbol, and what an innovator 
can change amounts to a trifle; we need only 
remember the splendid but often unreadable 
work of a Mallarmé or a Joyce. It is likely that 
this all-too-reasonable reasoning is only the fruit 
of weariness. My now advanced age has taught 
me to resign myself to being Borges.
I am impartially indifferent to both the dic- 
tionary of the Spanish Royal Academy—dont 
chaque édition fait regretter la précédente, ac- 
cording to the sad observation of Paul Groussac 
—and those weighty Argentine dictionaries of 
local usage. All, I find—those of this and those 
of the other side of the ocean—have a tendency 
to emphasize differences and to fragment the 
Spanish language. In connection with this, I 
recall that when it was held against the novelist 
Roberto Arlt that he had no knowledge of 
Buenos Aires slang, he replied, “I grew up in 
Villa Luro, among poor people and hoodlums, 
and I really had no time to learn that sort of 
thing.” Our local slang, in fact, is a literary joke 
xii
Preface to the First Edition

concocted by writers of popular plays and tango 
lyrics, and the people who are supposed to use 
it hardly know what it means, except when they 
have been indoctrinated by phonograph rec- 
ords.
I have set my stories some distance off in 
time and in space. The imagination, in this way, 
can operate with greater freedom. Who, in 1970, 
is able to remember with accuracy what at the 
end of the last century the outskirts of Buenos 
Aires around Palermo and Lomas were like? 
Unbelievable as it may seem, there are those 
who go to the length of playing policeman and 
looking for a writer’s petty slips. They remark, 
for example, that Martín Fierro would have 
spoken of a “bag” and not a “sack” of bones, 
and they find fault, perhaps unjustly, with the 
roan piebald coat of a certain horse famous in 
our literature.
God spare thee, reader, long prefaces. The 
words are Quevedo’s, who, careful not to fall 
into an anachronism which in the long run 
would have been detected, never read those 
of Bernard Shaw.
Preface to the First Edition
J. L. B.
Buenos Aires, April 19, 1970
xiii


The Gospel According to 
Mark


The Gospel According to Mark
These events took place at La Colorada ranch, 
in the southern part of the township of Junín, 
during the last days of March, 1928. The pro- 
tagonist was a medical student named Baltasar 
Espinosa. We may describe him, for now, as 
one of the common run of young men from 
Buenos Aires, with nothing more noteworthy 
about him than an almost unlimited kindness 
and a capacity for public speaking that had 
earned him several prizes at the English school 
in Ramos Mejía. He did not like arguing, and 
preferred having his listener rather than himself 
in the right. Although he was fascinated by the 
probabilities of chance in any game he played, 
he was a bad player because it gave him no 
pleasure to win. His wide intelligence was un- 
directed; at the age of thirty-three, he still 
lacked credit for graduation, by one course—the 
course to which he was most drawn. His father,
3

who was a freethinker (like all the gentlemen 
of his day), had introduced him to the lessons 
of Herbert Spencer, but his mother, before leav- 
ing on a trip for Montevideo, once asked him 
to say the Lord’s Prayer and make the sign of 
the cross every night. Through the years, he 
had never gone back on that promise.
Espinosa was not lacking in spirit; one day, 
with more indifference than anger, he had ex- 
changed two or three punches with a group of 
fellow-students who were trying to force him 
to take part in a university demonstration. 
Owing to an acquiescent nature, he was full 
of opinions, or habits of mind, that were ques- 
tionable: Argentina mattered less to him than 
a fear that in other parts of the world people 
might think of us as Indians; he worshiped 
France but despised the French; he thought 
little of Americans but approved the fact that 
there were tall buildings, like theirs, in Buenos 
Aires; he believed the gauchos of the plains to 
be better riders than those of hill or mountain 
country. When his cousin Daniel invited him 
to spend the summer months out at La Colo- 
rada, he said yes at once—not because he was 
really fond of the country, but more out of his 
natural complacency and also because it was 
easier to say yes than to dream up reasons for 
saying no.
The Gospel According to Mark
4

The ranch’s main house was big and slightly 
run-down; the quarters of the foreman, whose 
name was Gutre, were close by. The Gutres 
were three: the father, an unusually uncouth 
son, and a daughter of uncertain paternity. 
They were tall, strong, and bony, and had hair 
that was on the reddish side and faces that 
showed traces of Indian blood. They were barely 
articulate. The foreman’s wife had died years 
before.
There in the country, Espinosa began learn- 
ing things he never knew, or even suspected— 
for example, that you do not gallop a horse 
when approaching settlements, and that you 
never go out riding except for some special 
purpose. In time, he was to come to tell the 
birds apart by their calls.
After a few days, Daniel had to leave for 
Buenos Aires to close a deal on some cattle. 
At most, this bit of business might take him a 
week. Espinosa, who was already somewhat 
weary of hearing about his cousin’s incessant 
luck with women and his tireless interest in the 
minute details of men’s fashions, preferred stay- 
ing on at the ranch with his textbooks. But the 
heat was unbearable, and even the night brought 
no relief. One morning at daybreak, thunder 
woke him. Outside, the wind was rocking the 
Australian pines. Listening to the first heavy
5
The Gospel According to Mark

drops of rain, Espinosa thanked God. All at 
once, cold air rolled in. That afternoon, the 
Salado overflowed its banks.
The next day, looking out over the flooded 
fields from the gallery of the main house, Balta- 
sar Espinosa thought that the stock metaphor 
comparing the pampa to the sea was not alto- 
gether false—at least, not that morning—though 
W. H. Hudson had remarked that the sea seems 
wider because we view it from a ship’s deck and 
not from a horse or from eye level.
The rain did not let up. The Gutres, helped 
or hindered by Espinosa, the town dweller, 
rescued a good part of the livestock, but many 
animals were drowned. There were four roads 
leading to La Colorada; all of them were under 
water. On the third day, when a leak threatened 
the foreman’s house, Espinosa gave the Gutres 
a room near the tool shed, at the back of the 
main house. This drew them all closer; they ate 
together in the big dining room. Conversation 
turned out to be difficult. The Gutres, who knew 
so much about country things, were hard put 
to it to explain them. One night, Espinosa asked 
them if people still remembered the Indian 
raids from back when the frontier command 
was located there in Junín. They told him yes, 
but they would have given the same answer to 
a question about the beheading of Charles I.
6
The Gospel According to Mark

Espinosa recalled his father’s saying that almost 
every case of longevity that was cited in the 
country was really a case of bad memory or of 
a dim notion of dates. Gauchos are apt to be 
ignorant of the year of their birth or of the 
name of the man who begot them.
In the whole house, there was apparently 
no other reading matter than a set of the Farm 
Journal, a handbook of veterinary medicine, a 
deluxe edition of the Uruguayan epic Tabaré, 
a History of Shorthorn Cattle in Argentina, a 
number of erotic or detective stories, and a 
recent 
novel 
called 
Don Segundo Sombra. 
Espinosa, trying in some way to bridge the in- 
evitable after-dinner gap, read a couple of 
chapters of this novel to the Gutres, none of 
whom could read or write. Unfortunately, the 
foreman had been a cattle drover, and the doings 
of the hero, another cattle drover, failed to whet 
his interest. He said that the work was light, 
that drovers always traveled with a packhorse 
that carried everything they needed, and that, 
had he not been a drover, he would never have 
seen such far-flung places as the Laguna de 
Gómez, the town of Bragado, and the spread of 
the Núñez family in Chacabuco. There was a 
guitar in the kitchen; the ranch hands, before 
the time of the events I am describing, used 
to sit around in a circle. Someone would tune
The Gospel According to Mark
7

the instrument without ever getting around to 
playing it. This was known as a guitarfest.
Espinosa, who had grown a beard, began 
dallying in front of the mirror to study his new 
face, and he smiled to think how, back in Buenos 
Aires, he would bore his friends by telling them 
the story of the Salado flood. Strangely enough, 
he missed places he never frequented and never 
would: a comer of Cabrera Street on which 
there was a mailbox; one of the cement lions 
of a gateway on Jujuy Street, a few blocks from 
the Plaza del Once; an old barroom with a tiled 
floor, whose exact whereabouts he was unsure 
of. As for his brothers and his father, they would 
already have learned from Daniel that he was 
isolated—etymologically, the word was perfect 
—by the floodwaters.
Exploring the house, still hemmed in by the 
watery waste, Espinosa came across an English 
Bible. Among the blank pages at the end, the 
Guthries—such was their original name—had 
left a handwritten record of their lineage. They 
were natives of Inverness; had reached the New 
World, no doubt as common laborers, in the 
early part of the nineteenth century; and had in- 
termarried with Indians. The chronicle broke off 
sometime during the eighteen-seventies, when 
they no longer knew how to write. After a few 
generations, they had forgotten English; their
8
The Gospel According to Mark

Spanish, at the time Espinosa knew them, gave 
them trouble. They lacked any religious faith, 
but there survived in their blood, like faint 
tracks, the rigid fanaticism of the Calvinist and 
the superstitions of the pampa Indian. Espinosa 
later told them of his find, but they barely took 
notice.
Leafing through the volume, his fingers 
opened it at the beginning of the Gospel ac- 
cording to St. Mark. As an exercise in transla- 
tion, and maybe to find out whether the Gutres 
understood any of it, Espinosa decided to begin 
reading them that text after their evening meal. 
It surprised him that they listened attentively, 
absorbed. Maybe the gold letters on the cover 
lent the book authority. It’s still there in their 
blood, Espinosa thought. It also occurred to 
him that the generations of men, throughout 
recorded time, have always told and retold two 
stories—that of a lost ship which searches the 
Mediterranean seas for a dearly loved island, 
and that of a god who is crucified on Golgotha. 
Remembering his lessons in elocution from his 
schooldays in Ramos Mejía, Espinosa got to his 
feet when he came to the parables.
The Gutres took to bolting their barbecued 
meat and their sardines so as not to delay the 
Gospel. A pet lamb that the girl adorned with a 
small blue ribbon had injured itself on a strand
9
The Gospel According to Mark

of barbed wire. To stop the bleeding, the three 
had wanted to apply a cobweb to the wound, 
but Espinosa treated the animal with some pills. 
The gratitude that this treatment awakened in 
them took him aback. (Not trusting the Gutres 
at first, he’d hidden away in one of his books 
the two hundred and forty pesos he had brought 
with him.) Now, the owner of the place away, 
Espinosa took over and gave timid orders, 
which were immediately obeyed. The Gutres, as 
if lost without him, liked following him from 
room to room and along the gallery that ran 
around the house. While he read to them, he 
noticed that they were secretly stealing the 
crumbs he had dropped on the table. One eve- 
ning, he caught them unawares, talking about 
him respectfully, in very few words.
Having finished the Gospel according to St. 
Mark, he wanted to read another of the three 
Gospels that remained, but the father asked him 
to repeat the one he had just read, so that they 
could understand it better. Espinosa felt that 
they were like children, to whom repetition is 
more pleasing titan variations or novelty. That 
night—this is not to be wondered at—he 
dreamed of the Flood; the hammer blows of 
the building of the Ark woke him up, and he 
thought that perhaps they were thunder. In fact, 
the rain, which had let up, started again. The
10
The Gospel According to Mark

cold was bitter. The Gutres had told him that 
the storm had damaged the roof of the tool 
shed, and that they would show it to him when 
the beams were fixed. No longer a stranger now, 
he was treated by them with special attention, 
almost to the point of spoiling him. None of 
them liked coffee, but for him there was always 
a small cup into which they heaped sugar.
The new storm had broken out on a Tuesday. 
Thursday night, Espinosa was awakened by a 
soft knock at his door, which—just in case—he 
always kept locked. He got out of bed and 
opened it; there was the girl. In the dark he 
could hardly make her out, but by her footsteps 
he could tell she was barefoot, and moments 
later, in bed, that she must have come all the 
way from the other end of the house naked. She 
did not embrace him or speak a single word; 
she lay beside him, trembling. It was the first 
time she had known a man. When she left, she 
did not kiss him; Espinosa realized that he didn’t 
even know her name. For some reason that he 
did not want to pry into, he made up his mind 
that upon returning to Buenos Aires he would 
tell no one about what had taken place.
The next day began like the previous ones, 
except that the father spoke to Espinosa and 
asked him if Christ had let Himself be killed so 
as to save all other men on earth. Espinosa, who
11
The Gospel According to Mark

was a freethinker but who felt committed to 
what he had read to the Gutres, answered, “Yes, 
to save everyone from Hell.”
Gutre then asked, “What’s Hell?”
“A place under the ground where souls bum 
and bum.”
“And the Roman soldiers who hammered in 
the nails—were they saved, too?”
“Yes,” said Espinosa, whose theology was 
rather dim.
All along, he was afraid that the foreman 
might ask him about what had gone on the night 
before with his daughter. After lunch, they 
asked him to read the last chapters over again.
  
Espinosa slept a long nap that afternoon. It 
was a light sleep, disturbed by persistent 
hammering and by vague premonitions. Toward 
evening, he got up and went out onto the gal- 
lery. He said, as if thinking aloud, “The waters 
have dropped. It won’t be long now.”
“It won’t be long now,” Gutre repeated, like 
an echo.
The three had been following him. Bowing 
their knees to the stone pavement, they asked 
his blessing. Then they mocked at him, spat on 
him, and shoved him toward the back part of 
the house. The girl wept. Espinosa understood 
what awaited him on the other side of the door.
12
The Gospel According to Mark

When they opened it, he saw a patch of sky. A 
bird sang out. A goldfinch, he thought. The shed 
was without a roof; they had pulled down the 
beams to make the cross.
The Gospel According to Mark
13


The Unworthy Friend


The Unworthy Friend
Our image of the city is always slightly out of 
date. Cafés have degenerated into barrooms; 
old arched entranceways with their grilled inner 
gates, once giving us a glimpse of patios and of 
overhanging grapevines, are now dingy cor- 
ridors that lead abruptly to an elevator. For 
years, in this way, I thought that in a certain 
block of Talcahuano Street I might still find the 
Buenos Aires Bookstore. But one morning I dis- 
covered its place had been taken by an antique 
shop, and I was told that don Santiago Fisch- 
bein, its owner, had died. Fischbein had been a 
heavyset, rather overweight man, whose fea- 
tures I now remember less than our long talks. 
In a quiet but firm way he had always been 
against Zionism, which he held would turn the 
Jew into a man like anyone else—tied down 
to a single tradition and a single homeland, 
and no longer enriched by strife and com-
17

plexities. He’d been at work, he once told me, 
putting together a comprehensive anthology of 
the writings of Baruch Spinoza, freed of all 
that Euclidean apparatus, which, while lending 
to its strange system an illusory rigor, bogs 
the reader down. He would not sell me, but let 
me look at, a rare copy of Rosenroth’s Kabbala 
Denudata. At home I still have a few books 
on the Kabbalah by Ginsburg and by Waite 
which bear the seal of Fischbein’s shop.
One afternoon, when the two of us were 
alone, he confided a story to me about his early 
life, and I feel I can now set it down. As may be 
expected, I will alter one or two details. Here 
is what Fischbein said.
The Unworthy Friend
I’m going to tell you something I’ve never told 
anyone before. Ana—my wife—doesn’t know a 
word about this, nor do any of my closest 
friends. These things took place so many years 
ago now that I sometimes feel they might have 
happened to another person. Maybe you can 
make some use of this as a story—which, of 
course, you’ll dress up with daggers. I wonder 
if I’ve already told you I was born in the 
Province of Entre Ríos. I can’t say we were 
Jewish gauchos—there never were any Jewish 
gauchos. We were shopkeepers and farmers.
18

Anyway, I was born in Urdinarrain, a town I 
can hardly remember anymore. I was very young 
when my parents moved to Buenos Aires to 
open up a shop. A few blocks away from where 
we lived was the Maldonado, and beyond that 
ditch were open lots.
Carlyle says that men need heroes to worship. 
Argentine schoolbooks tried getting me to wor- 
ship San Martín, but in him I found little more 
than a soldier who’d fought his battles in other 
countries and who’s now only a bronze statue 
and the name of a square. Chance, however— 
unfortunately enough for the two of us—pro- 
vided me with another kind of hero. This is 
probably the first time you’ve ever heard of him. 
His name was Francisco Ferrari.
Our neighborhood may not have been as 
tough as the Stockyards or the waterfront, but 
it had its share of hoodlums who hung out in 
the old saloons. Ferrari’s particular hangout was 
a place at the comer of Triunvirato and Thames. 
It was there the thing happened that brought 
me under his spell. I’d been sent around to the 
saloon to buy a small package of mate, when 
in walked a stranger with long hair and a mous- 
tache, and ordered a shot of gin. Ferrari said 
to him, mildly, “By the way, didn’t we see each 
other night before last dancing at Juliana’s? 
Where are you from?”
The Unworthy Friend
19

“From San Cristóbal,” the other man said.
“My advice,” Ferrari said, still gently, “is that 
you might find it healthier to keep away from 
here. This neighborhood’s full of people on the 
lookout for trouble.”
On the spot, the man from San Cristóbal 
turned tail—moustache and all. Maybe he was 
just as much a man as Ferrari was, but he knew 
others of the gang were around.
From that afternoon on, Francisco Ferrari 
was the hero my fifteen years were in search 
of. He was dark and stood straight and tall— 
good-looking in the style of the day. He always 
wore black. One day, a second episode brought 
us together. I was on the street with my mother 
and aunt, when we ran into a bunch of young 
toughs and one of them said loudly to the 
others:
“Old stuff. Let them by.”
I didn’t know what to do. At that moment, 
Ferrari stepped in. He had just left his house. 
He looked the ringleader straight in the eye and 
said, “If you’re out for fun, why not try having 
some with me?”
He kept staring them up and down, one after 
the other, and there wasn’t a word out of any 
of them. They knew all about him. Ferrari 
shrugged his shoulders, tipped his hat, and went 
on his way. But before starting off, he said to 
20
The Unworthy Friend

me, “If you have nothing else to do, drop in at 
the saloon later on.”
I was tongue-tied. “There’s a gentleman who 
demands respect for ladies,” my Aunt Sarah 
pronounced.
Coming to my rescue, my mother said, “I’d 
say more a hoodlum who wants no competi- 
tion.”
I don’t really know how to explain this now. 
I’ve worked my way up, I own this shop—which 
I love—and I know my books; I enjoy friend- 
ships like ours, I have my wife and children, I 
belong to the Socialist Party, I’m a good Argen- 
tine and a good Jew. People look up to me. As 
you can see, I’m almost bald; in those days I was 
just a poor redheaded Jew-boy, living in a down- 
and-out neighborhood. Like all young men, of 
course, I tried hard to be the same as everyone 
else. Still, I was sneered at. To shake off the 
Jacob, I called myself Santiago, but just the 
same there was the Fischbein. We all begin tak- 
ing on the idea others have of us. Feeling peo- 
ple despised me, I despised myself as well. At 
that time, and above all in that neighborhood, 
you had to be tough. I knew I was a coward. 
Women scared the daylights out of me, I was 
deeply ashamed of my inexperience with them, 
and I had no friends my own age.
The Unworthy Friend
21

That night I didn’t go around to the saloon. 
How I wish I never had! But the feeling grew 
on me that Ferrari’s invitation was something 
of an order, so the next Saturday, after dinner, I 
finally walked into the place.
 Ferrari sat at the head of one of the tables. 
I knew all the other men by sight. There were 
six or seven of them. Ferrari was the eldest, 
except for an old man who spoke little and 
wearily and whose name is the only one I have 
not forgotten—don Eliseo Amaro. The mark of 
a slash crossed his broad, flabby face. I found 
out afterward he’d spent some time in jail.
Ferrari sat me down at his left, making don 
Eliseo change places for me. I felt a bit uneasy, 
afraid Ferrari would mention what had hap- 
pened on the street a few days before. But 
nothing of the kind took place. They talked of 
women, cards, elections, of a street singer who 
was about to show up but never did, of neigh- 
borhood affairs. At first, they seemed unwilling 
to accept me, then later—because it was what 
Ferrari wanted—they loosened up. In spite of 
their names, which for the most part were 
Italian, every one of them thought of himself 
(and thought of each other) as Argentine and 
even gaucho. Some of them owned or drove 
teams or were butchers at the slaughter yards, 
and having to deal with animals made them a
22
The Unworthy Friend

lot like farm hands. My suspicion is that their 
one desire was to have played the outlaw Juan 
Moreira. They ended up calling me the Sheeny, 
but they didn’t mean it in a bad way. It was 
from them that I learned to smoke and do other 
things.
In a brothel on Junín Street, somebody asked 
me whether I wasn’t a friend of Francisco Fer- 
rari’s. I told him I wasn’t, feeling that to have 
answered yes would have been bragging.
One night the police came into the saloon and 
frisked us. Two of the gang were taken into 
custody, but Ferrari was left alone. A couple 
of weeks later the same thing happened all over 
again; this second time they rounded up Ferrari, 
too. Under his belt he was carrying a knife. 
What happened was that he must have had a 
falling out with the political boss of our ward.
As I look back on Ferrari today, I see him as 
an unlucky young man who was filled with il- 
lusions and in the end was betrayed; but at the 
time, to me he was a god.
Friendship is no less a mystery than love or 
any other aspect of this confusion we call life. 
There have been times when I’ve felt the only 
thing without mystery is happiness, because 
happiness is an end in itself. The plain fact is 
that, for all his brass, Francisco Ferrari, the 
tough guy, wanted to be friends with someone
The Unworthy Friend
23

as pitiful as me. I was sure he’d made a mistake, 
I was sure I was unworthy of his friendship, and 
I did my best to keep clear of him. But he 
wouldn’t let me. My anxiety over this was made 
even worse by my mother’s disapproval. She just 
couldn’t get used to the company I kept and 
went around aping, and referred to them as 
trash and scum. The point of what I’m telling 
you is my relationship with Ferrari, not the 
sordid facts, which I no longer feel sorry about. 
As long as any trace of remorse remains, guilt 
remains.
One night, the old man, who had again taken 
up his usual place beside Ferrari, was whisper- 
ing back and forth in Ferrari’s ear. They were 
up to something. From the other end of the 
table, I thought I made out the name of Weide- 
mann, a man who owned a textile mill out on the 
edge of the neighborhood. Soon after, without 
any explanation, I was told to take a stroll 
around Weidemann’s factory and to have a good 
look at the gates. It was beginning to get dark 
when I crossed the Maldonado and cut through 
the freight yards. I remember the houses, which 
grew fewer and farther between, a clump of 
willows, and the empty lots. Weidemann’s was 
new, but it was lonely and somehow looked like 
a ruin; in my memory, its red brick gets mixed 
up with the sunset. The mill was surrounded
24
The Unworthy Friend

by a tall fence. In addition to the front entrance, 
there were two big doors out back opening into 
the south side of the building.
I have to admit it took me some time to figure 
out what you’ve probably guessed already. I 
brought back my report, which was confirmed 
by one of the others, who had a sister working 
in the place. Then the plan was laid out. For 
the gang not to have shown up at the saloon 
on a Saturday night would have attracted at- 
tention, so Ferrari set the robbery for the follow- 
ing Friday. I was the one they picked for 
lookout. Meanwhile, it was best that we 
shouldn’t be seen together. When we were alone 
in the street—just Ferrari and myself—I asked 
him, “Are you sure you can trust me?”
“Yes,” he answered. “I know you’ll handle 
yourself like a man.”
That night and the following nights I slept 
well. Then, on Wednesday, I told my mother 
I was going downtown to see a new cowboy 
picture. I put on my best clothes and started 
out for Moreno Street. The trip on the streetcar 
was a long one. At police headquarters I was 
kept waiting, but finally one of the desk ser- 
geants—a certain Eald or Alt—saw me. I told 
him I’d come about a confidential matter and 
he said I could speak without fear. I let him in 
on the gang’s plan. What surprised me was that
The Unworthy Friend
25

Ferrari’s name meant nothing to him; but it was 
something else again when I mentioned don 
Eliseo.
“Ah,” he said. “He used to be one of the old 
Montevideo gang.”
He called in another man, who came from my 
part of town, and the two of them talked things 
over. The second officer asked me, with a certain 
scorn in his voice, “Have you come here with 
this information because you think of yourself 
as a good citizen?”
I knew he would never understand, but I 
answered, “Yes, sir. I’m a good Argentine.” 
They told me to go through with my job 
exactly as Ferrari had ordered, but not to 
whistle when I saw the police arrive. As I was 
leaving, one of them warned me:
“Better be careful. You know what happens 
to stoolies.”
Policemen are just like kids when it comes to 
using slang. I answered him, “I wish they would 
lay their hands on me—maybe that’s the best 
thing that could happen.”
From early in the morning that Friday, I had 
the feeling of relief that the day had come, and 
at the same time I felt the guilt of not feeling 
guilty. The hours seemed to drag. All day I 
barely ate a mouthful. At ten that night we met 
26
The Unworthy Friend

a couple of blocks away from the factory. When 
one of the gang didn’t show up, don Eliseo re- 
marked that someone always turned yellow. I 
knew when it was over he’d be the one they’d 
blame.
It looked like it was about to pour. At first, I 
was scared someone else would be named to 
stand watch with me, but when it came time I 
was left alone near one of the back doors. After 
a while, the police, together with a superior offi- 
cer, put in their appearance. They came on foot, 
having left their horses some distance off. Fer- 
rari had forced one of the two doors and the 
 police were able to slip in without a sound. Then 
four shots rang out, deafening me. I imagined 
that there on the inside, in all that dark, they 
were slaughtering each other. At that point the 
police led a few of the men out in handcuffs. 
Then two more policemen came out, dragging 
the bodies of Francisco Ferrari and don Eliseo 
Amaro. In the official report it was stated that 
they had resisted arrest and had been the first 
to open fire. I knew the whole thing was a lie 
because I’d never once seen any of the gang 
carrying guns. They’d just been shot down; the 
police had used the occasion to settle an old 
score. A few days later, I heard that Ferrari 
had tried to escape but had been stopped by a
The Unworthy Friend
27

single bullet. As was to be expected, the news- 
papers made the hero of him he had never been 
except maybe in my eyes.
As for me, they rounded me up with the 
others and a short time later set me free.
The Unworthy Friend
28

The Duel
To Juan Osvaldo Viviano


The Duel
Henry James—whose world was first revealed 
to me by one of my two characters, Clara 
Figueroa—would perhaps have been interested 
in this story. He might have devoted to it a 
hundred or so pages of tender irony, enriched 
by complex and painstakingly ambiguous di- 
alogues. The addition at the end of some melo- 
dramatic touch would not have been at all 
unlikely, nor would the essence of the tale have 
been changed by a different setting—London 
or Boston. The actual events took place in 
Buenos Aires, and there I shall leave them, limit- 
ing myself to a bare summary of the affair, since 
its slow evolution and sophisticated background 
are quite alien to my particular literary habits. 
To set down this story is for me a modest and 
peripheral adventure. I should warn my reader 
ahead of time that its episodes are of less im-
31

The Duel
portance than its characters and the relationship 
between them.
Clara Glencairn de Figueroa was stately and 
tall and had fiery red hair. Less intellectual 
than understanding, she was not witty, though 
she did appreciate the wit of others—even of 
other women. Her mind was full of hospitality. 
Distinctions pleased her; perhaps that’s why 
she traveled so much. She realized that her 
world was an all too arbitrary combination of 
rites and ceremonies, but these things amused 
her and she carried them out with dignity. Her 
family married her off very young to a dis- 
tinguished lawyer, Isidro Figueroa, who was to 
become the Argentine ambassador to Canada 
and who ended by resigning that post, stating 
that in a time of telephones and telegraph, 
embassies were anachronisms and amounted to 
a needless public burden. This decision earned 
him the disapproval of all his colleagues; Clara 
liked the Ottawa climate—after all, she was of 
Scottish ancestry—and the duties of an ambas- 
sador’s wife did not displease her, but she never 
once dreamed of protesting. Figueroa died soon 
after. Clara, following several years of indeci- 
sion and self-searching, took up the exercise of 
painting—stimulated perhaps, by the example 
of her friend Marta Pizarro.
It is characteristic of Marta Pizarro that when
32

speaking about her, people referred to her as 
the sister of the brilliant Nélida Sara, who was 
married and divorced.
Before choosing palette and brush, Marta 
Pizarro had considered the alternative of writ- 
ing. She could be quite clever in French, the 
language in which she had done most of her 
reading, while Spanish was to her—like Guaraní 
to ladies in the Province of Corrientes—little 
more than a household utensil. The literary sup- 
plements had placed within her reach pages of 
Lugones and of the Spaniard Ortega y Gasset; 
the style of these masters confirmed her suspi- 
cion that the language to which she had been 
born was less fit for expressing the mind or the 
passions than for verbal showing off. Of music, 
all she knew was what any person who attends a 
concert should know. Coming from the western 
province of San Luis, she began her career with 
faithful portraits of Juan Crisóstomo Lafinur and 
of Colonel Pascual Pringles, which were—as 
was to be expected—acquired by the Provincial 
Museum. From portraits of local worthies, she 
passed on to pictures of old houses in Buenos 
Aires, whose quiet patios she painted with quiet 
colors and not that stage-set showiness with 
which 
they 
are 
frequently 
endowed 
by 
others. Someone—surely not Clara Figueroa— 
remarked that her whole art drew its inspira-
The Duel
33

The Duel
tion from the work of anonymous nineteenth- 
century 
Italian 
bricklayers. 
Between 
Clara 
Glencairn and Nélida Sara (who, according to 
gossip, had once had a fancy for Dr. Figueroa) 
there had always been a certain rivalry; perhaps 
the duel was between them, and Marta was 
merely a tool.
As is well known, most things originate in 
other countries and only in time find their way 
into the Argentine. That now so unjustly for- 
gotten school of painters who call themselves 
concrete, or abstract, as if to show their utter 
scorn for logic and language, is but one of many 
examples. It was argued, as I recall, that just as 
music is expected to create its own world of 
sound, its sister art, painting, should be allowed 
to attempt a world of color and form without 
reference to any actual physical objects. The 
Dallas art critic Lee Kaplan wrote that this 
school’s pictures, which outraged the bour- 
geoisie, followed the Biblical proscription, also 
shared by the Islamic world, that man shall 
make no images of living things. The icon- 
oclasts, he argued, were going back to the true 
tradition of painting, which had been led astray 
by such heretics as Dürer and Rembrandt. 
Kaplan’s enemies accused him of being in- 
fluenced merely by broadloom rugs, kaleido- 
scopes, and men’s neckwear.
34

The Duel
All aesthetic revolutions put forth a tempta- 
tion toward the irresponsible and the far too 
easy; Clara Glencairn chose to be an abstract 
painter. Having always been an admirer of 
Turner, she set as her goal the enrichment of 
abstract art with the diffused splendor of the 
Master. She worked under no pressure, painted 
over or destroyed a number of canvases, and in 
the winter of 1954 exhibited a series of temperas 
in a gallery on Suipacha Street whose specialty 
was paintings which, according to a military 
metaphor then in vogue, was called the van- 
guard. Something paradoxical happened. On the 
whole, the reviews were favorable, but the sect’s 
official organ condemned her anomalous forms, 
which, although they were not representational, 
suggested the tumult of a sunset, a tangled for- 
est, or the sea, and did not limit themselves to 
dots and stripes. Perhaps the first person to smile 
was Clara Glencairn. She had tried her best to 
be modern and the moderns had rejected her. 
The act of painting, however, mattered more to 
her than its public success, and she went on 
working. Indifferent to this episode, art also 
went on.
The secret duel had already begun. Marta 
was not only an artist; she was, as well, deeply 
committed to what may not unfairly be called 
the administrative side of art, and was assistant
35

secretary of the organization known as the 
Giotto Circle. Sometime toward the middle of 
1955, Marta managed to have Clara, who had 
already been accepted in the Circle, figure as a 
committee member among the Circle’s new offi- 
cers. The fact, in itself trivial, may be worth 
analyzing. Marta had lent support to her friend, 
but it is undeniable—although mysterious—that 
the person who confers a favor in some way 
stands above the one who receives it 
Around 1960, “two plastic artists of interna- 
tional stature”—may we be forgiven the jargon 
—were in the running for a first prize. One of 
the candidates, the elder, had dedicated solemn 
oils to the representation of awe-inspiring gau- 
chos of a Scandinavian altitude; his rather 
young rival, a man in his early twenties, had won 
both praise and indignation through deliberate 
chaos. The members of the jury, all past fifty 
and fearing that the general public would im- 
pute outdated standards to them, tended to 
favor the latter painter, though deep down they 
rather disliked him. After arguing back and 
forth, at first politely and finally out of boredom, 
they could not reach an agreement. In the 
course of their third meeting, one of them re- 
marked, “B. seems quite bad to me; really, I 
think he’s even worse than Clara Figueroa.”
The Duel
36

The Duel
“Would you give her your vote?” said another 
juror, with a trace of scorn.
“Yes,” answered the first, at the brink of ill- 
temper.
That same evening, the prize was unanimous- 
ly granted to Clara Glencairn. She was elegant, 
lovable, scandal had never touched her, and in 
her villa out in Pilar she gave parties to which 
the most lavish magazines sent photographers. 
The expected dinner in her honor was organized 
and offered by Marta. Clara thanked her with 
few and carefully chosen words, remarking that 
between the traditional and the new, or between 
order and adventure, no real opposition exists, 
and that what we now call tradition is made up 
of a centuries-old web of adventures. The ban- 
quet was attended by a large number of society 
people, by almost all the members of the jury, 
and by two or three painters.
All of us tend to think of our own circum- 
stances in terms of a narrow range and to feel 
that other pastures are greener. The worship of 
the gaucho and the Beatus ille are but a wistful- 
ness bred of city living; Clara Glencairn and 
Marta Pizarro, weary of the continual round of 
wealth and idleness, longed for the world of art, 
for people who had devoted their lives to the 
creation of things of beauty. My suspicion is
37

The Duel
that in Heaven the Blessed are of the opinion 
that the advantages of that locale have been 
overrated by theologians who were never actual- 
ly there. Perhaps even in Hell the damned are 
not always satisfied.
A year or two later, in the city of Cartagena, 
there took place the First Congress of Inter- 
American Painting and Sculpture. Each country 
sent its representative. The themes of the con- 
ference—may we be forgiven the jargon—were 
of burning interest: Can the artist disregard 
the indigenous? Can he omit or slight flora and 
fauna? Can he be insensitive to problems of a 
social nature? Should he not join his voice to 
those suffering under the yoke of Saxon im- 
perialism? Et cetera, et cetera. Before becoming 
ambassador to Canada, Dr. Figueroa had per- 
formed a diplomatic mission in Cartagena. 
Clara, a bit proud over the prize, would have 
liked returning there—this time as an artist. 
That hope was denied her; the government ap- 
pointed Marta Pizarro. According to the im- 
partial reports of correspondents from Buenos 
Aires, her participation (although not always 
persuasive) was on several occasions quite bril- 
liant.
Life demands a passion. Both women found 
it in painting, or rather, in the relationship im- 
posed on them by painting. Clara Glencairn 
38

The Duel
painted against Marta and in a sense for Marta; 
each of them was her rival’s judge and only 
public. In their pictures, which even then no 
one ever looked at, I think I observe—as was
  unavoidable—a mutual influence. Clara’s sunset 
glows found their way into Marta Pizarro’s 
patios, and Marta’s fondness for straight lines 
simplified the ornateness of Clara’s final stage. 
It is important to remember that the two women 
were genuinely fond of each other and that in 
the course of their intimate duel they behave to- 
ward one another with perfect loyalty.
It was during those years that Marta, who by 
then was no longer so young, rejected a mar- 
riage proposal. All that interested her was her 
battle.
On the second of February, 1964, Clara Glen- 
cairn died of a heart ailment. The columns of 
the newspapers devoted long obituaries to her 
of the kind that are still quite common in the 
Argentine, where a woman is regarded as a 
member of the species, not an individual. Out- 
side of some hasty mention of her dabbling in 
painting and of her impeccable good taste, she 
was praised for her religious devotion, her kind- 
ness, her constant and almost anonymous phi- 
lanthropy, her illustrious family tree—General 
Glencairn had fought in the Brazilian campaign 
—and her outstanding place in society’s highest
39

The Duel
circles. Marta realized that her life now lacked 
a meaning. She had never before felt so useless. 
Remembering her first endeavors, now so far in 
the past, she hung in the National Gallery a 
sober portrait of Clara after the manner of those 
English masters whom the two women had so 
admired. Some judged it her finest work. She 
was never to paint again.
In that delicate duel, only suspected by a few 
close friends, there were neither defeats nor 
victories nor even an open encounter, nor any 
visible circumstances other than those I have 
attempted respectfully to record. Only God (of 
whose aesthetic preferences we are unaware) 
can grant the final palm. The story that made its 
way in darkness ends in darkness.
40

The End of the Duel


The End of the Duel
It’s a good many years ago now that Carlos 
Reyles, the son of the Uruguayan novelist, told 
me the story one summer evening out in 
Adrogué. In my memory, after all this time, the 
long chronicle of a feud and its grim ending are 
mixed up with the medicinal smell of the 
eucalyptus trees and the babbling voices of 
birds.
We sat talking, as usual, of the tangled history 
of our two countries, Uruguay and the Argen- 
tine. Reyles said that probably I’d heard of 
Juan Patricio Nolan, who had won quite a 
reputation as a brave man, a practical joker, and 
a rogue. Lying, I answered yes. Though Nolan 
had died back in the nineties, people still 
thought of him as a friend. As always happens, 
however, he had his enemies as well. Reyles 
gave me an account of one of Nolan’s many 
pranks. The thing had happened a short time
43

before the battle of Manantiales; two gauchos 
from Cerro Largo, Manuel Cardoso and Carmen 
Silveira, were the leading characters.
How and why did they begin hating each 
other? How, after a century, can one unearth 
the long-forgotten story of two men whose only 
claim to being remembered is their last duel? A 
foreman of Reyles’ father, whose name was 
Laderecha and “who had the whiskers of a 
tiger,” had collected from oral accounts certain 
details that I transcribe now with a good deal 
of misgiving, since both forgetfulness and mem- 
ory are apt to be inventive.
Manuel Cardoso and Carmen Silveira had a 
few acres of land that bordered each other. Like 
the roots of other passions, those of hatred are 
mysterious, but there was talk of a quarrel over 
some unbranded cattle or a free-for-all horse 
race in which Silveira, who was the stronger 
of the two, had run Cardoso’s horse off the edge 
of the course. Months afterward, a long two- 
handed game of truco of thirty points was to 
take place in the local saloon. Following almost 
every hand, Silveira congratulated his opponent 
on his skill, but in the end left him without a 
cent. When he tucked his winnings away in his 
money belt, Silveira thanked Cardoso for the 
lesson he had been given. It was then, I believe, 
that they were at the point of having it out. The
44
The End of the Duel

game had had its ups and downs. In those rough 
places and in that day, man squared off against 
man and steel against steel. But the onlookers, 
who were quite a few, separated them. A pe- 
culiar twist of the story is that Manuel Cardoso 
and Carmen Silveira must have run across each 
other out in the hills on more than one occasion 
at sundown or at dawn, but they never actually 
faced each other until the very end. Maybe 
their poor and monotonous lives held nothing 
else for them than their hatred, and that was 
why they nursed it. In the long run, without 
suspecting it, each of the two became a slave to 
the other.
I no longer know whether the events I am 
about to relate are effects or causes. Cardoso, 
less out of love than out of boredom, took up 
with a neighbor girl, La Serviliana. That was all 
Silveira had to find out, and, after his manner, 
he began courting her and brought her to his 
shack. A few months later, finding her in the 
way, he threw her out. Full of spite, the woman 
tried to seek shelter at Cardoso’s. Cardoso spent 
one night with her, and by the next noon packed 
her off. He did not want the other man’s leav- 
ings.
It was around that same time, just before or 
just after La Serviliana, that the incident of 
Silveira’s sheepdog took place. Silveira was very
The End of the Duel
45

fond of the animal, and had named him Treinta 
y Tres, after Uruguay’s thirty-three founding 
fathers. When the dog was found dead in a 
ditch, Silveira was quick to suspect who had 
given it poison.
Sometime during the winter of 1870, a civil 
war broke out between the Colorados, or Reds, 
who were in power, and Aparicio’s Blancos, or 
Whites. The revolution found Silveira and Car- 
doso in the same crossroads saloon where they 
had played their game of cards. A Brazilian 
half-breed, at the head of a detachment of 
gaucho militiamen, harangued all those present, 
telling them that the country needed them and 
that the government oppression was unbearable. 
He handed around white badges to mark them 
as Blancos, and at the end of his speech, which 
nobody understood, everyone in the place was 
rounded up. They were not allowed even to say 
goodbye to their families.
Manuel Cardoso and Carmen Silveira ac- 
cepted their fate; a soldier’s life was no harder 
than a gaucho’s. Sleeping in the open on their 
sheepskin saddle blankets was something to 
which they were already hardened, and as for 
killing men, that held no difficulty for hands al- 
ready in the habit of killing cattle. The clinking 
of stirrups and weapons is one of the things al- 
ways heard when cavalry enter into action. The
46
The End of the Duel

man who is not wounded at the outset thinks 
himself invulnerable. A lack of imagination 
freed Cardoso and Silveira from fear and from 
pity, although once in a while, heading a charge, 
fear brushed them. They were never homesick. 
The idea of patriotism was alien to them, and, 
in spite of the badges they wore on their hats, 
one party was to them the same as the other. 
During the course of marches and counter- 
marches, they learned what a man could do 
with a spear, and they found out that being 
companions allowed them to go on being en- 
emies. They fought shoulder to shoulder and, 
for all we know, did not exchange a single word.
It was in the sultry fall of 1871 that their end 
was to come. The fight, which would not last 
an hour, happened in a place whose name they 
never knew. (Such places are later named by 
historians.) On the eve of battle, Cardoso crept 
on all fours into his officer’s tent and asked him 
sheepishly would he save him one of the Reds 
if the Whites won the next day, because up till 
then he had not cut anyone’s throat and he 
wanted to know what it was like. His superior 
promised him that if he handled himself like a 
man he would be granted that favor.
The Whites outnumbered the enemy, but the 
Reds were better equipped and cut them down 
from the crown of a hill. After two unsuccessful
The End of the Duel
47

charges that never reached the summit, the 
Whites’ commanding officer, badly wounded, 
surrendered. On the very spot, at his own re- 
quest, he was put to death by the knife.
The men laid down their arms. Captain Juan 
Patricio Nolan, who commanded the Reds, ar- 
ranged the expected execution of the prisoners 
down to the last detail. He was from Cerro 
Largo himself, and knew all about the old ri- 
valry between Silveira and Cardoso. He sent 
for the pair and told them, “I already know you 
two can’t stand the sight of each other, and 
that for some time now you’ve been looking for 
a chance to have it out. I have good news for 
you. Before sundown, the two of you are going 
to have that chance to show who’s the better 
man. I’m going to stand you up and have your 
throats cut, and then you’ll run a race. God 
knows who’ll win.” The soldier who had brought 
them took them away.
It was not long before the news spread 
throughout the camp. Nolan had made up his 
mind that the race would close the proceedings, 
but the prisoners sent him a representative to 
tell him that they, too, wanted to be spectators 
and to place wagers on the outcome. Nolan, 
who was an understanding man, let himself be 
convinced. The bets were laid down—money, 
riding gear, spears, sabers, and horses. In due
The End of the Duel
48

time they would be handed over to the widows 
and next of kin. The heat was unusual. So that 
no one would miss his siesta, things were de- 
layed until four o’clock. Nolan, in the South 
American style, kept them waiting another hour. 
He was probably discussing the campaign with 
his officers, his aide shuttling in and out with the 
maté kettle.
Both sides of the dirt road in front of the 
tents were lined with prisoners, who, to make 
things easier, squatted on the ground with their 
hands tied behind their backs. A few of them 
relieved their feelings in a torrent of swear- 
words, one went over and over the beginning 
of the Lord’s Prayer, almost all were stunned. 
Of course, they could not smoke. They no longer 
cared about the race now, but they all watched.
“They’ll be cutting my throat on me, too,” one 
of them said, showing his envy.
“Sure, but along with the mob,” said his 
neighbor.
“Same as you,” the first man snapped back.
With his saber, a sergeant drew a line in the 
dust across the road. Silveira’s and Cardoso’s 
wrists had been untied so that they could run 
freely. A space of some five yards was between 
them. Each man toed the mark. A couple of the 
officers asked the two not to let them down be- 
cause everyone had placed great faith in them,
49
The End of the Duel

and the sums they had bet on them came to 
quite a pile.
It fell to Silveira’s lot to draw as executioner 
the mulatto Nolan, whose forefathers had no 
doubt been slaves of the captain’s family and 
therefore bore his name. Cardoso drew the Red’s 
official cutthroat, a man from Corrientes well 
along in years, who, to comfort a condemned 
man, would pat him on the shoulder and tell 
him, “Take heart, friend. Women go through 
far worse when they give birth.”
Their torsos bent forward, the two eager men 
did not look at each other. Nolan gave the 
signal.
The mulatto, swelling with pride to be at the 
center of attention, overdid his job and opened 
a showy slash that ran from ear to ear; the man 
from Corrientes did his with a narrow slit. 
Spurts of blood gushed from the men’s throats. 
They dashed forward a number of steps before 
tumbling face down. Cardoso, as he fell, 
stretched out his arms. Perhaps never aware of 
it, he had won.
The End of the Duel
50

Rosendo’s Tale


Rosendo’s Tale
It was about eleven o’clock at night; I had 
entered the old grocery store-bar (which today 
is just a plain bar) at the comer of Bolívar and 
Venezuela. From off on one side, a man signaled 
me with a “psst.” There must have been some- 
thing forceful in his manner because I heeded 
him at once. He was seated at one of the small 
tables in front of an empty glass, and I somehow 
felt he had been sitting there for a long time. 
Neither short nor tall, he had the appearance of 
a common workingman or maybe an old farm- 
hand. His thin moustache was graying. Fearful 
of his health, like most people in Buenos Aires, 
he had not taken off the scarf that draped his 
shoulders. He asked me to have a drink with 
him. I sat down and we chatted. All this took 
place sometime back in the early thirties. This is 
what the man told me.
53

Rosendo’s Tale
You don’t know me except by reputation, but 
I know who you are. I’m Rosendo Juárez. The 
late Paredes must have told you about me. The 
old man could pull the wool over people’s eyes 
and liked to stretch a point—not to cheat any- 
body, mind you, but just in fun. Well, seeing 
you and I have nothing better to do, I’m going 
to tell you exactly what happened that night, 
the night the Butcher got killed. You put 
all that down in a storybook, which I’m not 
equipped to pass judgment on, but I want you 
to know the truth about all that trumped-up 
stuff.
Things happen to you and it’s only years later 
you begin understanding them. What happened 
to me that night really had its start a long time 
back. I grew up in the neighborhood of the 
Maldonado, way out past Floresta. The Maldo- 
nado was just a ditch then, a kind of sewer, and 
it’s a good thing they’ve covered it over now. 
I’ve always been of the opinion that the march 
of progress can’t be held back—not by anybody. 
Anyway, a man’s born where he’s born. It never 
entered my head to find out who my father was. 
Clementina Juárez—that was my mother—was 
a decent woman who earned a living doing 
laundry. As far as I know, she was from Entre 
Ríos or Uruguay; anyhow, she always talked 
about her relatives from Concepción del Uru-
54

guay. I grew up like a weed. I first learned to 
handle a knife the way everyone else did, fenc- 
ing with a charred stick. If you jabbed your 
man, it left a mark. Soccer hadn’t taken us over 
yet—it was still in the hands of the English.
One night at the comer bar, a young guy 
named Garmendia began taunting me, trying to 
pick a fight. I played deaf, but this other guy, 
who’d had a few, kept it up. We stepped out. 
Then from the sidewalk he swung open the 
door and said back inside to the people, “Don’t 
anybody worry, I’ll be right back.”
I somehow got hold of a knife. We went off 
toward the brook, slow, our eyes on each other. 
He had a few years on me. We’d played at that 
fencing game a number of times together, and 
I had the feeling he was going to cut me up in 
ribbons. I went down the right-hand side of the 
road and he went down the left. He stumbled 
on some dry clods of mud. That moment was 
all I needed. I got the jump on him, almost 
without thinking, and opened a slice in his face. 
We got locked in a clinch, there was a minute 
when anything might have happened, and in 
the end I got my knife in and it was all over. 
Only later on did I find out I’d been cut up, too. 
But only a few scratches. That night I saw how 
easy it was to kill a man or to get killed. The 
water in the brook was pretty low; stalling for
Rosendo’s Tale
55

time, I half hid him behind one of the brick 
kilns. Fool that I was, I went and slipped off 
that fancy ring of his that he always wore with 
the nice stone in it. I put it on, I straightened 
my hat, and I went back to the bar. I walked in 
nonchalant, saying to them, “Looks like the one 
who came back was me.”
I asked for a shot of rum and, to tell the truth, 
I needed it bad. It was then somebody noticed 
the blood on my sleeve.
I spent that whole night tossing and turning 
on my cot, and it was almost light outside before 
I dropped off and slept. Late the next day two 
cops came looking for me. My mother (may she 
rest in peace) began shrieking. They herded me 
along just like I was some kind of criminal. Two 
nights and two days I had to wait there in the 
cooler. Nobody came to see me, either, outside 
of Luis Irala—a real friend—only they wouldn’t 
let him in. Then the third morning the police 
captain sent for me. He sat there in his chair, 
not even looking at me, and said, “So you’re the 
one who took care of Garmendia, are you?”
“If that’s what you say,” I answered.
“You call me sir. And don’t get funny or try 
beating around the bush. Here are the sworn 
statements of witnesses and the ring that was 
found in your house. Just sign this confession 
and get it over with.”
Rosendo’s Tale
56

Rosendo’s Tale
He dipped the pen in the inkwell and handed 
it to me.
“Let me do some thinking, Captain sir,” I 
came out with.
“I’ll give you twenty-four hours where you 
can do some hard thinking—in the cooler. I’m 
not going to rush you. If you don’t care to see 
reason, you can get used to the idea of a little 
vacation up on Las Heras—the penitentiary.”
As you can probably imagine, I didn’t under- 
stand.
“Look,” he said, “if you come around, all you’ll 
get is a few days. Then I’ll let you go, and don 
Nicolás Paredes has already given me his word 
he’ll straighten things out for you.”
Actually, it was ten days. Then at last they re- 
membered me. I signed what they wanted, and 
one of the two cops took me around to Paredes’ 
house on Cabrera Street.
Horses were tied to the hitching post, and in 
the entranceway and inside the place there were 
more people than around a whorehouse. It 
looked to me like the party headquarters. Don 
Nicolás, who was sipping his maté, finally got 
around to me. Taking his good time, he told me 
he was sending me out to Morón, where they 
were getting ready for the elections. He was 
putting me in touch with Mr. Laferrer, who 
would try me out. He had the letter written by
57

some kid all dressed in black, who, from what I 
heard, made up poems about tenements and 
filth—stuff that no refined public would dream 
of reading. I thanked Paredes for the favor and 
left. When I got to the comer, the cop wasn’t 
tailing me any more.
Providence knows what it’s up to; everything 
had turned out for the best. Garmendia’s death, 
which at first had caused me a lot of worry, now 
opened things up for me. Of course, the law 
had me in the palm of their hands. If I was no 
use to the party they’d clap me back inside, but 
I felt pretty good and was counting on myself.
Mr. Laferrer warned me I was going to have 
to walk the straight and narrow with him, and 
said if I did I might even become his body- 
guard. I came through with what was expected 
of me. In Morón, and later on in my part of 
town, I earned the trust of my bosses. The cops 
and the party kept on building up my reputation 
as a tough guy. I turned out to be pretty good 
at organizing the vote around the polls here in 
the capital and out in the province. I won’t take 
up your time going into details about brawls and 
bloodletting, but let me tell you, in those days 
elections were lively affairs. I could never stand 
the Radicals, who down to this day are still 
hanging onto the beard of their chief Alem. 
There wasn’t a soul around who didn’t hold me 
58
Rosendo’s Tale

in respect. I got hold of a woman, La Lujanera, 
and a fine-looking sorrel. For years I tried to live 
up to the part of the outlaw Moreira, who, in his 
time—the way I figure it—was probably trying 
to play the part of some other gaucho outlaw. 
I took to cards and absinthe.
An old man has a way of rambling on and on, 
but now I’m coming to the part I want you to 
hear. I wonder if I’ve already mentioned Luis 
Irala. The kind of friend you don’t find every 
day. Irala was a man already well along in years. 
He never was afraid of work, and he took a 
liking to me. In his whole life he never had any- 
thing to do with politics. He was a carpenter by 
trade. He never caused anyone trouble and 
never allowed anyone to cause him trouble. One 
morning he came to see me and he said, “Of 
course, you’ve heard by now that Casilda’s left 
me. Rufino Aguilera took her away from me.” 
I’d known that customer around Morón. I an- 
swered, “Yes, I know all about him. Of all the 
Aguileras, he’s the least rotten.”
“Rotten or not, now hell have to reckon with
me.”
I thought that over for a while and told him, 
“Nobody takes anything away from anybody. If 
Casilda left you, it’s because she cares for Rufino 
and you mean nothing to her.”
Rosendo’s Tale
59

“And what are people going to say? That I’m 
a coward?”
“My advice is don’t get yourself mixed up in 
gossip about what people might say or about a 
woman who has no use for you.”
“It’s not her I’m worried about. A man who 
thinks five minutes straight about a woman is no 
man, he’s a queer. Casilda has no heart. The last 
night we spent together she told me I wasn’t as 
young as I used to be.”
“Maybe she was telling you the truth.”
“That’s what hurts. What matters to me now is 
Rufino.”
“Be careful there. I’ve seen Rufino in action 
around the polls in Merlo. He’s a flash with a 
knife.”
“You think I’m afraid of him?”
“I know you’re not afraid of him, but think it 
over. One of two things—if you kill him, you 
get put away; if he kills you, you go six feet 
under.”
“Maybe so. What would you do in my shoes?” 
“I don’t know, but my own life isn’t exactly 
a model. I’m only a guy who became a party 
strong-arm man trying to beat a jail sentence.” 
“I’m not going to be the strong-arm guy for 
any party, I’m only out to settle a debt.”
“So you’re going to risk your peace and quiet
Rosendo’s Tale
60

for a man you don’t know and a woman you 
don’t love any more?”
He wouldn’t hear me out. He just left. The 
next day the news came that he challenged 
Rufino in a saloon in Morón, and Rufino killed 
him. He was out to kill, and he got killed—but 
a fair fight, man to man. I’d given him my 
honest advice as a friend, but somehow I felt 
guilty just the same.
A few days after the wake, I went to a cock- 
fight. I’d never been very big on cockfights, and 
that Sunday, to tell the truth, I had all I could 
do to stomach the thing. What is it in these 
animals, I kept thinking, that makes them gouge 
each other’s eyes like that?
The night of my story, the night of the end 
of my story, I had told the boys I’d show up at 
Blackie’s for the dance. So many years ago now, 
and that dress with the flowers my woman was 
wearing still comes back to me. The party was 
out in the backyard. Of course, there was the 
usual drunk or two trying to raise hell, but I 
took good care to see that things went off the 
way they ought to. It wasn’t twelve yet when 
these strangers put in an appearance. One of 
them—the one they called the Butcher and who 
got himself stabbed in the back that same night 
—stood us all to a round of drinks. The odd
61
Rosendo’s Tale

thing was that the two of us looked a lot alike. 
Something was in the air; he drew up to me and 
began praising me up and down. He said he was 
from the Northside, where he’d heard a thing 
or two about me. I let him go on, but I was al- 
ready sizing him up. He wasn’t letting the gin 
alone, either, maybe to work up his courage, and 
finally he came out and asked me to fight. Then 
something happened that nobody ever under- 
stood. In that big loudmouth I saw myself, the 
same as in a mirror, and it made me feel 
ashamed. I wasn’t scared; maybe if I’d been 
scared I’d have fought with him. I just stood 
there as if nothing happened. This other guy, 
with his face just inches away from mine, began 
shouting so everyone could hear, “The trouble 
is you’re nothing but a coward.”
“Maybe so,” I said. “I’m not afraid of being 
taken for a coward. If it makes you feel good, 
why don’t you say you’ve called me a son of 
a bitch, too, and that I’ve let you spit all over 
me. Now—are you any happier?”
La Lujanera took out the knife I always car- 
ried in my vest lining and, burning up inside, she 
shoved it into my hand. To clinch it, she said, 
“Rosendo, I think you’re going to need this.”
I let it drop and walked out, but not hurrying. 
The boys made way for me. They were stunned. 
What did it matter to me what they thought.
Rosendo’s Tale
62

To make a clean break with that life, I took off 
for Uruguay, where I found myself work as a 
teamster. Since coming back to Buenos Aires, 
I’ve settled around here. San Telmo always was 
a respectable neighborhood.
Rosendo’s Tale
63


The Intruder


The Intruder
. . . passing the love of women.
2 Samuel 1:26
People say (but this is unlikely) that the story 
was first told by Eduardo, the younger of the 
Nelsons, at the wake of his elder brother 
Cristián, who died in his sleep sometime back 
in the nineties out in the district of Morón. The 
fact is that someone got it from someone else 
during the course of that drawn-out and now 
dim night, between one sip of mate and the 
next, and told it to Santiago Dabove, from 
whom I heard it. Years later, in Turdera, where 
the story had taken place, I heard it again. The 
second and more elaborate version closely fol- 
lowed the one Santiago told, with the usual 
minor variations and discrepancies. I set down 
the story now because I see in it, if I’m not mis- 
taken, a brief and tragic mirror of the character
67

The Intruder
of those hard-bitten men living on the edge of 
Buenos Aires before the turn of the century. I 
hope to do this in a straightforward way, but 
I see in advance that I shall give in to the 
writer’s temptation of emphasizing or adding 
certain details.
In Turdera, where they lived, they were 
called the Nilsens. The priest there told me that 
his predecessor remembered having seen in the 
house of these people—somewhat in amazement 
—a worn Bible with a dark binding and black- 
letter type; on the back flyleaf he caught a 
glimpse of names and dates written in by hand. 
It was the only book in the house—the roaming 
chronicle of the Nilsens, lost as one day all 
things will be lost. The rambling old house, 
which no longer stands, was of unplastered 
brick; through the arched entranceway you 
could make out a patio paved with red tiles and 
beyond it a second one of hard-packed earth. 
Few people, at any rate, ever set foot inside; 
the Nilsens kept to themselves. In their almost 
bare rooms they slept on cots. Their extrav- 
agances were horses, silver-trimmed riding gear, 
the short-bladed dagger, and getting dressed up 
on Saturday nights, when they blew their money 
freely and got themselves into boozy brawls. 
They were both tall, I know, and wore their red 
hair long. Denmark or Ireland, which they prob-
68

ably never heard of, ran in the blood of these 
two Argentine brothers. The neighborhood 
feared the Redheads; it is likely that one of 
them, at least, had killed his man. Once, shoul- 
der to shoulder, they tangled with the police. 
It is said that the younger brother was in a fight 
with Juan Iberra in which he didn’t do too bad- 
ly, and that, according to those in the know, is 
saying something. They were drovers, team- 
sters, horse thieves, and, once in a while, profes- 
sional gamblers. They had a reputation for 
stinginess, except when drink and cardplaying 
turned them into spenders. Of their relatives or 
where they themselves came from, nothing is 
known. They owned a cart and a yoke of oxen.
Their physical make-up differed from that of 
the rest of the toughs who gave the Costa Brava 
its unsavory reputation. This, and a lot that we 
don’t know, helps us understand the close ties 
between them. To fall out with one of them was 
to reckon with two enemies.
The Nilsens liked carousing with women, but 
up until then their amorous escapades had al- 
ways been carried out in darkened passageways 
or in whorehouses. There was no end of talk, 
then, when Cristián brought Juliana Burgos to 
live with him. Admittedly, in this way he gained 
a servant, but it is also true that he took to 
squandering his money buying her the most
The Intruder
69

The Intruder
hideous junk jewelry, and showing her off at 
parties. At those dingy parties held in ten- 
ements, where suggestive dance steps were 
strictly forbidden and where, at that time, 
partners still danced with a good six inches of 
light showing between them. Juliana was a dark 
girl and her eyes had a slight slant to them; all 
anyone had to do was look at her and she’d 
break into a smile. For a poor neighborhood, 
where drudgery and neglect wear women out, 
she was not bad-looking.
In the beginning, Eduardo went places with 
them. Later, at one point, he set out on a 
journey north to Arrecifes on some business or 
other, returning home with a girl he had picked 
up along the way. But after a few days he threw 
her out. He turned more sullen; he took to 
drinking alone at the comer saloon and kept 
completely to himself. He had fallen in love 
with Cristián’s woman. The whole neighbor- 
hood, which may have realized it before he did, 
maliciously and cheerfully looked forward to 
the enmity about to break out between the two 
brothers.
Late one night, on coming from the comer, 
Eduardo saw Cristián’s horse, a big bay, tied to 
the hitching post. Inside in the patio, dressed in 
his Sunday best, his older brother was waiting 
for him. The woman shuttled in and out serving 
70

maté. Cristián said to Eduardo, “I’m on my way 
over to Farías’ place, where they’re throwing a 
party. Juliana stays here with you; if you want 
her, use her.”
His tone was half commanding, half friendly. 
Eduardo stood there a while staring at him, not 
knowing what to do. Cristián got up, said good- 
bye—to his brother, not to Juliana, who was no 
more than an object—mounted his horse, and 
rode off at a jog, casually.
From that night on they shared her. Nobody 
will ever know the details of this strange part- 
nership which outraged even the Costa Brava’s 
sense of decency. The arrangement went well 
for several weeks, but it could not last. Between 
them the brothers never mentioned her name, 
not even to call her, but they kept looking for, 
and finding, reasons to be at odds. They argued 
over the sale of some hides, but what they were 
really arguing about was something else. Cris- 
tián took to raising his voice, while Eduardo 
kept silent. Without knowing it, they were 
watching each other. In tough neighborhoods a 
man never admits to anyone—not even to him- 
self—that a woman matters beyond lust and 
possession, but the two brothers were in love. 
This, in some way, made them feel ashamed.
One afternoon, in the square in Lomas, 
Eduardo ran into Juan Iberra, who congrat-
The Intruder
71

The Intruder
ulated him on this beauty he’d got hold of. It 
was then, I believe, that Eduardo let him have 
it. Nobody—not to his face—was going to poke 
fun at Cristián.
The woman attended both mens wants with 
an animal submission, but she was unable to 
keep hidden a certain preference, probably for 
the younger man, who had not refused sharing 
her but who had not proposed it either.
One day, they ordered Juliana to bring two 
chairs out into the first patio and then not show 
her face for a while because they had things to 
talk over. Expecting a long session between 
them, she lay down for a nap, but before very 
long they woke her up. She was to fill a sack 
with all her belongings, including her glass-bead 
rosary and the tiny crucifix her mother had left 
her. Without any explanation, they lifted her 
onto the oxcart and set out on a long, tiresome, 
and silent journey. It had rained; the roads were 
heavy with mud, and it was nearly daybreak be- 
fore they reached Morón. There they sold her 
to the woman who ran the whorehouse. The 
terms had already been agreed to; Cristián 
pocketed the money and later on split it with 
his brother.
Back in Turdera, the Nilsens, up till then 
trapped in the web (which was also a routine) 
of this monstrous love affair, tried to take up 
72

The Intruder
their old life of men among men. They went 
back to cardplaying, to cockfights, to their Sat- 
urday night binges. At times, perhaps, they felt 
they were saved, but they often indulged—each 
on his own—in unaccountable or only too ac- 
countable absences. A little before the year was 
out, the younger brother said he had business 
in the city. Immediately, Cristián went off to 
Morón; at the hitching post of the whore- 
house he recognized Eduardo’s piebald. Cristián 
walked in; there was his brother, sure enough, 
waiting his turn. It is said that Cristián told 
him, “If we go on this way, we’ll wear out the 
horses. We’d be better off keeping her close at 
hand.”
He spoke with the owner of the place, drew a 
handful of coins out of his money belt, and they 
took the girl away. Juliana rode with Cristián. 
Eduardo dug his spurs into his horse, not want- 
ing to see them together.
They went back to what has already been 
told. Their solution had ended in failure, for the 
two had fallen into cheating. Cain was on the 
loose here, but the affection between the Nilsens 
was great—who knows what hard times and 
what dangers they may have faced together!— 
and they preferred taking their feelings out on 
others. On strangers, on the dogs, on Juliana, 
who had set this wedge between them.
73

The month of March was coming to a close 
and there was no sign of the heat’s letting up. 
One Sunday (on Sundays people go to bed 
early), Eduardo, on his way home from the 
comer saloon, saw that Cristián was yoking the 
oxen. Cristián said to him, “Come on. We have 
to leave some hides off at Pardo’s place. I’ve al- 
ready loaded them; let’s make the best of the 
night air.”
Pardo’s warehouse lay, I believe, farther 
south; they took the old cattle trail, then turned 
down a side road. As night fell, the countryside 
seemed wider and wider.
They skirted a growth of tall reeds; Cristián 
threw down the cigar he had just lit, and said 
evenly, “Let’s get busy, brother. In a while the 
buzzards will take over. This afternoon I killed 
her. Let her stay here with all her trinkets, she 
won’t cause us any more harm.”
They threw their arms around each other, on 
the verge of tears. One more link bound them 
now—the woman they had cruelly sacrificed 
and their common need to forget her.
The Intruder
74

The Meeting
To Susana Bombal


The Meeting
Anyone leafing his way through the morning 
paper does so either to escape his surroundings 
or to provide himself with small talk for later 
in the day, so it is not to be wondered at that 
no one any longer remembers—or else remem- 
bers as in a dream—the famous and once widely 
discussed case of Maneco Uriarte and of Dun- 
can. The event took place, furthermore, back 
around 1910, the year of the comet and the 
Centennial, and since then we have had and 
have lost so many things. Both protagonists are 
now dead; those who witnessed the episode 
solemnly swore silence. I, too, raised my hand 
for the oath, feeling the importance of the ritual 
with all the romantic seriousness of my nine or 
ten years. I do not know whether the others 
noticed that I had given my word; I do not know 
whether they kept theirs. Anyway, here is the
77

story, with all the inevitable variations brought 
about by time and by good or bad writing.
My cousin Lafinur took me to a barbecue that 
evening at a country house called The Laurels, 
which belonged to some friends of his. I cannot 
fix its exact location; let us take any of those 
suburban towns lying just to the north, shaded 
and quiet, that slope down to the river and that 
have nothing in common with sprawling Buenos 
Aires and its surrounding prairie. The journey 
by train lasted long enough to seem endless to 
me, but time for children—as is well known— 
flows slowly. It was already dark when we 
passed through the villa’s main gate. Here, I 
felt, were all the ancient, elemental things: the 
smell of meat cooking golden brown, the trees, 
the dogs, the kindling wood, and the fire that 
brings men together.
The guests numbered about a dozen; all were 
grown-ups. The eldest, I learned later, was not 
yet thirty. They were also—this I was soon to 
find out—well versed in matters about which I 
am still somewhat backward: race horses, the 
right tailors, motorcars, and notoriously expen- 
sive women. No one ruffled my shyness, no one 
paid any attention to me. The lamb, slowly and 
skillfully prepared by one of the hired men, kept 
us a long time in the big dining room. The dates 
of vintages were argued back and forth. There
78
The Meeting

was a guitar; my cousin, if I remember correct- 
ly, sang a couple of Elías Regules’ ballads about 
gauchos in the back country of Uruguay and 
some verses in dialect, in the incipient lunfardo 
of those days, about a knife fight in a brothel 
on Junín Street. Coffee and Havana cigars were 
brought in. Not a word about getting back. I 
felt (in the words of the poet Lugones) the fear 
of what is suddenly too late. I dared not look 
at the clock. In order to disguise my boyish 
loneliness among grown-ups, I put away—not 
really liking it—a glass or two of wine. Uriarte, 
in a loud voice, proposed to Duncan a two- 
handed game of poker. Someone objected that 
that land of play made for a poor game and sug- 
gested a hand of four. Duncan agreed, but 
Uriarte, with a stubbornness that I did not un- 
derstand and that I did not try to understand, 
insisted on the first scheme. Outside of truco— 
a game whose real aim is to pass time with 
mischief and verses—and of the modest mazes 
of solitaire, I never enjoyed cards. I slipped 
away without anyone’s noticing. A rambling old 
house, unfamiliar and dark (only in the dining 
room was there light), means more to a boy 
than a new country means to a traveler. Step by 
step, I explored the rooms; I recall a billiard 
room, a long gallery with rectangular and di- 
amond-shaped panes, a couple of rocking chairs,
The Meeting
79

and a window from which you could just make 
out a summerhouse. In the darkness I lost my 
way; the owner of the house, whose name, as I 
recall after all these years, may have been 
Acevedo or Acebal, finally came across me some- 
how. Out of kindness or perhaps out of a col- 
lector’s vanity, he led me to a display cabinet. 
On lighting a lamp, I saw the glint of steel. It 
was a collection of knives that had once been 
in the hands of famous fighters. He told me that 
he had a bit of land somewhere to the north 
around Pergamino, and that he had been picking 
up these things on his travels back and forth 
across the province. He opened the cabinet and, 
without looking at what was written on the tags, 
he began giving me accounts of each item; they 
were more or less the same except for dates 
and place names. I asked him whether among 
the weapons he might have the dagger of Juan 
Moreira, who was in that day the archetype of 
the gaucho, as later Martín Fierro and Don 
Segundo Sombra would be. He had to confess 
that he hadn’t but that he could show me one 
like it, with a U-shaped crosspiece in the hilt. 
He was interrupted by the sound of angry 
voices. At once he shut the cabinet and turned 
to leave; I followed him.
Uriarte was shouting that his opponent had 
tried to cheat him. All the others stood around
The Meeting
80

the two players. Duncan, I remember, was a 
taller man than the rest of the company, and 
was well built, though somewhat round-shoul- 
dered; his face was expressionless, and his hair 
was so light it was almost white. Maneco Uriarte 
was nervous, dark, with perhaps a touch of 
Indian blood, and wore a skimpy, petulant 
moustache. It was obvious that everybody was 
drunk; I do not know whether there were two 
or three emptied bottles on the floor or whether 
an excess of movies suggests this false memory 
to me. Uriarte’s insults did not let up; at first 
sharp, they now grew obscene. Duncan ap- 
peared not to hear, but finally, as though weary, 
he got up and threw a punch. From the floor, 
Uriarte snarled that he was not going to take 
this outrage, and he challenged Duncan to fight.
Duncan said no, and added, as though to 
explain, “The trouble is I’m afraid of you.” 
Everybody howled with laughter.
Uriarte, picking himself up, answered, “I’m 
going to have it out with you, and right now.” 
Someone—may he be forgiven for it—re- 
marked that weapons were not lacking.
I do not know who went and opened the 
glass cabinet. Maneco Uriarte picked out the 
showiest and longest dagger, the one with the 
U-shaped crosspiece; Duncan, almost absent- 
mindedly, picked a wooden-handled knife with
The Meeting
81

the stamp of a tiny tree on the blade. Someone 
else said it was just like Maneco to play it safe, 
to choose a sword. It astonished no one that his 
hand began shaking; what was astonishing is 
that the same thing happened with Duncan.
Tradition demands that men about to fight 
should respect the house in which they are 
guests, and step outside. Half on a spree, half 
seriously, we all went out into the damp night. I 
was not drunk—at least, not on wine—but I was 
reeling with adventure; I wished very hard that 
someone would be killed, so that later I could 
tell about it and always remember it. Maybe at 
that moment the others were no more adult 
than I was. I also had the feeling that an over- 
powering current was dragging us on and would 
drown us. Nobody believed the least bit in 
Maneco’s accusation; everyone saw it as the fruit 
of an old rivalry, exacerbated by the wine.
We pushed our way through a clump of trees, 
leaving behind the summerhouse. Uriarte and 
Duncan led the way, wary of each other. The 
rest of us strung ourselves out around the edge 
of an opening of lawn. Duncan had stopped 
there in the moonlight and said, with mild au- 
thority, “This looks like the right place.”
The two men stood in the center, not quite 
knowing what to do. A voice rang out: “Let go 
of all that hardware and use your hands!”
The Meeting
82

But the men were already fighting. They be- 
gan clumsily, almost as if they were afraid of 
hurting each other; they began by watching the 
blades, but later their eyes were on one another. 
Uriarte had laid aside his anger, Duncan his 
contempt or aloofness. Danger, in some way, 
had transfigured them; these were now two men 
fighting, not boys. I had imagined the fight as a 
chaos of steel; instead, I was able to follow it, or 
almost follow it, as though it were a game of 
chess. The intervening years may, of course, 
have exaggerated or blurred what I saw. I do 
not know how long it lasted; there are events 
that fall outside the common measure of time.
Without ponchos to act as shields, they used 
their forearms to block each lunge of the knife. 
Their sleeves, soon hanging in shreds, grew 
black with blood. I thought that we had gone 
wrong in supposing that they knew nothing 
about this kind of fencing. I noticed right off 
that they handled themselves in different ways. 
Their weapons were unequal. Duncan, in order 
to make up for his disadvantage, tried to stay in 
close to the other man; Uriarte kept stepping 
back to be able to lunge out with long, low 
thrusts. The same voice that had called atten- 
tion to the display cabinet shouted out now: 
“They’re killing each other! Stop them!”
But no one dared break it up. Uriarte had
The Meeting
83

lost ground; Duncan charged him. They were 
almost body to body now. Uriarte’s weapon 
sought Duncan’s face. Suddenly the blade 
seemed shorter, for it was piercing the taller 
man’s chest. Duncan lay stretched out on the 
grass. It was at this point that he said, his 
voice very low, “How strange. All this is like a 
dream.”
He did not shut his eyes, he did not move, 
and I had seen a man kill another man.
Maneco Uriarte bent over the body, sobbing 
openly, and begged to be forgiven. The thing 
he had just done was beyond him. I know now 
that he regretted less having committed a crime 
than having earned out a senseless act.
I did not want to look anymore. What I had 
wished for so much had happened, and it left 
me shaken. Lafinur told me later that they had 
had to struggle hard to pull out the weapon. A 
makeshift council was formed. They decided to 
lie as little as possible and to elevate this duel 
with knives to a duel with swords. Four of them 
volunteered as seconds, among them Acebal. In 
Buenos Aires anything can be fixed; someone al- 
ways has a friend.
On top of the mahogany table where the men 
had been playing, a pack of English cards and a 
pile of bills lay in a jumble that nobody wanted 
to look at or to touch.
The Meeting
84

In the years that followed, I often considered 
revealing the story to some friend, but always I 
felt that there was a greater pleasure in being 
the keeper of a secret than in telling it. How- 
ever, around 1929, a chance conversation sud- 
denly moved me one day to break my long 
silence. The retired police captain, don José 
Olave, was recalling stories about men from the 
tough riverside neighborhood of the Retiro who 
had been handy with their knives; he remarked 
that when they were out to kill their man, scum 
of this kind had no use for the rules of the game, 
and that before all the fancy playing with 
daggers that you saw now on the stage, knife 
fights were few and far between. I said I had 
witnessed one, and gave him an account of 
what had happened nearly twenty years earlier.
He listened to me with professional attention, 
then said, “Are you sure Uriarte and What’s-His- 
Name never handled a knife before? Maybe 
they had picked up a thing or two around their 
fathers’ ranches.”
“I don’t think so,” I said. “Everybody there 
that night knew one another pretty well, and I 
can tell you they were all amazed at the way the 
two men fought.”
Olave went on in his quiet manner, as if 
thinking aloud. “One of the weapons had a U- 
shaped crosspiece in the handle. There were two
The Meeting
85

daggers of that kind which became quite famous 
—Moreira’s and Juan Almada’s. Almada was 
from down south, in Tapalquén.”
Something seemed to come awake in my 
memory. Olave continued. “You also mentioned 
a knife with a wooden handle, one with the 
Little Tree brand. There are thousands of them, 
but there was one—“
He broke off for a moment, then said, 
“Señor Acevedo had a big property up around 
Pergamino. There was another of these famous 
toughs from up that way—Juan Almanza was 
his name. This was along about the turn of the 
century. When he was fourteen, he killed his 
first man with one of these knives. From then 
on, for luck, he stuck to the same one. Juan 
Almanza and Juan Almada had it in for each 
other, jealous of the fact that many people con- 
fused the two. For a long time they searched 
high and low for one another, but they never 
met. Juan Almanza was killed by a stray bullet 
during some election brawl or other. The other 
man, I think, died a natural death in a hospital 
bed in Las Flores.”
Nothing more was said. Each of us was left 
with his own conclusions.
Nine or ten men, none of whom is any longer 
living, saw what my eyes saw—that sudden stab 
and the body under the night sky—but perhaps 
86
The Meeting

what we were really seeing was the end of an- 
other story, an older story. I began to wonder 
whether it was Maneco Uriarte who killed Dun- 
can or whether in some uncanny way it could 
have been the weapons, not the men, which 
fought. I still remember how Uriarte’s hand 
shook when he first gripped his knife, and the 
same with Duncan, as though the knives were 
coming awake after a long sleep side by side 
in the cabinet. Even after their gauchos were 
dust, the knives—the knives, not their tools, 
the men—knew how to fight. And that night 
they fought well.
Things last longer than people; who knows 
whether these knives will meet again, who 
knows whether the story ends here.
The Meeting
87


Juan Muraña


Juan Muraña
For years now, I have been telling people I grew 
up in that part of Buenos Aires known as 
Palermo. This, I’ve come to realize, is mere 
literary bravado; the truth is that I really grew 
up on the inside of a long iron picket fence in a 
house with a garden and with my father’s and 
his father’s library. The Palermo of knife fights 
and of guitar playing lurked (so they say) on 
street comers and down back alleys. In 1930, I 
wrote a study of Evaristo Carriego, a neighbor 
of ours, a poet and glorifier of the city’s outlying 
slums. A little after that, chance brought me 
face to face with Emilio Trápani. I was on the 
train to Morón. Trápani, who was sitting next 
to the window, called me by name. For some 
time I could not place him, so many years had 
passed since we’d been classmates in a school 
on Thames Street. Roberto Godel, another class- 
mate, may remember him.
91

Trápani and I never had any great liking for 
each other. Time had set us apart, and also our 
mutual indifference. He had taught me, I now 
recall, all the basic slang words of the day. Rid- 
ing along, we struck up one of those trivial con- 
versations that force you to unearth pointless 
facts and that lead up to the discovery of the 
death of a fellow-schoolmate who is no longer 
anything more than a name. Then, abruptly, 
Trápani said to me, “Someone lent me your 
Carriego book, where you’re talking about hood- 
lums all the time. Tell me, Borges, what in the 
world can you know about hoodlums?” He 
stared at me with a kind of wonder.
“I’ve done research,” I answered.
Not letting me go on, he said, “Research is 
the word, all right. Personally, I have no use for 
research—I know these people inside out.” 
After a moment’s silence, he added, as though 
he were letting me in on a secret, “I’m Juan 
Muraña’s nephew.”
Of all the men around Palermo famous for 
handling a knife way back in the nineties, the 
one with the widest reputation was Muraña. 
Trápani went on, “Florentina—my aunt—was 
his wife. Maybe you’ll be interested in this 
story.”
Certain devices of a literary nature and one
Juan Muraña
92

or two longish sentences led me to suspect that 
this was not the first time he had told the story.
My mother [Trápani said] could never quite 
stomach the fact that her sister had linked her- 
self up with a man like Muraña, who to her was 
just a big brute, while to Aunt Florentina he 
was a man of action. A lot of stories circulated 
about my uncle’s end. Some say that one night 
when he was dead drunk he tumbled from the 
seat of his wagon, making the turn around the 
comer of Coronel, and cracked his skull on the 
cobblestones. It’s also said that the law was on 
his heels and he ran away to Uruguay. My 
mother, who couldn’t stand her brother-in-law, 
never explained to me what actually happened. 
I was just a small boy then and have no mem- 
ories of him.
Along about the time of the Centennial, we 
were living in a long, narrow house on Russell 
Alley. The back door, which was always kept 
locked, opened on the other side of the block, 
on San Salvador Street. My aunt, who was well 
along in years and a bit queer, had a room with 
us up in our attic. Big-boned but thin as a stick, 
she was—or seemed to me—very tall. She also 
wasted few words. Living in fear of fresh air,
93
Juan Muraña

she never went out; nor did she like our going 
into her room. More than once, I caught her 
stealing and hiding food. The talk around the 
neighborhood was that Muraña’s death, or dis- 
appearance, had affected her mind. I remember 
her always in black. She had also fallen into the 
habit of talking to herself.
Our house belonged to a certain Mr. Luchessi, 
the owner of a barbershop on the Southside, in 
Barracas. My mother, who did piecework at 
home as a seamstress, was in financial straits. 
Without being able to understand them, I heard 
whispered terms like “court order” and “eviction 
notice.” My mother was really at her wit’s end, 
and my aunt kept saying stubbornly that Juan 
was not going to stand by and let the gringo, 
that wop, throw us out. She recalled the incident 
—which all of us knew by heart—of a big- 
mouthed tough from the Southside who had 
dared doubt her husband’s courage. Muraña, 
the moment he found out, took all the trouble 
to go clear across the town, ferret the man out, 
put him straight with a blow of his knife, and 
dump his body into the Riachuelo. I don’t know 
if the story’s true; what matters is that it was 
told and that it became accepted.
I saw myself sleeping in empty lots on Serrano 
Street or begging handouts or going around 
with a basket of peaches. Selling on the streets
94
Juan Muraña

tempted me, because it would free me from 
school. I don’t know how long our troubles 
lasted. Your late father once told us that you 
can’t measure time by days, the way you mea- 
sure money by dollars and cents, because dollars 
are all the same while every day is different and 
maybe every hour as well. I didn’t quite under- 
stand what he meant, but the words stuck in my 
mind.
One night, I had a dream that ended in a 
nightmare. I dreamed of my Uncle Juan. I had 
never got to know him, but I thought of him as 
a burly man with a touch of the Indian about 
him, a sparse moustache and his hair long. He 
and I were heading south, cutting through huge 
stone quarries and scrub, but these quarries and 
thickets were also Thames Street. In the dream, 
the sun was high overhead. Uncle Juan was 
dressed in a black suit. He stopped beside a sort 
of scaffolding in a narrow mountain pass. He 
held his hand under his jacket, around the level 
of his heart—not like a person who’s about to 
pull a knife but as though he were keeping the 
hand hidden. In a very sad voice, he told me, 
“I’ve changed a lot.” He withdrew the hand, 
and what I saw was the claw of a vulture. I 
woke up screaming in the dark.
The next day, my mother made me go with 
her to Luchessi’s. I know she was going to ask
Juan Muraña
95

him for extra time; she probably took me along 
so that our landlord would see her helplessness. 
She didn’t mention a word of this to her sister, 
who would never have let her lower herself in 
such a way. I hadn’t ever set foot in Barracas 
before; it seemed to me there were a lot more 
people around than I imagined there’d be, and 
a lot more traffic and fewer vacant lots. From the 
comer, we saw several policemen and a flock of 
people in front of the house we were looking for. 
A neighbor went from group to group telling 
everyone that around three o’clock that morning 
he had been awakened by someone thumping 
on a door. He heard the door open and someone 
go in. Nobody shut the door, and as soon as it 
was light Luchessi was found lying there in the 
entranceway, half dressed. He’d been stabbed a 
number of times. The man lived alone; the au- 
thorities never caught up with the murderer. 
Nothing, it seems, had been stolen. At the time, 
somebody recalled that the deceased had almost 
lost his sight. In an important-sounding voice, 
someone else said, “His time had come.” This 
judgment and the tone made an impression on 
me; as the years passed I was to find out that 
any time a person dies there’s always somebody 
who makes this same discovery.
At the wake, we were offered coffee and I
Juan Muraña
96

had a cup. In the coffin there was a wax dummy 
in place of the dead man. I mentioned this to 
my mother; one of the undertaker’s men laughed 
and explained to me that the dummy dressed in 
black was Mr. Luchessi. I stood spellbound, 
staring at him. My mother had to yank me 
away.
For months afterward, nobody talked of any- 
thing else. Crimes were so few in those days; just 
remember all the fuss that was made over the 
case of Melena, Campana, and Silletero. The 
one person in all Buenos Aires who showed no 
interest whatever was Aunt Florentina. She kept 
on saying, with the persistence of old age, “I 
told you Juan would never let that gringo put 
us out in the street.”
One day, it rained buckets. As I could not go 
to school that morning, I began rummaging 
through the house. I climbed up to the attic. 
There was my aunt, sitting with her hands 
folded together; I could tell that she wasn’t 
even thinking. The room smelled damp. In one 
corner stood the iron bedstead, with her rosary 
beads attached to one of the bars, in another a 
wooden chest where she kept her clothes. A 
picture of the Virgin was pinned to one of the 
whitewashed walls. On the table by the bed was 
a candlestick. Without lifting her eyes, my aunt
97
 
Juan Muraña

said, “I know what brings you up here. Your 
mother sent you. She just doesn’t seem to un- 
derstand that it was Juan who saved us.”
“Juan?” I said, amazed. “Juan died over ten 
years ago.”
“Juan is here,” she told me. “Do you want to 
see him?” She opened the drawer of the night 
table and took out a dagger, then went on speak- 
ing in a soft, low voice. “Here he is. I knew he 
would never forsake me. In the whole world 
there hasn’t been another man like him. He 
didn’t let the gringo get out a word.”
It was only then that I understood. That poor 
raving woman had murdered Luchessi. Driven 
by hate, by madness, and maybe—who knows 
—by love, she had slipped out by the back door, 
had made her way block after block in the 
dead of night, had found the house she was 
after, and, with those big, bony hands, had sunk 
the dagger. The dagger was Muraña—it was the 
dead man she had gone on worshiping.
I never knew whether she told my mother the 
story or not. She died a short time before the 
eviction.
Here Trápani—whom I have never run across 
again—ended his account. Since then, I have 
often thought about this bereft woman and
98
Juan Muraña

about her man. Juan Muraña walked the fa- 
miliar streets of my boyhood; I may have seen 
him many times, unawares. He was a man who 
knew what all men come to know, a man who 
tasted death and was afterward a knife, and is 
now the memory of a knife, and will tomorrow 
be oblivion—the oblivion that awaits us all.
Juan Muraña
99


The Elder Lady


The Elder Lady
On the fourteenth of January, 1941, María 
Justina Rubio de Jáuregui was to be one hun- 
dred years old. She was the last surviving 
daughter of any of the soldiers who had fought 
in the South American War of Independence.
Colonel Mariano Rubio, her father, was what 
might, without irreverence, be called a minor 
immortal. Born in 1799 in the Buenos Aires 
parish of La Merced, the son of local land- 
owners, he was promoted to ensign in San 
Martín’s Army of the Andes, and he fought in 
the battle of Chacabuco, in the defeat of Cancha 
Rayada, at Maipú, and, two years after that, at 
Arequipa. It is told that on the eve of one of 
these battles, he and a fellow-officer, José de 
Olavarría, exchanged swords. At the beginning 
of April, 1823, there took place the famous en- 
gagement of Big Hill, which, having been 
fought in a valley between two summits, is often
103

also known as the battle of Red Hill. Always 
envious of our glories, the Venezuelans attribute 
this victory to General Simón Bolívar, but the 
impartial observer, the Argentine historian, is 
not easily taken in and knows only too well 
that the laurels rightfully belong to Colonel 
Mariano Rubio. The Colonel, at the head of a 
regiment of Colombian hussars, turned the tide 
in this battle, waged entirely with sabers and 
lances, which paved the way for the no less 
famous action at Ayacucho, in which he also 
took part, receiving a wound. In 1827, it was 
his fate to fight boldly at Ituzaingó, under the 
immediate command of Alvear. In spite of his 
blood tie with the dictator Rosas, in later years 
he Was one of Lavalle’s men, and once broke up 
a troop of gaucho militia in an action the Col- 
onel always referred to as a saberfest. With the 
defeat of the Unitarians, he emigrated to Uru- 
guay, where he married. In the eighteen-forties, 
in the course of that country’s long civil war, 
the Guerra Grande, he died in Montevideo dur- 
ing the siege of the city by Oribe’s Blancos. He 
was nearly forty-four, which at that time was 
almost old age. He had been a friend of the 
writer Florencio Varela. It is quite likely that 
professors at the Military Academy would have 
flunked him, since his only experience lay in 
fighting battles, not in taking examinations. He
104
The Elder Lady

left two daughters, of which the younger, María 
Justina, is the one who concerns us.
Toward the end of 1853, the Colonel’s widow 
and his daughters settled in Buenos Aires. They 
never got back their lands, which had been con- 
fiscated by the dictator during the Colonel’s 
long absence, but the memory of those miles 
and miles of lost acres on which they had never 
laid eyes survived in the family for many years. 
At the age of seventeen, María Justina married 
the physician Bernado Jáuregui, who, though a 
civilian, fought during the civil wars in the 
battles of Pavón and Cepeda, and later died 
practicing his profession during the yellow-fever 
epidemic of the eighteen-seventies. He left a 
son and two daughters. Mariano, the firstborn, 
was a customs inspector, and he used to fre- 
quent the National Library and National Ar- 
chives, with the intention of compiling an 
exhaustive life of the hero, his grandfather, 
which he never finished and perhaps never be- 
gan. The older daughter, María Elvira, married 
a cousin, a Saavedra, who was employed in the 
Ministry of Finance. Julia, the second daughter, 
had married a Mr. Molinari, who, despite his 
Italian name, was a professor of Latin and a 
person of the highest accomplishments. I pass 
over grandchildren and great-grandchildren; it 
is enough that my reader picture a family that
The Elder Lady
105

is honorable, that has come down in life, and 
that is presided over by a heroic shade and by a 
daughter born in exile.
The family lived modestly in Palermo, in what 
at the time was the outskirts of Buenos Aires, 
not far from the church of Guadalupe. Mariano 
still remembered having seen there, from a tram- 
car of the Grand National Lines, the big pond 
on whose shores were scattered a series of hovels, 
not of galvanized-iron sheets but of unplastered 
brick. Yesterday’s poverty was less poor than the 
poverty handed down to us today by industrial- 
ism. Fortunes were also much smaller then.
The Rubios lived above a local dry-goods 
store. The stairway was narrow; the bannister, 
which ran up the right-hand side, led to a longish 
corridor, at the end of which was a dark vesti- 
bule, where there were a coatrack and a few 
chairs. The vestibule opened into the small 
drawing room, with its upholstered furniture, 
and the drawing room into the dining room, 
with its mahogany furniture and glass-fronted 
china closet. The metal shutters, always kept 
drawn in fear of the sunlight, let a little dim 
twilight filter through. I recall an odor of stored- 
away things. At the back of the house were the 
bedrooms, the bathroom, a small gallery with a 
laundry tub, and the servant’s room. In the 
whole house there were no books other than a
106
The Elder Lady

volume of the poet Andrade; a short biography 
of the hero, with handwritten additions scrib- 
bled into the margins; and Montaner y Simón’s 
Hispano-American Encyclopedia, acquired on 
installments, together with the small set of 
shelves that came with it. They lived on a pen- 
sion, which was never paid them punctually, 
and on the income from a rented property—the 
single remains of the once vast acreage—in 
Lomas de Zamora.
At the time of my story, the elder lady lived 
with Julia, who was widowed, and with Julia’s 
son. Mrs. Jáuregui went on hating bygone ty- 
rants—Artigas, Rosas, and Urquiza. The First 
World War, which made her loathe the Ger- 
mans, about whom she knew very little, was 
less real to her than the revolution of 1890 and, 
needless to say, the cavalry charge at Big Hill. 
Since 1932, she had been growing dimmer and 
dimmer; common metaphors are the best be- 
cause they are the only true ones. She was, of 
course, a Catholic, which does not necessarily 
mean that she believed in a God that is One 
and is Three, or even in an afterlife. While her 
hands moved over her rosary, she muttered 
prayers that she had never understood. In place 
of Easter and of Twelfth Night she had ac- 
cepted Christmas, just as she had grown to ac- 
cept tea instead of maté. To her, the words
107
The Elder Lady

“Protestant,” “Jew,” “Freemason,” “heretic,” and 
“atheist” were synonyms and empty of meaning. 
While she could still talk, she spoke not of 
Spaniards but of godos, or Goths, just as her 
ancestors had done. During the Centennial, in 
1910, she could hardly believe that the Spanish 
Infanta—who, after all, was a princess—spoke, 
against all expectation, like a common Spaniard 
and not like an Argentine lady; it was at her 
son-in-law’s wake that a rich relative, who had 
never set foot in the Jáuregui house but whose 
name they avidly sought in the society pages of 
the newspapers, gave her the disquieting news. 
Many of the place names that Mrs. Jáuregui 
used had long since been altered; she still spoke 
of such streets as Las Artes, Temple, Buen 
Orden, La Piedad, the two Calles Largas, and of 
the Plaza del Parque and the Portones. The 
family affected these archaisms, which in her 
were spontaneous. They spoke of “Orientales” 
instead of “Uruguayans.”
Mrs. Jáuregui never went out of the house 
after 1921; perhaps she never suspected that 
Buenos Aires had been changing and growing. 
First memories are the most vivid. The city that 
she pictured beyond her front door may well 
have been a much earlier one than that of the 
time they were forced to move from the center 
of town out to Palermo. If so, to her the oxen
The Elder Lady
108

that hauled wagons still rested in the square of 
the Once, and dead violets still spread their fra- 
grance among the gardens of Barraeas. “Now 
all my dreams are of dead people” was one of 
the last things she was heard to say. No one had 
ever thought of her as a fool, but as far as I 
know she had never enjoyed the pleasures of 
the mind; the last pleasures left her would be 
those of memory and, later on, of forgetfulness. 
She had always been generous. I recall her 
bright, quiet eyes and her smile. Who knows 
what tumult of passions—now lost but which 
once burned—there had been in that old 
woman; in her day, she had been quite pleasant- 
looking. Sensitive to plants, whose modest and 
silent life was so akin to her own, she looked 
after some begonias in her room and touched 
their leaves, which she could no longer see. Up 
until 1929, the year in which she sank into a kind 
of half sleep, she recounted historical happen- 
ings, but always using the same words in the 
same order, as if they were the Lord’s Prayer, 
so that I grew to suspect there were no longer 
any real images behind them. Even eating one 
thing or another was all the same to her. She 
was, in short, happy.
Sleeping, as we all know, is the most secret 
of our acts. We devote a third of our lives to it, 
and yet do not understand it. For some, it is no
109
The Elder Lady

more than an eclipse of wakefulness; for others, 
a more complex state spanning at one and the 
same time past, present, and future; for still 
others, an uninterrupted series of dreams. To 
say that Mrs. Jáuregui spent ten years in a quiet 
chaos is perhaps mistaken; each moment of 
those ten years may well have been a pure 
present, without a before or after. There is no 
reason to marvel at such a present, which we 
count by days and nights and by the hundreds 
of leaves of many calendars and by anxieties 
and events; it is what we go through every 
morning before waking up and every night be- 
fore falling asleep. Twice each day, we are all 
the elder lady.
The Jáuregui family lived, as we have already 
seen, in a somewhat false situation. They felt 
they belonged to the aristocracy, but the people 
spoken of in the society column knew nothing 
whatever about them; they were descendants 
of a founding father, but more often than not the 
schoolbooks overlooked him. While it is un- 
deniable that a street bore his name, that street, 
known to very few people, was lost somewhere 
out behind the sprawling Westside cemetery.
The fourteenth of January was drawing near. 
On the tenth, an officer in full-dress uniform de- 
livered to the family a letter signed by the 
Minister of War himself, announcing his visit
The Elder Lady
110

on the fourteenth. The Jáureguis showed the 
letter to the whole neighborhood and made a 
great deal of the engraved stationery and the 
signature. Then the newspapermen came. The 
family helped them with all available informa- 
tion; it was obvious that they had never heard of 
Colonel Rubio. People whom the family scarcely 
knew called by telephone so as to be invited.
They all worked very hard for the great day. 
They waxed the floors, they washed the win- 
dows, they undraped the chandeliers, they 
polished the mahogany, they shined all the 
silver in the china closet, they moved the furni- 
ture around, and they opened the lid of the 
drawing-room piano to show off the velvet cloth 
that covered the keys. People came and went. A 
neighbor lady very kindly lent a pot of gerani- 
ums. The only person unaware of all the fuss 
was Mrs. Jáuregui, who, wearing a fixed smile, 
seemed not to understand a thing. Helped by 
the servant girl, Julia got her mother primped 
up as though she were already dead. The first 
things visitors would see on entering would be 
the oil portrait of the hero and, a little below it 
and to the right, the sword of his many battles. 
Even in hard times, the Jaureguis had always 
refused to sell the sword, thinking they would 
one day donate it to the Historical Museum.
The party would begin at seven. They had
The Elder Lady
111

set the hour for six-thirty, knowing all along that 
nobody likes to be the first to arrive. By ten 
minutes past seven, not a soul had yet appeared; 
the family argued somewhat nervously the ad- 
vantages and disadvantages of not being punc- 
tual. Elvira, who took pride in arriving on the 
dot, flatly stated that it was an unpardonable 
discourtesy to keep others waiting. Julia, repeat- 
ing what her husband had always said, was of 
the opinion that arriving late was a courtesy, 
because if everyone did so it would make things 
easier and that way no one would be hurrying 
anyone else. At seven-fifteen, the house was 
packed. The whole neighborhood could see and 
envy the automobile and chauffeur of Mrs. 
Figueroa, who almost never invited the Jáu- 
reguis to her house but whom they received 
effusively, so that nobody would guess they 
only saw each other once in a blue moon. The 
President sent his aide, an extremely polite 
gentleman, who said that it was a great honor 
for him to shake the hand of the daughter of 
the hero of Big Hill. The Minister, who had to 
leave early, read a very fine speech, in which 
more was said about General San Martín, how- 
ever, than about Colonel Rubio. The elderly 
lady sat in her armchair, propped up with pil- 
lows, and from time to time nodded her head 
approvingly or dropped her fan. A group of dis­
The Elder Lady
112

tinguished ladies, the Daughters of the Re- 
public, sang her the National Anthem, which she 
seemed not to hear. The photographers herded 
the gathering into artistic groupings and were 
lavish with their flashbulbs. The small glasses of 
sherry and port were not enough to go around. 
Someone uncorked a number of bottles of cham- 
pagne. Mrs. Jáuregui did not utter a single 
word; perhaps she no longer knew who she was. 
From that night on, she never left her bed.
When all the strangers had gone, the family 
improvised a small cold supper. The delicate 
perfume of incense had long since been dis- 
pelled by the odor of tobacco smoke and coffee.
The morning and afternoon papers loyally 
lied, dwelling on the almost miraculous memory 
of the hero’s daughter, who “is an eloquent 
storehouse of a century of Argentine history.” 
Julia wanted to show her mother the clippings. 
In her twilit room, the elder lady lay motionless, 
her eyes closed. She had no fever; the doctor 
examined her and said that everything was 
as it should be. A few days later, she died. The 
press of so many people, the unusual clamor, 
the flashbulbs, the speech, the uniforms, and 
the repeated handshaking had hastened her end. 
Perhaps she believed that they were Rosas’ 
henchmen, who had broken into the house.
I think back on the dead soldiers of Big Hill;
The Elder Lady
113

I think of the nameless men of America and of 
Spain who met their deaths under the hooves 
of the horses; I think that the last victim of 
that throng of lances high on a Peruvian table- 
land was, more than a century later, a very old 
lady.
The Elder Lady
114

Guayaquil


Guayaquil
Now I shall not journey to the Estado Oc- 
cidental; now I shall not set eyes on snow- 
capped Higuerota mirrored in the waters of 
the Golfo Plácido; now I shall not decipher 
Bolívar’s manuscripts in that library, which 
doubtless has its own shape and its own length- 
ening shadows but which from here in Buenos 
Aires I picture in so many different ways.
Rereading the above paragraph preparatory 
to writing the next, its at once melancholy and 
pompous tone troubles me. Perhaps one cannot 
speak of that Caribbean republic without, even 
from afar, echoing the monumental style of its 
most famous historian, Captain Joseph Kor- 
zeniowski—but in my case there is another 
reason. My opening paragraph, I suspect, was 
prompted by the unconscious need to infuse a 
note of pathos into a slightly painful and rather 
trivial episode. I shall with all probity recount
117

what happened, and this may enable me to un- 
derstand it. Furthermore, to confess to a thing 
is to leave off being an actor in it and to become 
an onlooker—to become somebody who has seen 
it and tells it and is no longer the doer.
The actual event took place last Friday, in 
this same room in which I am writing, at this 
same—though 
now 
slightly 
cooler—evening 
hour. Aware of our tendency to forget un- 
pleasant things, I want to set down a written 
record of my conversation with Dr. Edward 
Zimmerman, of the University of Cordoba, be- 
fore oblivion blurs the details. The memory I 
retain of that meeting is still quite vivid.
For the better understanding of my story, I 
shall have to set forth briefly the curious facts 
surrounding certain letters of General Bolívar’s 
found among the papers of Dr. José Avellanos, 
whose History of Fifty Years of Misrule— 
thought to be lost under circumstances that are 
only too well known—was ultimately unearthed 
and published by his grandson, Dr. Ricardo 
Avellanos. To judge from references I have col- 
lected from various sources, these letters are of 
no particular interest, except for one dated from 
Cartagena on August 13, 1822, in which the 
Liberator places upon record details of his 
celebrated meeting with the Argentine national 
hero General San Martín. It is needless to un-
Guayaquil
118

derscore the value of this document; in it, 
Bolívar reveals—if only in part—exactly what 
had taken place during the two generals’ inter- 
view the month before at Guayaquil. Dr. Ricar- 
do Avellanos, embattled opponent of the gov- 
ernment, refused to turn the correspondence 
over to his own country’s Academy of History, 
and, instead, offered it for initial publication 
to a number of Latin American republics. 
Thanks to the praiseworthy zeal of our ambas- 
sador, Dr. Melaza-Mouton, the Argentine gov- 
ernment was the first to accept Dr. Avellanos’ 
disinterested offer. It was agreed that a delegate 
should be sent to Sulaco, the capital of the 
Estado Occidental, to transcribe the letters so 
as to see them into print upon return here. The 
rector of our university, in which I hold the 
chair of Latin American History, most generous- 
ly recommended to the Minister of Education 
that I be appointed to carry out this mission. I 
also obtained the more or less unanimous vote 
of the National Academy of History, of which 
I am a member. The date of my audience with 
the Minister had already been fixed when it was 
learned that the University of Córdoba—which, 
I would rather suppose, knew nothing about 
these decisions—had proposed the name of Dr. 
Zimmerman.
Reference here, as the reader may be well
Guayaquil
119

aware, is to a foreign-born historian expelled 
from his country by the Third Reich and now 
an Argentine citizen. Of the doubtless note- 
worthy body of his work, I have glanced only 
at a vindication of the Semitic republic of 
Carthage—which posterity judges through the 
eyes of Roman historians, its enemies—and a 
sort of polemical essay which holds that govern- 
ment should be neither visible nor emotional. 
This proposal drew the unanswerable refutation 
of Martin Heidegger, who, using newspaper 
headlines, proved that the modern chief of 
state, far from being anonymous, is rather the 
protagonist, the choragus, the dancing David, 
who acts out the drama of his people with all 
the pomp of stagecraft, and resorts unhesitating- 
ly to the overstatement inherent in the art of 
oration. He also proved that Zimmerman came 
of Hebrew, not to say Jewish, stock. Publication 
of this essay by the venerated existentialist was 
the immediate cause of the banishment and no- 
madic activities of our guest.
Needless to say, Zimmerman had come to 
Buenos Aires to speak to the Minister, who per- 
sonally suggested to me, through one of his 
secretaries, that I see Zimmerman and, so as to 
avoid the unpleasant spectacle of two uni- 
versities in disagreement, inform him of exactly 
how things stood. I of course agreed. Upon re- 
130
Guayaquil

turn home, I was told that Dr. Zimmerman had 
telephoned to announce his visit for six o’clock 
that same afternoon. I live, as everyone knows, 
on Chile Street. It was the dot of six when the 
bell rang.
With republican simplicity, I myself opened 
the door and led him to my private study. He 
paused along the way to look at the patio; the 
black and white tiles, the two magnolias, and 
the wellhead stirred him to eloquence. He was, 
I believe, somewhat ill at ease. There was noth- 
ing out of the ordinary about him. He must have 
been forty or so, and seemed to have a biggish 
head. His eyes were hidden by dark glasses, 
which he once or twice left on the table, then 
snatched up again. When we first shook hands, 
I remarked to myself with a certain satisfaction 
that I was the taller, and at once I was ashamed 
of myself, for this was not a matter of a physical 
or even a moral duel but was simply to be an 
explanation of where things stood. I am not 
very observant—if I am observant at all—but he 
brought to mind what a certain poet has called, 
with an ugliness that matches what it defines, 
an “immoderate sartorial inelegance.” I can still 
see garments of electric blue, with too many 
buttons and pockets. Zimmerman’s tie, I noticed, 
was one of those conjuror’s knots held in place 
by two plastic clips. He carried a leather port-
Guayaquil
121

folio, which I presumed was full of documents. 
He wore a short military moustache, and when 
in the course of our talk he lit a cigar I felt that 
there were too many things on that face. Trop 
meublé, I said to myself.
The successiveness of language—since every 
word occupies a place on the page and a mo- 
ment in the reader’s mind—tends to exaggerate 
what we are saying; beyond the visual trivia 
that I have listed, the man gave the impression 
of having experienced an arduous life.
On display in my study are an oval portrait 
of my great-grandfather, who fought in the wars 
of Independence, and some cabinets containing 
swords, medals, and flags. I showed Zimmerman 
those old glorious things, explaining as I went 
along; his eyes passed over them quickly, like 
one who is carrying out a duty, and, not with- 
out a hint of impoliteness that I believe was 
involuntary and mechanical, he interrupted and 
finished my sentences for me. He said, for ex- 
ample:
“Correct. Battle of Junín. August 6, 1824 
Cavalry charge under Juárez.”
“Under Suárez,” I corrected.
I suspect his error was deliberate. He spread 
his arms in an Oriental gesture and exclaimed, 
“My first mistake, and certainly not my last! I 
feed on texts and slip up on facts—in you the
122
Guayaquil

interesting past lives.” He pronounced his v’s 
like f’s.
Such flatteries displeased me. He was far 
more interested in my books, and let his eyes 
wander almost lovingly over the titles. I recall 
his saying, “Ah, Schopenhauer, who always dis- 
believed in history. This same set, edited by 
Grisebach, was the one I had in Prague. I 
thought I’d grow old in the friendship of those 
portable volumes, but it was history itself, in 
the flesh of a madman, that evicted me from 
that house and that city. Now here I am, with 
you, in South America, in this hospitable house 
of yours.”
He spoke inelegantly but fluently, his notice- 
able German accent going hand in hand with a 
Spanish lisp. By then we were seated, and I 
seized upon what he had said in order to take 
up our subject. “History here in the Argentine 
is more merciful,” I said. “I was born in this 
house and I expect to die here. Here my great- 
grandfather lay down his sword, which saw ac- 
tion throughout the continent. Here I have 
pondered the past and have compiled my books. 
I can almost say I’ve never been outside this 
library, but now I shall go abroad at last and 
travel to lands I have only traveled in maps.” I 
cut short with a smile my possible rhetorical 
excess.
Guayaquil
123

“Are you referring to a certain Caribbean re- 
public?” said Zimmerman.
“So I am,” I answered. “And it’s to this im- 
minent trip that I owe the honor to your visit.” 
Trinidad served us coffee. I went on slowly 
and confidently. “You probably know by now 
that the Minister has entrusted me with the mis- 
sion of transcribing and writing an introduction 
to the new Bolívar letters, which have acciden- 
tally turned up in Dr. Avellanos’ files. This mis- 
sion, by a happy stroke, crowns my lifework 
—the work that somehow runs in my blood.”
It was a relief having said what I had to say. 
Zimmerman appeared not to have heard me; his 
averted eyes were fixed not on my face but on 
the books at my back. He vaguely assented, and 
then spoke out, saying, “In your blood. You are 
the true historian. Your people roamed the 
length and breadth of this continent and fought 
in the great battles, while in obscurity mine 
were barely emerging from the ghetto. You, 
according to your own eloquent words, carry 
history in your blood; you have only to listen 
closely to an inner voice. I, on the other hand, 
must go all the way to Sulaco and struggle 
through stacks of perhaps apocryphal papers. 
Believe me, sir, I envy you.”
His tone was neither challenging nor mock- 
224
Guayaquil

ing; his words were the expression of a will that 
made of the future something as irrevocable as 
the past. His arguments hardly mattered. The 
strength lay in the man himself, not in them. 
Zimmerman continued, with a schoolteachers 
deliberation: “In this matter of Bolívar—I beg 
your pardon, San Martín—your stand, cher 
maître, is known to all scholars. Votre siège est 
fait. As yet, I have not examined Bolívar’s 
pertinent letter, but it is obvious, or reasonable 
to guess, that it was written as a piece of self- 
justification. In any case, this much-touted let- 
ter will show us only Bolívar’s side of the 
question, not San Martín’s. Once made public, it 
should be weighed in the balance, studied, 
passed through the sieve of criticism, and, if 
need be, refuted. No one is better qualified for 
that final judgment than you, with your mag- 
nifying glass. The scalpel, the lancet—scientific 
rigor itself demands them! Allow me at the same 
time to point out that the name of the editor of 
the letter will remain linked to the letter. Such 
a link is hardly going to stand you in good 
stead. The public at large will never bother to 
look into these subtleties.”
I realize now that what we argued after that, 
in the main, was useless. Maybe I felt it at the 
time. In order to avoid an outright confrontation
Guayaquil
125

I grasped at a detail, and I asked him whether 
he really thought the letters were fakes.
“That they are in Bolívar’s own hand,” he 
said, “does not necessarily mean that the whole 
truth is to be found in them. For all we know, 
Bolívar may have tried to deceive the recipient 
of the letter or, simply, may have deceived him- 
self. You, a historian, a thinker, know far better 
than I that the mystery lies in ourselves, not 
in our words.”
These pompous generalities irritated me, and 
I dryly remarked that within the riddle that 
surrounded us, the meeting at Guayaquil—in 
which General San Martín renounced mere 
ambition and left the destiny of South America 
in the hands of Bolívar—was also a riddle pos- 
sibly not unworthy of our attention.
“The interpretations are so many,” Zimmer- 
man said. “Some historians believe San Martín 
fell into a trap; others, like Sarmiento, have it 
that he was a European soldier at loose ends on 
a continent he never understood; others again— 
for the most part Argentines—ascribe to him an 
act of self-denial; still others, weariness. We also 
hear of the secret order of who knows what 
Masonic lodge.”
I said that, at any rate, it would be interesting 
to have the exact words spoken between San
Guayaquil
126

Martín, the Protector of Peru, and Bolívar, the 
Liberator. Zimmerman delivered his judgment.
“Perhaps the words they exchanged were ir- 
relevant,” he said. “Two men met face to face 
at Guayaquil; if one of them was master, it was 
because of his stronger will, not because of 
the weight of arguments. As you see, I have not 
forgotten my Schopenhauer.” He added, with a 
smile, “Words, words, words. Shakespeare, in- 
superable master of words, held them in scorn. 
In Guayaquil or in Buenos Aires—in Prague, for 
that matter—words always count less than per- 
sons.”
At that moment I felt that something was 
happening between us, or, rather, that some- 
thing had already happened. In some uncanny 
way we were already two other people. The 
dusk entered into the room, and I had not lit 
the lamps. By chance, I asked, “You are from 
Prague, Doctor?”
“I was from Prague,” he answered.
To skirt the real subject, I said, “It must be 
an unusual city. I’ve never been there, but the 
first book I ever read in German was Meyrink’s 
novel Der Golem.”
“It’s the only book by Gustav Meyrink worth 
remembering,” Zimmerman said. “It’s wiser not 
to attempt the others, compounded as they are
127
Guayaquil

of bad writing and worse theosophy. All in all, 
something of the strangeness of Prague stalks 
the pages of that book of dreams within dreams. 
Everything is strange in Prague, or, if you pre- 
fer, nothing is strange. Anything may happen 
there. In London, on certain evenings, I have 
had the same feeling.”
“You have spoken of the will,” I said. “In the 
tales of the Mabinogion, two kings play chess 
on the summit of a hill, while below them their 
warriors fight. One of the kings wins the game; 
a rider comes to him with the news that the 
army of the other side has been beaten. The 
battle of the men was a mirror of the battle of 
the chessboard.”
“Ah, a feat of magic,” said Zimmerman.
“Or the display of a will in two different 
fields,” I said. “Another Celtic legend tells of 
the duel between two famous bards. One, ac- 
companying himself on the harp, sings from the 
twilight of morning to the twilight of evening. 
Then, under the stars or moon, he hands his 
harp over to his rival. The second bard lays the 
instrument aside and gets to his feet. The first 
bard acknowledges defeat.”
“What erudition, what power of synthesis!” 
exclaimed Zimmerman. Then he added, more 
calmly, “I must confess my ignorance, my la­
Guayaquil
128

mentable ignorance, of Celtic lore. You, like the 
day, span East and West, while I am held to my 
little Carthaginian comer, complemented now 
with a smattering of Latin American history. I 
am a mere plodder.”
In his voice were both Jewish and German 
servility, but I felt, insofar as victory was al- 
ready his, that it cost him very little to flatter 
me or to admit I was right. He begged me not 
to trouble myself over the arrangements for his 
trip. (“Provisions” was the actual word he 
used.) On the spot, he drew out of his portfolio 
a letter addressed to the Minister. In it, I ex- 
pounded the motives behind my resignation, 
and I acknowledged Dr. Zimmerman’s indis- 
putable merits. Zimmerman put his own foun- 
tain pen in my hand for my signature. When 
he put the letter away, I could not help catch- 
ing a glimpse of his passage aboard the next 
day’s Buenos Aires-Sulaco flight.
On his way out he paused again before the 
volumes of Schopenhauer, saying, “Our master, 
our common master, denied the existence of 
involuntary acts. If you stay behind in this 
house—in this spacious, patrician home—it is 
because down deep inside you want to remain 
here. I obey, and I thank you for your will.” 
Taking this last pittance without a word, I
Guayaquil
129

accompanied him to the front door. There, as 
we said goodbye, he remarked, “The coffee was 
excellent.”
I go over these hasty jottings, which will soon 
be consigned to the flames. Our meeting had 
been short. I have the feeling that I shall give 
up any future writing. Mon siège est fait.
Guayaquil
130

Doctor Brodie’s Report


Doctor Brodie’s Report
Among the pages of one of the volumes of 
Lane’s Arabian Nights’ Entertainments (Lon- 
don, 1839), a set of which my dear friend Paul 
Keins turned up for me, we made the discovery 
of the manuscript I am about to transcribe be- 
low. The neat handwriting—an art which type- 
writers are now helping us to forget—suggests 
that it was composed some time around that 
same date. Lane’s work, as is well known, is 
lavish with extensive explanatory notes; in the 
margins of my copy there are a number of an- 
notations, interrogation marks, and now and 
then emendations written in the same hand as 
the manuscript. We may surmise that the won- 
drous tales of Shahrazad interested the annota- 
tor less than the customs of the Mohammedans. 
Of David Brodie, D.D., whose signature adorns 
the bottom of the last page with a fine flourish, 
I have been unable to uncover any information
133

except that he was a Scottish missionary, born 
in Aberdeen, who preached the Christian faith 
first in the heart of Africa and later on in certain 
backlying regions of Brazil, a land he was prob- 
ably led to by his knowledge of Portuguese. I 
am unaware of the place and date of his death. 
The manuscript, as far as I know, was never 
given to the press.
What follows is a faithful transcription of his 
report, composed in a rather colorless English, 
with no other omissions than two or three Bible 
verses jotted in the margins and a curious pas- 
sage concerning the sexual practices of the 
Yahoos, which our good Presbyterian discreetly 
committed to Latin. The first page is missing.
Doctor Brodie’s Report
. . . of the region infested by Ape-men dwell 
the “Mlch,”* whom I shall call Yahoos so that 
my readers will be reminded of their bestial 
nature and also because, given the total absence 
of vowels in their harsh language, an exact 
transliteration is virtually impossible. Includ- 
ing the “Nr,” who dwell farther to the south in 
the thorn-bush, the numbers of the tribe do not, 
I believe, exceed seven hundred. The cipher 
which I propose is a mere conjecture, since,
*I give the “ch” the value it has in the word “loch.” 
[Author’s note.]
134

save for the king and queen and the witch doc- 
tors, the Yahoos sleep in no fixed abode but 
wherever night overtakes them. Swamp fever 
and the continual incursions of the Ape-men 
diminish their number. Only a very few indi- 
viduals have names. In order to address one 
another, it is their custom to fling a small hand- 
ful of mud. I have also noticed Yahoos who, 
to attract a friend’s attention, throw themselves 
on the ground and wallow in the dust. Save for 
their lower foreheads and for having a peculiar 
copperish hue that reduces their blackness, in 
other physical respects they do not noticeably 
differ from the “Kroo.” They take their nourish- 
ment from fruits, root-stalks, and the smaller 
reptiles; they imbibe the milk of cats and of 
chiropterans; and they fish with their hands. 
While eating, they normally conceal themselves 
or else close their eyes. All other physical habits 
they perform in open view, much the same as 
the Cynics of old. . . . So as to partake of their 
wisdom, they devour the raw corpses of their 
witch doctors and of the royal family. When 
I admonished them for this evil custom they 
touched their lips and their bellies, perhaps to 
indicate that the dead are also edible, or—but 
this explanation may be farfetched—in order 
that I might come to understand that every- 
thing we eat becomes, in the long run, human
Doctor Brodie’s Report
135

flesh. In their warfare they employ stones, 
which they gather for that purpose, and magical 
spells and incantations. They go about quite 
naked, the arts of clothing and tattooing being 
altogether unknown to them.
It is worthy of note that, though they have at 
hand a wide, grassy plateau on which there are 
springs of clear water and shade-dispensing 
trees, they prefer to swarm in the marshlands 
which surround this eminence, as if delighting 
in the rigors of the hot climate and the general 
unwholesomeness. The slopes of the plateau 
are steep and could easily be utilized as a 
natural bulwark against the onslaughts of the 
Ape-men. The clans of Scotland, in similar 
circumstances, erected their castles on the sum- 
mits of hills; I advised the witch doctors to 
adopt this simple defensive measure, but my 
words were of no avail. They allowed me, how- 
ever, to build a hut for myself on higher ground, 
where the night air is cooler.
The tribe is ruled over by a king, whose 
power is absolute, but it is my suspicion that 
the true rulers are the witch doctors, who 
administer to him and who have chosen him. 
Every male born into the tribe is subjected to 
a painstaking examination; if he exhibits certain 
stigmata, the nature of which were not revealed 
to me, he is elevated to the rank of king of the
Doctor Brodie’s Report
136

Yahoos. So that the physical world may not lead 
him from the paths of wisdom, he is gelded on 
the spot, his eyes are burned, and his hands 
and feet are amputated. Thereafter, he lives 
confined in a cavern called the Castle (“Qzr”), 
into which only the four witch doctors and the 
two slave women who attend him and anoint 
him with dung are permitted entrance. Should 
war arise, the witch doctors remove him from 
his cavern, display him to the tribe to excite 
their courage, and bear him, lifted onto their 
shoulders after the manner of a flag or a talis- 
man, to the thick of the fight. In such cases, he 
dies almost immediately under the hail of stones 
flung at him by the Ape-men.
In another Castle lives the queen, who is not 
permitted to see her king. During my sojourn, 
this lady was kind enough to receive me; she 
was smiling, young, and insofar as her race 
allowed, graceful. Bracelets of metalwork and 
of ivory and necklaces of teeth adorned her 
nakedness. She inspected me, sniffed me, and, 
after touching me with a finger, ended by 
offering herself to me in the presence of all her 
retinue. My cloth and my ethics, however, for- 
bade me that honor, which commonly she 
grants only to the witch doctors and to the 
slave hunters, for the most part Muslims, whose 
caravans journey across the kingdom. Twice or
Doctor Brodie’s Report
137

thrice she sank a gold pin into my flesh; such 
prickings being tokens of royal favor, the num- 
ber of Yahoos are more than a few who stick 
themselves with pins to encourage the belief 
that the queen herself pricked them. The orna- 
ments she wore, and which I have described, 
come from other regions. Since they lack the 
capacity to fashion the simplest object, the 
Yahoos regard such ornaments as natural. To 
the tribe my hut was a tree, despite the fact 
that many of them saw me construct it and 
even lent me their aid. Amongst a number of 
other items, I had in my possession a watch, a 
cork helmet, a mariner’s compass, and a Bible. 
The Yahoos stared at them, weighed them in 
their hands, and wanted to know where I had 
found them. They customarily reached for my 
cutlass not by the hilt but by the blade, seeing 
it, undoubtedly, in their own way, which causes 
me to wonder to what degree they would be 
able to perceive a chair. A house of several 
rooms would strike them as a maze, though 
perhaps they might find their way inside it in 
the manner of the cat, though the cat does 
not imagine the house. My beard, which then 
was red, was a source of wonderment to them 
all, and it was with obvious fondness that they 
stroked it.
The Yahoos are insensitive to pain and plea- 
138
Doctor Brodie’s Report

sure, save for the relishment they get from 
raw and rancid meat and evil-smelling things. 
An utter lack of imagination moves them to 
cruelty.
I have spoken of the queen and the king; I 
shall speak now of the witch doctors. I have 
already recorded that they are four, this number 
being the largest that their arithmetic spans. 
On their fingers they count thus: one, two, 
three, four, many. Infinity begins at the thumb. 
The same, I am informed, occurs among the 
Indian tribes who roam in the vicinity of Bue- 
nos-Ayres on the South American continent. In 
spite of the fact that four is the highest number 
at their disposal, the Arabs who trade with 
them do not swindle them, because in the bar- 
tering everything is divided into lots—which 
each of the traders piles by his side—of one, 
two, three, and four. Such transations are 
cumbersome, but they do not admit of error or 
fraudulence. Of the entire nation of the Yahoos, 
the witch doctors are the only persons who have 
aroused my interest. The tribesmen attribute to 
them the power of transforming into ants or 
into turtles anyone who so desires; one individ- 
ual, who detected my disbelief, pointed out 
an ant-hill to me, as though that constituted a 
proof.
Memory is greatly defective among the Ya-
Doctor Brodie’s Report
139

hoos, or perhaps is altogether nonexistent. They 
speak of the havoc wrought by an invasion of 
leopards, but do not know who witnessed the 
event, they or their fathers, nor do they know 
whether they are recounting a dream. The witch 
doctors show some signs of memory, albeit to a 
reduced degree; they are able to recollect in the 
evening things which took place that morning or 
the preceding evening. They are also endowed 
with the faculty of foresight, and can state with 
quiet confidence what will happen ten or fifteen 
minutes hence. They convey, for example, that 
“A fly will graze the nape of my neck” or “In a 
moment we shall hear the song of a bird.” 
Hundreds of times I have borne witness to this 
curious gift, and I have also reflected upon it at 
length. Knowing that past, present, and future 
already exist, detail upon detail, in God’s pro- 
phetic memory, in His Eternity, what baffles 
me is that men, while they can look indefinitely 
backward, are not allowed to look one whit 
forward. If I am able to remember in all vivid- 
ness that towering four-master from Norway 
which I saw when I was scarcely four, why am 
I taken aback by the fact that man may be 
capable of foreseeing what is about to happen? 
To the philosophical mind, memory is as much 
a wonder as divination; tomorrow morning is 
closer to us than the crossing of the Red Sea
140
Doctor Brodie’s Report

by the Hebrews, which, nevertheless, we re- 
member.
The tribesmen are proscribed from lifting 
their gaze to the stars, a privilege accorded 
only to the witch doctors. Each witch doctor 
has a disciple, whom he instructs from child- 
hood in secret lore and who succeeds him upon 
his death. In this wise they are always four, a 
number of magical properties, since it is the 
highest to which the Yahoo mind attains. They 
profess, in their own fashion, the doctrines of 
heaven and hell. Both places are subterranean. 
Hell, which is dry and filled with light, har- 
bours the sick, the aged, the ill-treated, the 
Ape-men, the Arabs, and the leopards; heaven, 
which is depicted as marshy and beclouded, is 
the dwelling-place of the king and queen, the 
witch doctors, and those who have been happy, 
merciless, and blood-thirsty on earth. They 
worship as well a god whose name is “Dung,” 
and whom possibly they have conceived in the 
image and semblance of the king; he is a blind, 
mutilated, stunted being, and enjoys limitless 
powers. Dung is wont to take the form of an 
ant or a serpent.
After the foregoing remarks, it should cause 
no one to wonder that during my long stay 
among them I did not contrive to convert a 
single Yahoo. The words “Our father,” owing to
141
Doctor Brodie’s Report

the fact that they have no notion of fatherhood, 
left them puzzled. They cannot, it seems, accept 
a cause so remote and so unlikely, and are 
therefore uncomprehending that an act carried 
but several months before may bear relation to 
the birth of a child. Moreover, all the women 
engage in carnal commerce, and not all are 
mothers.
The Yahoo language is complex, having af- 
finities with no others of which I have any 
knowledge. We cannot speak even of parts of 
speech, for there are no parts. Each monosyl- 
labic word corresponds to a general idea whose 
specific meaning depends on the context or 
upon accompanying grimaces. The word “nrz,” 
for example, suggests dispersion or spots, and 
may stand for the starry sky, a leopard, a 
flock of birds, smallpox, something bespattered, 
the act of scattering, or the flight that follows 
defeat in warfare. “Hrl,” on the other hand, 
means something compact or dense. It may 
stand for the tribe, a tree trunk, a stone, a heap 
of stones, the act of heaping stones, the gather- 
ing of the four witch doctors, carnal conjunc- 
tion, or a forest. Pronounced in another manner 
or accompanied by other grimaces, each word 
may hold an opposite meaning. Let us not be 
unduly amazed; in our own tongue, the verb 
“to cleave” means both to divide asunder and
Doctor Brodie’s Report
142

to adhere. Of course, among the Yahoos, there 
are no sentences, nor even short phrases.
The intellectual power to draw abstractions 
which such a language assumes has led me to 
believe that the Yahoos, for all their backward- 
ness, are not a primitive but a degenerate nation. 
This conjecture is borne out by the inscriptions 
I discovered on the heights of the plateau and 
whose characters, which are not unlike the 
runes carved by our forefathers, are no longer 
within the tribe’s capacity to decipher. It is as 
though the tribe had forgotten written language 
and found itself reduced now only to the spoken 
word.
The diversions of these people are the fights 
which they stage between trained cats, and 
capital executions. Someone is accused of an 
attempt against the queen’s chastity, or of 
having eaten in the sight of another; without 
either the testimony of witnesses or a confession, 
the king finds a verdict of guilty. The con- 
demned man suffers tortures that I shall do 
my best to forget, and then is stoned to death. 
The queen is privileged to cast the first stone 
and, what is usually superfluous, the last. The 
throng applauds her skill and the beauty of her 
parts, and, all in a frenzy, acclaims her, pelting 
her with roses and fetid things. The queen, 
without uttering a sound, smiles.
Doctor Brodie’s Report
143

Another of the tribe’s customs is the discovery 
of poets. Six or seven words, generally enig- 
matic, may come to a man’s mind. He cannot 
contain himself and shouts them out, standing 
in the center of a circle formed by the witch 
doctors and the common people, who are 
stretched out on the ground. If the poem does 
not stir them, nothing comes to pass, but if the 
poet’s words strike them they all draw away 
from him, without a sound, under the command
of a holy dread. Feeling then that the spirit has 
touched him, nobody, not even his own mother, 
will either speak to him or cast a glance at him. 
Now he is a man no longer but a god, and any- 
one has license to kill him. The poet, if he has 
his wits about him, seeks refuge in the sand- 
dunes of the North.
I have already described how I came to the 
land of the Yahoos. It will be recalled that they 
encircled me, that I discharged my firearm into 
the air, and that they took the discharge for a 
kind of magical thunderclap. In order to foster 
that error, I strove thereafter to go about with- 
out my weapon. One spring morning, at the 
break of day, we were suddenly overrun by the 
Ape-men; I started down from the highlands, 
gun in hand, and killed two of these animals. 
The rest fled in amazement. Shot, it is known, 
is invisible. For the first time in my life I 
144
Doctor Brodie’s Report

heard myself cheered. It was then, I believe, 
that the queen received me. The memory of 
the Yahoos, as I have mentioned, being unde- 
pendable, that very afternoon I made good an 
escape. My subsequent adventures in the jungle 
are of little account. In due course, I came 
upon a village of black men who knew how to 
plough, to sow, and to pray, and with whom I 
made myself understood in Portuguese. A Rom- 
ish missionary, Father Fernandes, offered me 
the hospitality of his hut, and cared for me 
until I was able to continue on my hard journey. 
At first I found it revolting to see him open his 
mouth without the slightest dissimulation and 
put into it pieces of food. I still covered my 
mouth with my hand, or averted my eyes; a 
few days later, however, I had readjusted my- 
self. I recall with distinct pleasure our debates 
in topics theological, but I had no success in 
turning him to the true faith of Jesus.
I 
set down this account now in Glasgow. I 
have told of my visit among the Yahoos, but 
have not dwelt upon the essential horror of the 
experience, which never ceases entirely to be 
with me, and which visits me yet in dreams. In 
the street, upon occasion, I feel that they still 
surround me. Only too well do I know the Ya- 
hoos to be barbarous nation, perhaps the most 
barbarous to be found upon the face of the
Doctor Brodie’s Report
145

earth, but it would be unjust to overlook cer- 
tain traits which redeem them. They have in- 
stitutions of their own; they enjoy a king; they 
employ a language based upon abstract con- 
cepts; they believe, like the Hebrews and the 
Greeks, in the divine nature of poetry; and 
they surmise that the soul survives the death of 
the body. They also uphold the truth of punish- 
ments and rewards. After their fashion, they 
stand for civilization much as we ourselves do, 
in spite of our many transgressions. I do not 
repent having fought in their ranks against the 
Ape-men. Not only is it our duty to save their 
souls, but it is my fervent prayer that the 
Government of Her Majesty will not ignore 
what this report makes bold to suggest.
Doctor Brodie’s Report
146

Afterword


Afterword
It is a known fact that the word “invention” 
originally stood for “discovery,” and thus the 
Roman Church celebrates the Invention of the 
Cross, not its unearthing, or discovery. Behind 
this etymological shift we may, I think, glimpse 
the whole Platonic doctrine of archetypes—of 
all things being already there. William Morris 
thought that the essential stories of man’s im- 
agination had long since been told and that 
by now the storyteller’s craft lay in rethinking 
and retelling them. His Earthly Paradise is a 
token of the theory, though not, of course, a 
proof. I do not go as far as Morris went, but to 
me the writing of a story has more of discovery 
about it than of deliberate invention.
Walking down the street or along the gal- 
leries of the National Library, I feel that some- 
thing is about to take over in me. That some- 
thing may be a tale or a poem. I do not tamper
149

with it; I let it have its way. From afar, I 
sense it taking shape. I dimly see its end and 
beginning but not the dark gap in between. 
This middle, in my case, is given me gradually. 
If its discovery happens to be withheld by the 
gods, my conscious self has to intrude, and 
these unavoidable makeshifts are, I suspect, my 
weakest pages.
“The Intruder,” the first written of these new 
stories of mine, haunted me for some thirty 
years before I set it down. At first, all I had 
was the idea of two brothers and a woman, 
loved by them both, who in the end had to be 
sacrificed to their friendship. Initially, I wanted 
a California setting, but as I knew—and so 
would my readers—that my knowledge of 
California was merely bookish, the credibility 
of the tale would have been impaired. I finally 
kept to Buenos Aires.
In my Preface, I mention a hidden link 
between two of the stories. Now I can say 
openly that I meant “Juan Muraña” and “The 
Meeting.” Underlying both of them is the fancy 
that a weapon, in time, may have a secret life 
of its own. In “Juan Muraña,” we also get the 
idea of a man, after death, becoming a thing— 
of a knife fighter being his knife.
Three of the stories are taken from life. The 
elder lady who presides over one of these was— 
150
Afterword

may I confide this to the reader?—a great-aunt 
of mine. In another, a certain duel is still being 
fought with a fine grace by the two antagonists. 
The tale of the two gauchos whose throats were 
cut and who were then made to run a race 
actually took place a century ago in Uruguay.
“The Unworthy Friend” is really a confession. 
During my schooldays in Geneva, a companion 
whom I looked on as a hero offered me his 
friendship. I thrust it aside thinking his offer 
was a mistake, since I did not deserve it. Out 
of that personal experience came the tale of the 
Jewish boy in a Buenos Aires slum.
“Rosendo’s Tale” is, I think, a fair rendering 
of what actually happened, or might have hap- 
pened, in an early and all-too-famous extrava- 
ganza of mine called “Streetcorner Man.” In 
the new version I have done my best to hark 
back to sanity.
“Guayaquil” can be read in two different 
ways—as a symbol of the meeting of the famous 
generals, or, if the reader is in a magical mood, 
as the transformation of the two historians into 
the two dead generals.
In most cases, my stories are woven around a 
plot. In “The Elder Lady” and in “The Duel” I 
have attempted something else. I have tried, 
after the manner of Henry James, to build these 
tales around a situation or a character.
Afterword
151

Afterword
Since 1953, after a longish interval of com- 
posing only poems and short prose pieces, these 
are the first stories I have written.
J. L. B.
Buenos Aires, December 29, 1970
152

Bibliographical Note
The original titles and first magazine or newspaper ap- 
pearances of the stories in this volume are as follows 
(place of publication, throughout, in Buenos Aires): 
the 
meeting: “El encuentro,” La Prensa (October 
5, 1969).
rosendo’s 
tale: “Historia de Rosendo Juárez,” La 
Nación (November 9, 1969).
juan 
muraña: 
“Juan 
Muraña,” 
La 
Prensa 
(March 
29, 1970).
the end of the duel: “El otro duelo,” Los Libros 
(August 1970).
the 
gospel 
according 
to 
mark: 
“El 
evangelio 
según Marcos,” La Nación (August 2, 1970).
Guayaquil: 
“Guayaquil,” 
Periscopio 
(August 
4, 
1970).
“El indigno” (the 
unworthy 
friend), “La señora 
mayor” (the elder lady), and “El informe de Brodie” 
(doctor brodie’s report) did not appear anywhere be- 
fore their publication in book form. “La intrusa” (the 
intruder) was first published in an edition of fifty-two 
copies 
illustrated 
by 
Emilio 
Centurión 
and 
privately 
printed by the Buenos Aires bibliophile Gustavo Fillol 
Day in April 1966. It also appeared, the same month, 
in the sixth impression of the third edition of El Aleph
153

Bibliographical Note
(Emecé, 1966), where it continued to appear until the 
twelfth impression, issued November 1970; here it was 
removed from the text but is erroneously listed in the 
table of contents. “El duelo” (the duel) made its first 
appearance, with an illustration by Santiago Cogorno, in 
an edition of twenty-five copies; it was printed by Juan 
Osvaldo Viviano, another Buenos Aires bibliophile, in 
April 1970, for private distribution among his friends.
With the exception of “La intrusa,” these stories were 
collected for the first time in El informe de Brodie. “La 
intrusa” was slightly revised for its inclusion in the 
Brodie volume, as were certain other pieces in the 
book’s third and fourth printings.
El informe de Brodie was published by Emecé Ed- 
itores on August 7, 1970.
154

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Jorge Luis Borges was born on August 24, 1899, in 
Buenos Aires. In 1955, with the overthrow of Peron, he 
was named Director of the Argentine National Library, 
and in the same year became professor of English and 
American literatures at the University of Buenos Aires. In 
1961, he shared the International Publishers’ Prize with 
Samuel Beckett. He has made three trips to the United 
States—the latest, in 1969, to attend a conference devoted 
to his writings at the University of Oklahoma. In 1971, 
Mr. Borges received the Jerusalem Prize, honorary degrees 
from Columbia and Oxford universities, and was made an 
honorary member of the National Institute of Arts and 
Letters. Now over seventy, he has seen his audience grow 
from a small coterie in Buenos Aires, where he lives, to a 
readership that is worldwide.
ABOUT THE TRANSLATOR
Norman Thomas di Giovanni was born in Newton, Mas- 
sachusetts, in 1933, and was graduated from Antioch Col- 
lege in 1955. He met Borges in 1967 while the latter was 
at Harvard. In 1968, on Borges’ invitation, he went to live 
in Buenos Aires, where he works with the author in daily 
sessions. Together they are producing ten of Borges’ books 
in English versions. The first of these, The Book of Imagi- 
nary Beings, was published in 1969, and the second, The 
Aleph and Other Stories 1933-1969, in 1970. Di Giovanni 
has also edited Borges’ Selected Poems 1923-1967.


