
JORGE LUIS BORGES 
ADOLFO BIOY-CASARES
CHRONICLES OF 
BUSTOS DOMECQ
TRANSLATED BY NORMAN THOMAS Dl GIOVANNI
ALLEN LANE

ALLEN LANE 
Penguin Books Ltd 
536 King’s Road 
London SW10 0UH
First published as Crónicas de Bustos Domecq. Copyright © 1967 
by Editorial Losada, S.A., Buenos Aires 
Published in paperback in the U.S.A. by E. P. Dutton 1979 
Published by Allen Lane 1982
Copyright © Jorge Luis Borges, Adolfo Bioy-Casares,
and Norman Thomas di Giovanni, 1969, 1970, 1971, 1972, 1975, 1976
The acknowledgments opposite constitute an extension 
of the copyright information given here.
Assistance for the translation of this volume was given by the Ingram 
Merrill Foundation.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication
may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted
in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without
the prior permission of the copyright owner.
ISBN 0 7139 1109 3
Printed in Great Britain
by Billing & Sons Ltd, London & Worcester

Sundry of these chronicles were warmly received and perspicaciously 
singled out for publication by the editors of the following—we frankly 
admit—outstanding periodicals (parenthetically are the titles under 
which these papers first appeared):
Antaeus: “In Search of the Absolute”
The Antioch Review: Foreword by Gervasio Montenegro, “The 
Selective 
Eye,” 
“Naturalism 
Revived” 
(collected 
under 
the 
title 
“H. Bustos Domecq: Select Chronicles”)
Encounter: “On Universal Theater” (“H. Bustos Domecq on 
Universal Theatre”)
The New Yorker: “The Immortals,” “An Evening with Ramón 
Bonavena”
The New York Times Book Review: “The Idlers” (“H. Bustos Domecq 
on Automation”), “The Flowering of an Art” (“H. Bustos Domecq on 
the New Architecture”), “An Abstract Art” (“H. Bustos Domecq on 
Gastronomy”), “A Brand-New Approach” (“H. Bustos Domecq on 
Revisionism”)
The Scotsman: “Esse est Percipi”
Translation: “A List and Analysis of the Sundry Books of F. J. C. 
Loomis”
TriQuarterly: “Homage to César Paladión,” “The Sartorial Revolu- 
tion (1),” “The Sartorial Revolution (II)” (collected under the title 
“Three Chronicles of Bustos Domecq”), “The Brotherhood Move- 
ment” (“H. Bustos Domecq on the Brotherhood Movement”)


To those three forgotten greats— 
Picasso, Joyce, Le Corbusier


Contents
Foreword by Gervasio Montenegro

Homage to César Paladión

An Evening with Ramón Bonavena

In Search of the Absolute

Naturalism Revived

A List and Analysis of the Sundry Books 
of F. J. C. Loomis

An Abstract Art

The Brotherhood Movement

On Universal Theater

The Flowering of an Art

Gradus ad Parnassum

The Selective Eye

What’s Missing Hurts Not

The Multifaceted Vilaseco

Tafas, a Talented Brush

The Sartorial Revolution (I)

The Sartorial Revolution (II)

A Brand-New Approach

Esse est Percipi

The Idlers

The Immortals

Index by H. Bustos Domecq



Every absurdity has now a champion. 
OLIVER GOLDSMITH (1764)
Every dream is a prophecy: every jest 
is an earnest in the womb of Time.
FATHER KEEGAN (1904)


Foreword
Once again—this time upon the insistence of my 
old friend, the esteemed author—I front the in- 
herent risks and pitfalls that so stubbornly strew 
the path of the writer of a preface. Not, however, 
that these escape the notice of my magnifying 
glass! We must steer a course, even as Odysseus 
himself, between two opposing reefs: Charybdis, id 
est, to spur the attention of the listless and some- 
what careless reader with the fata morgana of at- 
tractions which the corpus of the tome will soon 
dispel; and Scylla, id est, to play down one’s own 
brilliance so as not to overshadow and even nullify 
the pages that follow. The rules of the game are 
ineluctably laid down. Like the showy royal tiger 
of Bengal, which retracts its claws so as not to 
obliterate with a single swipe the features of its 
trembling tamer, we shall (without laying aside al- 
together the critical scalpel) obey the demands of 
the genre itself. In other words, we shall in these 
introductory remarks be faithful to truth, but even 
more so to Plato.


Such scruples, the reader will doubtless inter- 
pose, will prove illusory. Nobody would dream of 
comparing the sober elegance, the ability to hit the 
mark, the panoramic cosmovision of the present 
writer with the unsophisticated, unbuttoned, and 
somewhat casual prose of that truly good man 
who, in his spare time, dashed off—thick with dust 
and provincial tedium—these praiseworthy chron- 
icles.
The rumor alone that an Athenian, a man of 
Buenos Aires (whose renowned name good taste 
forbids me to reveal), had consolidated the prelim- 
inary planning of a novel to be titled (unless I 
change my mind) The Montenegros—this rumor 
alone was enough that our beloved “Bugsy”, who 
once tried his own hand at narrative, should has- 
ten, neither clumsily nor lazily, to criticism. We 
must admit that this brilliant step of shifting fields 
has yielded its reward. Discounting one or two in- 
evitable blemishes, this little gathering of papers 
which it is now our privilege to preface shows 
quite a sufficiency of real value. That is to say, the 
book’s contents provide the curious reader with an 
interest that its style alone would never nourish.
In the chaotic times in which we live, negative 
criticism is everywhere wanting in force, since its 
preponderant purpose is to uphold—beyond our 
pleasure or displeasure—national values, au- 
tochthonous values. These mark—here today, 
gone tomorrow—mere trendiness. In the present 
case, on the other hand, the preface to which I 
lend my signature has been obtained by the en-
 Affectionate nickname for H. Bustos Domecq used among his 
intimates. [Footnote by H. Bustos Domecq.]


treaty of one of those friends to whom habit ties 
us. Let us, then, focus on achievements. From the 
vantage point granted him by his littoral Weimar, 
our secondhand shop Goethe has engendered a 
truly encyclopedic compilation in which every fea- 
ture of modernity finds its resonance. Whom- 
soever longs to dive into the depths of the novel, 
the lyric, the essay, conceptualism, architecture, 
sculpture, the theater, and the whole gamut of 
audiovisual media, which are so much the mark of 
our times, will, in spite of himself, have to come to 
terms with this indispensable vademecum, a true 
Ariadne’s thread which will lead him by the hand 
all the way to the Minotaur.
A chorus of voices may well be raised denounc- 
ing the absence in this collection of some outstand- 
ing figure, who would blend in an elegant synthe- 
sis the skeptic and the sportsman, the high priest 
of letters and the stud, but this omission we at- 
tribute to the natural modesty of the book’s 
author-craftsman, who knows his own limits, and 
not, more justifiably, to his envy.
On coolishly perusing the pages of this quite 
praiseworthy little opus, our drowsiness is for a 
moment shaken by a casual reference to one 
Lambkin Formento. An unexpected misgiving 
pangs us. Does such a personage, actualized in 
flesh and blood, exist? Is he not, perchance, a rela-
 This word is misemployed. Refresh your memory, don Mon- 
tenegro. I asked you for nothing; it was you who turned up out of 
the blue at the printer’s. [Footnote by H. Bustos Domecq.]
 After much explaining on the part of Dr. Montenegro, I in- 
sist no further and give up on the idea of sending him the regis- 
tered telegram that I had Attorney Baralt draw up at my request. 
[Footnote by H. Bustos Domecq.]


tive, or at least an echo, of that Lambkin, the ficti- 
tious marionette, who gave his august name to one 
of Hilaire Belloc’s satires? This is the sort of thing 
which tends to tarnish the potential carats of an 
otherwise instructive repertoire and one that 
aspires to no other endorsement—let us make this 
perfectly clear—than that of probity, plain and 
simple.
Equally unforgivable is the lightness with which 
the 
author 
approaches 
the 
concept 
of 
brotherhoodism when reviewing a certain baga- 
telle in six overwhelming volumes poured forth 
from the uncontainable keyboard of Attorney G. 
A. Baralt. This plaything of the sirens of that legal 
mind dwells overlong upon mere utopian combi- 
nations at the expense of true brotherhoodism, 
which is a solid pillar of the present order and of 
its most certain future.
In summary, what we have here is a little work 
not altogether unworthy of our indulgent send- 
off.
GERVASIO MONTENEGRO 
Member, Argentine Academy of Letters
Buenos Aires, July , 




Homage to César Paladión
To extol the manifold achievements of César Pala- 
dión, to wonder at the tireless hospitality of his 
mind, is—as we know—one of the truisms of con- 
temporary criticism; yet, is it not worth bearing in 
mind that any truism, once in a while, yields a ker- 
nel of truth? The parallel to Goethe, then, is no 
less inevitable. It has often been suggested that the 
affinity between these two worthies is shown not 
only by their physical likeness but also by the more 
or less fortuitous circumstance that, in a way, they 
share an Egmont. Goethe declared that his whole 
spirit was open to the four winds; Paladión re- 
frained from this affirmation (at least it is not in- 
cluded in his Egmont), but the thirteen protean vol- 
umes he has left us are proof that he might very 
well have adopted Goethe’s dictum. Both men, 
Goethe and Paladión, exhibited that health and 
vigor which are the firmest foundation for the 
erection of the true work of genius. Hardy tillers 
in the fields of art, their hands guide the plow and 
mark out the perfect furrows!


The brush, chisel, shading stump, and modern 
camera have made Paladión’s lineaments familiar 
the entire world over; still, those of us who knew 
him personally have undervalued—perhaps un- 
 justly—so profuse an iconography. An iconogra- 
phy, it may be added, which does not always trans- 
mit the authority and the probity that the man 
radiated with a constant, gem-like, never- 
bedazzling-the-eye flame.
In the year , César Paladión held the office 
of Consul of the Argentine Republic in Geneva, 
where he published his first book, The Abandoned 
Parks. The edition, which today is highly coveted 
among bibliophiles, was scrupulously corrected in 
proof by the author; but, nonetheless, the most 
outrageous misprints crept into the text, for, as it 
happened, its Calvinist typesetters were wholly in- 
nocent of the language of Sancho Panza. Those 
who thrive on gossip will be grateful for mention 
here of a rather regrettable episode which no one 
any longer remembers and whose single virtue was 
that it made abundantly clear the almost scandal- 
ous originality of the Paladionian theory of style. 
In the fall of , a critic of considerable renown 
collated The Abandoned Parks with a work of 
the same title by the Uruguayan modernist Julio 
Herrera y Reissig, arriving—incredible as it may 
seem—at the conclusion that Paladión was guilty 
of plagiarism. Long extracts from both works, 
printed in parallel columns, justified, according to 
him, the daring indictment. The accusation, how- 
ever, fell on deaf ears; not one reader paid it the 
slightest notice, nor did Paladión himself conde- 
scend to answer it. The muckraker, whose name I


do not care to remember, comprehending his 
error soon enough, dropped into everlasting si- 
lence. His astounding critical blind spots lay fully 
exposed!
The period - was one of almost superhu- 
man fertility. From Paladión’s pen, in rapid suc- 
cession, came this outpouring: The Pathfinder, the 
pedagogical novel Émile, Egmont, and the Eclectic 
Reader (second series). At this point, under the 
pseudonym of H. Rider Haggard, he wrote the 
novel entitled She, using the Spanish version for 
young readers by Dr. Carlos Astrada (Buenos 
Aires, ). Next came The Hound of the Basker- 
villes, From the Appenines to the Andes, Uncle Tom’s 
Cabin, The Province of Buenos Aires up until the 
Establishment of the Federal Capital, Fabiola, The 
Georgics (in the Ochoa translation), and the De di- 
vinatione (in Latin). And then, in mid-career, death 
overtook him. From what inside information we 
have been able to garner, it appears that he had 
nearly completed the first draft of the Gospel Ac- 
cording to St. Luke, a work of biblical character, of 
which unfortunately not a page has come down to 
us, but whose text would have been of the greatest 
interest.
Paladión’s methodology has been the subject of 
numerous critical monographs and doctoral the- 
ses, making any new discussion here superfluous. 
Let us concern ourselves, however, with a few
 It is perhaps worth noting that Paladión never again took up 
this particular pseudonym although his knowledge of the African 
scene was unerring, as may be evinced by even the slightest ac- 
quaintance with the book.
 On an impulse which reveals the man to the full, Paladión 
chose, as it seems, the standard version.


main points. The key has been given us, once and 
for all, in Farrel du Bosc’s authoritative study The 
Paladión-Pound-Eliot Line (Paris: Viuda de Ch. 
Bouret, ). As du Bosc has stated definitively, 
quoting the words of literary critic Myriam Powell- 
Paul Fort, it is a case of “an amplification of units.” 
Before and after Paladión, the literary unit that 
writers took from the common tradition was the 
word or, at most, the stock phrase. The long By- 
zantine centos, weaving together passages col- 
lected from various sources, were the earliest fore- 
runners of the Paladionian technique; in our own 
time, a copious fragment from the Odyssey opens 
one of Pound’s Cantos, and it is a well-known fact 
that the work of T. S. Eliot admits lines from 
Goldsmith, from Baudelaire, and from Verlaine. 
But Paladión, in , had already gone further. 
He annexed, so to speak, a complete opus, Her- 
rera y Reissig’s The Abandoned Parks. A confidence 
leaked out by Maurice Abramowicz is one more 
proof of the delicate scruples and unswerving 
rigor that Paladión always brought to the arduous 
task of poetic creation: personally, he preferred 
The Twilights of the Garden by the Argentine poet 
Lugones, but he did not consider himself worthy 
of assimilating them; instead, he perceived that 
Herrera’s book fell comfortably within his range at 
that time, inasmuch as in Herrera’s pages he 
found a full expression of himself. Paladión 
granted the book his name and sent it on to the 
printer, neither adding nor omitting a single 
comma—a rule to which he remained ever after 
steadfast.
We are thus confronted by the major literary


event of the century—the appearance of Pala- 
dión’s The Abandoned Parks. Certainly nothing 
could be further from the book by the same name 
by Herrera, which duplicated no earlier book. 
! Annus mirabilis! At that moment, Paladión 
stood at the very threshold of his labors, of a life 
work such as no one before him had attempted. 
Reaching into the depths of his soul, he published 
a series of books that expressed him utterly— 
completely without overburdening the already un- 
wieldy corpus of bibliography or falling into the all- 
too-easy vanity of writing a single new line. The 
unfading modesty of this man who, in spite of the 
lavish banquets tendered him by the well-stocked 
libraries of East and West, denies himself the Di- 
vine Comedy and the Arabian Nights and conde- 
scends, benevolent and smiling, to the Eclectic 
Reader (second series)!
The development of Paladión’s mind has not 
been fully explained; for example, nobody as yet 
has interpreted that mysterious leap from the 
Eclectic Reader (etc.) to The Hound of the Baskervilles. 
For our part, we do not hesitate to put forward 
the theory that this course is not really out of the 
ordinary but follows the pattern of the writer of 
stature who, growing out of the romantic mold, 
crowns himself at last with all the noble serenity 
and limpid grace of classicism.
Let us make it clear that Paladión, aside from 
early schoolboy exercises, had no knowledge of 
the dead languages. In , with a timidity that 
today touches our hearts, he published The 
Georgics, in the Spanish translation by Ochoa; a 
year later, by now aware of the range of his mind,


he sent the printer, in Latin, the De divinatione. 
And what Latin it was! Cicero’s!
Certain critics felt that to publish a gospel fol- 
lowing the texts of Cicero and Vergil amounts to a 
kind of apotheosis of classical ideals; we prefer to 
see in this last step, which Paladión did not live to 
take, a spiritual renewal. In a word, the mysterious 
and clear path that leads from paganism to faith.
Everyone knows that Paladión had to pay out of 
his own pocket for the publication of his books, 
and that the small printings never exceeded the 
figure of three or four hundred copies. Today, of 
course, these books are virtually out of print, and 
the reader who is lucky enough to come upon a 
copy of The Hound of the Baskervilles and who is 
transported by so unmistakable a style, finds, in 
aspiring to relish Uncle Tom’s Cabin, that this latter 
title is all but unavailable. For this reason we fully 
applaud the initiative of a group of congressmen, 
representing all parties, who propose a national 
authorized edition of the complete works of the 
most original and catholic of our men of letters.


An Evening 
with Ramón Bonavena
All statistics, all work that is merely descriptive or 
informative, imply the ambitious and perhaps 
groundless hope that in the incalculable future 
men like us, but with clearer minds, will infer 
from the data that we leave them some useful con- 
clusion or some hidden truth. Those familiar with 
the six volumes of North-Northeast, by Ramón Bona- 
vena, may, for all we know, suppose that further 
elaboration is needed in order to crown and to 
complement the body of work bequeathed by this 
master. Let us, at the outset, give warning that the 
foregoing remarks are the fruit of a personal reac- 
tion by no means authorized by Bonavena. The 
only time I spoke with him, Bonavena flatly dis- 
claimed the idea of any aesthetic or scientific sig- 
nificance in the work to which he had dedicated a 
lifetime. That evening, after all the intervening 
years, still stands out in my memory.
Along about , I worked on the Sunday lit- 
erary section of the Evening News. The editor, a 
man whose far-ranging curiosity included, now


and then, the world of books, assigned me one 
typical Tuesday to interview the well-known but 
not yet famous novelist at his suburban retreat in 
Ezpeleta.
The house, which is still standing, was of one 
floor, though its flat roof boasted two rather small 
balconies in a pathetic hope of an upper story. 
Bonavena himself opened the door to me. The 
dark glasses, which make so brave a show in his 
better-known photos and which were part and 
parcel, it seems, of a passing ailment, did not that 
day adorn that face of vast and flabby jowls in 
which his features seemed to melt. After so many 
years, I believe I still remember his knee-length 
linen dustcoat and Turkish bedroom slippers.
His unforced politeness did not hide a core of 
reticence; at the outset, I attributed this to mod- 
esty, but soon it was evident to me that the man 
felt very sure of himself and awaited, without 
undue impatience, the hour of worldwide fame. 
Engaged in his pressing and almost endless task, 
he was grudging of his time, and the publicity I of- 
fered meant little or nothing to him.
In his study—that had about it something of the 
waiting room of a small-town dentist, with its pas- 
tel seascapes and its china figurines of shepherds 
and dogs—there were few books, and most of 
these were dictionaries of various disciplines and 
trades. The powerful magnifying glass and the 
carpenter’s rule that I noticed on the green baize 
of his writing table did not surprise me in the 
least. Coffee and tobacco stimulated our conversa- 
tion.
“Of course, I have read and reread your work,”


I said. “I believe, nonetheless, that in order to 
guide the common reader, the mass man, along a 
plane of relative comprehension, it would be help- 
ful, perhaps, if you would sketch, in broad strokes 
and without going into great detail, the develop- 
ment of North-Northeast from the first seminal urge 
to the final vast production. I admonish—ab ovo, 
ab ovo!”
His face, until then gray and almost expres- 
sionless, brightened up. After a moment, his well- 
chosen words poured out in a torrent:
“My plan, at the beginning, did not exceed the 
bounds of literature, or, even worse, of realism. I 
wanted—there was nothing out of the ordinary 
about this, really—to produce a novel of the land, 
straightforward, with deeply human characters 
and the usual protest against absentee landowners. 
I thought of Ezpeleta, my own town. Indifferent 
to ivory-tower aesthetics, I meant to give open- 
minded testimony about a limited sector of local 
society. The first problems to come up were, per- 
haps, just trifles. The characters’ names, for ex- 
ample. To call them by their real names might 
have exposed me to charges of libel. My lawyer, 
Attorney Ignacio B. Garmendia, whose office is 
 just around the corner, assured me, as a bit of 
preventive medicine, that the average man of Ez- 
peleta is prone to litigation. I could always, of 
course, have invented names, but that might have 
opened the door to imagination. I opted for the 
use of initials, with asterisks—a solution that 
hardly satisfied me. Working my way into my sub- 
 ject, I came to realize that the major difficulty lay 
not in the characters’ names but rather was of a


psychological order. How was I to put myself into 
my neighbor’s head? How was I to guess what 
others were thinking without abjuring realism? 
The answer was clear, but at first I could not see it. 
Then I considered the prospect of a novel in 
which the characters were domestic animals. But 
once again, how was I to intuit the cerebral pro- 
cesses of a dog, how was I to enter into a world 
perhaps less visual than olfactory? At a loss, I fell 
back on myself and thought that the one remain- 
ing possibility rested in autobiography. But even 
here lay the labyrinth. Who was I? Today’s self, 
bewildered; yesterday’s, forgotten; tomorrow’s, 
unpredictable? What could be more unattainable 
than the mind? If I am self-conscious as I write, 
self-consciousness creeps in, a new factor; if I sur- 
render to free association, I surrender to chance. I 
don’t know whether you recall the story told, I 
believe by Cicero, of a woman who went to a tem- 
ple to consult with an oracle and unaware of it 
spoke the very words of the answer she sought. 
Something similar happened to me here in Ezpe- 
leta. Not so much in search of a solution but one 
day looking for something to do, I read over my 
notes. And there lay the key I was after. There, in 
the words limited sector. When I wrote them, I was 
simply using a commonplace; when I reread them, 
a sudden revelation dazzled me. A limited sector 
. . . What sector could be more limited than a 
corner of the deal table at which I worked? I de- 
cided then to restrict myself to one corner, to what 
that corner might offer. I measured with this car- 
penter’s rule—which you may examine at your 
pleasure—the leg of the aforementioned table and


verified that it stood at thirty-one inches above 
floor level, a height I deemed adequate. To have 
gone on indefinitely upward would have meant to 
knock my head against the ceiling, then the roof, 
and quite soon astronomy; to have delved down 
would have sunk me into the basement, out onto 
the subtropical plain, if not into the very bowels of 
the globe. The chosen corner, at least, offered no 
lack of interesting possibilities. The copper ash- 
tray, the blue-and-red pointed pencil, and so on, 
et cetera.”
At this point, I was unable to stifle my emotion, 
and I broke in:
“I know, I know. You’re talking about the sec- 
ond and third chapters, where we learn all about 
the ashtray—the various shades of the copper, its 
specific gravity, its diameter, the exact distances 
and angles between the ashtray, the pencil, and 
the edge of the table, and then the workmanship 
of the twin china sheepdogs, and what they cost 
wholesale and retail, and so many other facts no 
less scrupulous than to the point. And as for the 
pencil—an Eagle, an Eagle Chemi-Sealed No. 
B!—what can I say? You got it down so perfectly 
and, thanks to your genius for compression, into 
only twenty-nine pages—pages that leave nothing 
to be desired by even the most insatiable appetite.”
Bonavena did not blush. Without haste, without 
pause, he again picked up the flow of dialogue. 
“Ah, the seed has not fallen outside the furrow! 
You are steeped in my work. As a bonus, I’ll make 
you this free gift of an oral appendix. One refers 
not to the work itself but to the scruples of its cre- 
ator. Once having exhausted the herculean labors


of recording the objects in their fixed places at the 
north-northeast corner of my writing table (an 
achievement that cost me two hundred and eleven 
pages), I asked myself whether it was legitimate to 
replenish the stock—id est, to introduce arbitrarily 
new articles, to deploy them within the magnetic 
field, and go on, without ado, to describe them. 
These objects, deliberately chosen for my descrip- 
tive tasks and brought from the far reaches of the 
room and even from the house, would never at- 
tain the casualness, the spontaneity, of the first 
series. Nevertheless, once located within the 
proper angles, they would become a part of reality 
and would demand the appropriate treatment. 
The marvelous grapple of the ethic and the aes- 
thetic! This Gordian knot was cut by the sudden 
appearance of the baker’s delivery boy, a most reli- 
able young man, though a half-wit. Zanichelli, the 
half-wit in question, came to be, to use the com- 
mon expression, my deus ex machina. His very den- 
sity fitted him for the purpose. With trembling 
hope, almost as if committing an act of desecration, 
I ordered him to place something, anything, 
within the now vacant corner. He laid there a rub- 
ber eraser, a penholder, and, once again, the ash- 
tray.”
“The famous beta series!” I broke in. “Now I 
understand the enigmatic recurrence of the ash- 
tray, which is repeated almost word for word, ex- 
cept for a few references to the penholder and 
eraser. More than one hasty critic thought he spot- 
ted a confusion—”
Bonavena stood up, towering. “In my work 
there are no confusions,” he declared with justifi-


able gravity. “The references to the penholder and 
eraser should be a sufficient clue. With a reader 
like yourself, there’s no point in detailing the later 
arrangements. Let it be enough to tell you that I 
shut my eyes, the half-wit placed one object or 
another, and then—hands to the task! In theory 
my book is infinite, in practice I claim my right to 
the rest I’ve earned—call it a halt by the wayside— 
after having evacuated page  of volume V. At 
any rate, descriptionism is on the march. In 
Belgium there was recently celebrated the appear- 
ance of the first installment of Goldfish Bowl, a 
work wherein I have detected not a few het- 
erodoxies. In Burma, in Brazil, in Boston, in 
Bayonne, active new centers are emerging.”
Somehow, I felt that the interview was drawing 
to an end. I said, forestalling our goodbye, “Maes- 
tro, before I go I want to ask you one last favor. 
May I see some of the objects recorded in the 
book?”
“No,” said Bonavena. “You will never see them. 
Each arrangement, before its substitution by the 
succeeding, was carefully photographed. In this 
way, I obtained a brilliant series of slides. Their 
destruction, on October , , was most pain- 
ful to me. More painful still was the destruction of 
the objects themselves.”
I registered consternation. “What’s that?” I 
managed to get out. “You brought yourself to de- 
stroy the black pawn of upsilon and the hammer 
handle of gamma?”
Bonavena looked at me sadly. “The sacrifice was
 The whole world knows that a sixth volume appeared posthu- 
mously in .


necessary,” he explained. “The work, like the child 
who comes of age, must stand on its own feet. To 
have preserved the source material might have ex- 
posed it to irrelevant confrontations. Criticism 
might have fallen into the snare of judging it in 
terms of its more or less fidelity. In that way we 
would have lapsed into mere scientism. You are 
aware, of course, that I deny my work any scien- 
tific value.”
Trying to console him, I said, “Of course, of 
course. North-Northeast is a work of art—”
“That’s another mistake,” pronounced Bona- 
vena. “I deny my work any artistic value. It oc- 
cupies, so to speak, a plane of its own. The emo- 
tions awakened by it, the tears, the acclaim, the 
grimaces, leave me quite indifferent. It has not 
been my intention to instruct, to uplift, to enter- 
tain, to gladden, or to move. My work is beyond 
that. It aspires to the humblest and highest of all 
aims—a place in the universe.”
Firmly set on his shoulders, the solid head did 
not move. The eyes no longer saw me. I under- 
stood that the visit was over and left as best I 
could. The rest is silence.


In Search of the Absolute
It must be admitted, as much as it hurts, that the 
River Plate looks up to Europe and looks down 
on—or tends to ignore—authentic native values. 
The Nierenstein Souza case leaves no doubt as to 
this. Fernández Saldaña omits Nierenstein’s name 
from the Uruguayan Dictionary of Biography. Mon- 
teiro Novato himself limits Nierenstein to his 
dates, -, and to the bare listing of his 
best-known works: The Panic Plain (); After- 
noons of Amethyst (); Oeuvres et Théories chez 
Stuart Merrill (), an intelligent study which 
earned the praises of more than one associate pro- 
fessor of Columbia University; The Symbolism in 
Balzac’s La Rechèrche de l’Absolu (); and the 
ambitious historical novel The Gomensoro Feud 
(), which the author was to repudiate in ar- 
ticulo mortis. One searches Novato’s haphazard 
notes in vain for the slightest mention of the 
Franco-Belgian literary dinners of fin de siècle 
Paris, which Nierenstein Souza attended, if only as 
a silent spectator, or for any mention of the post-


humous miscellany Bric-a-Brac, published back in 
 by a group of friends captained by yours 
truly, H. B. D. Nor does one find in Novato the 
least attempt to draw attention to Nierenstein’s ap- 
preciable, though not always faithful, translations 
of Catulle Mendès, Ephraïm Mikhaël, Franz Wer- 
fel, and Humbert Wolfe.
Nierenstein’s background, as is obvious, was 
broad. His native Yiddish had opened to him the 
gates of Teutonic literature; Father Planes had 
taught him Latin without tears; French he had 
suckled along with culture; and his English had 
been inherited from an uncle, who managed a 
British-owned meat-packing plant in Mercedes. 
Nierenstein guessed at Dutch and had a suspicion 
of the lingua franca of the Brazil-Uruguayan bor- 
der.
With a second edition of The Gomensoro Feud in 
the press, Nierenstein retired to Fray Bentos, 
where, in the old family manor house rented him 
by the Medeiro family, he was at last able to dedi- 
cate himself fully to the painstaking composition 
of a masterpiece, the manuscript of which has be- 
come lost and whose very title is unknown. It was 
there, in that hot summer of , that Atropos’ 
scissors cut short the poet’s stubborn stint and his 
almost monastic life.
Six years later, the editor of the Evening News, a 
man whose far-ranging curiosity now and then in- 
cluded the world of books, assigned me the task— 
somewhere between literary detection and piety— 
of tracing the remains of that magnum opus. The 
paper’s cashier, after some natural reluctance, ad- 
vanced me expense money for the voyage up the


Uruguay River—and it was certainly welcome. In 
Fray Bentos, the hospitality of a pharmacist 
friend, Doctor Zhivago, took care of the rest. This 
excursion, my first journey abroad, filled me—why 
not admit it?—with much-to-be-expected uneasi- 
ness. Although a study of the atlas failed to quell 
my anxiety, the assurances given me by a fellow- 
traveler that the natives of Uruguay have a solid 
command of our tongue did, finally, set my mind 
at rest.
I disembarked in the sister country one twenty- 
ninth of December. On the morning of the thir- 
tieth, in the Hotel Capurro and accompanied by 
Zhivago, I put away my first Uruguayan café au 
lait. A notary entered into the conversation and— 
tossing off jokes right and left—he told us the 
story, not unknown back home among the joke- 
sters of our beloved Corrientes Avenue, about the 
traveling salesman and the ewe. We went out into 
the blazing sun. No transportation proved neces- 
sary and, within a half hour, after admiring the 
town’s exaggerated progress, we arrived at the 
poet’s mansion.
Its owner, don Nicasio Medeiro, after handing 
around a quick liqueur and a few tidbits of cheese, 
debited us with the always new, always funny story 
of the old maid and the parrot. He assured us that 
the house—thank goodness—had been repaired 
by a part-time bricklayer but that the late Nieren- 
stein’s library was still intact owing to a temporary 
lack of funds for further improvements. In fact, 
there on shelves made of old orange crates we 
glimpsed an abundant series of volumes; on a 
work table we saw an inkpot over which a bust of


Balzac pondered; and on the walls were portraits 
of loved ones as well as an autographed photo- 
graph of George Moore. Donning my spectacles, I 
submitted the dusty volumes to an impartial exam- 
ination. Here before me, predictably, were the yel- 
low spines of the Mercure de France, which had had 
its day; the choicest works of Symbolist writing of 
the Nineties; a broken set of Burton’s Thousand 
and One Nights; Queen Margaret’s Heptameron; the 
Decameron; Conde Lucanor; The Book of Calila and 
Dimna; and the Grimms’ Fairy Tales. Aesop’s Fables, 
annotated in Nierenstein’s own hand, did not es- 
cape my attention.
Medeiro allowed me to explore the drawers of 
the writing table. I spent two afternoons at the 
task. I shall say little of the manuscripts that I 
copied out, since Test Tube Editions, Inc., has just 
brought them before the reading public. The bu- 
colic idyll of Punch and Judy, the tribulations of 
Moscarda, and the trials of Doctor Ox in search of 
the philosopher’s stone are, by now, an indelible 
part of contemporary River Plate writing, despite 
the fact that some aristarch or other has spoken 
out against the preciousness of Nierenstein’s style 
and the overall excess in his work of acrostics and 
digressions. Still, these little writings—no matter 
what virtues were found in them by the 
Uruguayan weekly Marcha’s most exacting critic— 
could not have been part of the magnum opus 
that our curiosity was ferreting out.
On the blank leaf at the end of one of Mal- 
larmé’s books, I came across this note by Nieren- 
stein Souza: “How odd that Mallarmé, who was so 
intent on the absolute, should have sought it in


what is so uncertain and unstable—words. Every- 
one knows that their connotations change and that 
even the most distinguished word stands in danger 
of becoming trite or perishable tomorrow.”
I also had a chance to copy out three successive 
versions of one and the same alexandrine. In his 
first draft, Nierenstein wrote:
To live for memory, forgetting almost all.
In Breezes of Fray Bentos, which was little more than 
a house organ, the author preferred:
Things stored up by Memory for Forgetfulness.
The definitive text, which was to appear in the An- 
thology of Six Latin-American Poets, reads:
Memory lifts up its stores for Forgetfulness.
Another fruitful example is accorded us by this 
pentameter line:
And only in the lost do we survive, 
which became, in print:
Hang on encrusted in the flow of time.
Even the least attentive reader will note that in 
both cases the published text is less graceful than 
the draft version. The question intrigued me, but 
some time was to pass before I got to the bottom 
of the matter.


Somewhat disillusioned, I started off on my re- 
turn journey. What would the bigwigs back at the 
Evening News say, having financed the trip? The 
clinging company of a certain fellow-passenger 
from Fray Bentos, whose name shall remain anon- 
ymous, did not contribute to the lifting of my 
spirits. This man shared my cabin and over- 
whelmed me with an endless litany of stories, for 
the most part unsavory and even. shocking. I 
wanted to think about the Nierenstein case, but 
my insistent causeur refused to grant me the least 
truce. Along about daybreak I took refuge in the 
continued nodding of my head, an action some- 
where between seasickness, sleepiness, and utter 
boredom.
Reactionary detractors of the modern subcon- 
scious will be reluctant to believe that on the gang- 
plank of the South Docks Customs I hit upon the 
solution to the puzzle. I congratulated my name- 
less companion for his extraordinary memory and 
there and then I blurted out, “Where the devil did 
you get all these stories, my friend?”
His reply confirmed my sudden suspicion. He 
told me that Nierenstein had told him all, or 
nearly all, of them, and that Nicasio Medeiro, who 
had been a great intimate of the deceased, told 
him the rest. He added that the funny thing was 
that Nierenstein told stories very badly and that 
the locals actually improved them. All at once ev- 
erything became clear—the poet’s burning desire 
to attain the absolute in literature, his skeptical ob- 
servation as to the impermanence of words, the 
progressive deterioration of his verses from one 
text to another, and the twofold personality of his


library, which ranged from the hyper-refinements 
of the Symbolists to collections of purely narrative 
prose. Let us not be amazed by any of this. 
Nierenstein took up the tradition which, from 
Homer down to the hearth of the peasant cottage 
or to the gentleman’s club, takes pleasure in in- 
venting and listening to tales. The stories that 
Nierenstein made up he told badly, knowing that 
if they were worthy of it Time would polish them, 
as it has done with the Odyssey and the Thousand 
and One Nights. Like literature at its dawn, Nieren- 
stein limited himself to the oral, not unaware that 
the years would end up writing it all.



Naturalism Revived
With great relief it comes to our notice that the 
descriptionism-descriptivism debate no longer 
makes headlines in the Times Literary Supplement, 
The New York Times Book Review, or other such bul- 
letins. Nobody—not after the weighty lessons of 
Cyprian Cross, S. J.—can still be unaware that the 
former of the aforementioned terms finds its 
truest application in the area of the novel, whereas 
the latter is relegated to a whole gamut of items 
which includes, unquestionably, poetry, painting, 
and criticism. However, the confusion lives on and 
from time to time, to the scandal of all truth seek- 
ers, the name of Ramón Bonavena is linked with 
that of Hector Urbas. Perhaps to distract us from 
so great an absurdity, there is no end of those who 
perpetrate a second ridiculous coupling, that of 
Hilario Lambkin and César Paladión.
It is well to admit that such confusions are 
founded upon certain apparent parallels and ter- 
minological affinities; all in all, however, to the 
well-rounded reader a page of Bonavena will


always be . . . a page of Bonavena, just as several 
pages of Urbas will always be . . . several pages of 
Urbas. Men of letters—all foreigners, to be sure— 
have propagated the nonsense of a descriptivist 
school here in the Argentine. On no other author- 
ity than that which in-depth talks with the lumin- 
aries of the would-be school confer on our mod- 
esty, we hereby affirm that this matter of 
descriptivism is not one of a structured movement 
or even less of Thursday-night literary dinners but 
is a phenomenon of the coming together of indi- 
viduals.
Let us get to the bottom of the mystery. At the 
entrance of this exciting little descriptivist world, 
the first name that extends a hand to us (as you 
will have guessed) is that of Lambkin Formento.
Hilario Lambkin Formento’s lot has been a 
rather odd one. The editors to whom he brought 
his work, which was generally very short and of 
little interest to the average reader, classed him as 
an objective critic—in other words, as a man who 
excluded from his comments all praise and all cen- 
sure. His squibs, which many a time were but re- 
productions of the jackets of the books under re- 
view, began to incorporate details of their format, 
dimensions (in centimeters), weight, typography, 
quality of the ink, and porosity and scent of the 
paper. Between  and , without reaping 
either laurels or burrs, Lambkin Formento con- 
tributed to the back pages of The Annals of Buenos 
Aires. In November of the latter year, he gave up 
these duties in order to devote himself fully to a 
critical study of the Divine Comedy. Death overtook 
him seven years later, when he had already com-


pleted the three volumes which were to be, and 
are, the pedestal of his fame and which, respec- 
tively, are entitled Inferno, Purgatorio, and Paradiso. 
Neither the great public, nor even less his col- 
leagues, understood what he had done. A cry of 
attention (to which the initials H. B. D. lent their 
prestige) was necessary for Buenos Aires, rubbing 
its sleepy eyes, to rise from its dogmatic sleep.
According to the immensely probable hypoth- 
esis of H. B. D., Lambkin Formento had, in a 
bookstall in Chacabuco Park, leafed through a 
copy of that white fly of seventeenth-century bibli- 
ography, Travels of Praiseworthy Men, whose fourth 
book informs us:
. . . In that Empire, the craft of Cartography at- 
tained such Perfection that the Map of a Single 
province covered the space of an entire City, and 
the Map of the Empire itself an entire Province. In 
the course of Time, these Extensive maps were 
found somehow wanting, and so the College of 
Cartographers evolved a Map of the Empire that 
was of the same Scale as the Empire and that coin- 
cided with it point for point. Less attentive to the 
Study 
of 
Cartography, 
succeeding 
Generations 
came to judge a map of such Magnitude cumber- 
some, and, not without Irreverence, they aban- 
doned it to the Rigors of sun and Rain. In the 
western Deserts, tattered Fragments of the Map 
are still to be found, Sheltering an occasional Beast 
or beggar; in the whole Nation, no other relic is 
left of the Discipline of Geography.
 Quoted from Jorge Luis Borges’ A Universal History of Infamy, 
p. , in the translation of Jorge Luis Borges and Norman Thomas 
di Giovanni; reprinted by joint permission of the translators and 
publisher. [Footnote by H. B. D.]


With his customary perspicacity, Lambkin re- 
marked among a circle of friends that a full-scale 
map presented great difficulties, but that an analo- 
gous method (or device) was not inapplicable in 
other fields—for example, literary criticism. To 
evolve a “map” of the Divine Comedy became, from 
that auspicious moment on, his life’s aim. At first, 
he contented himself with publishing small, worn 
cuts of the plans of the circles of hell, the tower of 
purgatory, and the concentric heavens which 
adorn Dino Provenzal’s distinguished edition of 
the work. Lambkin’s exacting nature, however, 
would not be satisfied. The Dantesque epic still es- 
caped him! A second flash, which was soon after 
followed by a long, painstaking patience, pulled 
him out of his temporary marasmus. On February 
, , it dawned on him that a description of 
the poem, in order to be perfect, had to coincide 
word for word with the poem in the same way that 
the famous map coincided point for point with the 
empire. After mature reflection, Lambkin did 
away with the introduction, notes, index, pub- 
lisher’s name and address, and gave to the press 
Dante’s work. Thus it was that the first monument 
of descriptivism was launched in our metropolis!
Seeing is believing: there was no dearth of book- 
worms who took, or pretended to take, this newest 
tour de force of criticism for just another edition 
of the well-known poem of Alighieri, using it as a 
copy of the text itself! Thus is the poetic muse 
falsely worshiped! Thus is criticism underestima- 
ted! Approval was unanimous and general when a 
hard-hitting decree of the Association of Booksel- 
lers (or, according to others, the Argentine Acad-


emy of Letters) prohibited this abusive use of the 
greatest exegetical endeavor in our midst within 
the city limits of Buenos Aires. The damage, how- 
ever, had been done, confusion keeps snowballing, 
and there are scholars who stubbornly insist on 
likening such different products as Lambkin’s 
analysis and the Christian eschatology of the great 
Florentine. There are even those who, bedazzled 
by the mere fata morgana of their similar systems 
of reproduction, link Lambkin’s work with the di- 
versified ceuvre of César Paladión.
The case of Hector Urbas is somewhat different. 
This young poet, who today is reaching his fame, 
was almost a total unknown in September, . 
His discovery is owed to those qualified men of let- 
ters of the outstanding jury who that year judged 
the Destiempo Publishers’ poetry contest. The 
contest’s theme, as everyone knows, was the classic, 
eternal subject of the rose. Pens and inkpots set 
themselves to the task; names of renown flocked; 
horticultural treatises, composed in alexandrines 
when not in iambic pentameter, were admired. Ev- 
erything, however, paled next to the Columbus’ 
egg of Urbas, who submitted, simple and trium- 
phant—a rose. There was not a single dissident 
vote; words, those artificial daughters of man, 
were unable to compete with the spontaneous 
rose, daughter of God. Five hundred thousand 
pesos at once went to crown this unequivocal 
achievement.
Radio listeners, television spectators, even the 
rank amateur who now and then buys either the 
morning paper or those bulky world almanacs will 
by now, I am sure, have wondered at our delay in


bringing up the case of Fernando Colombres. We 
make no bones, however, about suggesting that 
the obvious notoriety of such an episode—it was a 
typical darling of the yellow press—is owed less to 
its intrinsic value than to the timely intervention of 
the Municipal Ambulance Service and the 
emergency scalpel wielded by the golden hand of 
Dr. Gastambide. The event—who dares forget 
it?—is only too well remembered. Around that 
time (we are talking now of ), the Salon of 
Fine Arts had opened and special prizes had been 
arranged for works dealing with the Antarctic or 
Patagonian regions of the Argentine. We shall say 
nothing of the abstract or concrete interpretations 
of icebergs in stylized forms that led to the crown- 
ing of Winslow Hopkins’ brow with laurel, but the 
main point here was actually Patagonian. Colom- 
bres, up till that time faithful to the most far-out 
extravagances of Italian neo-idealism, that year 
submitted a Well-ventilated wooden crate which, 
on being opened by the authorities, let loose a 
bounding ram that quickly gored more than one 
member of the jury in the groin and, in spite of 
the horseman’s agility with which he saved him- 
self, injured painter-cattle breeder César Kirón’s 
back. The ovine, far from being a more or less fic- 
titious caricature, turned out to be an Australian- 
bred rambouillet Merino well endowed with a 
head of horns that left their stamp on the said re- 
spective zones of the injured. Like Urbas’ rose, 
though in a more bruising and impetuous way, the 
aforementioned wool-bearer was not an artistic 
fancy but an actual, obstinate biological specimen.
For some reason that escapes us, the disabled


members of the jury denied Colombres the award 
that his artistic soul had looked forward to with 
appreciable hopes. The jury of the Rural Exposi- 
tion showed itself fairer and more generous, how- 
ever. These men were forthright in declaring our 
ram a champion, thanks to which, from that in- 
cident hence, it enjoyed the warmth and good 
wishes of the best Argentines everywhere.
The dilemma raised here is interesting. If the 
tendency to descriptivism continues, art runs the 
risk of sacrificing itself for the sake of Nature. The 
learned Thomas Browne long ago remarked that 
Nature was God’s art.



A List and Analysis of the 
Sundry Books of F. J. C. Loomis
As regards the work of Federico Juan Carlos Loo- 
mis, it is comforting to realize that the era of slick 
 jokes and of the facetiousness of incomprehension 
has long been relegated to oblivion. Neither does 
anyone any longer link Loomis’ work to chance 
polemics with Leopoldo Lugones, around , 
nor, later on, with the leaders of budding Ul- 
traism. Nowadays, we are fortunate to be able to 
look on the master’s poetry in all its naked full- 
ness. It has been said that Gracián forecast Loo- 
mis’ poetic achievement when he tossed out that 
famous phrase of his—no less perfect for being 
old hat—“What’s good, if short, is twice as good,” 
or, according to the teaching of don Julio Cejador 
y Frauca, “What’s short, if short, is twice as short.” 
It is indubitable, moreover, that Loomis always 
disbelieved in the expressive power of the meta- 
phor, which, in the first decade of our century, 
had been exalted by Lugones’ Lunario sentimental 
and, in the Twenties, by such avant-garde reviews 
as Prisma, Proa, etc. We challenge even the clever-


est critic to unearth—if we may be permitted an 
archeological term—a single metaphor in the en- 
tire range of Loomis’ output, with the exception of 
those which stand exactly for their etymological 
meanings. We who preserve in memory, as if in a 
precious jewel case, those eloquent and copious 
all-night sessions at the author’s home on Parera 
Street, sessions whose span embraced the two twi- 
lights, that of evening and that of the milky dawn, 
shall not easily forget the mocking diatribes of 
Loomis, the tireless causeur, against the metaphor- 
ists, who, to point the meaning of one thing, turn 
it into another. These diatribes, of course, owing 
to the very rigor of Loomis’ work, never transcen- 
ded the realm of oral expression. “Is not the evo- 
cation more alive and forceful in the word 
‘moon’,” he would ask, “than in the image ‘tea of 
nightingales’, as Mayakovsky disguised it?”
More given to posing questions than listening to 
answers, Loomis would ask in the same vein 
whether a fragment of Sappho or one of those in- 
exhaustible sentences of Heraclitus did not grow 
more and more through the ages than all the vol- 
umes of Trollope, the Goncourt brothers, and 
Tostado, which, in the face of memory, are ob- 
stinate.
One of the assiduous frequenters of our Parera 
Street Saturday nights was Gervasio Montenegro, 
who was no less charming as a gentleman than as 
the owner of a certain establishment out in the 
Chicago-like suburb of Avellaneda. Because of the 
multitudinous nature of Buenos Aires, where no- 
body knows anybody else, César Paladión, to the 
best of my knowledge, never once attended. How


unforgettable it would have been hearing him 
hold forth, as an equal, with the master!
On one or two occasions, Loomis announced to 
us the immanent publication of a work of his in 
the hospitable pages of Nosotros. I recall the expec- 
tation with which we, his disciples, full of youth 
and enthusiasm, elbowed our way into Lajouane’s 
bookshop in order to savor—first of the first—the 
 friandise promised us by the master. Each time, 
however, our hopes were frustrated. Someone or 
other ventured a guess as to the use of a pseud- 
onym (Evaristo Carriego’s name aroused more 
than a single suspicion); somebody else imagined a 
malicious joke was afoot; somebody else again, a 
ruse to elude our genuine curiosity or to gain 
time; and there was even some Judas, whose name 
I wish not to recall, who suggested that Bianchi or 
Giusti, the editors of Nosotros, might have turned 
down the master’s contribution. Loomis, a man of 
unimpeachable veracity, stuck to his story, repeat- 
ing, with a smile, that his piece had been published 
without our having noticed. In our confusion, we 
even imagined that the magazine issued special 
numbers, which were withheld from the common 
herd of subscribers and the great mob, avid for 
knowledge, that infests libraries, bookshops, and 
newsstands.
Everything came clear in the autumn of , 
when the windows of Moën’s displayed the work 
later called Opus . And why not mention here and 
now the pertinent, straightforward title the author 
initially gave it—Bear?
At first, not many properly evaluated the pains- 
taking labors that had preceded the writing of


Bear: the study of Buffon and Cuvier; frequent, 
attentive trips to our local zoo in Palermo; pictur- 
esque interviews with Piedmontese; the chilling 
and perhaps apocryphal descent into an Arizona 
cave, where a bear cub was sleeping its inviolable 
winter sleep; the acquisition of steel engravings, 
lithographs, photographs, and even of full-grown, 
stuffed specimens.
The preparation of his Opus , Pallet, carried 
Loomis to an unusual experiment, not without its 
hardships and risks—namely, a month and a half’s 
roughing it in a slum dwelling on Gorriti Street, 
whose tenants, of course, never came to suspect 
the true identity of the polygraph, who, under the 
assumed name of Luc Durtain, shared their joys 
and sorrows.
Pallet, illustrated by the pencil of B.S., appeared 
in October, . Deafened by the voice of distant 
cannon, the critics took no notice of it. The same 
happened to Beret (), a volume which suffers 
from a certain coldness, perhaps attributable to 
the demand it makes on the reader of having to 
learn French.
Scum () is the least popular of the author’s 
writings, in spite of the fact that the Encyclopedia 
Bompiani finds in it the culmination of what has 
come to be called the first Loomisian period. A 
temporary duodenal ailment suggested or im- 
posed the subject of the above-cited work. Accord- 
ing to the learned investigation of Farrel du Bosc, 
milk, the instinctive remedy of an ulcer patient, 
was the chaste and white muse of this modern 
Georgic.
The installation of a telescope on the roof of the


maid’s quarters and the fervent, haphazard study 
of Flammarion’s better known writings lay the 
groundwork of the second period. Moon () 
marks the author’s most poetical achievement, the 
open sesame that flung wide for him the great 
gates of Parnassus.
Then, the years of silence. No longer does 
Loomis frequent literary dinners; no longer is he 
the jovial master of ceremonies who, in the car- 
peted cellars of the Royal Keller, calls the tune. No 
more, no, does he leave his Parera Street resi- 
dence. On the lonely roof the forgotten telescope 
rusts; night after night Flammarion’s folios wait in 
vain. Cloistered in his library, Loomis turns the 
pages of Gregorovius’ History of Philosophies and 
Religions, peppering its pages with queries and 
marginal notes and other jottings. We disciples 
later wanted to publish them, but this would have 
meant renouncing the teaching and the spirit of 
the glossarist. A pity, but what could be done 
about it?
In , dysentery crowns what constipation 
had given rise to. Loomis, despite extreme physi- 
cal distress, brings to a climax his masterwork, 
which was to be published posthumously and 
whose proofsheets we had the melancholy privi- 
lege of correcting. Is there anyone by now who 
can possibly be unaware that we allude to the 
famous volume which, either in resignation or in 
irony, is entitled Perhaps?
In the books of other authors, it must be admit- 
ted that there is a schism, a split between contents 
and title. The words Uncle Tom’s Cabin do not 
readily communicate to us all the details of its plot.


To pronounce the words Don, Segundo Sombra is 
not the same as having expressed each one of the 
horns, heads, hooves, flanks, tails, whips, saddle 
blankets, saddles, and shoeing aprons that, in ex- 
tenso, make up the book. For Loomis, on the other 
hand, the title is the work. The reader marvels at 
the rigorous coincidence of both elements. The 
text of Pallet, for example, consists solely of the 
word “pallet.” Story, epithet, metaphor, charac- 
ters, suspense, rhythm, alliteration, social implica- 
tions, the ivory tower, littérature engagée, realism, 
originality, the slavish imitation of the classics, syn- 
tax itself—all have been totally transcended. Loo- 
mis’ life work, according to the malicious calcula- 
tions of a certain critic less versed in literature 
than in arithmetic, consists of six words: “bear,” 
“pallet,” “beret,” “scum,” “moon,” and “perhaps.” 
This may be so, but behind these words what a 
wealth of experience, of vitality, of ripeness the 
artist has distilled!
Not everyone has known how to listen to the 
master’s lesson. Carpenter’s Box, the book of a 
would-be disciple, does no more than list—and 
like a chicken’s flight, barely gets off the ground— 
chisels, hammers, saws, etc. Far more dangerous is 
the sect of the so-called “cabalists,” who amalga- 
mate the master’s six words into a single puzzling 
phrase, fraught with perplexities and symbolism. 
Controversial, though well-meaning, seems to us 
the work of Eduardo L. Planes, the author of Glo- 
glocioro, Hröbfroga, and Qul.
Eager publishers have long wanted to translate 
Loomis into various languages. The author, in 
spite of his pocket, rejected out of hand such


Carthaginian offers, which would have filled his 
coffers with gold. In these times of relativistic 
negativism, he upheld—the new Adam that he 
was—his faith in language, in simple and straight- 
forward words that are at the reach of everyone. 
For Loomis, to write the word “beret” was enough 
to express that typical article of clothing with all its 
racial connotations.
To follow in the master’s luminous wake is nigh 
impossible. If for a single moment, however, the 
gods were to grant us his eloquence and talent, we 
should obliterate all the preceding and limit our- 
selves to printing this sole and imperishable 
word—Loomis.



An Abstract Art
At the risk of wounding the noble sensibilities of 
all Argentines (whatever their particular or politi- 
cal persuasion), the fact must be faced that at this 
late date a tourist Mecca of the modern New 
World like Buenos Aires boasts but a single tene- 
brarium—located, at that, in a backwater of the city 
some several blocks from the nearest subway sta- 
tion. All things considered, however, the establish- 
ment stands for an effort worthy of the highest 
praise, for a real breakthrough in the Chinese wall 
of our general unfashionableness. More than one 
acute and far-ranging observer has dropped us the 
hint ad nauseum that the aforementioned tene- 
brarium is still far from holding its own with coun- 
terparts in Amsterdam or Basel or Paris or Den- 
ver, Colorado, or Bruges la Morte.
Without entangling ourselves in so ticklish a 
problem, we wish for the time being to pay hom- 
age to Ubalde Morpurgo, whose voice cries out in 
the wilderness from eight to eleven p.m. nightly 
except Mondays, backed—we must be frank—by a


handful of cognoscenti who dutifully take turns at 
attendance. On two occasions, we ourselves have 
partaken of those symposia and, both times, save 
for Morpurgo himself, the half-glimpsed faces of 
the dinner crowd were never quite the same. Not 
so, of course, the contagious enthusiasm. Our 
memory shall never forget either the metallic 
music of the cutlery or the occasional crash of a 
breaking tumbler.
Delving into prehistory, it should be mentioned 
that this petite histoire began, like so many others— 
in Paris! The forerunner, as everyone knows, the 
beacon who got the ball rolling, was none other 
than the Flemish (or Dutch) Frans Praetorius. 
Long ago, Praetorius’ lucky star drew him to a cer- 
tain Symbolist café which was frequented, off and 
on, by the now justly forgotten Vielé-Griffin. 
Those were the good old days of the third or 
fourth of January, ! The ink-begrimed hands 
of the entire upcoming literary generation clam- 
ored over each issue of the magazine Étape as it 
came rolling hot off the press.
Let us go back in time to the Café Procope. 
Someone sporting a bohemian beret waves aloft an 
article buried at the back of the aforesaid publica- 
tion; another, all petulance and military mous- 
tache, swears over and over again that he will not 
rest until he finds out who the author is; a third 
points with his meerschaum pipe to a person of 
timid smile and hairless head who, absorbed in his 
great blond beard, sits silent in a corner. Let light 
be shed on the mystery. The man upon whom as- 
tonished faces, pointing fingers, and gaping eyes


focus is the Flemish (or Dutch) Frans Praetorius 
already alluded to.
The article is brief, and its dry-as-dust style 
smacks of test tube and alembic, but its authorita- 
tive tone soon musters a following. In its half 
page, not a single simile from Greco-Roman my- 
thology is to be found, not a word is wasted. The 
writer sticks to his thesis—that the basic tastes are 
four: sour, salty, insipid, and bitter. This creed 
stirs discussion, provokes disagreement, but in the 
end for each unbeliever there are now a thousand 
devoted hearts. In , Praetorius publishes the 
today classical Les Saveurs; let us not forget, by the 
way, that the Grand Man, yielding with unim- 
peachable good will to a host of unknown corre- 
spondents, adds to his previous catalogue a fifth 
taste, that of sweetness, which, for reasons it would 
be impertinent to go into here, had hitherto 
eluded his perspicacity.
Then, in , an inveterate haunter of the Pro- 
cope named Ishmael Querido throws open the 
portals of the almost legendary establishment Les 
Cinq Saveurs in a location just around the corner 
from the Panthéon des Invalides itself. The place 
is friendly and unassuming. For the payment of a 
small fee upon entrance, the eventual customer is 
entitled to one of five alternative choices: a lump 
of sugar, a cube of aloes, a cotton wafer, a grape- 
fruit rind, or a granum salis. These items figure 
prominently in an early menu that it was recently 
our privilege to peruse in a certain cabinet bibliogra- 
phique in the port city of Bordeaux.
In the beginning, to choose one of the five was


to deny yourself acquaintance with the other four, 
but in time Querido was to give the nod to succes- 
sion, to rotation, and, finally, to mixing. He hardly 
reckoned, however, with the justified scruples of 
Praetorius, who argued that sugar besides being 
sweet tastes like sugar (who could refute this?) and 
that the admission of the grapefruit rind clearly 
constituted an infraction. It was a manufacturing 
pharmacist, the druggist Payot, who sliced the 
Gordian knot; he began furnishing Querido each 
week with twelve hundred identical pyramids, 
each an inch high and each affording the palate 
one of the now celebrated five tastes—sour, in- 
sipid, salty, sweet, and bitter. A veteran of these 
early campaigns has assured us that at first the 
pyramids were grayish and translucent and that 
later on, to make things easier, they were endowed 
with the five well-known colors, white, black, yel- 
low, red, and blue.
Lured on, perhaps by the prospect of gain, per- 
haps by the word “bittersweet,” Querido fell into 
the dangerous error of trying combinations. Even 
today purists accuse him of having pandered to 
public gluttony with his hundred and twenty pyra- 
mids of different shades of color. But such pro- 
miscuity led to Querido’s rapid downfall; that self- 
same year he was forced to sell his establishment 
to another chef, a nobody who desecrated the tem- 
ple of tastes by selling, for Christmas purposes, 
stuffed turkeys. Praetorius commented philo- 
sophically, “C’est la fin du monde.” 
 The French meaning is: “ ’Tis the end of the world.” [Joint note 
of the French Academy, the Argentine Academy of Letters, and 
the American Academy of Arts and Letters.]


In a certain sense this utterance was to prove 
prophetic to both forerunners. Querido, who 
spent his tottering years in the streets specializing 
in the sale of gumdrops, in the full summertide of 
 finally paid his fare to Charon. Completely 
heartbroken, Praetorius managed to survive him 
by some fourteen years. The project of erecting a 
commemorative monument to each had the full 
backing of high government officials, the press, 
public opinion, the military-industrial complex, 
the turf club, the clergy, and the mostly highly 
reputed artistic and gastronomic circles. The 
funds allocated, however, did not permit the erec- 
tion of two figures and so the sculptor’s chisel had 
to limit itself to a single likeness that would synthe- 
size the one’s unkempt beard, the flat noses of the 
two, and the other’s laconic stance. One hundred 
and twenty miniature pyramids worked in relief in 
the pedestal strike a note of freshness in the mon- 
ument.
Both ideologists dispatched, we stand now 
before 
pure 
cookery’s 
high 
priest, 
Pierre 
Moulonguet. His first manifesto dates from ; 
the Manuel Raisonné (three volumes in large oc- 
tavo) from . Moulonguet’s theoretical tenets 
are so well known that we may safely limit our- 
selves here, God willing, to no more than the 
barest lifeless outline of them. The Abbot 
Brémond foresaw the possibilities of a poetry 
purely poetical; abstract and concrete artists—both 
words are obviously synonyms—strive after picto- 
rial painting which condescends neither to anec- 
dote nor to the slavish imitation of nature. In 
a like way, using weighty arguments, Pierre


Moulonguet plumped for what he daringly called 
“culinary cooking.” Its aim, as the words imply, 
was a cuisine owing nothing to the plastic arts or to 
the object of nourishment. Vivid colors, elegant 
serving platters, and what common prejudice calls 
a well-presented dish—all these were banned; and 
banned was the crassly pragmatic orchestration of 
protein, vitamins, and the carbohydrates.
The age-old and ancestral tastes of veal, salmon, 
fish, pork, venison, mutton, parsley, omelette sur- 
prise, and tapioca—all dismissed by that cruel 
tyrant Praetorius—were now returned to as- 
tonished palates in the form (no compromising 
with the plastic arts) of a runny, grayish, muci- 
laginous mush. The diner, at last freed from the 
bonds of the much-touted five tastes, was again 
able to order himself fried chicken southern-style 
or coq au vin—but everything, as we know, took 
on the standard amorphous texture. Today as yes- 
terday, tomorrow as today, and ever the same. A 
single nonconformist cast his shadow on the scene: 
we speak of Praetorius, who, like so many precur- 
sors, cannot tolerate the slightest deviation. He 
could not tolerate the slightest deviation from the 
path he had blazed thirty-three years earlier.
Victory, however, did not lack her Achilles’ 
heel. A hand, any half-dozen fingers, are more 
than enough on which to count the now classic 
chefs—Dupont de Montpellier, Julio Cejador— 
unmatched in the art of turning the whole rich 
gamut of comestibles into the one runny mush 
demanded by the code.
But then in  the miracle took place, worked 
by a cipher out of the crowd. Every reader knows


his name: Jean-Françoise Darracq. J.-F.D. opened 
in Geneva a restaurant exactly like all others, serv- 
ing dishes in no way different from those of the 
past: the mayonnaise was yellow, the greens green, 
the cassata a rainbow, the roast beef red. He was at 
the point of being dubbed a reactionary when 
then and there he laid the golden egg. One eve- 
ning, in perfect calm, with a smile about to flicker 
across his lips and with that sureness of hand that 
genius alone commands, Darracq carried out the 
simple act destined to place him forever at the top- 
most point of the pinnacle in the entire annals of 
cookery. He snapped out the lights. There, in that 
instant, the first tenebrarium was launched.



The Brotherhood Movement
We should find it a pity were this essay, which 
aims mainly at eulogy and information, to distress 
the unprepared reader. Nonetheless, as the old 
Latin tag has it, Magna est veritas et prevalebit. Let 
us, then, harken ourselves for the rude blow.
As the hackneyed story of the apple, whose 
plopping to the ground gave rise to the discovery 
of the law of gravity, is attributed to Isaac Newton, 
so is the story of misplaced footwear attributed to 
Attorney G. A. Baralt. The rumor runs that our 
hero, in great impatience to feast his ears on 
Moffo in Traviata, rigged himself up in such a 
hurry one night that he slipped his right foot into 
his left shoe and, vice versa, his left foot into his 
right shoe. This painful arrangement, while deny- 
ing him full enjoyment of the overwhelming magic 
of both music and song, did reveal to him—in 
the very ambulance that removed him, finally,
 For “harken,” read “hearten.” [Author’s note.] 
 For “hearten,” we venture to suggest “harden.” [Copy editor’s 
note.]


from the topmost gallery of Buenos Aires’ 
Teatro Colón—his now famous discovery of 
brotherhoods. Baralt, on putting his wrong foot 
forward, may have reflected that at any number of 
points on the globe, at that selfsame moment, 
other men and women were suffering an analo- 
gous mishap. In the popular imagination, it was 
this trifling accident that inspired him to his dis- 
covery.
The unvarnished truth, however, is that we per- 
sonally got together with the attorney himself— 
capitalizing on a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity 
—in his now world-famous though cramped 
law office on Pasteur Street, in the heart of the 
Argentine capital, and that, always the gentle- 
man, he dismissed the still popular fallacy out of 
hand, assuring us repeatedly that his theory of 
brotherhoods was the fruit of lengthy meditation 
upon the supposed laws of probability and the ars 
combinatoria of Raymond Lull, and that, as a mat- 
ter of fact, in order to avoid catching bronchitis, 
he never ventured out of doors at night. So be it; 
gall is bitter, but undeniable.
The six tomes which Attorney Baralt saw into 
print under the overall title Brotherhoods (-) 
make up an exhaustive introduction to the prob- 
lem at hand. Together with the work of Ezra Fish- 
pond and the Polish novel Quo Vadis?, by Ramón 
Novarro, this six-volume set is found in any li- 
brary worthy of the name, but it has been re- 
marked that its mob of buyers is somewhat offset 
by a readership of zero. Despite its captivating
 For “Ramón Novarro,” read “H. Sienkiewicz.” [Copy editor’s 
note.]


style, its copious indices and appendices, and the 
subject’s irresistible glamor, the vast majority of 
bookbuyers has not been able to penetrate beyond 
the front endpapers and table of contents without 
losing their way like Dante in the selva oscura. To 
cite just one example, Cattaneo himself, in his 
prize-winning Analysis, progresses no farther than 
page nine of the “By Way of Preface,” as he strays 
increasingly from the work itself to comment on a 
certain banned pornographic novelette by Bishop 
Cottone. For the foregoing reasons, we do not 
 judge superfluous the present modest survey, 
which, though a pioneer effort, we hope will prove 
helpful in orienting the studious beginner. Our 
sources, what is more, are straight from the 
horse’s mouth himself, since, rather than become 
embroiled in a perusal of the bulky work, we have 
found preferable conversational impact, in the 
flesh, with Barak’s brother-in-law Henri Gallach y 
Gasset, who, after a series of delays, resigned him- 
self to admitting us into his now world-famous 
though cramped notary’s office on Matheu Street, 
in the heart of the above-mentioned Argentine 
capital.
With quite remarkable rapidity, Gallach brought 
the brotherhood movement within grasp of our 
feeble reach. Humankind, he explained away, is 
made up, despite climatic and political differences, 
of a multitude of secret societies, or brotherhoods, 
whose members are not only unknown to each 
other but who may, at any given moment, change 
their status. Some of these societies are more en- 
during than others—for example, the society of 
individuals sporting Catalan surnames, or sur-


names that begin with the letter G. Others, in- 
versely, quickly fade—the society of those who, at 
this very moment, in Brazil or Africa, are inhaling 
the odor of jasmine or, more culture-minded and 
studious, reading a bus ticket. Other societies may 
branch into subspecies which in themselves prove 
interesting—for example, persons attacked by a 
cigarette cough who, at the same time, may also be 
wearing baggy trousers or be sprinting along on 
ten-speed bicycles or be riding New York’s Times 
Square shuttle. Another sub-branch consists of 
those individuals who hold themselves aloof from 
the aforesaid—counting the nagging cough—only- 
too-human characteristics.
Brotherhoodism, in short, is never at rest, but 
flows like living sap. We ourselves, who do our 
level best to maintain a position of blameless neu- 
trality, just this evening belonged first to the fra- 
ternity of those riding the up elevator and, min- 
utes later, to the fraternity of those riding 
basementward or, claustrophobically, being stuck 
somewhere between ladies’ lingerie and home fur- 
nishings. The most trifling act—striking a match 
or blowing it out—expels us from one group and 
lodges us in another. Such widespread diversity 
has a valuable discipline for character formation 
built in: the person wielding a spoon is the adver- 
sary of he who brandishes a fork, but very soon 
both are at one over the use of the napkin, only to 
split again over their Postum or Sanka. And all 
without the slightest raising of the voice, without 
the slightest gnashing of teeth—what harmony! 
what an endless display of true integration! I think


you look like a turtle, and tomorrow I am taken 
for a tortoise, and so forth and so on!
There is no denying that so majestic a panorama 
opens itself, even if peripherally, to the blind stabs 
of certain self-appointed critics. As is always the 
case, the opposition sets in motion all sorts of con- 
tradictory objections. Channel  broadcasts that 
the whole scheme is old hat, that Baralt discovered 
nothing, since we have had, from time immemo- 
rial—we cite an American context—the A.F.L.- 
C.I.O., lunatic asylums, mutual aid societies, chess 
clubs, stamp albums, the Arlington National Cem- 
etery, the Cosa Nostra, Congress, State Fairs, Bo- 
tanical Gardens, the P.E.N. Club, drum major- 
ettes, sporting goods stores, the Boy Scouts, bingo, 
and other groupings, which, no less useful for 
being well known, are a matter of common knowl- 
edge. The radio, on the other hand, bandies it 
about the airwaves that brotherhoodism, by the 
very flimsiness of the brotherhoods, is totally de- 
void of practical value. To one, the scheme is odd; 
to the other, old wine in new bottles. But the un- 
deniable fact of the matter remains that 
brotherhoodism is the first planned attempt to 
unite on behalf of the individual all the latent af- 
finities, which, up to now, like underground 
rivers, have coursed through history. Perfectly 
structured and steered by an expert helmsman, 
the brotherhood movement would constitute the 
bedrock of resistance against the lava-like torrent 
of anarchy. Let us, however, not shut our eyes to 
the inevitable offshoots of strife that the well- 
meaning doctrine may awaken: the man getting


off a train will pull a switchblade on the man who 
boards; the incognizant buyer of gumdrops will 
try to strangle the master hand who dispenses 
them.
Equally aloof from detractors and adherents, 
Baralt marches his course. We are aware, from re- 
liable sources (his brother-in-law himself!), that 
the good attorney has in progress a compilation of 
all possible brotherhoods. Of course, no lack of 
obstacles presents itself: let us only think, to take 
but one example, of the present brotherhood of 
persons who are thinking about labyrinths; 
of those who, a minute ago, forgot all about them; 
of those who two minutes ago forgot; of those who 
three minutes ago; of those who four minutes ago; 
of those four and a half; of those five. . . . In- 
stead of labyrinths, let us take lamps. The plot 
thickens. Nor are cabbages and kings of any avail.
To end on a strong note, allow us to unburden 
ourselves of our warmest and weightiest approval. 
We have no idea how Baralt will steer clear of the 
reefs ahead of him; but we do know, with all the 
serene and mysterious certitude which faith alone 
can impart, that the Master will not fail to produce 
a catalogue that is all-embracing.


On Universal Theater
Nothing in this admittedly rainy fall season of 
 is less up for debate than the fact that Mel- 
pomene and Thalia are the youngest Muses. After 
twenty-five or more centuries, the mask that wears 
the grin as well as the mask of her tearful sister 
have at last overcome (as drama critic Myriam 
Powell-Paul Fort has so often maintained) almost 
insuperable obstacles.
In the first place, there was the enslaving influ- 
ence of names whose genius is above argument— 
Aeschylus, Aristophanes, Plautus, Shakespeare, 
Calderón, Corneille, Goldoni, Schiller, Ibsen, 
Shaw, Elmer Rice. In the second place, a succes- 
sion of ingeniously wrought architectonic bulks 
that ranged all the way from those plain court- 
yards wide open to every rigor of drizzle and snow 
flurry (such as the one in which Hamlet delivered 
his monologue) down to the elaborate revolving 
stages of today’s modern opera temples—to say 
nothing of such concomitant features as orchestra 
pits, prompters’ boxes, and ladies’ and gentlemen’s


powder rooms. In the third place, there were the 
overwhelming personalities of the mimes—Beer- 
bohm Tree, that giant, etc.—who intruded between 
spectator and Art for no other purpose than that 
of reaping a rich harvest of applause. In the 
fourth and last place were cinema, theater of the 
air, and television, which, by purely mechanical 
means, broadened and popularized past evils.
Those who have unearthed the prehistory of the 
new New Theater wave aloft, as forerunners, two 
precursors: the Oberammergau Passion Play, per- 
formed by Bavarian farmhands; and those truly 
popular, multitudinous presentations of William 
Tell, which burgeoned out across cantons and 
lakes in the selfsame setting that first produced 
this (to be quite candid) hackneyed historical ro- 
mance. Other investigators, even more antiquated, 
hark back to those guildsmen of the Middle Ages, 
who enacted the history of the world out of rustic 
oxcarts—fisherfolk performing Noah’s Ark and 
contemporary pastrycooks the Last Supper. All 
this, though undeniably true, hardly blurs the now 
venerable name of Georg-Adolphe Bluntschli.
It was in the Swiss city of Ouchy, sometime back 
around , that Bluntschli gained his much-dis- 
cussed reputation as an eccentric. Time and time 
again, with a well-aimed jerk of his elbow, he 
tipped waiters’ trays, managing to get himself 
soaked not infrequently in Kümmel when not in 
grated cheese. Typical—but apocryphal—is the in- 
cident on the grand staircase of the Gibbon Hotel 
of his having introduced his right arm into the left 
sleeve of a raincoat with a Scotch-plaid lining into 
which Baron Engelhart was struggling unsuccess-


fully to button himself up. Nobody would dream 
of denying, however, that he did put that swiftest 
of aristocrats to flight one day by the sudden dis- 
play of an outdated Smith-Wesson made entirely 
of almond-studded chocolate. It has also been con- 
clusively proved that Bluntschli was in the habit of 
venturing out onto the peaceful waters of Lake 
Geneva in a rowboat, where, under cover of dark- 
ness, he would mutter a brief aside or else allow 
himself a yawn. Further examples of his eccentric- 
ities are on record. We now definitely know that 
he smiled or sometimes sobbed in the funicular; 
and as to his conduct on streetcars, more than one 
witness has sworn as to having seen him swagger 
down the aisle, ticket tucked into the band of his 
boater, troubling some fellow passenger for the 
time. But around , increasingly conscious of 
the significance of his Art, Bluntschli forswore 
such far-out experimenting. From this point on, 
he strolled along the streets, he found his way into 
offices and shops, he entrusted a picture postcard 
to a mailbox, he purchased tobacco and smoked it, 
he leafed through the morning papers, he be- 
haved—in a word—exactly like the most inconspic- 
uous of citizens.
Then, in , he did what all of us end up 
doing (absit omen!)—he passed away one typical 
Thursday, well after ten p.m. Had it not been for 
the kindly-disposed disloyalty of his eternal friend, 
Maxime Petitpain, who in the unavoidable funeral 
harangue revealed it in words that are now classic, 
Bluntschli’s message to the world would have been 
buried with him in the peaceful cemetery of Lau- 
sanne. Incredible as this may seem today, the


address delivered by Petitpain and reproduced in 
its entirety in the biweekly Petit Vaudois had no 
repercussions whatever until , when, from the 
back files of the newspaper, it was brought to light 
by the now celebrated actor and producer Max- 
imilien Longuet. This promising young man, who 
had obtained the coveted Shortbread Award to 
study chess technique in Bolivia, ended by con- 
signing to the flames—like Hernán Cortés before 
him—both chessmen and chessboard and, without 
as much as crossing the traditional Rubicon be- 
tween Lausanne and Ouchy, gave himself up body 
and soul to those principles bequeathed posterity 
by Bluntschli.
In the back room of his bakery, Longuet 
brought together a limited but select group of illu- 
minati who in their way not only constituted the 
posthumous executors of what has come to be 
called “the Bluntschli plan” but who also put this 
plan into action. Let us, in gilded capitals, stencil 
the names our memory still retains, even though 
they may be somewhat mixed up or even apocry- 
phal—Jean Pees and Charles (or Charlotte) Saint 
Pe. This bold conventicle—on whose banner, we 
have no doubts, was inscribed the cry “Out into the 
streets!”—without an instant’s delay confronted all 
the risks of public indifference. Not for a single 
second condescending to advertising gimmicks or 
to billboard posters, they went out, a hundred 
strong, into the Rue Beau Séjour. Not all of them 
left the aforesaid bakery at the same time. First, 
one threaded his quiet way due south, then an- 
other due northeast; a third rode on bicycle; not a 
few took the streetcar (some in patent-leather


boots). No one suspected a thing. The populous 
city took them for common passersby. The con- 
spirators, showing exemplary discipline, neither 
greeted one another nor exchanged a wink. X 
strolled along the streets. Y, found his way into of- 
fices and shops. Z entrusted a picture postcard to a 
mailbox. Charlotte (or Charles) purchased tobacco 
and smoked it. Tradition has it that Longuet 
waited at home, tense, biting his nails, his whole 
attention glued to the telephone, which at long last 
would bring him one of the two horns of the di- 
lemma—succès d’estime or flat failure.
Is there any reader unaware of the outcome? 
Longuet, after the long centuries cited earlier, had 
struck a death blow to the theater of stage proper- 
ties, set speeches, and box-office queues. The new 
theater stood on its own legs! The unprepared, 
the most ignorant, you yourself, are the actors; the 
script is life; and all the world’s a stage.



The Flowering of an Art
Oddly enough, the term “functional architecture,” 
which people in the profession hardly use any- 
more without a certain pious smile, has not lost its 
hold over the public at large. In hopes of clarify- 
ing the concept, the present essay shall, with a 
minimum of broad strokes, sketch a compact sur- 
vey of the major architectural trends of the day.
The origins of the problem, though notably 
close to us, are blurred in polemical obfuscation. 
Two names compete for the roll of honor: Adam 
Quincey, who, in , published in Edinburgh 
the strange monograph titled Towards an Un- 
compromising Architecture; and the Pisan, Ales- 
sandro Piranesi, who, barely a couple of years 
later, erected at his own cost the first Chaotic in 
history. (Unruly mobs, urged on by an insane itch 
to get inside the building, set it afire repeated 
times, to the point—one Halloween Night—of re- 
ducing it to a heap of tenuous ash. Piranesi was to 
pass away in the interim, but photographs and a 
plan have made possible the work of reconstruc-


tion, which, following more or less faithfully the 
general lines of the original, enables us once again 
to admire it.)
Reread in the cold light of present-day perspec- 
tives, Adam Quincey’s short and badly printed 
study provides meager fare for those of us with a 
sweet tooth for novelties. Nevertheless, let us sin- 
gle out a page or two. In one passage, we read: 
“Emerson, whose memory was usually inventive, 
attributes to Goethe the concept of architecture as 
frozen music. That dictum and our own personal 
dissatisfaction with contemporary works have oc- 
casionally lifted us to the envisionment of an archi- 
tecture that would, like music, be a direct language 
of the passions and not one subject to the de- 
mands of inhabitability.” Further on, we read: “Le 
Corbusier speaks of the house as a machine for 
living—a definition which seems less applicable to 
the Taj Mahal than to an oak tree or to a fish.” 
Such affirmations as these, obvious or platitudi- 
nous today, brought upon them at the time the 
fulminations of Gropius and of Wright, who were 
wounded in their innermost citadels, to say noth- 
ing of stirring a general uproar. The remainder of 
the monograph, torpedoing Ruskin’s Seven Lamps 
of Architecture, now leaves us coldly apathetic.
It matters little or nothing whether or not Piran- 
esi was aware of the aforesaid monograph. The 
undeniable fact is that he erected, on formerly 
malarial terrain along the Via Pestifera, with the 
help of masons and a volunteer corps of the el- 
derly, the Great Chaotic of Rome. This noble edi- 
fice, which to some seemed a sphere, to others an


ovoid, and to the reactionary a shapeless mass, and 
whose materials ran the gamut from marble 
to cow dung, consisted essentially of truncated 
bridges, of spiral stairways that gave access to im- 
penetrable walls, of balconies to which entrance 
was impossible, and of doors that opened either 
into pits or into high, narrow rooms from whose 
ceilings soft armchairs and comfortable double 
beds hung upside down. Nor was there any lack of 
concave mirrors. In an initial burst of enthusiasm, 
Architectural Forum greeted it as the first concrete 
example of the new architectonic conscience. Who 
would have said then that the Chaotic, in a not too 
distant future, would be branded as half-hearted 
and outmoded!
We shall certainly not waste one drop of ink or 
one minute of time denouncing the coarse imita- 
tions that were opened to the public in the Dis- 
neylands of the Eternal City and in some of the 
leading fairgrounds of Paris.
Worthy of mention, though somewhat eclectic, 
is the sincretism of Otto Julius Manntoifel, whose 
shrine of the Many Muses, in Potsdam, brought 
together the revolving stage, the circulating li- 
brary, the house as living unit, the winter garden, 
some flawless allegorical marbles, the Roman 
Catholic chapel, the Buddhist temple, the skating 
rink, frescoes, the polyphonic organ, the currency 
exchange, the men’s room, the Turkish bath, and 
the wedding cake—to mention only a few of its el- 
ements. The burdensome maintenance of this 
multiple structure, however, caused it to be auc- 
tioned off and dismantled almost immediately fol-


lowing the festivities which crowned its opening. 
The date is significant: the twenty-third or twenty- 
fourth of April, !
Now, inescapably, there looms before us a fig- 
ure of even greater magnitude—the master of 
Utrecht, H. H. Verdussen. This peerless worthy 
not only wrote history but made it. In , he 
issued a volume under the appropriate title 
Organum Architecturae Recentis; in , under the 
patronage of Prince Bernhard, he opened to the 
public his House of Doors and Windows, to give it 
the affectionate name with which it was baptized 
by the entire population of Holland.
Let us summarize Verdussen’s theory: walls, 
windows, doors, floor, and ceiling constitute 
beyond all discussion the basic elements of mod- 
ern man’s habitat. Neither the most frivolous 
countess in her boudoir nor the wretch in his 
death cell awaiting the stroke of midnight, which 
beckons him to the chair, can elude this iron law. 
It has come to us by rumor that a single hint from 
His Highness was enough to cause Verdussen to 
add two additional elements to his rigid plan— 
thresholds and stairways.
The building which carries out these principles 
covers a rectangular plot with a frontage of six 
yards and a depth of something slightly under 
eighteen. Each of the six doors that go to make up 
the façade of the ground floor, communicates, at a 
distance of some thirty-six inches, with a similar 
door, and so on in succession, until at the rear of 
the building we arrive at the eighteenth door. Se- 
vere paneling on each side divides the six parallel 
systems, which all together add up to the imposing


sum of one hundred and eight doors. From the 
windows of houses across the street, the careful 
observer may make out that the second floor 
abounds in staircases of six steps that go up and 
down in zigzag form; that the third floor is made 
up entirely of windows; the fourth, of thresholds; 
and the fifth and last, of floors and ceilings. The 
building is of crystal, a characteristic which clearly 
facilitates examination from the outside. So per- 
fect is this jewel, in fact, that no one has as yet 
dared copy it.
And so, having come down to the present, we 
conclude this brief sketch of the morphological 
evolution of Uninhabitable Dwellings, those con- 
centrated refreshing whiffs of pure art which do 
not pander to the slightest trace of utilitarianism. 
Inside them, nobody finds his way, takes his ease, 
sinks himself down into comfortable furnishings, 
greets the passerby from the inaccessible balcony, 
waves a handkerchief (or throws himself) from the 
upper windows. La tout n’est qu’ordre et beauté.
P.S.: Galley proofs of the foregoing survey already 
corrected, word reaches us by cable from Tas- 
mania itself of a new offshoot. Hotchkiss de Es- 
tephano, who until now had never overstepped 
the bounds of the most conservative circles of non- 
habitable architecture, has launched a J’accuse that 
makes no bones about pulling the rug out from 
under the once respected Verdussen. The declara- 
tion argues that walls, floors, roofs, ceilings, sky- 
lights, doors, and windows—even if purely or- 
namental—are the bygone elements and fossils of 
a functional traditionalism which architects pre-


tend to reject but which nonetheless still slip in by 
the back door. With widespread and dazzling pub- 
licity, he announces a new uninhabitable that does 
away with such relics while at the same time it 
avoids the all-too-easy expedient of mere bulk and 
shapelessness. With unflagging interest, we look 
forward to the models, plans, and photographs of 
this latest expression of the Modern.


Gradus ad Parnassum
Returning from a brief but not undeserved sym- 
posium on my work jointly sponsored by the uni- 
versities of California (La Jolla) and Utah (Salt 
Lake City), what do I find awaiting me in one of 
the picturesque bars of our own Ezeiza Interna- 
tional Airport but news of a decidedly funereal na- 
ture. It may safely be said that at a certain stage of 
life a man cannot turn around without someone 
dropping dead behind his back. In this case I 
refer, of course, to Santiago Ginsberg.
Here and now, I suppress the sadness oc- 
casioned by the loss of this bosom friend in order 
to rectify—if I may be allowed the word—the 
many erroneous interpretations of his work that 
have made their way into the daily press. I hasten 
to point out that in these flagrant absurdities I 
find no trace of malice; rather, let it be said that 
they are born of haste and pardonable ignorance. 
I shall set things straight, that is all.
Certain so-called critics seem to forget, more or 
less deliberately, that the first book published by


Ginsberg’s pen was the poem-cycle entitled Clues 
 for You and Me. My modest private library has in it, 
under lock and key, a copy of the first edition— 
non bis in idem—of this most interesting pamphlet. 
A sober jacket in a rich range of colors, a recon- 
struction of the author’s face by Identikit, title by 
the publisher himself, typography by Bodoni & 
Co., text on the whole true to the manuscript—in 
plain fact, the book was a smash!
The date, a.d. July , . The outcome was 
entirely predictable: a frontal attack by the Ul- 
traists, the yawning neglect of the common herd 
of reviewers, one or two inconsequential notices, 
and, in conclusion, the prescribed dinner in the 
unpretentious Hotel Marconi on the near West- 
side. Nobody, it turned out, paid the slightest at- 
tention in the aforesaid sonnet sequence to certain 
blatant novelties that struck very deeply and that, 
every now and then, peeped through the work’s 
humdrum triviality. I now single them out:
In taproom chat the chums have gathered round 
While turnpike twilight falls without a sound.
Years later, K. Carter Wheelock was to be 
tripped up (Treatise on the Adjective in the River Plate 
Region, ) by the word “turnpike.” The fact 
remains, however, that this word is to be found in 
any authorized edition—even in pocket form—of 
Funk & Wagnall’s. Wheelock brands it “bold, feli- 
citous, modern,” and he puts forth the hypoth- 
esis—horresco referens—that the word is an epithet.
By way of example, this second flash:


The loving lips that kisses were to seal 
While whispering, whispering, nocoameal.
I nobly confess that at first glance “nocoameal” 
here eluded me.
Let’s try another sample:
Mailbox! The negligence of scattered stars 
Denies the wise astrologer his wars.
For all we know, the opening word of this lovely 
couplet elicited not the least indictment from the 
critical brotherhood, an oversight justified perhaps 
by the fact that “mailbox,” derived from the two 
words “mail” and “box,” stands out conspicuously 
on page  of the sixteenth edition of the pre- 
viously cited dictionary.
In order to protect ourselves from entangling 
contingencies, we judged it precautionary, at the 
time, to register with the Copyright Office the for- 
merly plausible hypothesis that the word “mail- 
box” was a mere slip of the pen and that the verse 
should read:
Hard knocks! The negligence of scattered stars 
or, if you prefer:
Smallpox! The negligence of scattered stars . . .
May no one brand me traitor; I put my cards on 
the table. Sixty days after having registered the
 The identical words are also found, respectively, on pp.  
and  of Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary. [Translator’s note.]

above emendations, I dispatched a registered tele- 
gram to my good friend the author, explaining to 
him at length, without beating around the bush, 
the step I had taken. His reply baffled us. Gins- 
berg accepted our emendations on condition that 
the three variants under discussion should be 
taken as synonyms. What on earth could I do, I 
ask you, but bow my head? Clutching at straws, I 
took counsel with Frank Kermode, who gave the 
knotty problem his full attention, only to acknowl- 
edge that though every single one of the three hy- 
potheses had its own undeniable attractiveness, no 
particular one gave him entire satisfaction. As may 
be seen, we were at a deadlock.
Ginsberg’s second collection, subtitled Bouquet of 
Perfumed Stars, may be ferreted out in the base- 
ment of certain self-styled bookshops. The lengthy 
essay which the pages of the New York Review of 
Books dedicated to him, under the imposing signa- 
ture of Jay Lee Parini, will for a long time remain 
definitive; but even so, as with so many other liter- 
ary hands, the eminent Dartmouth professor 
failed to detect certain idiomatic anomalies which 
in their way make up the true and weighty mar- 
row of the volume in question. These anomalies 
take the form of words which are, generally speak- 
ing, so brief that they elude the critical magnifying 
glass: “drj,” in the introductory quatrain; “ujb,” in 
a now classic sonnet to be found in most school 
anthologies; “gnll,” in the rondel “To His Be- 
loved”; “hnz,” in an epitaph bubbling over with re- 
strained sorrow—but why labor the point? It is 
useless. We shall as yet say nothing of whole lines


of which not a single word figures in Funk & Wag- 
nall’s!
Hloj ud ed pta jabuneh Jrof grugno.
The crux of all this would have remained in the 
air had it not been for the intervention of the un- 
dersigned, who furtively exhumed from an old 
built-in wardrobe-cum-bed a notebook (in Gins- 
berg’s own hand), which the trumpets of fame will 
one of these days designate Codex Primus et Ultimus. 
Quite obviously it is a totum revolutum that lumps 
together sayings that captivated the mind of our 
amateur of letters (“The wheel that squeaks gets 
the oil,” “To go from pillar to post,” “Try and try 
again,” et cetera, et cetera, et cetera), off-color 
doodles, signed essays, one hundred percent inspi- 
rational verses (“If—,” by Rudyard Kipling; “How 
do I love thee? Let me count the ways,” by Eliza- 
beth Barrett Browning; “Paul Revere’s Ride,” by 
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow; “Say not the strug- 
gle nought availeth,” by Arthur Hugh Clough), an 
incomplete selection of telephone numbers, and, 
not least, the most authoritative explanation of 
certain words, such as “turnpike,” “gnll,” “nocoa- 
meal,” and “jabuneh,” that figure in the Ginsberg 
canon.
Let us tread with caution. “Turnpike,” which 
comes down to us (?) from “turn” and “pike,” 
means, in the dictionary, “a toll road or one for- 
merly maintained as such.” Ginsberg is not in 
agreement with this. In his handwritten notebook, 
he suggests this: “ ‘Turnpike’ in my verse denotes


the emotion prompted by a melody that we have 
heard once, that we have forgotten, and that after 
some years we hear again.”
Also, the veil is lifted on “nocoameal.” Ginsberg 
specifically states: “Lovers repeat, without realizing 
it, that they have lived searching for each other, 
that they knew each other before ever meeting, 
and that their very happiness is the proof that they 
were always linked. To save time, to cut short such 
wordiness, I suggest that lovers simply say ‘nocoa- 
meal’ or, still more economical timewise, ‘mapu’ 
or, even better, ‘pu.’ ” It is a great pity that the tyr- 
anny of metrics was to impose on Ginsberg the 
least euphonic of the three words.
Touching on “mailbox” in its locus classicus, I 
hold a great surprise for you. The word does not 
suggest, as the common reader might dream, the 
everyday artifact, cylindrical in shape and painted 
red, that assimilates letters through an orifice. On 
the contrary, the notebook instructs us that Gins- 
berg preferred the meaning “accidental, fortui- 
tous, incompatible with a cosmos.”
On this same train, without haste but without 
pause, the deceased resolves the greater part of 
the unknown quantities so worthy of the attention 
of the sloppy reader. Thus, to look into but a sin- 
gle example or two, we put forward that “ja- 
buneh” means “the melancholy pilgrimage to 
places formerly shared with an unfaithful 
woman,” and that “grugno,” taken in its broadest 
sense, is equivalent to “letting out a sigh, an irre- 
pressible plaint of love.” We shall pass over the 
word “gnll” as over live coals; here the good taste


that Ginsberg made his banner seems to have be- 
trayed him.
Scruple compels us to copy out the following 
squib which, after so much tiresome explanation, 
leaves one exactly where we were in the first place:
My aim is the creation of a poetic language, made 
up of terms which have no exact equivalent in 
common languages but which denote situations 
and sentiments that are, and always were, the es- 
sential theme of the lyric. The definitions that I 
have attempted with words like “jabuneh” and 
“mloj” are, the reader must remember, mere ap- 
proximations. They are also a first effort. My fol- 
lowers will doubtless enrich my modest precursor’s 
vocabulary. I ask of them that they not fall into 
purism; but, rather, let them alter, let them re- 
shape.



The Selective Eye
The reverberation of a certain war of nerves, car- 
ried to a fever pitch by the A.A.A. (Association of 
Argentine Architects), that found its way into the 
yellow press and was spurred by the dark machin- 
ations of the technical director of the Plaza Garay, 
in the final analysis casts a crude, naked light on 
the postponed labors and much-respected person- 
ality of the most unbribable of our chisels, Antarc- 
tic A. Garay.
The whole affair brings back to memory, which 
is so prone to amnesia, heartwarming recollections 
of that unforgettable mackerel with French fries, 
washed down with a Rhine wine, that we savored 
in Freddy Loomis’ dining chambers sometime 
around . On that night, the most high-flown 
of the younger brood of the generation of that 
day—I speak of the literary side only—were gath- 
ered on Parera Street, lured there by the banquet- 
ing and by the Muses. The evening’s final toast, 
drunk with champagne, was proposed by the 
gloved hand of Dr. Montenegro himself. Epigrams


sparkled right and left, when not interspersed 
with ethnic gags. My nearest companion—seated 
at a corner of the table, where our waiter, that 
Tantalus in tails, overlooked our dessert—turned 
out to be a young man from the provinces, full of 
consideration and prudence, who never once bat- 
ted an eye as I loftily held forth on the arts. On 
that occasion, at least, it must be admitted that my 
table companion kept up with my lengthy perora- 
tion. Later, as we were having ourselves a hot 
chocolate at an old grocery-bar at the nearby Five 
Corners and close to the end of my analytical dith- 
yramb on Lola Mora’s fountain, Garay let me 
know that he was a sculptor. Sure enough, he 
proffered a printed announcement of an exhibi- 
tion of his works being held for relatives and those 
with nothing to do at the salon of the Friends of 
Art, formerly the Van Riel. Before accepting, I 
left the bill up to him, payment of which he daw- 
dled over for so long it ensured our missing the 
last streetcar and having to walk home.
For the opening, I put in a personal appear- 
ance. That first evening the show was steaming at 
full speed, sales dropping off only later to the 
point where not a single piece was sold. The 
stickers saying “Sold” fooled no one. As a matter 
of fact, the critics sugarcoated the pill as much as 
possible, alluding to Henry Moore and extolling 
the whole effort as praiseworthy. I myself, to 
repay the hot chocolates, penned an encomiastic 
line or two for the Revue de l’Amerique latine, taking 
cover, of course, behind the pseudonym “Fore- 
shortened.”
The exhibition did not break the old molds; it


was, in fact, made up of plaster molds, like those 
impressed on young minds in primary school by 
the drawing mistress, grouped in two and threes— 
acanthus leaves, feet, fruit. Antarctic A. Garay 
keyed us in to the fact that it was not the leaves or 
the feet or the fruit one was to regard but, rather, 
the space, or air, between the casts. This came to 
be what he called, according to my later explana- 
tion in the said publication in French, “concave 
sculpture.”
The success of the first show was repeated in 
Number Two. This came to pass in a premises in 
the wholly typical neighborhood of Caballito. 
There was a single room without any other fur- 
nishings in sight than the four bare walls, a bit of 
molding here and there on the ceiling, and, on the 
planks of the floor, a half dozen pieces of rubble 
scattered at random. “All this,” from the makeshift 
box office where I made a fortune hand over fist 
selling tickets at a quarter a head, I pontificated to 
the uninitiated, “really isn’t worth a fig; the main 
thing, for those of sophisticated taste, is the space 
that circulates between the ceiling moldings and 
the rubble.” The critics, who can’t see beyond their 
nostrils, failed to grasp that an authentic develop- 
ment had taken place in the interim, and they only 
deplored the lack of leaves, fruit, and feet.
The results of this campaign, which without 
trepidation I declare unwise, were not long in 
making themselves felt. The public, jovial and 
good-natured at first, got fed up and, acting as 
one, set fire to the show on the very eve of the 
birthday of the artist, who suffered considerable 
contusions of the region vulgarly called the glu-


teus, owing to the impact thereupon of the chunks 
of rubble. As for the ticket-seller—yours truly—he 
got wind of what was coming and, so as not stir a 
wasp’s nest, he packed up early, taking care to res- 
cue the proceeds in a small cardboard suitcase.
My road was clear: I had to find a den, a nest, a 
hideout, where I could lay low when he of the con- 
tusions was released from the hospital. On the in- 
sistence of a Negro cook, I installed myself at the 
New Impartial, a hotel a block and a half from the 
Once, where I collected material for my detective 
study “Tadeo Limardo’s Victim” and where I 
never lost an opportunity to make a pass or two at 
 Juana Musante, wife of one of the New Impartial’s 
co-owners.
Some years later, in the Western Bar, having a 
hot chocolate and croissants, I was taken unawares 
by Antarctic A. Although recovered from his le- 
sions, he had the tact not to bring up the subject of 
the little cardboard suitcase, and soon we resumed 
our inveterate friendship to the warmth of a sec- 
ond hot chocolate, which he once again paid for 
out of his own purse.
But why all this remembrance of the past when 
the present has taken over? I refer, as by now even 
the most obtuse reader must gather, to the stupen- 
dous show brought to a culmination in the Plaza 
Garay by the unrelenting labor and creative genius 
of our much-tried hero. Everything was planned 
sotto voce in the Western Bar. Beer stein alternat-
 N.B. We seize this opportunity to recommend to our buyers 
the immediate acquisition of Six Problems for don Isidro Parodi, by H. 
Bustos Domecq, soon to be available at better booksellers. [Footnote 
by H. B. D.]


ing with hot chocolate, the two of us, barely aware 
of what we consumed, conversed amicably. It was 
there and then that the artist whispered to me the 
preliminaries of his plan, which amounted to no 
more than a sheet-metal signboard bearing the no- 
tice “Sculptural Exhibition by Antarctic A. Garay.” 
Once attached to a couple of two-by-fours, we 
were to plant it in a conspicuous place so as to be 
seen by anyone coming along Entre Ríos Avenue.
At first, I argued for Old English lettering, but 
in the end we settled for plain letters on a red 
background. With no municipal permission what- 
ever and under cover of deepest night, while the 
watchman slept, we nailed up our sign in a rain 
that drenched both our heads. The deed commit- 
ted, we dispersed in various directions in order to 
avoid being nabbed by the cops. My present domi- 
cile is just around the corner, on Pozos Street, but 
the artist had to hoof it all the way across town to 
the residential area of the Plaza de Flores.
The next day, slave of pure greed and to steal a 
march on my friend, I turned up with the rosy- 
fingered dawn at the green enclosure of the plaza 
as the first rays were lighting up the sign and the 
sparrows were chirping their good morning. A flat 
cap with an oil-cloth visor and a baker’s dustcoat 
with mother-of-pearl buttons invested me with a 
look of authority. As for tickets, I had taken the 
precaution of keeping in my file the unused ones 
from the other time. What a difference between 
the humble—one might say casual—passersby, 
who paid their fifty cents without a grumble, and 
that mob of unionized architects who brought suit 
on us within three days! In spite of what the shy-


sters allege, the matter is plain and simple. At the 
expense of much time and effort, our lawyer, At- 
torney Savigny, was persuaded of this at his now 
world-famous though cramped office on Pasteur 
Street. The judge, whom we might have to bribe 
with a small slice of the box-office takings should 
worse come to worse, now has the case under ad- 
visement. I am making ready, in advance, to have 
the last laugh. Everyone should know that Garay’s 
sculptural œuvre, on show in the little plaza of the 
same name, consists of the space bounded by the 
buildings that line Solis and Pavón streets and 
reaching up to the sky itself, including, of course, 
the park’s trees, its benches, its rill, and its peram- 
bulating citizenry. A selective eye—that is what’s 
needed!
P.S.: Garay’s projects keep growing apace. Indif- 
ferent to the outcome of the lawsuit, he is now 
dreaming up an exhibition (Number Four) which 
would take in the entire neighborhood of Núñez. 
Tomorrow—who can say?—his work, so exem- 
plary and so Argentine, may come to incorporate 
the whole air space between the pyramids and the 
sphinx.


What's Missing Hurts Not
We once held that every age gives rise to its writer, 
its maximum organ, its true spokesman. The 
writer of our own accelerated times, as it happens, 
has taken up residence in Buenos Aires, where he 
was born on a certain twenty-fourth of August, 
. His name—Tulio Herrera. His books— 
Apologia (); the poem collection Rising Sooner 
(), which took a Second Municipal Prize; and, 
in , the completed novel Let Light.
Apologia owes its origin to an unusual episode, 
involving—so typical of our author—the plot 
woven by envy to impair the reputation of a 
member of his family, Father Ponderevo, six times 
accused of plagiarism. Relatives and outsiders 
alike could not help but recognize, in their heart 
of hearts, the steadfast devotion displayed by the 
young pen in his uncle’s behalf. Not two years 
passed, however, before the critics were pointing 
out a rather singular feature of the work—the 
omission throughout of the name of the man 
being vindicated, as well as any reference whatever


to the titles in question or to the dates of the works 
alleged to have served as the uncle’s model. More 
than one literary bloodhound settled for the fact 
that these sleights of hand were owing to an ex- 
traordinary delicacy on the part of our author. 
Given the backwardness of the times, not even 
F. R. Leavis saw that we were dealing here with 
the first infiltration of a new aesthetic.
This selfsame aesthetic lent itself to develop- 
ment in extenso in the poetry of Rising Sooner. 
Drawn to the book by the apparent simplicity of its 
title, and buying a copy or two, the average reader 
did not examine—in the least—what was inside. 
He read the first line of verse
Ogre lives no roof at all
without suspecting that our Tulio had, like Icarus 
before him, taken drastic shortcuts. The golden 
chain was there still, but one or another missing 
link had to be reconstructed.
In certain—shall we call them concentric?— 
circles, the verse was branded obscure. What bet- 
ter way to shed light on it than by the following 
anecdote, made up from stem to stern, which gives 
us a glimpse of the poet on fashionable Alvear 
Avenue—dressed in a tight-fitting linen outfit, thin 
moustache, and spats—greeting the Baroness von 
Servus. As legend has it, he said, “Madame, how 
long since I’ve heard you bark!”
His meaning was obvious. The poet was refer- 
ring to the Pekinese, which enhanced the lady. 
Apart from common courtesy, the little greeting 
reveals Herrera’s doctrine in a single flash. Of the


middle road nothing is said; we pass—O miracle 
of concision!—from the baroness to the barking.
This same methodology applies to the verse 
quoted above. A notebook in our possession and 
which we shall have printed the moment the still- 
active poet succumbs, cut off in the prime of youth 
and health, informs us that “Ogre lives no roof at 
all” was at the outset still more extensive. A 
number of amputations and loppings were neces- 
sary to bring out the synthesis which today we find 
dazzling. The early draft had a touch of the son- 
net about it, and this is how it looked:
Ogre of Crete, the Minotaur lives 
In a house of its own, the labyrinth.
I, on the other hand, poor and unwell,
Have no roof over my head at all.
As for the title, the words “rising sooner” con- 
stitute nothing less than a modern ellipsis of the 
age-old, dusted-off proverb—long since recorded 
by Correas in an embryonic stage—“Rising 
early brings dawn no sooner.”
And now for the novel. Herrera, who sold us 
the four manuscript volumes of his draft, has for 
the time being forbidden us their publication, 
which is why we so look forward to the hour of his 
demise. Owing to the author’s athletic makeup, 
however, this promises to be a dragged-out affair 
(Herrera being one of those who, when they take a 
deep breath, leave the rest of us panting for ox- 
ygen) and thus squelches any idea of that quick 
end which could satisfy the book-buying public’s 
healthy curiosity. At any rate, having cleared it


with legal counsel, we hasten to leak a summary of 
Let Light and its morphological evolution.
The title Let Light was, of course, taken straight 
from the Bible’s “Let there be light: and there was 
light,” omitting, as was inevitable, the words in be- 
tween. The plot of the novel concerns the rivalry 
of two women, whose names are the same and 
both of whom are in love with the same man, who 
is mentioned in the book only once and even then 
by the wrong name, for the author tells us, in an 
outburst so typical of him (which, surely, does 
honor to him and to us), that his name was Rupert 
but that he called him Albert. It is true, certainly, 
that a Rupert is mentioned in chapter nine, but 
this is another Rupert and constitutes a clear case 
of homonymy.
The two women are engaged in a hard-fought 
competition, resolved by the administration of 
massive doses of cyanide in a spine-tingling scene 
that Herrera elaborated with the patience of an 
ant, and that, naturally, he left out. Another un- 
forgettable cameo is provided by the moment the 
poisoner finds out—too late!— that she has exter- 
minated her rival for nothing, since it was not with 
the victim but with the survivor that Robert was in 
love. This scene, which crowns the novel, had been 
planned by Herrera with an excessive array of de- 
tails, but, so as not to have to leave it out, he never 
actually wrote it. What is above argument here is 
that this unexpected denouement, which we have 
had to sketch very superficially inasmuch as our 
contract quite literally muffles us, is perhaps the 
greatest achievement of the novel of today. The 
characters to whom the reader has access are sim-


ple supernumeraries, most likely drawn from 
other books, and have practically nothing to do 
with the plot. They linger in irrelevant conversa- 
tion and are not even aware of what is taking 
place. Nobody suspects a thing, the reader least of 
all, and yet the work will be translated into several 
foreign languages and will obtain an honorable 
mention.
To be over and done, we promise in our capac- 
ity as executor the publication of the manuscript in 
toto, with all its lacunae and deletions. The work 
will be offered for sale by subscription, to be paid 
in advance, and will commence the moment the 
author expires.
At the same time, public subscription is still 
open for a bust to be erected over the author’s 
common grave in the Argentine capital’s Western 
Cemetery. The work will be by the sculptor Za- 
noni. In applying to it the example of the lamented 
polygraph, the sculpture will consist of an ear, a 
chin, and a pair of shoes.



The Multifaceted Vilaseco
Pens of the highest order—the creme de la creme 
of the Sexton Blakes of criticism—have flocked to 
spread the word that the manifold oeuvre of Adal- 
berto Vilaseco symbolizes, quite unlike any other, 
the development of Spanish-speaking poetry from 
the opening of this century down to our own day. 
Vilaseco’s first turnout, the poem “The Soul’s 
Burrs” (), born in an issue of the Fisherton 
(Rosario) Overseas Courier, is the engaging opuscu- 
lum of the novice, still in search of himself, who 
crawls on all fours and, not infrequently, falls into 
sloppiness. The poem may be said to be more the 
work of a reader than a vigorous creator, since it is 
infested with influences, for the most part of 
others—namely, Argentina’s own Guido Spano 
and Núñez de Arce, with marked leanings toward 
the Uruguayan folklorist Elías Regules. To sum all 
this up in a word, no one would any longer re- 
member this youthful peccadillo were it not for 
the powerful light it sheds on Vilaseco’s sub- 
sequent writings.


Several years later, our author published his 
“Melancholy of a Faun” (), whose length and 
meter were the same as those of his earlier com- 
position. The new poem, however, was now 
marked with the seal of the modernism then in 
vogue. Next, Evaristo Carriego, the poet of the 
outskirts of Buenos Aires, was to have an impact 
on him, and it is from an issue of Caras y Caretas 
(dated November, ) that the third page we 
owe to Vilaseco comes down to us. This is the 
poem entitled “Masquerader.” In spite of the ex- 
treme sway exercised over him by the singer of the 
fringes of the Northside of old-time Buenos Aires, 
there crops up in full force in “Masquerader” the 
unmistakable personality and lofty tone of the ma- 
ture Vilaseco of “Kaleidoscope,” the poem that 
materialized, above Longobardi’s well-known vi- 
gnette, in the review Proa.
Events do not come to rest there. The following 
year, Vilaseco was to turn out his willful satire “Vi- 
perine Lines,” whose unusually severe language 
rid him—once and for all!—of a certain percent- 
age of archaisms.
“Evita at the Helm” dates from , and it was 
premiered with the greatest of fanfare in the Plaza 
de Mayo. Assistant Director of the Commission for 
Cultural Affairs only hours later, Vilaseco devoted 
his ensuing leisure to the projection of a poem 
which was to be—alas!—his last, for he passed 
away long before Tulio Herrera, who still clings to 
life for all he’s worth.
“Ode to Integration” was Vilaseco’s swan song, 
and it was dedicated to various statesmen. So it 
was that our poet’s life was cut short in advanced


old age, but not without his first having gathered 
in book form his uneven production. A touching 
private press edition, signed by the author in ar- 
ticulo mortis under our own friendly persuasion 
only moments before the undertaker bore him off, 
will make public his work among the select circle 
of bibliophiles who may wish to subscribe to the 
same by writing me at my home address on Pozos 
Street. Five hundred copies on featherweight 
paper, scrupulously numbered, more or less make 
up the editio princeps, which, upon receipt of cash 
payment, will be remitted by post, which these 
days is terribly unreliable.
Inasmuch as the book’s exhaustive analytical 
preface, printed in fourteen-point italic type, was 
the responsibility of my pen, I was left materially 
impoverished, making for a certain diminution of 
spark in the analysis, which was why I was forced 
to appeal for a subsidy to cover the costs of post- 
age and handling. Instead of concentrating on the 
specific task at hand, the present factotum squan- 
dered precious time reading Vilaseco’s seven lucu- 
brations, So it was that I came to discover that, 
apart from their titles, the seven poems were ex- 
actly the same. Not a comma, not a semicolon, not 
a single word was different! This finding, the gra- 
tuitous fruit of chance, is, of course, of no impor- 
tance to a thorough evaluation of the versatile Vi- 
lasiquian oeuvre, and the fact that we mention it at 
all at this late date is only in the interests of sheer
 As to the identity of the subsidizer, consult the study “An Eve- 
ning with Ramón Bonavena” included in the indispensable vade- 
mecum Chronicles of Bustos Domecq (New York, ), on sale at bet- 
ter booksellers.


curiosity. The soi-disant blemish adds to our edi- 
tion an undeniable philosophical dimension, and it 
proves once more that, although minor details 
may bog down a pygmy, Art is one and unique.


Tafas, a Talented Brush
Swamped by the figurative wave in its vigorous 
backlash, the highly esteemed memory of an 
Argentine worthy, José Enrique Tafas, is 
endangered. On October , , Tafas perished 
beneath the waters of the Atlantic at the fashion- 
able seaside resort of Claromecó. Drowned young, 
mature only as a painter, he bequeaths us a rigor- 
ous doctrine and a resplendent body of work. It 
would be a deplorable mistake to confuse him with 
the faceless legion of abstract painters. Tafas, like 
them, arrived at an identical goal but by a quite 
different trajectory.
In my mind, in a preferential spot, I cherish the 
memory of a certain tender Septemberish morn- 
ing when Tafas and I first met, courtesy of chance, 
at a newsstand that still displays its gallant profile 
at the south corner of Bernardo de Irigoyen Street 
and the Avenida de Mayo, in the very heart of the 
Argentine capital. Both of us full of the heady in- 
toxication of youth, we had simultaneously ap- 
peared in person at the said emporium in search


of the same Kodachrome postcard of the Café 
Tortoni. The coincidence proved decisive. Frank 
words crowned what smiles had already initiated. I 
shall not hide it that curiosity pricked me upon no- 
ticing that my new friend rounded out his acquisi- 
tion with two additional postcards—one of Rodin’s 
“Thinker” and another of the Hotel España.
Cultivators of art the pair of us, both inflated 
with trust, our conversation soon rose to the topics 
of the day. The circumstance that one of us was al- 
ready a solid storyteller and the other an almost 
anonymous promise still lurking in a brush did 
not, as one might well have feared, spoil the talk 
between us. The tutelary name of Santiago Gins- 
berg, whose friendship we shared, served as our 
first bridgehead. The next thing, a critical anec- 
dote of some relevant figure of the moment 
wormed its way into our conversation and, in the 
end, face to face over a steady flow of foaming 
steins—soaring, volatile talk on universal topics! 
We set a date to meet again for the following Sun- 
day at The Mixed Train Tea Rooms.
It was on that occasion, after informing me of 
his distant Muslim origins (his father had come to 
these shores rolled in a rug), that Tafas tried to 
make clear to me what he was driving at with his 
easel. In the Koran, he explained, just as with the 
 Jews of Junín Street, the painting of faces, of peo- 
ple, of features, of birds, of calves, and of other 
living beings is expressly forbidden. How was one 
to set brush and tube in motion without breaking 
Allah’s commandment? After much trial and 
error, Tafas struck the right key.
A spokesman from the midland Province of


Córdoba had implanted it in Tafas that to be in- 
novative in any art one has clearly to demonstrate 
that one has, so to speak, mastered it and can fol- 
low the rules like any old maestro. To break the 
traditional molds is the trend of our present age, 
but the would-be artist must first prove that he 
knows these molds like the palm of his own hand. 
As Lumbeira rightly pointed out, let us consume 
all we can of the tradition in advance of casting it 
before swine.
A truly wonderful person, Tafas took these sane 
words to his bosom and put them into practice in 
the following way: firstly, with photographic fidel- 
ity, he painted views of Buenos Aires (within a lim- 
ited perimeter of the city) that copied hotels, cafés, 
newsstands, and statues. He never showed these 
pictures to anybody—not even to the inseparable 
friend with whom he shared many a stein of beer. 
Secondly, he erased them with bread dough and 
tap water. Thirdly, he gave them a coat of shoe 
blacking, so that his little paintings came out com- 
pletely blackened. He was scrupulous enough, 
however, to label each one of his hodgepodges, 
which were now all the same—-jet black—with its 
correct title, so that on each canvas you could read 
“Café Tortoni” or “Newsstand with Postcards.”
The prices of these pictures, of course, were not 
uniform. They varied according to the chromatic 
details, the amount of foreshortening, the com- 
position, etc., of the rubbed-out work. In the face 
of formal objections raised by groups of abstrac- 
tionists, who refused to accept Tafas’ titles, the 
Fine Arts Museum pulled off a real coup in ac- 
quiring three of the young master’s eleven pic-


tures. The sum paid was so astronomical that it 
left the taxpayer utterly speechless. Nonetheless, 
criticism in leading organs of public opinion 
leaned toward praise, but while A took a shine to 
one picture B took a shine to quite another—all, of 
course, within a climate of respect.
Such is Tafas’ œuvre. He was, we have been in- 
formed, preparing a great mural with indigenous 
motifs, which he had in mind to record in the 
north and which once set down he would have 
submitted to the blacking process. What a great 
shame that death by water should have deprived 
us, the Argentine nation, of such a masterpiece!


The Sartorial Revolution (I)
According to the facts, the complex revolution 
began at the seaside resort of Necochea. The date, 
that interesting period that runs from  to 
; the leading actors, Eduardo S. Bradford 
and retired police chief Manuel M. Silveira.
Bradford, whose social background was rather 
dim, came to be an institution along the old 
wooden boardwalk, but that was no obstacle to his 
being seen as well at afternoon dancing parties, at 
charity fairs, at the celebration of children’s birth- 
days, at silver wedding anniversaries, at eleven 
o’clock Mass, in the hotel billiards room, and in 
better summer homes along the shore. Many will 
recall the figure he cut: his soft Panama with its 
snap brim, his horn-rimmed glasses, his dyed 
handlebar moustache that did not quite hide the 
fine full lips, the wing collar and bow tie, the white 
suit with its set of imported buttons, the matching 
cuff links, the heeled boots that enhanced his mid- 
dling stature—as all the while his right hand 
gripped a malacca cane and his left held a mouse-


colored glove that softly flapped in the breeze off 
the South Atlantic.
His always amiable conversation circled the 
widest range of subjects, but invariably came 
back to the world of tailoring. Bradford was fond 
of 
pronouncing 
upon 
buttonholes, 
linings, 
shoulder padding, trouser cuffs, underclothes, 
haberdashery, velvet collars, scarves, spats, cream- 
colored garters, and—especially—winter apparel. 
Such a bias should not strike one as strange; Brad- 
ford was singularly sensitive to the cold, so much 
so that no one ever saw him bathe in the sea. In- 
stead, he strolled the boardwalk from end to end, 
his head sunk down into his shoulders, arms 
crossed or hands in his pockets, and his whole 
frame shaking with the shivers.
Another idiosyncrasy that did not elude the eye 
of the keen observer was that, in spite of the watch 
chain connecting his lapel to his left pocket, he 
mischievously refused to give anyone the time. 
Also, though his liberality was beyond a doubt, he 
never picked up a check, nor was he ever known 
to press the smallest coin upon a beggar. On the 
other hand, he was often nagged by a cough. So- 
ciable as could be, he nonetheless maintained— 
with praiseworthy aloofness—a discreet space be- 
tween himself and others. His favorite motto: Noli 
me tangere. He was friendly to everyone but 
opened his door to no one, and up until that fated 
third of February, , the cream of Necochea 
never suspected his actual place of residence. One 
of the witnesses testified that a few days earlier he 
had seen Bradford enter Quiroz’ paint shop with a 
billfold in his right hand, and come out again with 
the same billfold plus a heavy cylindrical package.


No one, perhaps, might ever have rung down the 
curtain on his guise had it not been for the perspi- 
cacity of retired chief Silveira, a man who had won 
his stripes dealing with the Cosa Nostra in Rosario, 
and who, spurred on by a bloodhound instinct, 
came to have his suspicions.
Over the course of several seasons, Silveira 
tracked Bradford with every caution, although 
Bradford—who seemed quite unaware—night 
after night gave Silveira the slip, thanks to the 
darkness on the outskirts of Necochea. The activ- 
ity of the tireless sleuth was the talk of the town, 
and consequently many a citizen gave Bradford 
the cold shoulder, their cordiality passing from a 
former hearty give-and-take to a dry nod of the 
head. However, accredited families rallied round 
him and with a nobility of sentiment expressed 
their loyalty. That was not all; on the boardwalk 
certain newcomers appeared who followed in 
Bradford’s footsteps and who, under close exami- 
nation, were dressed in an identical way, though in 
paler shades and with a frankly down-and-out 
aspect about them.
The bomb hatched by Silveira did not take long 
to go off. On the above-mentioned date, two plain- 
clothesmen, headed up by the chief himself, ap- 
peared in person at the door of a small wooden 
shack on one of those still unnamed streets far out 
beyond the town limits. They knocked and called 
out repeated times, then finally forced the door 
and, revolvers in hand, broke their way into the 
rickety dwelling. Bradford surrendered on the 
spot. He raised his hands, but did not let go of his 
malacca cane nor did he take off his hat. Without 
losing a moment, the policemen threw a sheet


around him that had been brought along ex- 
pressly for that purpose, and off they whisked him 
while he sobbed and trembled. His scanty weight 
drew their attention.
Accused by the prosecuting attorney, Leonidas 
Codovilla, of breach of trust and indecent ex- 
posure, Bradford immediately gave in, thereby 
letting down his backers. Truth prevailed, self- 
evident. From  to , Bradford, the gentle- 
man on the boardwalk, had strolled the town of 
Necochea naked. Hat, horn-rimmed glasses, 
moustache, collar, necktie, watch chain, suit and 
set of buttons, malacca cane, gloves, handkerchief, 
and heeled boots were but drawings, in color, ap- 
plied to the tabula rasa of his epidermis. In such a 
hopeless predicament, the timely influence of stra- 
tegically placed friends might have rescued him, 
but unfortunately a circumstance came to light 
that totally estranged him from everyone. His fi- 
nancial position left much to be desired! It seemed 
he had not even the wherewithal to scrape 
together enough to get himself a pair of eye- 
glasses. He had been forced to paint them on, in 
the very way he painted on everything else— 
including the malacca cane. The judge brought 
down on the accused the full penalty of the law. 
After the trial, Bradford, in the martyrdom of the 
State Penitentiary, revealed himself as the pioneer 
he was. He died there of bronchial pneumonia, 
wearing no more than a striped suit stubbornly 
drawn on his lean flesh.
In the wake of all this, Carlos Anglada (with that 
nose of his for smelling out the most remunerative 
aspects of modern life) dedicated a series of 
articles to Bradford in Vogue. President of the


Commission Pro-Bradford’s Statue on the ex-Wooden 
Boardwalk of Necochea, Anglada got together a 
considerable number of signatures and contribu- 
tions. As far as we know, nothing concrete has 
come of the monument.
More cautious and highminded, perhaps, was 
don Gervasio Montenegro, who gave a short 
course at summer school on pictorial wardrobes 
and the eventual unrest this might create among 
members of the needle trades. But Montenegro’s 
hairsplitting and reluctance to commit himself 
were quick to give rise to Anglada’s now famous 
plaint—“Even after death they slander him!” Not 
satisfied with this alone, however, Anglada chal- 
lenged Montenegro to put on the gloves in a ring 
of his choice, but, too impatient to wait for the 
reply, Anglada was last seen boarding a jet for 
Boulogne-sur-Mer. Meanwhile, the sect of the 
Piets had multiplied its ranks. The latest and bol- 
dest of them fronted the inherent risks and began 
imitating the Pioneer and Martyr down to the last 
T. Others, by nature inclined to the pian piano, 
resorted to a middle road: a real toupee, but a 
painted monocle or an indelibly tattooed suit coat. 
About their trousers we choose to preserve silence.
But such precautions were useless. The reaction 
had set in! The Honorable Kuno Fingerman, who 
at the time was head of the Public Relations Office 
of the Center for Woolen Products, published a 
volume entitled The Aim of Clothing Is to Keep One- 
self Warm, which he soon after followed up with a 
sequel called Let's Bundle Up! Such shots in the 
dark found their echo in a group of young men 
who, driven by a quite understandable urge for 
positive action, came rolling out into the streets,


spherically wrapped in something they named 
Total Suits, which—devoid of a single opening— 
completely enclosed their happy owners from 
head to foot. The most highly favored materials 
for the Total Suit were tanned hides and wa- 
terproof canvas; a later refinement, intended to 
deaden the knocks, was the wraparound woolen 
mattress.
Nevertheless, the aesthetic touch was missing. 
This was supplied by the Baroness von Servus, 
who launched a new departure. As a first measure, 
she went back to verticalism and to the freedom of 
the arms and legs. In connection with a mixed 
group of metalworkers, artists in crystal, and 
makers of lamps and lampshades, she constructed 
what came to be known as Plastic Attire. Except 
for the problem of its weight—which no one has as 
yet denied—this attire allows the wearer all the 
mobility desired. Consisting of metal plates or sec- 
tions, and reminiscent of the deep-sea diver and 
the medieval knight, Plastic Attire is highpointed 
by a show of revolving flashing lights that are de- 
signed (and guaranteed) to bedazzle the passerby. 
It also sends out intermittent tintinnabulations 
that many class as useful and melodious as au- 
tomobile klaxons.
Two rival trends evolved from the Baroness von 
Servus, who (according to hearsay) gives her bles- 
sing to the second. The first is the somewhat dan- 
dified Downtown Look; the other, of a more pop- 
ular flavor, is Uptown Casual. Partisans of both 
followings agree, despite bitter antagonism, on 
keeping themselves in the main indoors and out of 
sight.


The Sartorial Revolution (II)
If, as has been duly pointed out, the epithet func- 
tional is wholly out of fashion in the small world of 
architects, in sartorial circles it has attained pres- 
tigious and dizzying heights. Clearly, men’s cloth- 
ing presented a rather vulnerable flank to the on- 
slaught of younger generations. On the part of the 
hidebound there has been a signal failure to justify 
the beauty—or even the utility—of lapels, trouser 
cuffs, buttons that do not button, the knotted tie, 
and the hat band (or, as the poet has it, the “frieze 
of the fedora”). And so the scandalous arbi- 
trariness of such useless embellishments has finally 
come under the public eye. In this respect, Pob- 
let’s condemnation is unanswerable.
It may be worthy of note that the new order 
springs from a passage by the Anglo-Saxon Sam- 
uel Butler. Butler remarked that the so-called 
human body is a material projection of the mind 
and that, when you come down to it, there is
 J. D. F. Poblet (or Pobblet), b. . [Translator’s note.]


hardly any difference whatever between the mi- 
croscope and the eye, inasmuch as the former is 
merely an improvement on the latter. The same, 
according to the trite riddle of the sphinx, might 
be said of the walking stick and the leg. The 
human body, in brief, is a machine: the hand no 
less than the Winchester, the buttocks than a 
wooden (or electric) chair, the skater than the 
skate. This is why the itch to flee from machinery 
is meaningless; man is but a working sketch to be 
supplemented, finally, by horn-rimmed glasses, by 
crutches, and by the wheelchair.
As is not infrequent these days, the great leap 
forward was born of the happy coupling of the 
dreamer (who operates in the dark) and the busi- 
ness tycoon. The former, Professor Lucius Scae- 
vola, was responsible for the general theory; the 
latter, the tycoon, was practical-minded Pablo No- 
taris, owner of the popular Red Monkey Hard- 
ware & Kitchenwares, Inc., now refurbished from 
basement to roof and universally known as Scae- 
vola-Notaris Functional Tailoring, Ltd. We cor- 
dially invite the reader to pay a visit, without cost 
or obligation, to the modern establishment of the 
aforementioned firm of Messrs. Scaevola and No- 
taris, where he will be warmly welcomed and will 
receive the utmost in personal attention. A well- 
trained staff is on hand to see to the full satisfac- 
tion of the reader’s every need, providing him—all 
at low, low prices—with the patented All-Round 
Glove, whose two components (matching, down to 
the last detail, the hands of the buyer) include 
every single one of the following finger exten- 
sions: On the right hand—The Thumb Drill, The


Index Corkscrew, The Middle-Finger Fountain- 
pen, The Ring-Finger Rubber Stamp, The Small- 
Finger Penknife; on the left hand—The Thumb 
Awl, The Index Hammer, The Middle-Finger 
Skeleton Key, The Ring-Finger Umbrella-Walk- 
ingstick, and finally, the Small-Finger Scissors. (No 
substitutions, please.) Other customers, perhaps, 
may wish to be shown the All-Purpose Highhat 
(second floor), which permits the easy conveyance 
of food products and valuables, to say nothing of a 
variety of things better left unmentioned. Not yet 
in stock but coming soon is the File-Suit, whose 
leading feature is the replacement of the old- 
fashioned pocket with the sliding drawer. The 
Trouser-Seat with built-in Double Steel Springs— 
at first opposed by the chairmaker trades—has so 
won the general approval of the buying public that 
its overwhelming success leaves us at liberty to 
omit it from this pre-paid advertisement. Remem- 
ber, readers, shop now and save later!



A Brand-New Approach
Paradoxically, the notion that happened to carry 
the day at the World Congress of Historians re- 
cently held at Pau, in the south of France—the con- 
cept of a pure history—is exactly what constitutes 
the major obstacle to the full understanding of the 
said congress. In open contravention of this very 
thesis, we have entombed ourselves in the base- 
ment of the Argentine National Library, Periodi- 
cal Division, consulting a variety of the same from 
 July of this year. The multilingual bulletin which 
recorded verbatim the bristling debates and the 
conclusion that was arrived at is in our hands. The 
principal theme of the congress was “Is History a 
Science or an Art?” Observers noted that the con- 
tending sides held aloft, each claiming for its own 
camp, the same names—Thucydides, Voltaire, 
Gibbon, and Michelet. (We shall not let pass here 
the pleasant opportunity of congratulating the del- 
egate from our northern province of the Chaco, 
Mr. Gaiferos, who gallantly proposed to the other 
members of the congress that they give a prefer-


ential place to our own Indo-America, beginning, 
of course, with the Chaco, that obvious seat of 
more than a single worthy.) The unforeseen, as it 
so often does, came to pass. The thesis that 
aroused the unanimous vote turned out to be, as is 
now well-known, the one put forward by Luigi 
Zevasco that History is an act of faith.
Truly the propitious hour was ripe for the 
congress to give its consensus to this proposal 
which, sudden and revolutionary on the face of it, 
had already been prepared after much rumination 
by the long patience of the centuries. Actually, 
there is no handbook of history, even down to 
schoolboy textbooks, that has not long since antici- 
pated, more or less offhandedly, some precedent 
or other. The dual nationality of Christopher Co- 
lumbus, for example; the victory of Jutland, 
which, in , was attributed to Saxon and Hun 
alike; the seven birthplaces of Homer, a writer of 
note—these are only a handful of cases that spring 
to the mind of the average reader. In all these in- 
stances there beats, embryonic, an unquenchable 
will to affirm what is one’s own, the indigenous, 
the pro domo. At this very moment, as with an open 
mind I turn out this discerning chronicle, our ear- 
drum is deafened by the controversy raging over 
tango king Carlos Gardel—darling of Buenos 
Aires to some, an Uruguayan to a few, when in 
point of fact he hailed from Toulouse. How akin 
this is to the controversy over the stamping 
ground of the old-time outlaw Juan Moreyra, now 
so hotly disputed by the progressive towns of 
Morón and Navarro. I but mention the business


about Leguisamo, who, I am afraid, is hopelessly 
Uruguayan.
Let us return to Zevasco’s pronouncement:
“History is an act of faith. Archives, records, 
archeology, statistics, hermeneutics, the facts 
themselves matter little. History’s commitment is 
to history—freed of all trepidation and scruples. 
Let the numismatist put away his coins and the 
papyrologist his papyruses. History is a blast of 
energy, is a life-giving breath. Exalter of power, 
the historian exaggerates, he inebriates, he embol- 
dens, he encourages. No tampering, no softening, 
our watchword is to reject out of hand that which 
does not build strength, that which does not posi- 
tivize, that which is not glory.”
The seed sprouted. Thus the destruction of 
Rome by Carthage is a paid holiday observed since 
 in the region of Tunis; thus the annexation 
of Spain to the tethered nomadism of the imperi- 
alistic Querandi Indian is, nowadays, here in the 
Argentine, a truth backed by a fine.
The versatile Poblet, like so many others, has 
once and for all settled it that the exact sciences 
not be based on the accumulation of statistics. In 
order to teach the young that three plus four 
make seven, you do not add four cakes plus three 
cakes nor four bishops plus three bishops nor four 
cooperatives plus three cooperatives nor four pat- 
ent leather buttons with three wool socks. Once 
the principle has been intuited, the youthful math- 
ematician grasps that three plus four invariably 
make seven and he does not have to prove it over 
and over again with chocolates, man-eating tigers,


oysters, or telescopes. The same methodology is 
required of history. Does a military defeat suit a 
nation of patriots? Certainly not. In the latest text- 
books, approved by the respective authorities, Wa- 
terloo is to France a victory over the hordes of Eng- 
land and Prussia; so too is Appomattox, all over 
the American south, a stunning victory.
At the outset, some coward or other held that 
such revisionism would break down the unity of 
the discipline of history and, what is worse, would 
put out on a limb the publishers of world histories. 
At present, we have reason to believe that this fear 
is truly groundless, since even the most near- 
sighted person must understand that the prolifer- 
ation of contradictory statements rises from a com- 
mon source, nationalism, and confirms urbi et orbi 
Zevasco’s dictum. Pure history brims, to a consid- 
erable extent, with the honest revenge of each na- 
tion. Mexico has thus recovered, in print, the oil- 
wells of Texas, and we here in the Argentine, 
without risking the skin of a single native son, 
have recovered the south polar cap and its inalien- 
able archipelago.
There is more. Neither archeology nor her- 
meneutics nor numismatics nor statistics are, in 
this day and age, ancillaries. They have at long last 
regained their independence and, equated with 
History—their mother—they have become pure 
sciences.


Esse est Percipi
As an old roamer of the neighborhood of Núñez 
and thereabouts, I could not help noticing that the 
monumental River Plate Stadium no longer stood 
in its customary place. In consternation, I spoke 
about this to my friend Dr. Gervasio Montenegro, 
the full-fledged member of the Argentine Acad- 
emy of Letters, and in him I found the motor that 
put me on the track. At the time, his pen was com- 
piling a sort of Historical Survey of Argentine Jour- 
nalism, a truly noteworthy work at which his secre- 
tary was quite busy, and the routine research had 
accidentally led Montenegro to sniff out the crux 
of the matter. Shortly before nodding off, he sent 
me to a mutual friend, Tulio Savastano, president 
of the Abasto Juniors Soccer Club, to whose head- 
quarters, situated in the Adamant Building on 
Corrientes Avenue near Pasteur Street, I hied.
This high-ranking executive still managed to 
keep fit and active despite the regimen of double 
dieting prescribed by his physician and neighbor, 
Dr. Narbondo. A bit inflated by the latest victory


of his team over the Canary Island All-Stars, Sa- 
vastano expatiated at length between one maté 
and another, and he confided to me substantial 
details with reference to the question on the 
carpet. In spite of the fact that I kept reminding 
Savastano that we had, in yesteryear, been boy- 
hood chums from around Agüero and the corner 
of Humahuaco, the grandeur of his office awed 
me and, trying to break the ice, I congratulated 
him on the negotiation of the game’s final goal, 
which, notwithstanding Zarlenga and Parodi’s 
pressing attack, center-half Renovales booted in 
thanks to that historic pass of Musante’s.
In acknowledgment of my support of the 
Abasto eleven, the great man gave his maté a post- 
humous slurp and said philosophically, like someone 
dreaming aloud, “And to think it was me who in- 
vented those names.”
“Aliases?” I asked, mournful. “Musante’s name 
isn’t Musante? Renovales isn’t Renovales? Limardo 
isn’t the real name of the idol acclaimed by the 
fans?”
Savastano’s answer made my limbs go limp. 
“What? You still believe in fans and idols?” he 
said. “Where have you been living, don Domecq?” 
At that moment, a uniformed office boy came 
in, looking like a fireman, and he whispered to 
Savastano that Ron Ferrabás wished a word with 
him.
“Ron Ferrabás, the mellow-voiced sportscaster?” 
I exclaimed. “The sparkplug of Profumo Soap’s 
after-dinner hour? Will these eyes of mine see him 
in person? Is it true that his name is Ferrabás?” 
“Let him wait,” ordered Mr. Savastano.
“Let him wait? Wouldn’t it be better if I sacri-


ficed myself and left?” I pleaded with heartfelt ab- 
negation.
“Don’t you dare,” answered Savastano. “Arturo, 
tell Ferrabás to come in.”
What an entrance Ferrabás made—so natural! I 
was going to offer him my armchair, but Arturo, 
the fireman, dissuaded me with one of those little 
glances that are like a mass of polar air.
The voice of the president began deliberating. 
“Ferrabás, I’ve spoken to De Filippo and Ca- 
margo. In the next match Abasto is beaten by two 
to one. It’s a tough game but bear this in mind— 
don’t fall back on that pass from Musante to Reno- 
vales. The fans know it by heart. I want imagina- 
tion—imagination, understand? You may leave 
now.”
I screwed up my courage to venture a question. 
“Am I to deduce that the score has been 
prearranged?”
Savastano literally tumbled me to the dust. 
“There’s no score, no teams, no matches,” he said. 
“The stadiums have long since been condemned 
and are falling to pieces. Nowadays everything is 
staged on the television and radio. The bogus ex- 
citement of the sportscaster—hasn’t it ever made 
you suspect that everything is humbug? The last 
time a soccer match was played in Buenos Aires 
was on June , . From that exact moment, 
soccer, along with the whole gamut of sports, 
belongs to the genre of the drama, performed by a 
single man in a booth or by actors in jerseys before 
the TV cameras.”
“Sir, who invented the thing?” I made bold to 
ask.
“Nobody knows. You may as well ask who first


thought of the inauguration of schools or the 
showy visits of crowned heads. These things don’t 
exist outside the recording studios and newspaper 
offices. Rest assured, Domecq, mass publicity is the 
trademark of modern times.”
“And what about the conquest of space?” I 
groaned.
“It’s not a local program, it’s a Yankee-Soviet co- 
production. A praiseworthy advance, let’s not 
deny it, of the spectacle of science.”
“Mr. President, you’re scaring me,” I mumbled, 
without regard to hierarchy. “Do you mean to tell 
me that out there in the world nothing is happen- 
ing?”
“Very little,” he answered with his English 
phlegm. “What I don’t understand is your fear. 
Mankind is at home, sitting back with ease, atten- 
tive to the screen or the sportscaster, if not the 
yellow press. What more do you want, Domecq? 
It’s the great march of time, the rising tide of pro- 
gress.”
“And if the bubble bursts?” I barely managed to 
utter.
“It won’t,” he said, reassuringly.
“Just in case, I’ll be silent as the tomb,” I prom- 
ised. “I swear it by my personal loyalty—to the 
team, to you, to Limardo, to Renovales.”
“Say whatever you like, nobody would believe 
you.”
The telephone rang. The president picked up 
the receiver and, finding his other hand free, he 
waved it, indicating the door.


The Idlers
The nuclear age, the curtain-drop on colonialism, 
the rise of the military-industrial complex, the 
challenge of the left, the zoom in the cost of living 
and concomitant shrinking of the pay envelope, 
the Papal call to peace, the threat of the devalua- 
tion of the dollar, the spread of sit-down strikes, 
the proliferation of supermarkets, the conquest of 
space, the population shift from rural life to city 
slums, the passing of rubber checks—all these spell 
quite an alarming panorama and, when you come 
right down to it, give the man of the Sixties food 
for thought. But the diagnosis of evils is one thing, 
the remedy another. Without wishing to venture 
in prophecy, we nonetheless make bold to suggest 
that the recent importation of Idlers into the 
Argentine Republic with a view to their ultimate 
manufacture here, may—in acting as a form of 
sedative—greatly contribute to the lessening of 
tensions so widespread in the nation today. The 
supremacy of the machine is a fact no one any 
longer disputes; the Idler, it turns out, is but one 
more step in this inevitable process.


Which, one may ask, was the first telegraph, 
which the first tractor, which the first Singer sew- 
ing machine? Questions such as these nonplus the 
intellectual mind. With respect to Idlers, however, 
no such problem exists. No iconoclast the world 
over would dream of denying that the original 
Idler first revved its intricate motors in Mulhouse, 
and that its undisputed begetter was the engineer 
Walter Eisengardt (-). Two distinct person- 
alities were at conflict in that notable Teuton— 
one, that of the incorrigible dreamer, who pub- 
lished an estimable yet utterly forgotten mono- 
graph on that thinker of the yellow race, Lao Tse; 
the other, the solid and down-to-earth man of ac- 
tion with practical bent of mind, who, after design- 
ing any amount of purely industrial machinery, on 
 June , , gave birth to the first recorded 
Idler. We are speaking of the model now on dis- 
play at the Mulhouse Museum. Barely over four 
feet long, two feet high, and eighteen inches wide, 
it nontheless contained nearly every last one of its 
eventual basic elements—all the way from its metal 
tanks to its glass conduits.
As is the case in any border town, one of the in- 
ventor’s maternal grandmothers sprang from Gal- 
lic stock, and, in the upper circles of her neigh- 
borhood, went by the name of Germaine 
Baculard. The pamphlet that serves as the main 
source of the present painstaking study states 
flatly that that elegance peculiar to Eisengardt’s 
work comes from his sprinkling of Cartesian 
blood. We entirely uphold this charming hypothe- 
sis, which, it may be added, enjoys the approval of 
 Jean-Christophe Baculard himself, the Great Alsa-


tian’s successor and publicizer. Eisengardt, killed 
in a Bugatti motorcar accident, did not live to see 
the spate of Idlers now rampant in factories and 
office buildings throughout the world. (God grant 
him power from heaven to view them, reduced to 
specks by the intervening distance and—for that 
very reason—closer to the prototype he personally 
hand-designed!)
Now for a thumbnail sketch of the Idler, slanted 
to those readers who have heretofore shirked their 
duty of paying a visit to San Justo (only twenty- 
seven miles southwest of Buenos Aires on Route ) 
to inspect the specimen on display there at the 
Ubalde Piston Works. The monumental artifact, 
filling the breadth of the terrace at the heart of the 
factory yard, reminds us after a fashion of an out- 
sized linotype. Twice the height of U. P. W.’s chief 
foreman, its weight is said to be computed in sev- 
eral sand tons. Not only is it made of iron, but its 
color is that of iron painted black.
A stepped gangplank allows the conscientious 
tourist to scrutinize and touch it. At the same time, 
if he puts his ear to the majestic contraption, from 
the machine’s innards he can make out a slight 
throbbing and may even detect distant rumblings. 
In effect, the Idler hides in its interior a system of 
conduits through which water and an occasional 
crystal globe run in the darkness.
Nobody in his right mind would fall into the 
error of believing that the Idler’s physical frame- 
work is of greater importance than the mood it 
casts over the masses of humanity who swarm 
around it. On the contrary, what counts most 
about the Idler is the awareness it creates that in


its bowels, secret and silent, beats something that 
plays and sleeps.
The goal envisioned during Eisengardt’s roman- 
tic wide-awake nights is now wholly attained. 
Wherever an Idler is found, the machine rests, 
and man, reinvigorated, works on.


The Immortals
And see, no longer blinded by our eyes.
Rupert Brooke
Whoever could have foreseen, way back in that in- 
nocent summer of , that the novelette The 
Chosen One by Camilo N. Huergo, presented to me 
by the author with his personal inscription on the 
flyleaf (which I had the decorum to tear out be- 
fore offering the volume for sale to successive men 
of the book trade), hid under the thin varnish of 
fiction a prophetic truth. Huergo’s photograph, in 
an oval frame, adorns the cover. Each time I look 
at it, I have the impression that the snapshot is 
about to cough, a victim of that lung disease which 
nipped in the bud a promising career. Tuberculo- 
sis, in short, denied him the happiness of acknowl- 
edging the letter I wrote him in one of my charac- 
teristic outbursts of generosity.
The epigraph prefixed to this thoughtful essay 
has been taken from the aforementioned novel- 
ette; I requested Dr. Montenegro, of the Acad- 
emy, to render it into Spanish, but the results were 
negative. To give the unprepared reader the gist 
of the matter, I shall now sketch, in condensed


form, an outline of Huergo’s narrative, as follows:
The storyteller pays a visit, far to the south in 
Chubut, to the English rancher don Guillermo 
Blake, who devotes his energies not only to the 
breeding of sheep but also to the ramblings of the 
world-famous Plato and to the latest and more 
freakish experiments in the field of surgical medi- 
cine. On the basis of his reading, don Guillermo 
concludes that the five senses obstruct or deform 
the apprehension of reality and that, could we free 
ourselves of them, we would see the world as it 
is—endless and timeless. He comes to think that 
the eternal models of things lie in the depths of 
the soul and that the organs of perception with 
which the Creator has endowed us are, grosso modo, 
hindrances. They are no better than dark spec- 
tacles that blind us to what exists outside, diverting 
our attention at the same time from the splendor 
we carry within us.
Blake begets a son by one of the farm girls so 
that the boy may one day become acquainted with 
reality. To anesthetize him for life, to make him 
blind and deaf and dumb, to emancipate him 
from the senses of smell and taste, were the fa- 
ther’s first concerns. He took, in the same way, all 
possible measures to make the chosen one un- 
aware of his own body. As to the rest, this was ar- 
ranged with contrivances designed to take over 
respiration, circulation, nourishment, digestion, 
and elimination. It was a pity that the boy, fully 
liberated, was cut off from all human contact.
Owing to the press of practical matters, the nar- 
rator goes away. After ten years, he returns. Don 
Guillermo has died; his son goes on living after his


fashion, with natural breathing, heart regular, in a 
dusty shack cluttered with mechanical devices. 
The narrator, about to leave for good, drops a cig- 
arette butt that sets fire to the shack and he never 
quite knows whether this act was done on purpose 
or by pure chance. So ends Huergo’s story, 
strange enough for its time but now, of course, 
more than outstripped by the rockets and astro- 
nauts of our men of science.
Having dashed off this disinterested compen- 
dium of the tale of a now dead and forgotten 
author—from whom I have nothing to gain—I 
steer back to the heart of the matter. Memory re- 
stores to me a Saturday morning in  when I 
had an appointment with the eminent geron- 
tologist Dr. Raúl Narbondo. The sad truth is that 
we young bloods of yesteryear are getting on; the 
thick mop begins to thin, one or another ear stops 
up, the wrinkles collect grime, molars grow hol- 
low, a cough takes root, the backbone hunches up, 
the foot trips on a pebble, and, to put it plainly, 
the paterfamilias falters and withers. There was no 
doubt about it, the moment had come to see Dr. 
Narbondo for a general checkup, particularly con- 
sidering the fact that he specialized in the replace- 
ment of malfunctioning organs.
Sick at heart because that afternoon the Palermo 
 Juniors and the Spanish Sports were playing a re- 
turn match and maybe I could not occupy my 
place in the front row to bolster my team, I betook 
myself to the clinic on Corrientes Avenue near 
Pasteur. The clinic, as its fame betrays, occupies 
the fifteenth floor of the Adamant Building. I 
went up by elevator (manufactured by the Electra


Company). Eye to eye with Narbondo’s brass 
shingle, I pressed the bell, and at long last, taking 
my courage in both hands, I slipped through the 
partly open door and entered into the waiting 
room proper. There, alone with the latest issues of 
the Ladies’ Companion and Jumbo, I whiled away the 
passing hours until a cuckoo clock struck twelve 
and sent me leaping from my armchair. At once, I 
asked myself, What happened? Planning my every 
move now like a sleuth, I took a step or two to- 
ward the next room, peeped in, ready, admittedly, 
to fly the coop at the slightest sound. From the 
streets far below came the noise of horns and traf- 
fic, the cry of a newspaper hawker, the squeal of 
brakes sparing some pedestrian, but, all around 
me, a reign of silence. I crossed a kind of labora- 
tory, or pharmaceutical back room, furnished with 
instruments and flasks of all sorts. Stimulated by 
the aim of reaching the men’s room, I pushed 
open a door at the far end of the lab.
Inside, I saw something that my eyes did not un- 
derstand. The small enclosure was circular, 
painted white, with a low ceiling and neon light- 
ing, and without a single window to relieve the 
sense of claustrophobia. The room was inhabited 
by four personages, or pieces of furniture. Their 
color was the same as the walls, their material 
wood, their form cubic. On each cube was another 
small cube with a latticed opening and below it a 
slot as in a mailbox. Carefully scrutinizing the 
grilled opening, you noted with alarm that from 
the interior you were being watched by something 
like eyes. The slots emitted, from time to time, a 
chorus of sighs or whisperings that the good Lord


himself could not have made head or tail of. The 
placement of these cubes was such that they faced 
each other in the form of a square, composing a 
kind of conclave. I don’t know how many minutes 
lapsed. At this point, the doctor came in and said 
to me, “My pardon, Bustos, for having kept you 
waiting. I was just out getting myself an advance 
ticket for today’s match between the Palermo Jun- 
iors and the Spanish Sports.” He went on, indicat- 
ing the cubes, “Let me introduce you to Santiago 
Silberman, to retired clerk-of-court Ludueña, to 
Aquiles Molinari, and to Miss Bugard.”
Out of the furniture came faint rumbling 
sounds. I quickly reached out a hand and, without 
the pleasure of shaking theirs, withdrew in good 
order, a frozen smile on my lips. Reaching the ves- 
tibule as best I could, I managed to stammer, “A 
drink. A stiff drink.”
Narbondo came out of the lab with a graduated 
beaker filled with water and dissolved some effer- 
vescent drops into it. Blessed concoction—the 
wretched taste brought me to my senses. Then, 
the door to the small room closed and locked 
tight, came the explanation:
“I’m glad to see, my dear Bustos, that my im- 
mortals have made quite an impact on you. Who- 
ever would have thought that Homo sapiens, Dar- 
win’s barely human ape, could achieve such 
perfection? This, my house, I assure you, is the 
only one in all Indo-America where Dr. Eric Sta- 
pledon’s methodology has been fully applied. You 
recall, no doubt, the consternation that the death 
of the late lamented doctor, which took place in 
New Zealand, occasioned in scientific circles. I flat-


ter myself, furthermore, for having implemented 
his precursory labors with a few Argentinean 
touches. In itself, the thesis—Newton’s apple all 
over again—is fairly simple. The death of the body 
is a result, always, of the failure of some organ or 
other, call it the kidney, lungs, heart, or what you 
like. With the replacement of the organism’s 
various components, in themselves perishable, 
with other corresponding stainless or polyethylene 
parts, there is no earthly reason whatever why the 
soul, why you yourself—Bustos Domecq—should 
not be immortal. None of your philosophical nice- 
ties here; the body can be vulcanized and from 
time to time recaulked, and so the mind keeps 
going. Surgery brings immortality to mankind. 
Life’s essential aim has been attained—the mind 
lives on without fear of cessation. Each of our im- 
mortals is comforted by the certainty, backed by 
our firm’s guarantee, of being a witness in aeter- 
num. The brain, refreshed night and day by a sys- 
tem of electrical charges, is the last organic bul- 
wark in which ball bearings and cells collaborate. 
The rest is Formica, steel, plastics. Respiration, ali- 
mentation, generation, mobility—elimination it- 
self!—belong to the past. Our immortal is real es- 
tate. One or two minor touches are still missing, 
it’s true. Oral articulation, dialogue, may still be 
improved. As for the costs, you need not worry 
yourself. By means of a procedure that circum- 
vents legal red tape, the candidate transfers his 
property to us, and the Narbondo Company, 
Inc.—I, my son, his descendants—guarantees your 
upkeep, in statu quo, to the end of time. And, I 
might add, a money-back guarantee.”
It was then that he laid a friendly hand on my


shoulder. I felt his will taking power over me. 
“Ha-ha! I see I’ve whetted your appetite, I’ve 
tempted you, dear Bustos. You’ll need a couple of 
months or so to get your affairs in order and to 
have your stock portfolio signed over to us. As far 
as the operation goes, naturally, as a friend, I want 
to save you a little something. Instead of our usual 
fee of ten thousand dollars, for you, ninety-five 
hundred—in cash, of course. The rest is yours. It 
goes to pay your lodging, care, and service. The 
medical procedure in itself is painless. No more 
than a question of amputation and replacement. 
Nothing to worry about. On the eve, just keep 
yourself calm, untroubled. Avoid heavy meals, to- 
bacco, and alcohol, apart from your accustomed 
and imported, I hope, Scotch or two. Above all, 
refrain from impatience.”
“Why two months?” I asked him. “One’s 
enough, and then some. I come out of the anes- 
thesia and I’m one more of your cubes. You have 
my address and phone number. We’ll keep in 
touch. I’ll be back next Friday at the latest.”
At the escape hatch he handed me the card of 
Nemirovski, Nemirovski, & Nemirovski, Counsel- 
ors-at-Law, who would put themselves at my dis- 
posal for all the details of drawing up the will. 
With perfect composure I walked to the subway 
entrance, then took the stairs at a run. I lost no 
time. That same night, without leaving the slight- 
est trace behind, I moved to the New Impartial, in 
whose register I figure under the assumed name 
of Aquiles Silberman. Here, in my bedroom at the 
far rear of this modest hotel, wearing a false beard 
and dark spectacles, I am setting down this ac- 
count of the facts.



Index Compiled 
by H. Bustos Domecq
Abasto Juniors Soccer Club,  
Arabian Nights (see Thousand and One Nights)
Architecture, functional,  
Association of Argentine Architects, 
Baralt, G. A., n, , -,  
Bonavena, Ramón, -, - 
Bradford, Eduardo S., - 
Brotherhoodism, , -
Bustos Domecq, H., his prose, ; his shift to criticism, ; friendship 
with Gervasio Montenegro, ; friendship with Ramón 
Bonavena, -; his work on the Evening News, -, ; visit to 
Nierenstein Souza's house, -; visit to Ramón Bonavena’s 
house, -; his support of Lambkin Formento, -; visits to 
Loomis’ house, , ; interview with G. A. Baralt, ; friendship 
with Santiago Ginsberg, -; friendship with Antarctic A. 
Garay, -; friendship with Narbondo, Ludueña, Molinari, 
Bugard, , ; alias Aquiles Silberman, ; his index, 
Chicken, Southern style,  
Clothing, functional, -
Descriptivism, -
di Giovanni, Norman Thomas, n
Eisengardt, Walter, -


Formento, Hilario Lambkin, , - 
Free association, 
Garay, Antarctic A., - 
Geriatrics (see Narbondo, Dr. Raúl)
Herrera, Tulio, - 
History as an act of faith,  
Huergo, Camilo N., 
Immortality through surgery, 
Kermode, Frank, 
Leavis, F. R., 
Loomis, F. J. C., -; dinners at, , 
Neo-idealism, Italian,  
New York Review of Books,  
New York Times Book Review,  
Nierenstein Souza, -; and Mallarmé, 
Paladión, César, -, , , ; and Goethe, ; and Herrera y 
Reissig, ,-; his knowledge of Africa, n; and Lugones,  
Parini, Jay Lee,  
Plastic Attire,  
Praetorius, Frans (see Vielé-Griffin)
Quiroz’s paint shop, 
Revisionism, - 
Rice, Elmer, 
Rubber checks, passing of, 
Small-Finger Scissors,  
Space, U.S.-Soviet conquest of,  
Sport as spectacle, -
Tafas, José Enrique, -
Tapioca, 
Texas, oil wells of, 
Thousand and One Nights (see Arabian Nights)


Times Literary Supplement,  
Times Square shuttle,  
Total Suits, 
Ubalde Piston Works,  
Uninhabitable Dwellings,  
Urbas, Hector, -, -
Vielé-Griffin (see Praetorius, Frans) 
Vilaseco, Adalberto, -
Webster’s New Collegiate Dictionary, n 
Western Bar,  
Wheelock, K. Carter, 


