JORGE lUIS BORGES 
ADOLFO BIOY-CASARES 



JORGE LUIS BORGES 
ADOLFO BIOY-CASARES
Translated by Norman Thomas di Giovanni 
ALLEN LANE

ALLEN LANE 
Penguin Books Ltd 
536 King’s Road 
London SW10 0UH
Originally published as Seis problemas para don Isidro Parodi, 
copyright © Editorial Sur, S.A., Buenos Aires, 1942 
First published in the U.S.A. by E. P. Dutton, New York, 1981 
Published in Great Britain by Allen Lane 1981 
Copyright © Jorge Luis Borges, Adolfo Bioy-Casares, 
and Norman Thomas di Giovanni, 1980, 1981
All rights reserved. No part of this publication 
may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, 
or transmitted in any form or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording 
or otherwise, without the prior 
permission of the copyright owner
ISBN 0 7139 1421 1
Printed in America
Certain of these stories first appeared 
in the following periodicals:
American Poetry Review: ‘The God of the Bulls’
Antaeus: ‘The Twelve Figures of The World’
The 
Bennington 
Review: ‘Free Will and the Commendatore’ 
Salmagundi: ‘The Nights of Goliadkin’
The first three stories of this book have also been 
dramatized for radio broadcast by the BBC.

Contents
Foreword by Gervasio Montenegro

The Twelve Figures of the World

The Nights of Goliadkin

The God of the Bulls

Free Will and the Commendatore

Tadeo Limardo’s Victim

Tai An’s Long Search

H. Bustos Domecq by Adelma Badoglio

5


Foreword
Good! It shall be. Revealment of myself! 
But listen, for we must co-operate;
I don’t drink tea: permit me the cigar!
ROBERT BROWNING
How fated, how interesting the idiosyncrasy of the 
homme de lettres! Literary Buenos Aires has probably 
not forgotten nor, I dare suggest, will ever forget my 
frank decision not to concede yet another preface to 
the claims—entirely legitimate, of course—of unim- 
peachable friendship and meritorious worth. We can- 
not but admit, however, that this Socratic “Bugsy”* is 
irresistible. What a peach of a man! With a peal of 
laughter that disarms me he acknowledges the perfect 
validity of my position; yet with an infectious chuckle, 
he repeats, persuasively and obstinately, that his book 
and our long-standing friendship demand my preface. 
Protestation is useless. De guerre lasse, I give in to sit- 
ting down at my trusty Remington, the partner and 
dumb confidant of so many of my flights into the blue.
Present-day pressures from the bank, the stock ex- 
change, and the racetrack have been no impediment to 
my paying tribute—whether ensconced in the arm-
*Affectionate nickname for H. Bustos Domecq used among his inti- 
mates. [Footnote by H.B.D.]


chair of a Pullman car or as the skeptical patron of 
mud baths in more or less thermal spas—to the blood- 
curdling cruelties of the roman policier. Here I must risk 
confessing that I am no slave to fashion. Night after 
night in the central solitude of my bedroom the inge- 
nious Sherlock Holmes retreats before the ever-fresh 
adventures of the wandering Ulysses, son of Laertes 
and seed of Zeus. But the admirer of the stern Medi- 
terranean epic sips in many gardens. Bolstered by the 
French sleuth M. Lecoq, I have turned over dusty dos- 
siers; I have pricked up my ears in vast imaginary 
country houses so as to capture the muffled footsteps 
of the gentleman-cambrioleur; in the grim wastes of 
Dartmoor, enclosed in an English fog, the great lumi- 
nous hound has devoured me. To continue would be 
in bad taste. The reader knows my credentials. I too 
have been in Boeotia.
Before embarking on a fruitful analysis of the basic 
elements of this recueil, I beg the reader’s leave to 
congratulate myself that at last in the motley Musée 
Grevin of belles lettres . . . criminologiques an Argentine 
hero has made his appearance in a purely Argentine 
setting. What an uncommon pleasure it is—between 
puffs of the aromatic herb and with an unmistakable 
First Empire cognac at one’s elbow—to savor a detec- 
tive story which does not obey the rigid rules of a 
foreign, Anglo-Saxon market and which I have no hes- 
itation in putting on the same level as those authors 
recommended to keen London enthusiasts by the in- 
corruptible Crime Club! Let me also modestly point 
out my satisfaction as a native of Buenos Aires in 
learning that our writer, although from the provinces, 
has proved himself deaf to the call of narrow parochi- 
alism and has had the sense to choose Buenos Aires 
as the natural frame for his etchings of local scenes.


Nor shall I fail to applaud the courage and good taste 
shown by our much-loved “Bugsy”* in turning his 
back on the dark and dissolute fat-man stereotype 
from Rosario. However, two elements are missing 
from this metropolitan palette, and I venture to de- 
mand them of future books. They are our silky, femi- 
nine Florida Street in sublime procession before the 
avid eyes of its shop windows; and the melancholy 
quarter of La Boca, slumbering by the docks, when the 
last street-corner bar has shut its metal eyelids, and an 
accordion, unvanquished in the dark, greets the now 
paling constellations.
At this point let us frame the most salient and at the 
same time most profound feature of the author of Six 
Problems for Don Isidro Parodi. I have mentioned—let 
there be no mistake—concision, the art of brûler les 
étapes. H. Bustos Domecq is at all times an attentive 
servant of his public. In his stories there are no false 
trails or confusing timetables. He spares us all blind 
alleys. Offspring of the tradition of the tragic Edgar 
Allan Poe, the mandarin M. P. Shiel, and Baroness 
Orczy, our author concentrates on the main events in 
his cases—the statement of the problem and its il- 
luminating solution. Mere puppets of curiosity—if not 
under direct pressure from the police—the characters 
gather in a colorful flock in the now legendary cell 
. On their first visit they put forward the mystery 
that troubles them; on their second they hear its solu- 
tion, which astounds young and old alike. The author, 
whose skill is as compact as it is artistic, reduces ele- 
mentary reality and heaps all the laurels of the case on 
the brow of Parodi alone. The less perceptive reader 
will smile, suspecting the deliberate omission of some
*See footnote on p. . [Footnote by H.B.D.]


tedious inquiry and the unintentional omission of 
more than one inspired insight made by a gentleman 
on whose identity it would be inappropriate to dwell.
Let us look closely at the book. It consists of six 
stories. I obviously cannot hide my penchant for 
“Tadeo Limardo’s Victim,” a story of Slavonic inspira- 
tion, which combines a thrilling plot with a probe into 
more than one aspect of morbid Dostoevskian psy- 
chology. And it does this while still charming us with 
a revelation of a sui generis world that lies on the 
fringe of our European veneer and refined egocentric- 
ity. I also recall with pleasure “Tai An’s Long Search,” 
which is a new and original treatment of the classic 
problem of the hidden object. Poe began it with “The 
Purloined Letter”; Lynn Brock attempts a Parisian 
variation with The Two of Diamonds, an elegantly writ- 
ten piece spoiled by a stuffed dog; Carter Dickson, less 
successfully, falls back on a central heating system 
radiator. It would be unjust, to say the least, not to 
mention “Free Will and the Commendatore,” a puzzle 
whose impeccable solution will—:parole de gentilhomme 
—bewilder even the most perceptive reader.
One of the tasks which test the mettle of a first-class 
writer must surely be skillful, elegant characterization. 
The unsophisticated Neapolitan puppeteer who once 
brought fantasy to our childhood Sundays solved the 
problem in a makeshift way. He gave Punch a hunch- 
back, Pierrot a starched collar, Columbine the naugh- 
tiest smile in the world, and Harlequin a harlequin 
suit. Mutatis mutandis, H. Bustos Domecq operates in 
a similar way. In short, he resorts to the heavy strokes 
of the caricaturist, although when drawn by his jovial 
pen the inevitable exaggerations typical of the genre 
have little to do with the physical traits of his puppets; 
instead, he breathes life into them by dwelling on their


habits of speech. In return for a certain abuse of the 
good salt of our native cooking, the irrepressible sati- 
rist presents us with an entire portrait gallery of our 
day. In it we find the religious grande dame with her 
strong sensibility; the journalist with his sharp pencil 
who, with more ease than elegance, churns out all 
manner of articles; the decidedly amiable playboy 
from a well-to-do family, a rake who keeps late hours 
and is easily recognizable by his slicked-back hair and 
inevitable polo ponies; the soft-spoken, courteous 
Chinese of old literary convention, whom I look on as 
a pastiche of the art of rhetoric rather than as a living 
person; and the gentleman, artist and lover, interested 
alike in feasts of the mind and flesh, in the learned 
tomes of the Jockey Club Library, and in the piste of 
the same establishment’s fencing competitions. One 
touch forecasts the gloomiest of sociological develop- 
ments. From this fresco of what I do not hesitate to call 
“contemporary Argentina” is missing the silhouette of 
the gaucho on horseback, and in his place stands—and 
I expose the phenomenon in all its repulsive crude- 
ness—the Jew, the Israelite. The debonair figure of 
the hoodlum of our city’s outer slums suffers a similar 
capitis diminutio. This robust half-breed who in bygone 
days stole the scene with his lascivious steps on the 
dance floor at Hansen’s, where only the uppercut 
curbed the knife, is now called Tulio Savastano, and 
he fritters away his by no means common talents in the 
most inane gossip. We are barely rescued from this 
wearisome laxity by Pardo Salivazo, a peripheral but 
lively character who is another proof of the stylistic 
qualities of H. Bustos.
But all is not flowers. The Attic censor in me con- 
demns without appeal the tiring extravagance of col- 
orful but episodic brush strokes—an overgrown


thicket that clutters and obscures the Parthenon’s 
sharp outline.
The pen which in our satirist’s hand becomes a scal- 
pel is soon blunted when it works on the living flesh 
of don Isidro Parodi. For our amusement the author 
introduces the most priceless of old-time Argentines, 
a portrait that now takes its place beside those equally 
famous ones bequeathed us by Del Campo, Her- 
nández, and other high priests of our traditional gui- 
tar, among whom towers the author of Martín Fierro.
In the stirring annals of criminal investigation, the 
honor of being the first detective to be a jailbird goes 
to don Isidro. Any critic with a sound nose can, how- 
ever, point to several possible derivatives. Without 
leaving his nightly den in the Faubourg St. Germain, 
the gentleman Auguste Dupin captures the trouble- 
some ape who caused the tragedies in the Rue 
Morgue; Prince Zaleski, from his remote palace re- 
treat, where in sumptuous surroundings the jewel 
rubs shoulders with the music box, the amphora with 
the sarcophagus, the idol with the winged bull, solves 
the crimes of London; and last but not least, Max 
Carrados carries with him everywhere the portable jail 
cell of his blindness. Such sedentary sleuths, such 
strange voyageurs autour de la chambre, are, if only in 
part, forerunners of our Parodi. Perhaps an inevitable 
character in the development of detective fiction, 
Parodi’s appearance, his trouvaille, is an Argentine 
achievement, produced—it should be noted—during 
the presidency of Dr. Castillo. Parodi’s lack of mobility 
is the symbol and epitome of intellectuality, and it 
stands as a challenge to the pointless, frenetic action 
of American detective stories, which an overcritical yet 
quite accurate mind might compare with the cele- 
brated squirrel of legend.


But I think I notice a veiled impatience in my 
reader’s face. Nowadays, interest in adventure ranks 
above philosophical dialogue. The time has come to 
say goodbye. To this point we have walked together; 
from here, face to face with the book, you are on your 
own.
Gervasio Montenegro 
Member, Argentine Academy 
of Letters
Buenos Aires,
November , 





The Twelve Figures 
of the World
To the memory of José S. Álvarez
I
Capricorn, Aquarius, Pisces, Aries, Taurus, thought 
Achilles Molinari in his sleep. Then came a moment of 
uncertainty. He saw the Scales, the Scorpion. Realiz- 
ing his mistake, he woke with a start.
The sun had warmed his face. On the night table, 
perched atop a copy of the Bristol Almanac and a hand- 
ful of lottery tickets, his alarm clock showed twenty to 
ten. Still reciting the signs, Molinari got up. He looked 
out of the window. There on the street corner stood 
the unknown man.
Molinari smiled knowingly. Ambling down the cor- 
ridor, he returned with his razor, a brush, a sliver of 
yellow soap, and a cup of steaming water. He flung the 
window open wide, stared down at the unknown man 
with exaggerated calm, and slowly, whistling the tango 
“Marked Card,” began to shave.
Ten minutes later Molinari was on the street, wear- 
ing his brown suit on which he still owed the Rabuffi 
chain of Great English Tailor Shops the final two pay- 
ments. He strolled to the corner. At once, the man 
became absorbed in the posted lottery results.


Molinari, accustomed by now to this dreary pretense, 
went on to the corner of Humberto I. A bus pulled up; 
he boarded it. To make it easier for the man tailing 
him, Molinari sat at the front. Two or three blocks 
farther on, he glanced around. The unknown man, 
easily recognizable by his dark glasses, was reading a 
newspaper. Before reaching downtown, the bus had 
filled up. Molinari could have gotten off without being 
detected, but he had a better plan. He stayed on until 
the Palermo Beer Gardens. There, never once looking 
back, he made his way north, skirting the penitentiary 
wall, and entered the front gate. He thought he was 
behaving normally, but before reaching the armed 
guards he threw away a cigarette that he had just lit. 
He spoke briefly to a man in shirtsleeves behind a 
counter. A prison officer accompanied him to cell .
Fourteen years earlier, Agustín R. Bonorino, the 
butcher, while taking part in a carnival parade in Bel- 
grano rigged out as an Italian, received a fatal conk on 
the head. It was common knowledge that the seltzer 
bottle that had laid him low had been wielded by one 
of the goons in the gang known as the Holy Hoofs. But 
since the Holies were useful during elections, the po- 
lice decided that the culprit was Isidro Parodi, who 
some claimed was an anarchist, by which they meant 
an oddball. Actually, Isidro Parodi was neither. He 
owned a barbershop in Barracas, on the Southside of 
Buenos Aires, and he had been unwise enough to have 
let a room to a police clerk from the Eighth Precinct, 
who owed him a year’s back rent. This conjunction of 
adverse circumstances had sealed Parodi’s fate. The 
evidence of witnesses (all of whom belonged to the 
Holy Hoofs) was unanimous; Parodi was sentenced to 
twenty-one years. A sedentary life had worked a 
change in the homicide of ; he was now in his


forties, sententious and fat, and had a shaved head and 
unusually wise eyes. These eyes were now fixed on 
young Molinari.
“What can I do for you, my friend?”
The tone was not overly cordial, but Molinari knew 
that Parodi was not averse to visits. Besides, any reac- 
tion of Parodi’s was less important than Molinari’s 
need to find a confidant and a counselor. Slowly and 
efficiently, Parodi brewed maté in a small blue mug. 
He offered some to Molinari. Molinari, though impa- 
tient to explain the irreversible adventure that had 
turned his life upside down, knew it was pointless to 
try to hurry Isidro Parodi. Molinari astounded himself 
by the ease with which he launched into a casual dis- 
cussion of the racetrack and how it was rigged nowa- 
days so that nobody could tell who was going to win 
anymore. Don Isidro paid no attention. Taking up his 
favorite gripe, he railed on and on against the Italians, 
who had wormed their way into everything—not ex- 
cluding the state penitentiary.
“Now it’s full of foreigners of the most dubious 
pedigree,” he said, “and nobody knows where they 
come from.”
Molinari, who was prone to nationalistic sentiments, 
 joined battle to say that he was fed up with Italians and 
Druses, not to mention English capitalists, who had 
filled Argentina with railways and meat-packing 
plants. Only yesterday he’d walked into the All-Star 
Pizza Parlor, and the first thing he set eyes on was an 
Italian.
“Tell me,” said don Isidro, “this Italian that’s on 
your mind—is it a man or a woman?”
“Neither,” replied Molinari, to the point. “Don Isi- 
dro, I have killed a man.”
“They say I killed one too, and yet look at me. Take


it easy. This business of the Druses is complicated, but 
as long as no clerk in the Eighth Precinct has it in for 
you, maybe your hide can be saved.”
Molinari was taken aback. Then he remembered 
that his name had been linked to the mystery of Ibn 
Khaldun’s villa by an unscrupulous newspaper—a 
newspaper that was a breed apart from the dynamic 
daily for which Molinari reported on soccer as well as 
the nobler sports. He recalled that Parodi kept his 
mind sharp and, thanks to his astuteness and the gen- 
erous oversight of Assistant Chief Grondona, always 
submitted the afternoon papers to intelligent scrutiny. 
In fact, don Isidro was not unaware of the recent de- 
mise of Ibn Khaldun. Nonetheless, he asked Molinari 
to explain what had happened, requesting him not to 
speak fast, since he was becoming a bit hard of hear- 
ing. Molinari, almost relaxed, told this story:
“Believe me, I’m a modern guy, a man of my times. 
I’ve seen a thing or two, but I also enjoy a bit of 
meditation. It seems to me that mankind has gone 
beyond the stage of materialism. Holy Communion 
and the mobs who attended the recent Eucharistic 
Congress left me with something unforgettable. As 
you said last time—and believe you me, your words 
didn’t fall on deaf ears—life’s enigma has to be solved. 
Look, fakirs and yogis, with their breathing exercises 
and their gimmicks, know a thing or two. As a good 
Catholic, I’ve renounced the Honor and Patria 
Spiritualist Institute, but I’m convinced that the 
Druses form a forward-looking community and are 
closer to the mystery than many who go to Mass every 
Sunday. For instance, Dr. Ibn Khaldun had a real 
showplace out in Villa Mazzini, with a fabulous library. 
I first met him at Radio Phoenix on Arbor Day. He 
made a really meaningful speech, and he praised me


for an article of mine that someone had sent him. He 
took me to his house, lent me serious books, and in- 
vited me to a party he was giving. The female element 
was missing, but these cultural exchanges are some- 
thing, let me tell you. People accuse the Druses of 
believing in idols, but in their assembly room there’s 
a metal statue of a bull that must be worth a king’s 
ransom. Every Friday the Akils—they’re the initiates— 
gather around the bull. A while ago, Dr. Ibn Khaldun 
wanted me to be initiated. I didn’t see how I could 
refuse; I wanted to be on good terms with the old guy, 
and man doesn’t live by bread alone. The Druses are 
a closed group; some of them didn’t think a Westerner 
was worthy of entering the brotherhood. To give one 
example, Abdul Hassam, the owner of a fleet of trucks 
that carry frozen meat, recalled that the number of the 
chosen is fixed and that it’s not in the bylaws to make 
converts. The treasurer, Izz-al-Din, was opposed too. 
But he’s a nobody who spends his whole day at a desk 
scribbling figures in a ledger. Dr. Ibn Khaldun 
laughed off him and his books. Still, these reactionar- 
ies, with their outdated prejudices, kept trying to cut 
the ground from under me, and I wouldn’t hesitate to 
come right out and say that indirectly they’re to blame 
for everything. The eleventh of August I had a letter 
from Ibn Khaldun, informing me that on the four- 
teenth I’d be put through a pretty stiff test, for which 
I had to prepare myself.”
“And what did you have to do to prepare yourself?” 
asked Parodi.
“Well, as I’m sure you know, three days on nothing 
but tea, learning the signs of the Zodiac—in their cor- 
rect order—the way they appear in the Bristol Almanac.
I asked for sick leave at the Sanitation Department, 
where I work mornings. At first, it surprised me that


the ceremony was to take place on a Sunday and not 
on a Friday, but the letter explained that for an exami- 
nation as important as this one the Lord’s day was 
more appropriate. I was told to turn up at the villa 
before midnight. All Friday and Saturday I was rela- 
tively calm, but on Sunday I woke up with a bad case 
of nerves. You see, don Isidro, now that I think about 
it I’m sure I already had a premonition of what was 
going to happen. But I didn’t cave in. I spent the 
whole day with the book in my hand. It was comical. 
Every five minutes I looked at my watch to see if I 
could have another glass of tea. I don’t know why the 
watch; I had to drink anyway. My throat was parched, 
and it cried out for liquid. And then, although I had 
been waiting and waiting for the hour of the examina- 
tion, I went and missed the train out of Retiro. The 
one I took, the eleven-eighteen, was slower than the 
one I should have been on.
“Despite being well rehearsed, I kept studying the 
Almanac on the train. I was annoyed by a gang of idiots 
arguing about how the Millionaires trounced the 
Chacarita Juniors and, believe you me, they didn’t 
know a thing about soccer. I got off at Belgrano R. The 
villa’s located about thirteen blocks from the station. 
I thought the walk was going to refresh me; instead, 
it left me bushed. Following Ibn Khaldun’s instruc- 
tions to the letter, I phoned him from the bar at the 
corner of Rosetti Street.
“In front of the villa was a line of parked cars; the 
house was lit up as if for a wake, and from a long way 
off you could hear the sound of voices. Ibn Khaldun 
was waiting for me in the doorway. It struck me that 
he had aged. I’d always seen him by day; only that 
night did I realize that with his beard and all he looked 
a bit like D’Annunzio. Here’s one of life’s little ironies.


Worried half out of my wits over the examination, I go 
and notice a foolish thing like that. We made our way 
along the brick walk that went around the house and 
entered by a back door. Izz-al-Din was in the office, 
standing beside the files.”
“It’s fourteen years now that I’ve been filed away,” 
remarked don Isidro sweetly. “But this office—de- 
scribe the place a little.”
“Well, it’s very simple. The office is on the upper 
floor. A stairway comes down directly into the assem- 
bly room. That’s where the Druses were, about a hun- 
dred and fifty of them, all veiled and dressed in white 
robes, standing around the metal bull. The files are in 
an alcove off the office; it’s an inner room. I’ve always 
maintained that in the long run a room without a 
proper window is unhealthy. You feel the same, don’t 
you?”
“Don’t talk to me about rooms without windows. 
Since settling here on the Northside I’m fed up with 
blank walls. Describe the office.”
“It’s a big room. There’s an oak desk with an Oli- 
vetti on it, some really comfortable armchairs that you 
sink down to your ears in, one of those Turkish pipe 
things that seemed to be broken but still worth a mint, 
a crystal chandelier, a kind of futuristic-looking Orien- 
tal carpet, a bust of Napoleon, a library of serious 
books—César Cantú’s World History, The Wonders of the 
World and of Man, The International Library of Famous 
Authors, the Daily Mirror Yearbook, Peluffo’s Illustrated 
Gardener, The Treasure of Youth, Lombroso’s Criminal 
Woman, and who knows what else.
“Izz-al-Din was nervous. Right away I found out 
why; he’d gone back to work on his books. There was 
an enormous stack of them on the table. Dr. Ibn Khal- 
dun, concerned about my examination, wanted to get


rid of Izz-al-Din and he said to him, ‘Don’t worry. I’ll 
look into your books later tonight.’
“I don’t know whether Izz-al-Din believed him or 
not. He left to put on his robe to go down with the 
others. He never once glanced at me. As soon as we 
were alone, Dr. Ibn Khaldun said to me, ‘Have you 
fasted faithfully? Have you learned the twelve figures 
of the world?’
“I assured him that since ten o’clock on Thursday 
night—earlier that evening, in the company of some 
drumbeaters for the new sensibility, I had eaten a light 
stew and some roast beef at the Wholesale Market— 
I’d had nothing but plain tea.
“Then Ibn Khaldun asked me to recite the names of 
the twelve figures. I recited them without a single mis- 
take; he made me repeat the list five or six times. 
Finally, he said to me, ‘I see you’ve carried out your 
instructions. This wouldn’t have been enough, how- 
ever, had you not been diligent and brave. I know that 
you are, and I’ve decided to ignore your detractors. I 
shall put you to a single test—the most perilous and 
difficult of all. Thirty years ago, in the mountains of 
Lebanon, I myself performed it, but my masters as- 
signed me other easier tests beforehand. I found a 
coin at the bottom of the sea, a forest made of air, a 
chalice at the center of the earth, a saber condemned 
to Hell. You will not seek four magical objects; you 
shall seek out the four masters who make up the veiled 
tetragon of the Godhead. Right now, entrusted with a 
pious mission, they are gathered around the metal 
bull, praying with their brothers, the Akils, who are 
also veiled. No mark distinguishes them, but your 
heart will recognize them. I command you to bring 
Yusuf. You will descend to the auditorium, remember- 
ing in their exact order the twelve figures of the heav-


ens. When you reach the last figure, the sign of Pisces, 
you shall return to the first, which is Aries, and so on 
in rotation. Thrice you will weave a circle round the 
Akils and your steps will lead you to Yusuf—so long 
as you have not changed the order of the figures. You 
will tell him, “Ibn Khaldun summons,” and you will 
bring him here. Then I shall command you to bring 
the second master, then the third, then the fourth.’ 
“Luckily, reading and rereading the Bristol Almanac 
so many times had engraved the twelve figures in my 
mind; but to make a mistake all you need is to be told 
not to. I was not daunted, I assure you, but I had a 
premonition. Ibn Khaldun shook my hand, told me his 
prayers would be with me, and I started down the 
stairs into the gathering. I was very busy with the 
figures; as if that weren’t enough, those white backs, 
those bowed heads, those smooth masks, and that sa- 
cred bull I’d never before seen close up made me 
uneasy. Still, I circled three times without a mistake, 
and I found myself behind a person in a sheet who 
looked to me exactly like all the others. But as my 
mind was working on the signs of the Zodiac, I had no 
time to think, and I said, ‘Ibn Khaldun summons.’ The 
man followed me. I kept the signs in mind as we 
climbed the stairway and entered the office. Ibn Khal- 
dun was praying; he made Yusuf enter the alcove, and 
almost immediately he turned again and said to me, 
‘Now bring Ibrahim.’ I went back to the assembly, 
made my three turns, stopped behind another man in 
a sheet, and said, ‘Ibn Khaldun summons.’ Leading 
him, I returned to the office.”
“Whoa, my friend, whoa,” said Parodi. “Are you 
sure that while you were weaving your three circles no 
one left the office?”
“Look, I can tell you positively. I admit I was con-


centrating on the figures and all that, but I’m not that 
foolish. I didn’t take my eyes off that door. Nobody 
went in or came out.
“Ibn Khaldun took Ibrahim by the arm and ushered 
him into the other room. Then he said to me, ‘Now 
bring Izz-al-Din.’ A strange thing, don Isidro, the first 
two times I had all the confidence in the world; this 
time I lost my nerve. I went down, I walked around the 
Druses three times, and I returned with Izz-al-Din. I 
was absolutely exhausted. On the stairway my sight 
blurred. I figured it was my kidneys acting up. Every- 
thing seemed different—even the man beside me. Ibn 
Khaldun himself had so much faith in me by now that 
I found him playing a game of solitaire instead of 
praying. He herded Izz-al-Din into the alcove and, 
speaking like a father, said to me, ‘This exercise has 
worn you out. I shall seek the fourth initiate—Kahlil.’
“Fatigue is the enemy of concentration, but as soon 
as Ibn Khaldun went out, I put my nose to the gallery 
railing and spied on him. He made his three turns 
without any ado, took Kahlil by the arm, and brought 
him back up. I said that the alcove had no other door 
than the one that opened into the office. Well, Ibn 
Khaldun entered that door with Kahlil; straightaway 
he came out with the four veiled Druses. He made the 
sign of the cross, because these Druses are very devout 
people. Then he told them in good Argentine to take 
off their veils. You’ll say I’ve made all this up, but there 
was Izz-al-Din with that foreign face of his, and Kahlil, 
the assistant manager of Dyno-Rod Pipe, Drain, and 
Hygiene Services, and Yusuf, the brother-in-law of a 
man who talks through his nose, and Ibrahim, Ibn 
Khaldun’s partner, unshaven and white as a corpse. A 
hundred and fifty identical Druses, and here were the 
four masters!


“Dr. Ibn Khaldun almost embraced me. But the 
others were the sort that hate to show their feelings, 
and being full of superstitions and taboos they 
wouldn’t let him twist their arms. They got angry with 
him in Druse. Poor Ibn Khaldun tried hard to con- 
vince them, but in the end he had to submit. He said 
he would put me to another test, an extremely difficult 
one this time, but that in this test the lives of all of 
them and maybe the fate of the world would be at 
stake.
“ ‘We’ll blindfold you with this veil,’ he said. ‘We’ll 
put this long rod in your hand, and each of us will hide 
in some corner or other of the house or garden. You’ll 
wait here until the clock strikes twelve. Then you’ll 
search for us, one by one, guided by the figures. These 
signs rule the world. While the examination lasts, we 
shall entrust you with the order of the figures. The 
entire cosmos will be in your power. If you do not 
change the order of the Zodiac, our fate and the fate 
of the world will continue on their predetermined 
course. If you make a mistake—if, for instance, after 
Libra you come up with Leo or Scorpio—the master 
you seek will perish, and the whole wide world will fall 
victim to the menace of wind and water and fire.’
“Everyone agreed, except for Izz-al-Din. He’d 
stuffed himself with so much salami that his eyes were 
half shut, and he was so flustered that on leaving he 
shook hands with us all, one by one—a thing he never 
does.
“They handed me a bamboo rod, blindfolded me, 
and scattered. I was alone. I was petrified! I had to 
imagine the figures without changing their order; I 
had to wait for the stroke of twelve, which I was sure 
would never come, knowing all the while that I’d have 
to find my way through that house. Suddenly the place


seemed not only interminable but completely unfamil- 
iar. Without trying to, I kept thinking about the stair- 
way, the landings, the furniture I’d bump into, the 
cellars, the courtyard, the skylights. And I heard all 
sorts of things—the branches of the trees in the gar- 
den; some footsteps upstairs; the Druses, who were 
leaving the house; Abd-al-Malik’s Isotta starting up. 
You know, he’s the one who won the Raggio Olive Oil 
raffle. Well, everybody was leaving and there I was, all 
alone in the mansion, with those Druses hiding God 
knows where. When midnight struck I nearly jumped 
out of my skin! I set out with my wand—me, a young 
man, still in the prime of life—walking like a cripple, 
like a blind man, if you know what I mean. I immedi- 
ately turned left. The brother-in-law of the guy that 
talks through his nose has a lot of savoir faire, and I 
thought I’d find him under the table. All this time, 
clear as a bell, I saw Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, and all 
those illustrations. I forgot the first landing and kept 
stumbling. Then I entered the conservatory. Suddenly 
I was lost. I couldn’t find either the door or the walls. 
What else would you expect after three days on plain 
tea, not to mention the strain of concentration? Still, 
I took myself in hand and headed for the dumbwaiter, 
suspecting that one of them might have hidden him- 
self in the coalbin. But these Druses, no matter how 
educated they are, haven’t our native Argentine cun- 
ning. I went back to the assembly room. I tripped over 
a three-legged table used by some of the Druses who 
still believe in spiritualism—as if they were back in the 
Middle Ages. I felt that all the eyes in the oil paintings 
were staring at me. You’ll probably laugh—my 
younger sister always said I have something of the 
mad poet in me. But I was on my toes, and at once I 
discovered Ibn Khaldun. I stretched out an arm and


there he was. Without much trouble we found the 
stairway, which turned out to be a lot closer than I 
thought, and we entered the office. On our way, we 
didn’t exchange a single word. I was too busy concen- 
trating on the signs. I left him and went to look for 
another Druse. Just then I heard a stifled laugh. For 
the first time, a doubt crossed my mind. I began to 
think they were laughing at me. Suddenly I heard a 
cry. I’d swear I made no mistake with the signs. But 
what with my anger and then my surprise I may have 
mixed them up—I never try to hide the truth. I turned 
around and, prodding with my rod, I went back into 
the office. I tripped over something on the floor. I 
squatted down. My hand touched hair; I felt a nose, 
eyes. Without realizing what I was doing, I tore off the 
blindfold.
“Ibn Khaldun lay on the floor, his mouth covered 
with saliva and blood. I touched him; he was still warm 
but he was already a corpse. There was no one in the 
room. I saw the rod, which had fallen from my hand. 
Blood stained the tip of it. Only then did I see I had 
killed him. When I heard the laugh and the cry, I must 
have become momentarily confused and changed the 
order of the figures. That cost a man his life—maybe 
even the lives of the four masters. I looked over the 
gallery and called out. Nobody answered. In a panic, 
I ran through the back part of the house, mumbling to 
myself, ‘The Ram, the Bull, the Twins,’ trying to keep 
the world in one piece. Despite the fact that the 
grounds were nearly a block long, I was at the garden 
wall in no time. Tullido Ferrarotti always said I had a 
future in the middle-distance events, but that night I 
turned into a champion high-jumper. With one leap I 
cleared the wall, which is close to six feet high. Picking 
myself up from the ditch and brushing off the pieces


of broken glass that clung to me, I found I was cough- 
ing. From the villa poured a column of smoke, thick 
and black as mattress stuffing. Out of condition or not, 
I sprinted like I used to in the old days. When I 
reached Rosetti Street I turned around. The sky was 
lit up like Independence Day. The house was burning 
—that’s what a mix-up in the figures could do! Just the 
thought of it made my mouth drier than a parrot’s 
tongue. Catching a glimpse of a cop on the corner, I 
did an about-face, then dashed across some open lots. 
What a disgrace that we still have them in this city! As 
a good Argentine it hurt me, let me tell you, and what 
with shaking off a pack of dogs I was quite dizzy. All 
it takes is one to start barking for all the others to 
deafen you. Out there in those Westside neighbor- 
hoods you’re not safe walking around, and there’s no 
police of any kind. But after a while, seeing I was on 
Charlone Street, I calmed down. A right, then a left, 
and I found myself at the wall of the Chacarita. A 
bunch of hooligans standing on a street corner began 
chanting, ‘The Ram, the Bull,’ and making noises unfit 
for a human mouth. What could I do? I gave them a 
wide berth. Would you believe it took some time be- 
fore I realized I was repeating the names of the signs 
out loud? I lost my way again. You know how it is out 
in that part of the city. They don’t know a thing about 
urbanization, and all the streets end up in a labyrinth. 
The idea of looking for transportation didn’t even 
occur to me. My shoes were a mess. I got home just 
about the time the trash men were making their 
rounds. I was sick with exhaustion; I think I was even 
running a temperature. I threw myself down on my 
bed, but so as not to lose my concentration on the 
figures I wouldn’t let myself fall asleep.
“At noon I asked for sick leave from both the news-


paper and the Sanitation Department. That was when 
my neighbor poked his head in—he’s on the road for 
Brylcreem—and he insisted on taking me to his room 
for a spaghetti feed. I’m opening my heart to you now. 
At first I felt a little better. My friend has a bit of the 
old savoir faire, and he uncorked a nice little local 
muscatel. But I was in no mood for deep conversation. 
Using the excuse that the sauce sat on my stomach like 
lead, I retired to my room. I didn’t go out all day. Still, 
not being a hermit and worried stiff about what had 
happened the night before, I asked the landlady to 
bring me a copy of the afternoon paper. I skipped the 
sports page, plunged straight into the crime news, and 
saw the photographs of the holocaust. At twelve-thirty 
in the morning a fire of vast proportions had broken 
out in the Villa Mazzini home of Dr. Ibn Khaldun. 
Despite the brave efforts of the Fire Department, the 
property was gutted by the flames, its owner, the dis- 
tinguished member of the Syrio-Lebanese commu- 
nity, also perishing in the blaze. Dr. Ibn Khaldun was 
a pioneer in the importation of linoleum substitutes. 
I was horror-stricken. Baudizzone, who’s always 
sloppy in his reporting, had made several errors. For 
example, he completely overlooked the religious cere- 
mony and said that that night they had met to read the 
minutes and to reelect officers. A little before the di- 
saster, the Messrs. Kahlil, Yusuf, and Ibrahim had left 
the premises. They claimed that up until midnight 
they had been engaged in amicable conversation with 
the deceased, who, far from foreseeing the tragedy 
that would put an end to his days and would reduce 
to ashes a residence characteristic of our city’s western 
zone, displayed his usual esprit. The cause of the great 
conflagration was still to be determined.
“I’m not afraid of work, but from then on I haven’t


been back to the paper or to the department. I’ve been 
in a terrible state. Two days later, I was paid a visit by 
an affable gentleman, who questioned me about my 
part in the requisition of brooms and mops for the 
personnel canteen at the government warehouse on 
Bucarelli Street. Then he changed the subject and 
spoke of foreign communities, and he was especially 
interested in the Syrio-Lebanese. He vaguely prom- 
ised to come back again, but he never did. Instead, a 
total stranger installed himself on my street corner, 
and he follows me everywhere, hiding behind dark 
glasses. I know you aren’t a man to be taken in by the 
police or by anybody else. Help me, don Isidro. I’m 
desperate!”
“I’m neither a wizard nor a magician—I don’t go 
around solving riddles. I won’t deny you a helping 
hand, however. But there’s one condition. Promise me 
you’ll do everything I tell you.”
“Whatever you say, don Isidro.”
“Good. We’ll begin right now. Recite in order the 
figures of the Almanac.”
“Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, 
Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius, Pisces.” 
“Fine. Now say them backward.”
Molinari, his face pale, mumbled, “Riesa, Rustau—” 
“Can the pig Latin. Now change the order and say 
the figures any way you like.”
“Change the order? You haven’t understood me, 
don Isidro. That can’t be done!”
“No? Give the first sign, the last, and next to last.” 
On the brink of terror, Molinari obeyed. Then he 
looked wildly around him.
“Good. Now that you’ve emptied your head of this 
nonsense, off you go to the paper. And don’t worry 
about a thing.”


Speechless, redeemed, dumbfounded, Molinari left 
the jail. Outside, the man was waiting for him.
II
A week later, Molinari told himself that he couldn’t 
wait any longer, he’d have to pay a second visit to the 
penitentiary. Still, having to face Parodi troubled him, 
for Parodi had seen through his vanity and his pitiful 
gullibility. It galled him that a man of his sophistica- 
tion should let himself be bamboozled by a pack of 
foreign fanatics! At the same time, the appearances of 
the affable gentleman had become more frequent and 
more sinister. He spoke not only of the Syrio- 
Lebanese but also of the Druses of Lebanon. And his 
conversation was enriched by new subjects—for ex- 
ample, the abolition of torture in , the merits of 
an electric prod recently imported from Bremen by 
the Criminal Investigation Division, and so forth.
One rainy morning, Molinari caught the bus at the 
corner of Humberto I. When he got off in Palermo, the 
unknown man got off too. He had graduated from 
dark glasses to a blond beard.
As usual, Parodi received Molinari with a certain 
curtness. The older man had the tact not to refer to 
the Villa Mazzini mystery. He launched into a theme 
that was almost obsessive with him—what a man could 
do with a solid knowledge of cards. He called to mind 
the teachings of Lynxie Rivarola, who was hit by a 
chair and died just as he drew a second ace of spades 
from a special device he had up his sleeve. Comple- 
menting the anecdote, Parodi brought out a greasy


pack of cards, had Molinari shuffle them, and asked 
him to lay out the cards, face down.
“My dear friend,” said Parodi, “you who have magic 
powers are going to hand this poor old man the four 
of hearts.”
“I’ve—I’ve never pretended to have magic powers,” 
stammered Molinari. “You know very well, sir, that 
I’ve cut all ties with those fanatics.”
“You’ve cut that deck too. Give me the four of 
hearts. Don’t be afraid. It’s the first card you’ll reach 
for.”
His hand shaking, Molinari picked up a card at ran- 
dom and gave it to Parodi.
“Wonderful,” Parodi said, glancing at it. “Now 
you’re going to give me the jack of spades.”
Molinari picked another card and handed it over. 
“Now the seven of clubs.”
Molinari handed Parodi a card.
“The exercise has tired you. I’ll pick the last card for 
you. It’s the king of hearts.”
Casually, Parodi drew a card and added it to the 
three previous ones. Then he told Molinari to turn 
them up. They were the king of hearts, the seven of 
clubs, the jack of spades, and the four of hearts.
“Don’t be so amazed,” said Parodi. “Among these 
cards is one that’s marked—the first I asked for, but 
not the first you gave me. I asked for the four of hearts; 
you gave me the jack of spades. I asked for the jack of 
spades; you gave me the seven of clubs. I asked for the 
seven of clubs; you gave me the king of hearts. Then 
I said you were tired and that I would pick the fourth 
card myself—the king of hearts. I picked the four of 
hearts, the marked card.
“Ibn Khaldun did the same. He ordered you to seek 
out Druse number one, and you brought him number


two. He asked for number two, and you brought him 
three. He asked for three and you brought him four. 
He told you he’d find number four himself, and he 
brought number one. Number one was Ibrahim, his 
closest friend. Ibn Khaldun had no trouble recogniz- 
ing him even among the crowd. You see—this is what 
happens to people who get themselves mixed up with 
foreigners. You told me yourself that the Druses are 
a closed society. You were right, and the most closed 
of them all was Ibn Khaldun, the dean of the commu- 
nity. The rest were satisfied just to make fun of a native 
Argentine; it was Ibn Khaldun who wanted to rub it in. 
He told you to appear on a Sunday, and you said 
yourself that Friday was the day of his services. To give 
you a case of nerves he put you on a three-day diet of 
tea and the Bristol Almanac. On top of that, he made 
you walk I don’t know how many blocks. He plunged 
you into the midst of a gathering of Druses who were 
got up in bedsheets and, as if you needed more con- 
fusing, he made up the business of the figures of the 
Almanac. The man was having his fun. He hadn’t yet 
looked over Izz-al-Din’s account books—nor would he 
ever. Those were the books they were talking about 
when you entered. You thought they were speaking 
about mere novels and poetry. Who knows what 
fiddling the treasurer had done. But what’s certain is 
that he killed Ibn Khaldun and burned down the 
house so that no one would ever see those books. He 
said goodbye to you all, he shook hands—a thing he 
never did—to make you think he had left. He hid 
nearby, waited for the others to leave—by then they’d 
have had enough of the joke—and when you, with the 
rod and blindfold, were looking for Ibn Khaldun, Izz- 
al-Din went back to the office. When you returned with 
the old man, the two of them laughed to see you walk-


ing around like a blind man. You went out to find a 
second Druse. Ibn Khaldun followed you so that you 
would find him again; you made four trips, bumping 
into things and bringing the same person back each 
time. The treasurer then knifed him in the back; you 
heard the cry. While you were going back to the room, 
feeling your way, Izz-al-Din fled, setting fire to the 
books. After that, to justify the disappearance of the 
books, he set fire to the house.”
Pujato, Province of Santa Fe,
December , 


The Nights 
of Goliadkin
To the memory of the Repentant Thief
I
Tall, distinguished, bland, his profile romantic, his 
brush mustache tinted, Gervasio Montenegro stepped 
with blasé elegance into the police van and let himself 
be chauffeured to the penitentiary. He found himself 
in a paradoxical situation. The countless readers of 
evening papers throughout the fourteen Argentine 
provinces were outraged that such a famous actor 
should be accused of theft and murder; the countless 
readers of evening papers knew that Gervasio Mon- 
tenegro was a famous actor because he was accused of 
theft and murder.
This priceless confusion was the exclusive doing of 
that alert reporter Achilles Molinari, who, in solving 
the mystery of Ibn Khaldun, had acquired so much 
prestige. It was also thanks to Molinari that the police 
allowed Gervasio Montenegro this highly unusual visit 
to the jail where in cell  the sedentary detective 
Isidro Parodi was serving time. (Molinari, with a gen- 
erosity that fooled no one, attributed all his successes 
to Parodi.)
A skeptic at heart, Montenegro had his doubts


about a detective who had formerly been a barber on 
Mexico Street, on the Southside of Buenos Aires, and 
was now a prison inmate. Montenegro’s whole being, 
sensitive as a Stradivarius, shuddered at the prospect 
of this fateful visit. Still, he’d let himself be talked into 
it, well aware that he should avoid a falling out with 
Achilles Molinari, who, as Montenegro himself had 
put it, represented the fourth estate.
Parodi received the famous actor without looking 
up. In his slow, efficient way the detective was brewing 
maté in a small blue mug, which Montenegro was 
quite ready to sample. Parodi, however—no doubt 
owing to shyness—failed to offer him any. To put the 
detective at his ease, Montenegro patted him on the 
shoulder and lit a cigarette from a pack of Sublimes 
that lay on a stool.
“You’ve come early, don Montenegro. But I know 
what brings you. It’s this business of the diamond.” 
“I see that these stout walls are no barrier to my 
fame,” Montenegro hastened to remark.
“Correct. What better place than a jail cell to know 
what’s going on all over the country—from the thiev- 
ing in high places down to the cultural efforts of the 
lowliest radio actor.”
“I share your aversion to the radio. As Margarita 
always said—Margarita Xirgu, you know—actors, 
those of us who have the stage in our blood, need the 
warmth of an audience. The microphone is cold, un- 
natural. Faced with that unsatisfactory gadget, I myself 
have experienced a loss of touch with my public.” 
“If I were you I’d forget about gadgets and being 
out of touch. I’ve read Molinari’s articles. The boy’s 
skillful with his pen, but all this fine writing and por- 
trait sketching end up clear as mud. Why don’t you tell


me about it in your own way and leave out the art. 
Plain talk—that’s what I like.”
“Very well. As a matter of fact, that’s exactly what 
I’m qualified for. Clarity is the prerogative of Latins. 
Nonetheless, you must allow me to cast a veil over a 
certain event which could compromise a society lady. 
The lady is from La Quiaca, in the far north, where, 
as you know, people of substance still live. Laissez faire, 
laissez passer. The stringent necessity of keeping untar- 
nished the name of that lady who in the world’s eyes 
is a darling of the finest drawing rooms—and for me 
an angel as well—forced me to interrupt my trium- 
phant tour of the Indo-American republics. Out-and- 
out man of Buenos Aires that I am, I had looked for- 
ward—not without nostalgia—to the hour of my 
return, never for a moment believing it would be upset 
by circumstances which may well be termed criminal. 
In actual fact, the moment I arrived at Retiro Station, 
I was placed under arrest. I am now accused of theft 
and of a double murder. To crown the accueil, the men 
in blue stripped me of a jewel that I had acquired only 
hours before, in quite picturesque circumstances, 
while crossing the Rio Tercero. Bref, I detest pointless 
circumlocution. Let me tell my story ab initio—of 
course, without suppressing the lively irony that is 
now so much a part of modern life. I shall also allow 
myself a touch or two of the landscapist, a certain note 
of color.
“On the seventh of January, at four-fourteen a.m., 
soberly attired as a Bolivian Indian, I boarded the 
Pan-American Flyer in Mococo, cleverly shaking off— 
a question of savoir faire, my dear friend—my numer- 
ous but inept pursuers. The generous distribution of 
some autographed self-portraits succeeded in allay-


ing, although not abolishing, the mistrust of the train’s 
employees. I was given a compartment which I re- 
signed myself to sharing with a stranger, who was ob- 
viously a Jew and who awoke on my arrival. I learned 
later that this intruder’s name was Goliadkin and that 
he trafficked in diamonds. How on earth was I to know 
that this morose Israelite, whom the fates of the rail- 
way had bestowed on me, would plunge me into an 
unfathomable tragedy!
“The next day, while enjoying the heroic capolavoro 
of some Calchaquí chef, I was able to inspect with 
bonhomie the human fauna which populates that nar- 
row world of the speeding train. My painstaking scru- 
tiny began—cherchez la femme—with an interesting sil- 
houette that even along fashionable Florida Street at 
eight p.m. would have merited a sidelong glance of 
male appreciation. On this topic I’m never mistaken. 
Later I found out that she was an exotic, exceptional 
woman; that she was the Baroness Puffendorf-Duver- 
nois; that she was a woman of maturity with none of 
the deadly insipidity of, say, a schoolgirl; that she was 
a typical specimen of our time, having a trim body 
shaped by lawn tennis, a face perhaps a touch basée but 
subtly enhanced by creams and cosmetics—a woman, 
in a word, whose long spells of silence lent her ele- 
gance and whose slimness lent her height. She had, 
nonetheless, the faible—unforgivable in a true Duver- 
nois—of flirting with Communism. At first, she suc- 
ceeded in holding my interest, but soon I realized that 
her glittering veneer concealed a banal mind, and I 
requested poor Mr. Goliadkin to relieve me. She—and 
this is so typical of a woman—pretended not to have 
noticed the change. Still, I overheard a conversation 
between the baronne and another passenger, a certain 
Colonel Harrap, from Texas, in which she used the


epithet ‘nitwit’ referring doubtless to ce pauvre M. Go- 
liadkin. Let me return to Goliadkin. He was from 
Russia, a Jew, whose features in the photographic 
plate of my memory are decidedly weak. He was on the 
fair side, well built, and he had bulging eyes. He knew 
his place; he was forever rushing to open doors for 
me. On the other hand, it’s impossible—albeit highly 
desirable—to forget the bearded, apoplectic Colonel 
Harrap, that typical product of a boisterous vulgar 
country which has reached gigantism but in which 
shades, nuances, are unknown. Shades, I might add, 
with which the lowliest urchin of any Neapolitan trat- 
toria is familiar and which are the trademark of the 
Latin race.”
“Never mind about Naples. If someone doesn’t 
clear up this affair for you, you’re going to find your- 
self sitting on one hell of a Vesuvius.”
“I envy you your Benedictine reclusion, Mr. Parodi, 
but my life has been an errant one. I’ve sought light 
in the Balearics, color in Brindisi, and sophisticated 
sin in Paris. Also, like Renan, I’ve said a prayer on the 
Acropolis. I have squeezed life’s juicy bunch of grapes 
the world over. But back to my story. In the Pullman 
car, while the unfortunate Goliadkin—after all, he was 
a Jew and so predestined to persecution—bore with 
resignation the baronne’s tireless and tiring verbal wit, 
I, in the company of the young Catamarcan poet 
Bibiloni, enjoyed myself like an Athenian, expatiating 
upon poetry and the provinces. I confess now that the 
tanned—or, to be more exact, dusky—features of the 
young man who’d won the Vulcan Kerosene Stove 
Prize did not at first predispose me toward him. His 
pince-nez, his clip-on bow tie, his cream-colored 
gloves made me think that I had before me one of the 
many pedagogues bequeathed us by Sarmiento—that


prophetic genius from whom it’s absurd to demand 
the pedestrian virtue of foresight. However, the keen 
satisfaction with which he listened to a crown of trio- 
lets that I had dashed off a few days before demon- 
strated to me that he was one of the solid assets of our 
emerging literature. He was not one of those insuffer- 
able versifiers who take advantage of the first tête-á- 
tête to inflict on one the abortions of their pen. 
Bibiloni was thoughtful, discreet, and he did not 
squander the opportunity to keep quiet in the pres- 
ence of his masters. I delighted him with the first of my 
odes to José Martí; just before my eleventh, however, 
I had to deprive him of the pleasure. The boredom 
that the incessant baronne inflicted on Goliadkin had 
rubbed off on my Catamarcan through an interesting 
phenomenon of psychological sympathy that I have 
often observed in other subjects. With my proverbial 
straightforwardness, which is the apanage of the man 
of the world, I hesitated not one instant before taking 
a radical course of action. I shook Bibiloni until he 
opened his eyes. Our conversation subsequently went 
into a decline. To give it new heights, I turned to the 
subject of fine tobaccos. That hit the mark. Bibiloni 
was all animation and interest. After rummaging in the 
inside pockets of his hunting jacket, he fished out a 
German cigar and, too shy to offer it to me, said that 
he had acquired it to smoke in his berth that night. I 
understood the innocent subterfuge. With a rapid 
movement I accepted the cigar and was quick to light 
it. Some pained memory crossed the young man’s 
mind—at least, through my experience of reading 
faces, that’s how I interpreted it. Sitting back comfort- 
ably in my armchair and exhaling blue mouthfuls of 
smoke, I asked him to speak of his triumphs. His inter- 
esting, swarthy face lit up. I listened to the old story


of the writer, who struggles against the incomprehen- 
sion of the middle classes and traverses the seas of 
life bearing his chimera on his shoulders. The Bibiloni 
family, after several decades of dedication to the phar- 
macopoeia of the sierra, managed to quit the borders 
of Catamarca and progress all the way to Bancalari. 
There, on the outskirts of Buenos Aires, the poet was 
born. His first teacher was nature—on the one hand, 
the bean patch of his paternal half-acre; on the other, 
the neighboring hen coops that the boy visited more 
than once on moonless nights, armed with a long rod 
for angling poultry. After a good grounding in pri- 
mary studies at Kilometer , the poet returned to the 
soil. He understood the fruitful, virile labors of plow 
and harrow, which are worth more than any hollow 
applause, until the good judgment of Vulcan Stoves 
rescued him with an award for his book Catamarqueñas 
(Memoirs of Provincial Life). The prize money permitted 
him to become acquainted with the province that he 
had sung with such affection. Now, enriched with bal- 
lads and villanelles, he was returning to his native 
Bancalari.
“We went into the dining car. Poor Goliadkin had to 
go and sit next to the baronne; across from them sat 
Father Brown and myself. The ecclesiastic’s features 
were uninteresting. He had chestnut-colored hair and 
a round, vacant face. Nonetheless, I looked on him with 
certain envy. Those of us who’ve suffered the misfor- 
tune of losing the faith that the coal miner and the child 
still hold do not find in cold intelligence the comforting 
balm that the church holds out to its flock. Ultimately, 
what debt does our century, that white-haired blasé 
child, owe to the deep skepticism of Anatole France 
and Júlio Dantas? All of us, my esteemed Parodi, could 
do with a bit of innocence and simplicity.


“I remember the conversation of that evening with 
some confusion. The baronne, using as a pretext the 
midsummer heat, kept lowering her neckline and 
pressing herself against Goliadkin—just to excite me. 
The Jew, little accustomed to this sort of advance, 
vainly shrank from the contact and, conscious of the 
poor figure he was cutting, spoke nervously on sub- 
 jects that couldn’t have been of interest to anyone— 
such as the downward trend of the diamond market, 
the impossibility of substituting a fake diamond for a 
real one, and something about the business of running 
a boutique. Father Brown, who seemed oblivious of 
the difference between the dining car of a deluxe ex- 
press train and a congregation of defenseless parish- 
ioners, repeated I forget which paradox on the need 
to lose the soul in order to save it. It was the mindless 
Byzantinism of theologians, who have obscured the 
clarity of the Gospels.
“Noblesse oblige. To have ignored the baronne’s las- 
civious invitations would have meant making a fool of 
myself. That same night I glided on tiptoe to her com- 
partment and, squatting down on my haunches, my 
dream-filled head pressed to the door, eye to the key- 
hole, I hummed confidentially, ‘Mon ami Pierrot.’ Out 
of this peaceful lull that comes to every soldier in the 
throes of life’s struggle, I was startled by the old- 
fashioned puritanism of Colonel Harrap. In fact, this 
bearded old man, this relic of the piratical Spanish- 
American War, took me by the shoulders, raised me a 
considerable height, and dumped me unceremoni- 
ously in front of the gentlemen’s toilet. My response 
was quick. I got in and shut the door in his face. There 
I remained for close on two hours, lending a sharp ear 
to his confused threats, uttered in faulty Spanish. 
When I abandoned my refuge, the way was clear. ‘I’m


free!’ I exclaimed to myself, and instantly retired to my 
compartment. Obviously, lady luck was with me. In 
the compartment was the baronne, waiting for me. She 
literally leaped on seeing me. In the background, Go- 
liadkin was putting on his jacket. The baronne, with 
quick feminine intuition, realized that Goliadkin’s 
presence destroyed the intimate mood that is so nec- 
essary to lovers. She left without a word to him. I know 
my temperament. I knew that if I ran into the colonel 
again, we’d fight a duel. This would be most awkward 
on a train. Besides, however difficult it is to accept, the 
fact is the age of dueling is no more. I opted for my 
bed.
“How strange the servility of the Hebrew! My en- 
trance had frustrated who knows what unprovoked 
intention of Goliadkin; nevertheless, from that mo- 
ment on, he became exceedingly cordial to me, forced 
me to accept his Italian cigars, and began lavishing 
attention on me.
“The next day, everybody was in a bad humor. For 
my part, ever sensitive to psychological moods, I tried 
to lift the spirits of my table companions by telling 
some of Roberto Payró’s anecdotes and one or two of 
Marcos Sastre’s perfect epigrams. Madame Puffen- 
dorf-Duvemois, indignant over the episode of the 
night before, was plainly irritable. Apparently, some 
echo of her mésaventure had reached Father Brown’s 
ears. He treated her with a curtness that was alto- 
gether unworthy of the ecclesiastical tonsure.
“After lunch, I taught Colonel Harrap a lesson. To 
show him that his faux pas had had no effect on our 
cordial relations, I offered him one of Goliadkin’s sto- 
gies, and I gave myself the pleasure of lighting it for 
him. A slap in the face with a white glove!
“That night, the third of our journey, young


Bibiloni disappointed me. I’d been looking forward to 
telling him about a few of my adventures in gallantry 
—the ones I don’t often share with the first man I 
meet. But he was not in his compartment. It upset me 
to think that a Catamarcan half-breed could have 
slipped into Baroness Puffendorf’s compartment. 
Sometimes I can be like Sherlock Holmes. Cleverly 
eluding the conductor, whom I bribed with an inter- 
esting example of Paraguayan numismatics, I tried— 
cold-blooded hound of the Baskervilles—to listen in 
to, nay, to spy on, what was taking place in that com- 
partment. (The colonel had retired early.) Complete 
silence and darkness were the harvest of my inspec- 
tion. But my anxiety was not to last. To my surprise I 
saw the baronne leaving Father Brown’s compartment. 
For a moment I was overcome by violent feelings of 
rebellion, forgivable in a man whose veins pulse with 
the fiery blood of Montenegros. And then it came to 
me. The baronne had been making her confession. Her 
hair was in disarray, her attire was ascetic—a flaming- 
red nightgown, silver ballerina slippers with gold 
pompoms. She wore no makeup and, woman to the 
core, she fled to her compartment so that I should not 
come upon her without her cosmetic mask. I lit up one 
of young Bibiloni’s bad cigars and beat a philosophical 
retreat.
“Surprisingly, in spite of the lateness of the hour, 
Goliadkin was still up. I smiled. Two days of railroad- 
car conviviality had been enough for the dull Jew to 
begin imitating the noctambulism of the man about 
town. Goliadkin’s new habit, of course, did not suit 
him at all. He was beside himself, nervous. Heedless 
of my nodding off and my yawns, he inflicted on me 
all the details of his insignificant and probably apocry- 
phal life story. He claimed to have been stable master


and then lover of Princess Clavdia Fiodorovna. With 
a cynicism that reminded me of the most daring pages 
of Gil Blas de Santillana, he claimed that, taking ad- 
vantage of the trust of the princess and of her confes- 
sor, Father Abramowicz, he had stolen a great, old, 
rough diamond, a nonpareil that but for the minor 
defect of being uncut would have been the most valu- 
able in the world. Twenty years yawned between him 
and that night of passion, robbery, and flight. In the 
interim, the Red tide had expelled the despoiled lady 
and her untrustworthy stable master from the empire 
of the czars. On those very borders the threefold odys- 
sey began—the princess in search of her daily bread; 
Goliadkin in search of the princess to restore the dia- 
mond to her; and a gang of international thieves in 
search of the stolen diamond and Goliadkin. Goliad- 
kin, in the mines of South Africa, in Brazilian laborato- 
ries, in the bazaars of Bolivia, had known danger and 
poverty. But he never tried to sell the diamond, which 
was his scourge and his hope. In time, Princess 
Clavdia became for Goliadkin a symbol of that Russia, 
once beneficent and grand, which had been crushed 
by bureaucrats and Utopians. Not finding the princess 
made him love her more and more. Then, not long 
ago, he discovered she was in the Argentine, running 
—without giving up her aristocratic morgue—a pros- 
perous establishment in Avellaneda. Only at the last 
moment did Goliadkin remove the diamond from its 
secret hiding place. Now that he knew where the prin- 
cess was, he would rather have died than have lost it.
“Naturally, such a long story from a man who, by his 
own confession, had been a stable groom and a thief, 
made me uneasy. With my typical frankness, I allowed 
myself to express a discreet doubt about the existence 
of the jewel. My thrust went home. Goliadkin took two


identical boxes out of an imitation alligator valise and 
opened one of them. There could be no doubt. There 
in its velvet nest glittered a true brother of the Koh-i- 
noor. Nothing human is strange to me. I sympathized 
with poor Goliadkin, who had once shared the fleeting 
bed of a Fiodorovna and who now, in a creaking rail- 
way car, confided his troubles to an Argentine gentle- 
man who would certainly offer his services to help him 
reach the princess. I warmed him to the idea, telling 
him that pursuit by a band of thieves was less serious 
than pursuit by the police. At once fraternal and mag- 
nanimous, I mentioned that a raid on the Salón Doré 
had caused my name—one of the country’s oldest—to 
be entered in heaven knows what infamous police 
blotter.
“How odd was my friend’s psychology! Twenty 
years without seeing his beloved’s face and now, al- 
most on the eve of happiness, his mind was besieged 
by doubts.
“In spite of a reputation as a bohemian—-justified 
d’ailleurs—I’m a man of regular habits. It was late, and 
I was no longer able to sleep. In my mind I kept turn- 
ing over the story of the diamond so near and the 
princess so far away. Goliadkin, obviously moved by 
the noble frankness of my words, couldn’t sleep ei- 
ther. At any rate, he tossed and turned in his upper 
berth all night.
“Morning had two surprises in store for me. First, 
a distant view of the pampa, which spoke to my soul 
as an Argentine and an artist. A ray of sun lit up the 
countryside. Beneath the lavish blessing of life-giving 
sunshine, the fence posts, the wires, the thistles wept 
with joy. The sky grew suddenly immense, and the 
plain glowed in the light. The heifers seemed to be 
dressed in new clothes.


“My second surprise was of a psychological nature. 
Over our cordial breakfast mugs, Father Brown 
showed us clearly that the cross need not be at odds 
with the sword. With all the authority and prestige of 
his tonsure, he berated Colonel Harrap, whom he 
called (and quite rightly in my opinion) an ass and a 
beast. He also told him that he was only good for 
bullying poor nobodies, and that in the presence of a 
real man he was careful to maintain his distance. Har- 
rap uttered not a peep.
“Only later did I understand the full meaning of the 
priest’s reprimand. I found out that Bibiloni had dis- 
appeared that night. The man of the pen had been that 
military lunatic’s poor nobody.”
“Let me get a word in edgewise, friend Montene- 
gro,” said Parodi. “That strange train of yours—didn’t 
it stop anywhere?”
“Where do you come from, my dear friend Parodi? 
Don’t you know that the Pan-American runs nonstop 
from Bolivia to Buenos Aires? Let me continue. That 
evening the conversation was boring. No one wanted 
to speak of anything other than Bibiloni’s disappear- 
ance. Indeed, some passenger or other remarked that 
the much-touted safety that Anglo-Saxon capitalists 
claim for railway trains was open to doubt after this 
turn of events. Without disagreeing, I pointed out that 
Bibiloni’s action might well have been the result of 
absentmindedness, which is so typical of the poetic 
temperament, and that I myself, in the thrall of a chi- 
mera, was often in the clouds. These hypotheses, 
which seemed plausible by the sober light of day, 
began to fade with the last pirouette of the sun. When 
night fell, everything was tinged with melancholy. 
From time to time from out of the blackness came the 
insistent complaints of an unseen owl, mocking the


dry cough of a sick man. It was the moment perhaps 
when in his mind each passenger turned over distant 
memories or experienced some vague dark fear of the 
nether life. In unison, all the wheels of the train 
seemed to drum out Bi-bi-lo-ni-has-been-killed, Bi-bi-lo- 
ni-has-been-killed, Bi-bi-lo-ni-has-been-killed.
“That night, after dinner, Goliadkin—doubtless to 
relieve the anguished mood that had taken possession 
of the dining car—made the mistake of challenging me 
to a two-handed game of poker. His need to measure 
himself against me was such that he turned down with 
surprising stubbornness the suggestion of the baronne 
and the colonel to play a foursome. Naturally, Goliad- 
kin’s hopes were dashed. The haunter of the Salón 
Doré did not disappoint his public. At first, the cards 
did not favor me, but later, in spite of my fatherly 
warnings, Goliadkin lost all his money—three hun- 
dred and fifty pesos, forty cents—which the cops, 
quite arbitrarily, later lifted from me. I shall never 
forget that duel. The plebeian versus the man of the 
world, greed versus detachment, the Jew versus the 
Aryan. What a valuable picture for my mental gallery! 
Goliadkin, looking for a last chance to break even, 
suddenly left the dining car. He was not long in re- 
turning with his imitation crocodile valise. He drew 
out one of the two boxes and put it on the table. He 
suggested playing for the three hundred pesos against 
the diamond. I did not deny him this last chance. I 
dealt the cards. I held a full house; we showed our 
hands. Princess Fiodorovna’s diamond was mine. The 
Jew withdrew, navré. What a moment!
“A tout seigneur, tout honneur. The gloved-hand ap- 
plause of the Baroness Puffendorf, who had followed 
her champion’s victory with ill-concealed interest, 
crowned the spectacle. As the saying goes in the Salón


Doré, Montenegro does not do things by halves. I had 
made up my mind. I called for the waiter and ipso 
facto asked for the wine list. A quick look at it coun- 
seled that the occasion called for Champagne Ap- 
plefizz—a half bottle. I drank a toast with the baronne.
“You can always tell a playboy. After such an adven- 
ture, no one else would have slept a wink. But sud- 
denly, insensitive to the spell of the tête-á-tête, I 
craved the solitude of my compartment. I yawned an 
excuse and withdrew. My fatigue was overwhelming. I 
remember making my way, half asleep, along the 
train’s endless passageways. Disregarding the regula- 
tions invented by Anglo-Saxon companies to restrict 
the freedom of the passenger, I finally entered the first 
free compartment and, faithful guardian of my jewel, 
bolted the door.
“I confess without a blush, my dear Parodi, that 
night I slept with my clothes on. I fell like a log into 
the berth.
“All mental effort brings about its own retribution. 
The whole night I was subjected to a disturbing night- 
mare. The ritornello of that nightmare had Goliadkin’s 
mocking voice, and it kept repeating, ‘I won’t tell you 
where the diamond is.’ I awoke with a start. My first 
movement was to check an inner pocket. The case was 
there. In it was the genuine nonpareil. Relieved, I 
opened the window. Light. Fresh air. The mad dawn 
chattering of birds. A misty January dawn—a sleepy 
dawn, still wrapped in sheets of whitish haze.
“From this morning poetry, I was suddenly yanked 
into the prose of life by a knock at my door. I opened. 
It was Assistant Chief Grondona. He asked what I was 
doing in that compartment and, without waiting for 
my answer, he told me to go back to my own. I’ve 
always been like a swallow for finding my way. Unbe-


lievable as it may seem, my compartment was next 
door. I found it a shambles. Grondona suggested that 
I stop feigning astonishment. Later, I learned what 
you must have read in the newspapers. Goliadkin had 
been thrown from the train. A conductor heard his cry 
and sounded the alarm. In San Martín, the police came 
aboard. Everybody accused me, even the baronne—no 
doubt out of spite. And here’s a detail that reveals 
what an acute observer I am. In the thick of the police 
bustle, I noticed that the colonel had shaved off his 
beard.”
II
A week later, Montenegro appeared at the prison 
again. In the quiet comfort of the back of the police 
van he’d boned up on no less than fourteen country- 
bumpkin jokes and seven of García Lorca’s acrostics— 
all for the edification of his new protégé, the inhabi- 
tant of cell , Isidro Parodi. But once the two were 
together the stubborn barber took a grimy playing 
card out of his regulation cap, and he proposed—or 
rather, imposed—a two-handed game of truco.
“All games are my game,” said Montenegro. “At my 
forebears’ estate, in its battlemented castle whose tow- 
ers are reflected in the flowing Paraná, I have accepted 
the gaucho’s embracing fellowship and shared his rus- 
tic pastime. Indeed, my motto ‘It’s all in the cards’ was 
the fear of every truco player the length and breadth 
of the Paraná delta.”
Very soon, Montenegro—who lost badly in the two 
hands they played—was forced to admit that truco, 
owing to its very simplicity, could never hold the at-


tention of a devotee of chemin de fer and auction 
bridge.
Ignoring him, Parodi said, “Look, in return for this 
lesson in truco that you have taught an aging man 
who’s no longer much good, even against a nobody, 
I’m going to tell you a story. It’s about a very brave, 
though star-crossed man—a man for whom I have 
enormous respect.”
“I grasp your drift, dear Parodi,” said Montenegro, 
helping himself unselfconsciously to a Sublime. “This 
respect does you great credit.”
“I wasn’t thinking of you. No, I speak of a deceased 
man whom I never knew, a foreigner from Russia, the 
coachman or groom of a lady who owned a valuable 
diamond. That lady was a princess in her own country, 
but love obeys no rules. The young man, dizzy from 
so much luck, had one weakness—it can happen to 
anyone—and he made off with the diamond. When he 
realized what he had done it was too late. The Maxi- 
malist revolution had cast the two of them into differ- 
ent corners of the world. A band of thieves, first in a 
small town in South Africa, then in another in Brazil, 
sought to snatch the jewel from him. They couldn’t. 
The man managed to hide it. He didn’t want it for 
himself; he wanted to return it to the lady. After years 
of vicissitude, he learned that the lady was in Buenos 
Aires. It was dangerous to travel with a diamond, but 
the man did not flinch. The thieves pursued him onto 
the train, one disguised as a monk, another as a sol- 
dier, another as a man from the provinces, and an- 
other had her face touched up. Among the passengers 
was a countryman of ours, a simpleton, an actor. This 
man, as he had spent his life among disguises, saw 
nothing strange in these people. Still, the farce was 
obvious. The group was too random. A priest who


takes his name from fiction, a Catamarcan from Ban- 
calari, a woman who pretends to be a baroness be- 
cause there’s a princess in the affair, an old man who 
from one day to the next loses his beard and who is 
able to lift you ‘to a considerable height,’ despite your 
hundred and eighty pounds, and lock you up in a 
toilet. They were a determined bunch. They had four 
nights in which to do the trick. On the first night, you 
turned up in Goliadkin’s compartment and blew it for 
them. The second night, you saved him again, unwit- 
tingly; the woman had wormed her way into his room 
on the pretext of love, but on your arrival she was 
forced to beat a retreat. The third night, while you 
were glued to the baroness’s door, the Catamarcan 
held Goliadkin up. Bibiloni botched it. Goliadkin 
threw him off the train. That was why the Jew acted 
nervously and twisted and turned in his bed. He was 
thinking about what had happened and what was to 
come; he was probably thinking about the fourth night 
—the last and the most dangerous of all. He recalled 
the priest’s words about those who lose their souls to 
save them. He decided to let himself be killed and so 
lose the diamond to save it. You had mentioned your 
police record; he realized that if he were killed you’d 
be the prime suspect. On that fourth night he showed 
off two cases so that the thieves would think he had 
two diamonds, a real and a fake one. In the presence 
of everyone he lost the fake to someone who’s hope- 
less at cards. The thieves figured that he wanted them 
to believe he had gambled away the real jewel. Slip- 
ping a mickey into your cider, they put you to sleep. 
Then they got into the Jew’s compartment and or- 
dered him to hand over the diamond. In your dreams 
you heard him repeating that he didn’t know where it 
was. To confuse them, he may also have told them that


you had it. The trick worked. Early that morning the 
devils killed that brave man, but the diamond was safe 
with you. And so, as soon as the train arrived in 
Buenos Aires, the police nabbed you and saw to it that 
the jewel was handed over to its rightful owner.
“Maybe Goliadkin thought his life wasn’t worth liv- 
ing out. Twenty cruel years had befallen the princess, 
who now ran a house of ill fame. In his place, I too 
would have had my misgivings.”
Montenegro lit a second Sublime. “It’s the old, old 
story,” he remarked. “Straggling intellect once again 
confirms the artist’s intuition. All along, I had my 
doubts about Madame Puffendorf-Duvernois, Bibi- 
loni, Father Brown, and—most especially—Colonel 
Harrap. Don’t worry, my dear Parodi, I shan’t be long 
in revealing my solution to the authorities.”
Quequén, Province of Buenos Aires,
February , 


The God 
of the Bulls
To the memory of the poet Alexander Pope
I
With the manly frankness so characteristic of him, the 
poet José Formento told the ladies and gentlemen 
gathered at the Casa de Arte (at the corner of Florida 
and Tucumán): “Nothing gladdens my heart more 
than the verbal contests between my master Carlos 
Anglada and our eighteenth-centuryish Gervasio 
Montenegro. Marinetti versus Lord Byron. The Buick 
versus the aristocratic tilbury. The machine gun ver- 
sus the sword.” These contests gave pleasure to the 
principals as well, who, moreover, were exceedingly 
fond of each other. As soon as he learned about the 
disappearance of the letters, Montenegro (since mar- 
rying the Princess Fiodorovna, he had retired from the 
theater and was devoting his leisure both to the writ- 
ing of a bulky historical novel and to the pursuit of 
criminal investigations) offered Carlos Anglada the 
full range of his perspicacity and prestige, but he 
pointed out the advisability of a visit to cell , where 
for the moment his collaborator Isidro Parodi was 
confined.
Unlike the reader, Parodi was unacquainted with


Carlos Anglada. Don Isidro had not looked into the 
sonnets of The Senile Pagodas () or the pantheistic 
odes of I Am All Others () or the capital letters of 
I Spy with My Little Eye () or the telluric novel The 
Cahiers of a Cowhand () or a single one of the 
Hymns for Millionaires (five hundred numbered copies, 
plus the popular Catholic Boy Scouts Press edition, 
) or the Antiphon of the Loaves and Fishes () or 
—outrageous as it may seem—the learned imprint of 
Test Tube Editions, Inc. (Loose Leaves of a Diver, Col- 
lected and Edited by the Minotaur, ).* It pains us to 
confess that in the course of twenty years of imprison- 
ment, Parodi had not had time to study Carlos Anglada’s 
Itinerary, The Genesis and Development of a Lyric Poet. In 
this indispensable study, José Formento, advised by 
the master himself, documents Anglada’s various peri- 
ods: his modernist beginnings; his assimilation (at 
times transcription) of Joaquín Belda; his pantheistic 
fervor of  when, thirsting for complete commu- 
nion with nature, the poet rejected any sort of foot- 
wear and limped, bruised and bleeding, among the 
flower beds of his attractive villa out in Vicente López; 
his rejection of impersonal intellectualism—those 
now celebrated years when Anglada, in the company 
of a governess and a Chilean version of D. H. Law- 
rence, paid many an intrepid visit to the lakes in 
Palermo Park, childishly dressed in a sailor suit and 
armed with a hoop and a scooter; his Nietzschean 
reawakening, which germinated in Hymns for Mil-
* Carlos Anglada’s commendable bibliography also comprises the fol- 
lowing: the crude naturalistic novel Drawing-Room Flesh (), the mag- 
nanimous palinode Drawing-Room Spirit (), the long since super- 
seded manifesto Words to Pegasus (), the travel notes In the Beginning 
Was the Pullman Car (), and the four numbered numbers of the 
review Zero (-).


lionaires, a work that was based on an article by Azorín 
and upheld aristocratic values but which Anglada 
would ultimately disown when he became the popular 
catechumen of the Eucharistic Congress; and finally, 
his altruistic forays into the provinces, where the mas- 
ter submits to the scalpel of criticism the latest unpub- 
lished generation of poets, for whom Test Tube Edi- 
tions, Inc., provides a forum thanks to its nearly one 
hundred subscribers and projected handful of thin- 
nish booklets.
Carlos Anglada in person was not as formidable as 
his bibliography or his photograph. Don Isidro, who 
was brewing himself a maté in his blue mug, looked up 
and saw the man—tall, sturdy, red-faced, prematurely 
bald, his stubborn eyes frowning, his bristling mus- 
tache dyed. He wore, as José Formento used to remark 
 jovially, a checked suit. He was followed by a man who, 
up close, looked like Anglada himself seen from a 
distance—the baldness, the eyes, the mustache, the 
burliness, the checked suit were the same but on a 
smaller scale. The alert reader will have guessed by 
now that this young man was José Formento, An- 
glada’s apostle and gospel-spreader. Formento’s task 
was by no means dull. Anglada’s versatility would have 
defeated a less self-denying and tireless disciple than 
the author of Pissabed (), Notes of a Poultry Whole- 
saler (), Odes for Managers (), and Sunday in the 
Sky (). As everyone knew, Formento worshiped 
his master, who reciprocated with a cordial conde- 
scension that included the occasional friendly scold- 
ing. Formento was not only Anglada’s disciple but also 
his secretary—that bonne á tout faire whom great writers 
retain to punctuate their masterpieces and to clean up 
the odd orthographical error.
Anglada went straight to the point. “Please excuse


me,” he said. “I speak with the frankness of a motorcy- 
cle. I’ve come at the suggestion of Gervasio Montene- 
gro. I want to make that perfectly clear. I don’t believe 
—and I never will—that a convicted felon’s the proper 
person to solve criminal cases. My problem is straight- 
forward. I live, as everyone knows, out in Vicente 
López. In my study—in my metaphor workshop, to 
be more precise—there’s a safe. This locked poly- 
hedron holds—or, rather, used to hold—a packet of 
letters. That is no mystery. My correspondent and 
admirer is Mariana Ruiz Villalba de Muñagorri—Mon- 
cha to her intimates. My cards are on the table. Despite 
slanderous rumor, there has been no carnal commerce 
between us. We move on a higher plane—emotional 
and intellectual. I’m afraid no Argentine would ever 
understand a relationship like this. Mariana is a beauti- 
ful spirit. And what is more, she’s a beautiful woman. 
This superbly endowed creature has an antenna sensi- 
tive to every modern vibration. My firstborn work, The 
Senile Pagodas, inspired her to compose sonnets. I cor- 
rected her pentameters. The presence of a few alexan- 
drines among them showed a true vocation for free 
verse. In fact, she now cultivates the prose essay. She 
has written ‘A Rainy Day,’ ‘My Dog Bob,’ ‘The First 
Day of Spring,’ ‘The Battle of Chacabuco,’ ‘Why I Like 
Picasso,’ ‘Why I Like My Garden,’ and so forth and so 
on. To be brief, let me descend like a diver to the fine 
points of detection, which is more in your line. As 
everyone knows, I’m essentially gregarious. On the 
fourteenth of August, I opened the maw of my villa to 
an interesting group of people: all Test Tube writers 
and subscribers. The former demanded the publica- 
tion of their manuscripts; the latter, a refund of their 
money. In circumstances like these, I’m as happy as a 
submarine in water. The lively party went on until two


in the morning. If nothing else, I’m a warrior. Throw- 
ing up a barricade of armchairs and stools, I managed 
to save a good part of the crockery. Formento, more 
like Ulysses than Diomedes, tried to placate the 
polemicists by bringing in a trayful of cold cuts and 
orangeade. Poor Formento! All he succeeded in doing 
was to provide my detractors with more ammunition. 
When the last pompier had left, Formento, with a devo- 
tion I shall never forget, poured a bucket of water over 
my head, thus restoring my wit to its customary three- 
thousand watts. During my collapse, I devised an acro- 
batic poem called ‘Standing Up on an Impulse.’ The 
last line ran, ‘I shot at Death from point-blank range.’ 
It would have been fatal to have lost that nugget of my 
subconscious mind. Without a mention of the mor- 
row, I dismissed my disciple. Formento, in the thick of 
the verbal battle, had lost his change purse. To be 
quite frank, he required my assistance for his return 
 journey to Saavedra. The key to my inviolable Diebold 
lies in the stronghold of my pocket. I extracted the 
key, thrust it home, and gave it a turn. I found the 
solicited funds but not my letters from Moncha— 
sorry, from Mariana Ruiz Villalba de Muñagorri. The 
blow did not fell me. Eternally vigilant in the ancient 
citadel of Thought, I searched the house and grounds 
from the water heater down to the cesspool. The re- 
sults of my efforts were negative.”
“I confirm that the letters aren’t at the villa,” said 
the thick voice of Formento. “On the morning of the 
fifteenth, I returned with a fact from the Shorter Illus- 
trated Larousse that my master required for his re- 
search. I volunteered to look through the house again. 
I turned up nothing. No, that’s not quite true. I found 
something of value for Mr. Anglada and for the nation.


It was treasure that the poet, in his absentmindedness, 
had mislaid in the basement—four hundred and nine- 
ty-seven copies of the out-of-print Cahiers of a Cow- 
hand.”
“You must excuse my disciple’s literary enthusi- 
asm,” Carlos Anglada quickly put in. “This scholarly 
discovery can’t possibly be of interest to a mind like 
yours, narrowly confined as it is to police matters. The 
fact is this: the letters have disappeared. In the hands 
of an unscrupulous person these outpourings from a 
great lady, these records of both gray and sentimental 
matter could precipitate an enormous scandal. We’re 
dealing here with a human document that combines 
style—modeled after my own—with the delicate inti- 
macy of a woman of the world. Bref, wonderful bait for 
piratical Chilean publishing houses.”
II
One week later, an enormous Cadillac stopped on Las 
Heras Street before the state penitentiary. The small 
door in the main gate opened. A gentleman wearing 
a gray jacket, fancy trousers, light-colored gloves, and 
carrying a walking stick with a handle in the shape of 
a dog’s head got out of the car. With resolute step, 
slightly old-fashioned in his elegance, he entered the 
prison grounds.
Assistant Chief Grondona received him with fawn- 
ing subservience. The gentleman accepted a Brazilian 
cigar and allowed himself to be led to cell . Don 
Isidro, as soon as he saw him, concealed a pack of 
Sublimes under his regulation cap and in a gentle


voice said, “My, isn’t flesh selling well in Avellaneda! 
It’s a trade that keeps many a good man in trim, but 
on you it’s fattening.”
“Touché, my dear Parodi, touché. I confess I’m a 
trifle overweight,” said Montenegro between two blue 
mouthfuls of smoke. “The princess begs me to kiss 
your hand. Also, our mutual friend Carlos Anglada— 
a wit, if ever there was one, although he lacks the 
discipline of the true Latin—remembers you. Inter nos, 
he remembers you all too often. Only yesterday he 
stormed into my office. By his wheezing and the way 
he slammed the door, I—a reader of physiognomies— 
deduced in a twinkling that Carlos Anglada was on 
edge. I understood why at once. Traffic congestion 
destroys serenity of mind. Of course, you, a wiser 
man, have chosen well—solitude, routine, absence of 
stimuli. Here in the heart of the city your little oasis 
is another world. Our friend hasn’t your character. 
The merest chimera terrifies him. Frankly, I thought 
he was made of sterner stuff. At first, he took the loss 
of the letters with the stoicism of a playboy. But yester- 
day I discovered that this was little more than a façade. 
The man has been wounded, blessé. In my office, over 
a bottle of  Maraschino, veiled in the bracing 
smoke of cigars, he stripped himself of all disguise. I 
understand his fears. Publication of Moncha’s corre- 
spondence would be a rude blow to society. The 
woman’s hors concours, my dear friend. Physical beauty, 
breeding, fortune, position—she’s a modern spirit in 
a Murano vase. Pitifully, Carlos Anglada insists that 
the publication of these letters would bring about his 
ruin and the distinctly unhealthy besogne of finishing 
off the irascible Muñagorri in a duel. In spite of this, 
my esteemed Parodi, I beg you, keep a level head. My 
genius for organization has come to grips with the


problem. As a first step I’ve invited Carlos Anglada 
and Formento to spend a few days at La Moncha, 
Muñagorri’s breeding ranch. Noblesse oblige—we 
must admit that Muñagorri’s work has brought prog- 
ress to a whole sector of El Pilar. You really should 
come out and see the place. It’s one of the few estates 
where the tradition of native culture is kept alive and 
thriving. In spite of the intrusion of the owner of the 
house, an absolute tyrant with thoroughly old-fash- 
ioned views, no cloud will darken this friendly gather- 
ing. Mariana will do the honors—with her customary 
grace, of course. I can assure you that this journey is 
no mere artistic caprice of mine. Our personal physi- 
cian, Dr. Mugica, prescribes a radical treatment for my 
surmenage. Despite Mariana’s cordial insistence, the 
princess will not be able to join us. Her various activi- 
ties in Avellaneda keep her busy. For my part, how- 
ever, I intend to extend my villégiature until the begin- 
ning of spring. As you’ve just seen, I haven’t shrunk 
from swallowing the bitter pill. I leave in your hands 
the details of the detective work—the recovery of the 
letters. Tomorrow at ten, our happy motorcade pro- 
ceeds from the Rivadavia cenotaph, en route to La 
Moncha, intoxicated with limitless horizons, with free- 
dom.”
With a precise movement, Gervasio Montenegro 
consulted his gold Vacheron et Constantin. “Time is 
money,” he exclaimed. “I’ve promised to pay visits to 
Colonel Harrap and Reverend Brown, your confreres 
in this penal institution. A short time ago, at the 
women’s prison on San Juan Street, I visited the Bar- 
oness Puffendorf-Duvernois, née Pratolongo. Her dig- 
nity has not suffered, but her Abyssinian tobacco is 
abominable.”


III
On the fifth of September, in the late afternoon, a 
visitor with a black armband and umbrella entered cell 
. He spoke without hesitation, but beneath his 
funereal liveliness don Isidro sensed that the man was 
worried.
“Here I stand, crucified like the sun at the hour it 
sets.” José Formento pointed vaguely in the direction 
of an airshaft that led to the laundry room. “You may 
brand me a Judas, busy with social calls while my mas- 
ter endures persecution. But my motive for coming 
here concerns something entirely different. I have 
come to demand of you—or, better still, to beg you— 
to use every last bit of the influence you’ve acquired 
during so many years of living close to the law. With- 
out love, charity is unviable. It’s as Carlos Anglada 
said in his appeal to the Agrarian Youth Movement: to 
understand the tractor, one must love the tractor. To 
understand Carlos Anglada, it’s necessary to love Car- 
los Anglada. Surely the master’s books will prove use- 
less in any criminal investigation. Here’s a copy of my 
Carlos Anglada Itinerary. In it, the man who hoodwinks 
the critics yet interests the police is revealed as impul- 
sive, almost as a child.”
Formento opened the book at random and thrust it 
into Parodi’s hands. Parodi, true enough, saw a photo- 
graph of Carlos Anglada, bald and brimming with en- 
ergy, dressed as a sailor.
“As a photographer,” said Parodi, “you may be un- 
rivaled—I don’t question that. But what I need to be 
told is what happened since the night of August 
twenty-ninth. I’d also like to know how all those peo- 
ple got on. I’ve read Molinari’s pieces; he has a good


head on his shoulders, that boy, but one gets bogged 
down in so much photographic detail. Don’t be upset, 
young man; just tell me everything, step by step.”
“I’ll give you a snapshot of the facts. We arrived at 
the ranch on the twenty-fourth. Plenty of cordiality 
and harmony. Señora Mariana—in a Redfern riding 
outfit, Patou cape, Hermès boots, Elizabeth Arden 
‘Outdoor Girl’ makeup—received us with her usual 
simple grace. Until well after nightfall, the Anglada- 
Montenegro duo argued about the sunset. Anglada 
claimed it was inferior to the headlights of an automo- 
bile devouring the macadam. Montenegro said it was 
inferior to a Petrarchan sonnet. In the end, both fac- 
tions drowned their polemical spirits in vermouth with 
bitters. Señor Manuel Muñagorri, appeased by Mon- 
tenegro’s tact, appeared to be resigned to our visit. At 
eight o’clock sharp, the governess—a truly coarse 
blonde, believe me—brought in Pampa, the happy 
couple’s only child. From the top of the stairs, Señora 
Mariana held out her arms to the boy, and he, dressed 
as a gaucho with a dagger and breeches, ran to bury 
himself in her maternal caress. It was an unforgettable 
scene, even if repeated nightly, and it demonstrates 
the permanence of family ties despite an atmosphere 
of bohemian worldliness. At once, the governess took 
Pampa away. Muñagorri explained that the whole sci- 
ence of bringing up children was contained in the 
Solomonic rule, ‘Spare the rod and spoil the child.’ 
I’m positive that in order to make the boy wear the 
chiripá and dagger, the father had to keep putting that 
rule into practice.
“On the afternoon of the twenty-ninth, from a posi- 
tion on the terrace, we watched a solemn, splendid 
parade of bulls. We were indebted to Señora Mariana 
for this rural tableau. Had it not been for her, this, and


other pleasant experiences, would never have been. 
With a man’s candor, I must confess that Señor Muña- 
gorri—for all his apparent experience as a breeder— 
was a retiring, unsociable host. He barely addressed a 
word to us. He preferred speaking to foremen and 
cowhands, and he showed more interest in the forth- 
coming Palermo Cattle Show than in the marvelous 
conjunction of nature and art, the pampa and Carlos 
Anglada, that was taking place on his own property 
minute after minute. While the animals filed by below, 
dark in the death of the sun, above on the terrace the 
group of men and women became more voluble and 
verbose. A single exclamation from Montenegro 
about the majesty of bulls was enough to spur An- 
glada’s wit. The master, quoting himself, improvised 
one of those spontaneous lyrical outbursts that never 
fails to astound both historian and grammarian, both 
the cold rationalist and the warm heart. He said that 
in earlier ages, bulls were sacred animals; before that, 
priests and kings; still earlier, gods. He said that the 
same sun that shone on this parade of bulls had wit- 
nessed, in Cretan labyrinths, the parades of men who 
had been sentenced to death for having blasphemed 
against the bull. He spoke of men for whom immer- 
sion in a bull’s warm blood bestowed immortality. 
Montenegro tried to evoke a bloody spectacle of bulls 
with balls stuck on their horns that he had witnessed 
in the arenas of Nîmes under the dying Provençal sun. 
But Muñagorri, the sworn enemy of all expansiveness 
and flair, said that on the subject of bulls Anglada was 
little more than a shopkeeper. Enthroned on an enor- 
mous wicker armchair, the cattleman stated the obvi- 
ous—that he had been brought up among bulls, and 
that they were peaceful and even cowardly animals, 
though extremely powerful. So as to convince An-


glada, Muñagorri was apparently trying to hypnotize 
him. He didn’t take his eyes off Anglada for a moment. 
And that’s where we left the master and Muñagorri— 
in full polemical bliss. Guided by our incomparable 
hostess, Señora Mariana, Montenegro and I were able 
to appreciate each and every detail of the ranch’s 
electric generator. The gong sounded, we sat down to 
dinner, and we finished the beef course before the 
polemicists joined us. It was obvious that the mas- 
ter had been the victor; Muñagorri, sullen and van- 
quished, didn’t speak a single word during the whole 
of dinner.
“The following day he invited me to see the village 
of El Pilar. There were just the two of us, and we went 
in his two-wheeled buggy. As a true Argentine, I de- 
lighted in our escapade across typical dusty pampa. 
The paternal sun lavished its kindly rays on our heads. 
The postal service reaches even these backcountry dirt 
roads. And while Muñagorri was sponging up in- 
flammable liquids in the local saloon, I entrusted to a 
mail slot a filial greeting to my publisher, written on 
the back of a picture of me dressed as a gaucho.
“The return journey was unpleasant. The drunk- 
ard’s clumsiness increased the perils of our via crucis. 
But I confess upon my honor that I took pity on that 
slave of alcohol, and I forgave him the ugly spectacle 
he was making of himself. He punished the horse as 
if it were his son. The buggy was in grave danger of 
rolling over, and more than once I feared for my life.
“Back at the estate, some flaxseed compresses and 
the reading of an old manifesto of Marinetti’s restored 
my equilibrium. Now, don Isidro, we arrive at the eve- 
ning of the crime. It was foreshadowed by an unpleas- 
ant incident. Muñagorri, ever faithful to the teachings 
of Solomon, rained a hail of blows on the seat of


Pampa’s pants—all because the boy, misled by the 
false claims of exotic fashion, refused to wear the na- 
tive whip and dagger. Miss Bilham, the governess, not 
knowing her place, prolonged the unpleasant episode 
by launching into a bitter recrimination of Muñagorri. 
I have no hesitation in stating that the nanny inter- 
vened in this uncontrolled manner because she was 
out for another position. Montenegro, who’s an abso- 
lute fox for sniffing out beautiful souls, had offered 
her some kind of job in Avellaneda. We all withdrew 
in a state of nerves. The hostess, the master, and I 
went for a walk out as far as the water tank. Montene- 
gro retired within the house in the company of the 
governess. Muñagorri, obsessed by the coming cattle 
show, went to watch another promenade of bulls. Soli- 
tude and work are the twin staffs upon which the true 
man of letters leans; I took advantage of a bend in the 
path to take leave of my friends, and I made my way 
to my bedroom, a truly wonderful windowless refuge 
where not even the least echo of the outside world 
penetrates. Putting on the light, I harnessed myself to 
the furrow of my popular translation of La soirée avec 
M. Teste. But it proved impossible to work. Montene- 
gro and Miss Bilham were chatting away in the next 
room. I hadn’t shut my door out of fear of offending 
Miss Bilham as well as of suffocating. The other door 
of my room opens, as you know, out into the kitchen’s 
steamy backyard.
“I heard a cry. It hadn’t come from Miss Bilham’s 
room. I thought I recognized the incomparable voice 
of Señora Mariana. Down corridors and stairways I 
raced to reach the terrace. There, against the sunset 
—solemn, like the great natural actress she is—Señora 
Mariana pointed to the terrible scene which, to my 
eternal regret, I shall always remember. Down below,


like the previous day, the bulls had paraded past; up 
on the terrace, like the previous day, the ranch’s owner 
had presided over the slow promenade. But this time 
the bulls were on show for one man alone, and that 
man was dead. A knife had pierced the woven pattern 
of the back of the chair. Held in place by the chair’s 
arms, the corpse sat upright. Horror-struck, Anglada 
confirmed that the unbelievable murder had been 
committed with the child’s miniature dagger.”
“Tell me, don Formento, how do you think the 
killer got hold of the weapon?”
“It’s a mystery. After having attacked his father, the 
boy threw a tantrum, then chucked his gaucho gear 
behind the hortensias.”
“I should have guessed. But how do you explain the 
presence of the toy whip in Anglada’s room?” 
“Easily, but with explanations no police detective 
would understand. As the photograph which you have 
seen shows, in Anglada’s protean life there was a stage 
one could term infantile. Even today, as a champion of 
international copyright and art for art’s sake, he feels 
the irresistible attraction that toys have for an adult.”
IV
On the ninth of September, two women in mourning 
entered cell . One was a blonde, with powerful 
hips and full lips; the other, who dressed more dis- 
creetly, was small, thin, and flat-chested, and she had 
short, slender legs.
“From what I’ve heard, you must be Muñagorri’s 
widow,” said don Isidro, addressing the blonde.


“What a gaff!” the other woman said in a shrill 
voice. “He’s already off on the wrong foot. How can 
she be me when she’s only keeping me company? 
She’s the nanny, Miss Bilham. I’m Mrs. Muñagorri.”
Parodi offered them his two stools and sat on the 
cot.
Mariana went on in no particular hurry. “What an 
absolutely divine little room—not at all like my sister- 
in-law’s living room, full of those horrid Japanese 
screens. You’ve surpassed cubism, Mr. Parodi, al- 
though that’s quite passé now. Still, if I were you I’d 
have that door given a nice coat of Duco enamel. I just 
love ironwork painted white. Mickey Montenegro— 
don’t you think he’s too, too divine?—told us we 
should come and bother you. What splendid luck to 
find you in! I wanted so much to speak to you person- 
ally. It’s such an awful bore to have to keep repeating 
this story to one inspector after another. They only 
confuse you with a deluge of questions, and then there 
are my sisters-in-law, who’re just too much for words.
“I’m going to tell you all about the morning of the 
thirtieth. There were Formento, Montenegro, An- 
glada, I, and my husband. Nobody else. The princess 
—it’s a shame really that she couldn’t make it, because 
she’s just so full of charme which, of course, is quite 
extinct since the Communists. But think for a moment 
what feminine intuition and the maternal instinct are. 
When Consuelo brought me my prune juice, I had a 
splitting headache. Men are such brutes. The first 
thing I did was to go to Manuel’s bedroom, but he 
wouldn’t take any notice. He was more interested in 
his own headache, which wasn’t nearly as awful as 
mine. We women, schooled as we are in motherhood, 
aren’t so feeble. It was his fault, anyway, for having 
gone to bed so late. He’d been up until all hours,


speaking to Formento about a book. Why in heaven he 
insists on talking about things he knows nothing about 
I’ll never understand. I arrived at the tail end of their 
discussion, but it didn’t take me long to sense what it 
was about. Pepe—I mean, Formento—is about to pub- 
lish a popular translation of La soirée avec M. Teste. To 
reach the masses, which after all is what matters, he has 
called it in translation, Once a Night with Mr. Noodle. 
Manuel, who has never understood that without love 
charity is simply unviable, had elected to discourage 
Formento. He claimed that Paul Valéry recommends 
thinking to others but doesn’t bother himself, to which 
Formento argued that the translation was already 
made, but I always say in the Casa de Arte that we ought 
to invite Valéry to give some lectures. I don’t really 
know what was going on that day, but the wind was 
blowing so hot that it drove all of us nearly out of our 
minds—especially me, I’m so sensitive. Even nanny 
here forgot her place and interfered with Manuel over 
Pampa, who hates his gaucho costume. I can’t imagine 
why I’m telling you these things, which actually took 
place the night before. On the thirtieth, after tea, An- 
glada, who only thinks about himself and doesn’t seem 
to know how much I detest going for walks, insisted 
that I show him the water tank a second time, despite 
the sun and mosquitoes. Luckily, I was able to make my 
getaway and go back to reading Giono—now don’t you 
dare tell me you don’t like Accompagné de la flute. It’s a 
tremendous book, and it does take one’s mind off the 
ranch. But beforehand, I wanted to see Manuel, who, 
with his mania for bulls, was on the terrace. It was 
almost six o’clock, and I climbed up the stairs to him. It 
was so stunning I caught my breath and said, ‘Oh! 
What a picture!’ There I was in my salmon-pink wind- 
breaker and Vionnet shorts, leaning against the railing,


and two steps away Manuel was riveted to his chair, 
stuck through the back of it with Pampa’s toy knife. 
Luckily, the little angel had been out hunting cats and 
so was spared this horrible sight. That evening he came 
home with a half-dozen tails.”
“They smelled so bad I had to flush them down the 
toilet,” Miss Bilham said with almost voluptuous rel- 
ish.
V
That September morning Anglada was inspired. His 
lucid mind embraced both past and future: the history 
of futurism and the plotting of certain men of letters 
in his behalf to get him to accept the Nobel Prize. 
When Parodi thought that the verbal flood had dried 
up, Anglada flourished a letter, saying with a kindly 
laugh, “Poor José! These Chilean pirates know their 
business, all right. Read this, Parodi, my friend. They 
want no truck with Formento’s grotesque version of 
Valéry.”
Acquiescing, don Isidro read:
Dear Sir,
We hasten to reaffirm what has already been ex- 
plained in reply to yours of the th, th, and 
th August. It is impossible at the present time 
to fund the edition. Expenses for plates, for per- 
mission fees to Walt Disney, and for New Year 
and Easter foreign-language editions make the 
proposal unfeasible unless you are prepared to


pay in advance the various and sundry printing, 
overhead, and warehouse costs.
We remain,
Very truly yours, 
(signed)
Rufino Gigena S., Assistant to the 
Assistant Vice-President
“This little business note comes straight from 
heaven,” don Isidro said, managing at last to get in a 
word. “Now I can begin to tie up loose ends. You’ve 
been going on and on about books for ages. Let me 
say a thing or two. A short time ago, I read this . . . this 
thing full of heart-warming pictures: you on stilts, you 
dressed as a baby, you riding your bicycle. You’ve no 
idea how I laughed! Whoever would have imagined 
that don Formento, a pathetic fool if ever there was 
one, could make you such a laughingstock! All your 
books are ludicrous: you bring out your Hymns for 
Millionaires, and little Sir Echo, falling over himself 
with respect, writes his Odes for Managers; you, The 
Cahiers of a Cowhand and he, Notes of a Poultry Wholesaler. 
Listen carefully now; I’m going to tell you from the 
beginning exactly what happened.
“First, a pompous ass came to me with a tale of the 
theft of a number of letters. I took no notice of him, 
because if someone’s lost something the last person 
he’s going to ask to find it for him is a jailbird. This 
same ass, maintaining that the letters compromised a 
lady, claimed there was nothing between the lady and 
him, that they were exchanging letters purely out of 
mutual regard. He said this to make me believe the 
lady was his lover. A week later, good old Montenegro 
turned up and said the pompous ass was beside him-


self with worry. This time you behaved like someone 
who really had lost something. You went and saw a 
person who hasn’t landed in jail yet and who’s won 
himself a bit of a name for criminal detection. Then 
everyone went off to the country, the late Muñagorri 
died, don Formento and a silly tramp came around 
bothering me, and I began to smell a rat.
“You told me your correspondence had been sto- 
len. You even led me to believe it was Formento who’d 
stolen it. What you wanted was to get people talking 
about those letters and imagining all manner of things 
about you and the lady. Then the lie became reality: 
Formento did steal the letters. He stole them to pub- 
lish them. You bored him, and after the two-hour 
monologue you unleashed on me this afternoon I see 
why. He got so fed up, in fact, that he couldn’t put up 
with the innuendo any longer. He decided to have the 
correspondence published so as to finish the thing 
once and for all and to let the whole country know that 
there was nothing between you and Mariana. Muña- 
gorri viewed things very differently. He didn’t want to 
see his wife made a laughingstock on account of a slim 
volume of drivel. On the twenty-ninth, he confronted 
Formento. Of their discussion, Formento told me 
nothing. This was what they were arguing about when 
Mariana interrupted them, and they had the tact to 
make her believe they were discussing some book or 
other that Formento was copying from the French. 
What could books by people like you possibly matter 
to a cattle breeder? The next day, Muñagorri took 
Formento to El Pilar with a letter to his publishers to 
stop the book. To Formento this was the last straw, 
and he decided to get rid of Muñagorri. He had no 
scruples about it, because there was always the risk of 
his affair with the lady being discovered. That tramp


simply couldn’t keep her mouth shut. She went 
around repeating everything he said—about love and 
charity, about the Englishwoman who didn’t know her 
place. Once, when she made a slip and called him by 
his nickname, she even managed to betray herself.
“When the boy threw away his gaucho costume, 
Formento saw that the moment was ripe. He was safe. 
He had a good alibi. He said that the door between his 
bedroom and the Englishwoman’s was open. Neither 
she nor our friend Montenegro denied this. And yet, 
it’s customary to shut a door when pastimes of that 
sort are going on. Formento chose the right weapon. 
Pampa’s knife helped implicate two people—Pampa 
himself, who’s half crazy, and you, don Anglada, who 
pretend to be the lady’s lover just as more than once 
you pretended to be a child. Formento put the whip 
in your room for the police to find. He brought me 
the book with pictures of you to plant the same sus- 
picion in me. As easy as can be, he slipped out onto 
the terrace and stabbed Muñagorri. The cowhands 
couldn’t see him, because they were busy with the 
bulls down below.
“This is fate for you. Formento went to all that 
trouble to bring out a book of love letters from the 
tramp and some New Year greetings. You’ve only got 
to look at that woman to guess what her correspon- 
dence is like. Is it any wonder those publishing people 
wanted no part of it?”
Quequén,
February , 


Free Will 
and the Commendatore
To the prophet Muhammad
I
The prisoner in cell  received Mrs. Anglada and 
her husband with obvious resignation.
“I’ll come straight to the point and avoid circumlo- 
cution,” Carlos Anglada promised solemnly. “My 
brain is a huge refrigerator. The circumstances of the 
death of Julia Ruiz Villalba—Pumita to her peers—live 
on in this gray vessel, untainted. I shall be scrupu- 
lously honest; I look on these matters with the detach- 
ment of a deus ex machina. I mean to offer you a 
cross-section of the facts. I exhort you, Parodi—be an 
auditory nerve.”
Parodi did not lift his eyes. He went on looking at 
a photograph of ex-President Irigoyen. The poet’s 
animated introduction revealed nothing new in the 
way of information. A few days earlier, Parodi had 
read an article of Molinari’s on the sudden disappear- 
ance from the Argentine social scene of Miss Ruiz 
Villalba, one of the liveliest of the younger set.
Anglada opened his mouth to speak, but before he 
could, his wife Mariana took over and said, “Carlos 
here has dragged me to this jail when I was supposed


to go to Mario’s lecture on Concepción Arenal and be 
bored stiff. You are my rescuer, Mr. Parodi, from the 
Casa de Arte. Some of these so-called important 
figures are nothing but stuffed shirts, though I always 
say the Monsignor speaks with great style. Carlos, as 
usual, will want to put his oar in, but after all it’s my 
sister, and they haven’t dragged me all this way to keep 
my mouth shut like some ninny. Besides, with our 
native intuition we women notice things more, as 
Mario said when he congratulated me on my mourn- 
ing costume. I was beside myself with grief, but black 
does look good on a bleached blonde. Look, with the 
luck I’ve been having I’m going to tell you everything 
from the very beginning—without a fuss and without 
being obsessed with books like everyone else. You 
probably saw in the rotogravure section that poor 
Pumita, my sister, was engaged to Ricky San Giacomo. 
Now there’s a name with class, and corny though it 
sounds they made an ideal couple. Pumita was so 
pretty. She had all the style of the Ruiz Villalbas and 
eyes like Norma Shearer. Now that she’s gone, as 
Mario said, mine are the only Norma Shearers left. Of 
course, Pumita was wild and never read anything but 
Vogue, which is why she lacked that charme you find in 
French theater, though the best you can say of Made- 
leine Ozeray is that she dresses like a scarecrow. Well, 
it’s just too much all these people coming and telling 
me Pumita committed suicide—me, such a good Cath- 
olic since the Eucharistic Congress, and her with her 
 joie de vivre, which I have too. After all, there’s noth- 
ing mousy about me. Don’t tell me this scandal is 
really a shame and shows a lack of consideration—as 
if I didn’t have enough to swallow what with poor 
Formento sticking that little knife through the chair 
into Manuel, who was so gaga over his bulls. Some-


times it makes me stop and think, but then I always say 
what’s the use?
“Ricky’s famous for his super looks, but what more 
could he want than to marry into an old family. 
They’re just parvenus, though the father I respect be- 
cause he came to Rosario poor as a churchmouse. My 
sister was no fool, and Mother with her weakness for 
Pumita went the whole hog when she had her coming- 
out party, so it’s no wonder she got engaged when she 
was only just beginning to bud. Everyone says they 
met in the most romantic way, in Llavalol, like Errol 
Flynn and Olivia de Havilland in Vamos a Méjico, which 
in English is called Sombrero. Pumita was out driving 
her tonneau, and as it reached the paved road her 
horse bolted. Ricardo, whose interest in life doesn’t 
go beyond polo ponies, wanted to play Douglas Fair- 
banks, and he stopped her horse, which is not all that 
sensational. Of course, when he found out she was my 
sister he fell head over heels, and poor Pumita—well, 
she liked playing around even with the servants. The 
thing is that I invited Ricky out to La Moncha for her, 
and that was in spite of our never having met. The 
Commendatore—Ricky’s father, you’ll recall—did all 
he could to help things along, and Ricky was driving 
me absolutely crazy with the orchids he kept sending 
Pumita every day, so I finally got my own thing going 
with Bonfanti, but that’s another story.”
“Why don’t you take a breather, madame,” Parodi 
respectfully interrupted. “Now that the weather’s 
cleared, don Anglada, couldn’t you take the opportu- 
nity to sum things up for me?”
“Let me open fire.”
“God, you’re so stuffy,” said Mariana, applying a 
careful lipstick to her disdainful mouth.
“The landscape devised by my wife is accurate.


Nonetheless, it lacks pragmatic coordinates. I shall be 
the surveyor, the cadastre, and embark upon a thor- 
oughgoing synthesis.
“In Pilar, adjoining La Moncha, lay the parks, nurs- 
eries, greenhouses, observatory, gardens, swimming 
pool, animal cages, underground aquarium, service 
houses, gymnasium, and stronghold of Commen- 
datore San Giacomo. This colorful old man—his eyes 
piercing, his height middling, his complexion ruddy, 
and his snow-white mustache cleft by a festive cheroot 
—is a veritable bundle of muscle on the track, the 
scooter, and the springboard. Now, moving from 
snapshot to motion picture, I’ll set off without circum- 
locution on the life story of this fertilizer merchant. 
The rusty old nineteenth century went round and 
round, blubbering in its wheelchair—those years of 
the Japanese screen and madcap velocipede—when 
the city of Rosario opened its generous maw to an 
Italic immigrant. Pardon, an Italian boy. Who was that 
boy? I ask. Commendatore San Giacomo, I answer. 
Illiteracy, the Mafia, bad weather, and a blind faith in 
the future of the Argentine were his guides. A consu- 
lar gentleman—to be exact, the Italian consul, Count 
Isidoro Fosco—had an inkling of the young man’s 
moral fiber, and on several occasions offered him un- 
selfish advice.
“In , San Giacomo confronted life from the 
driver’s seat of a Department of Sanitation cart. In 
, he presided over a determined fleet of night-soil 
carts. From  on—the year he got out of jail—he 
linked his name forever to the conversion of fats into 
soap. In , he embraced tanning and manure. In 
, with the eye of a Cyclops, he discerned the me- 
dicinal possibilities of asafetida, but the war destroyed 
this dream. Our hero, on the brink of disaster, gave


the rudder a sharp turn and consolidated in rhubarb. 
Italy was not long in putting its shoulder to the wheel. 
San Giacomo, from the other side of the Atlantic, 
shouted ‘Count me in!’ and dispatched a shipload of 
rhubarb to the latter-day trench dwellers. Not a whit 
discouraged by the rebelliousness of ignorant sol- 
diers, he let his nutritive shiploads clog the docks and 
warehouses of Genoa, Salerno, and Castellamare, 
emptying more than one densely populated neighbor- 
hood. This alimentary extravagance was rewarded: the 
breast of the newly made millionaire was crucified with 
the cross and sash of a Commendatore.”
“What a way to tell a story! You’re like a sleep- 
walker,” Mariana said coolly, as she hiked up her skirt. 
“Before they made him Commendatore, he’d already 
married his cousin, whom he sent for from Italy, and 
you also left out anything about the children.”
“I concur. I’ve let myself drift on the ferryboat of my 
verbiage. A River Plate H. G. Wells, let me row up- 
stream in time. I shall disembark on the possessive 
marriage bed. Now our hero engenders his scion. A 
child is born. He is Ricardo San Giacomo. The moth- 
er, a barely glimpsed peripheral figure, disappears, 
dying in . Death, who, like the postman, rings 
twice, deprived San Giacomo that same year of the spon- 
sor who’d never withheld encouragement—Count Isi- 
doro Fosco. I say, and I’ll say it again without hesita- 
tion, the Commendatore veered toward madness. The 
crematory oven had devoured his wife’s flesh. All that 
remained was her progeny, her likeness—her only- 
begotten infant son. The father, a moral monolith, 
dedicated himself to educating the boy, to worshiping 
him. Let me stress the contradiction: the Commen- 
datore—as hard and dictatorial among his machines as 
a hydraulic press—was, chez lui, the most pliant of his 
son’s puppets.


“Let me throw a spotlight on this heir: gray felt hat, 
his mother’s eyes, a circumflex mustache, the legs of 
an Argentine centaur, and mannerisms borrowed 
from the tango lyricist Juan Lomuto. This hero of 
poolsides and racetracks is also an attorney at law, a 
man of the world. I admit that his collection of poems, 
Combing the Wind, is not an iron chain of metaphors, 
but neither is it lacking in deep vision, in neostructural 
insight. Nevertheless, it’s in the field of the novel 
where our poet will turn on all his voltage. I predict 
that some muscular critic is bound to point out that 
our iconoclast, before breaking the old molds, repro- 
duced them; but this same critic will have to acknowl- 
edge the scientific accuracy of the copy. Ricardo is an 
Argentine of promise. His story of the Countess of 
Chinchón welds the archeological past to neofutur- 
ism. This work demands comparison with the writings 
of such contemporaries of his as Gandia, Levene, 
Grosso, and Radaelli. Happily, our explorer is not 
alone. Eliseo Requena, his selfless foster-brother, 
stands behind him and encourages his explorations. 
To define this acolyte I’ll be as frank as a fist. Our great 
novelist himself deals with the central characters of his 
novel, leaving lesser pens to deal with lesser charac- 
ters. Requena (obviously invaluable as a factotum) is 
one of the Commendatore’s many natural sons and is 
neither better nor worse than the others. Or is he? He 
does stand out in one particular: his absolute devotion 
to Ricardo.
“A character of a monetary, indeed almost fiduciary 
complexion now comes under my lens. Stripping him 
of his mask, I introduce the Commendatore’s financial 
director, Giovanni Croce. His detractors claim he’s 
from La Rioja and that his real name is Juan Cruz. The 
truth is something quite different. His patriotism is 
obvious; his devotion to the Commendatore, constant;


his accent, most unpleasant. Commendatore San 
Giacomo, Ricardo San Giacomo, Eliseo Requena, 
Giovanni Croce—this is the human quartet who wit- 
nessed Pumita’s last days. I leave aside in justified 
anonymity a whole pack of hired help: gardeners, la- 
borers, chauffeurs, and masseurs.”
Mariana could not help interrupting. “Aha! This 
time you can’t deny you’re consumed with envy and 
always thinking the worst of people. You haven’t said 
a single word about Mario. His room was next to ours 
and was absolutely full of books. He knows a smart 
woman when he sees one and doesn’t waste any time, 
but scribbles messages to her like a peacock. How he 
left you gaping—you couldn’t even say boo! The 
things that man knows are incredible.”
“True. I often give myself a veneer of silence. Dr. 
Mario Bonfanti is a Hispanist in the service of the 
Commendatore’s household. He’s published an adap- 
tation for adults of the Cantar de Myo Cid and is con- 
templating a strict Argentinization of Gongora’s Sole- 
dades, which he will endow with water troughs and well 
shafts, with sheepskin saddle blankets and nutrias.” 
“Don Anglada, you’ve made me dizzy with all those 
books,” said Parodi. “If you want me to be of any use, 
tell me about your late-lamented sister-in-law. I sup- 
pose I’ll hear it whether I want to or not.”
“Like the critics, you don’t follow me. A great 
painter—Picasso—places the background of his pic- 
tures in the foreground and leaves the central figure 
on the line of the horizon. My battle plan is the same. 
With the supernumeraries out of the way—Bonfanti, 
etc.—I attack Pumita Ruiz Villalba, corpus delicti, 
head on.
“The artist is never carried away by appearances. 
Pumita, an ephebus in her frolics, and with her slightly


unkempt grace, was, above all, a backdrop. Her func- 
tion was to show off my wife’s opulent beauty. Pumita 
is dead. When I remember that function now I am 
unspeakably moved. It was positively Grand Guig- 
nolesque—on the night of the twenty-third of June she 
laughed and, warmed by my words, luxuriated in the 
after-dinner talk; on the twenty-fourth, she lay poi- 
soned in her bedroom. Fate, which is no gentleman, 
decreed that my wife should find her.”
II
On the afternoon of the twenty-third of June, the eve 
of her death, Pumita saw Emil Jannings die three times 
in scratchy but venerated copies of High Treason, The 
Blue Angel, and The Last Command. It was Mariana who 
had suggested this outing to the Pathé-Baby Club. On 
the way back, she and Mario Bonfanti relegated them- 
selves to the back seat of Ricardo San Giacomo’s 
Rolls-Royce, letting Pumita ride in front with Ricky so 
as to complete the reconciliation, which had started in 
semidarkness in the movie house. Bonfanti deplored 
Anglada’s absence. That same afternoon, the latter 
was at work on his Scientific History of Moving Pictures. 
He preferred to base his research on memory—his 
infallible artist’s memory—uncontaminated by an ac- 
tual viewing of the films, which is always ambiguous 
and misleading.
That night, in Villa Castellamare, the after-dinner 
talk was dialectical.
“Once again, I quote my old friend Maestro Cor- 
reas,” said Bonfanti eruditely. He was sporting a her- 
ringbone tweed jacket; a heavy sweater; a tartan tie; a


sober, brick-colored shirt; an outsized pen and pencil 
set; and a referee’s wrist stopwatch. “We were out for 
wool, and we got shorn. The spineless twits who run 
the Pathé-Baby Club let us down. They gave a showing 
of Jannings’ films without putting on the best and 
most characteristic of them all. We’ve been denied the 
screen version of Butler’s satire, Ainsi va toute chair— 
The Way of All Flesh.”
“But have we?” said Pumita. “All Jannings’ films are 
The Way of All Flesh. It’s the same plot every time—first 
they bring about his happiness, then they jinx him and 
bring about his downfall. It’s so boring and so lifelike. 
I’ll bet the Commendatore agrees with me.”
The Commendatore hesitated. Mariana seized the 
opportunity and said, “I suppose it’s my fault, because 
it was my idea that we go. You blubbered like a fool 
in spite of your makeup.”
“That’s right,” Ricky said. “I saw you crying. You 
make yourself a nervous wreck and then you have to 
take those drops you keep by your bed so you can 
sleep at night.”
“You must be the world’s greatest nincompoop,” 
Mariana said. “You know the doctor told you that 
stuff’s bad for you. With me it’s different. I’m always 
fighting with the servants.”
“If I can’t drop off straightaway my head gets filled 
with nagging thoughts. Never mind, it’s not as if this 
is my last night on earth. Don’t you think, Commen- 
datore, that some people’s lives are just like Jannings’ 
pictures?”
It seemed to Ricardo that Pumita was trying to avoid 
the subject of insomnia. “Pumita’s right,” he said. 
“Nobody can escape his fate. Morganti was a crack 
polo player until the day he bought himself a piebald 
that brought him bad luck.”


“No!” shouted the Commendatore. “No Homo pen- 
sante believes in bad luck. I ward it off with this rabbit’s 
foot.” And there was the foot, extracted from an inner 
pocket of his dinner jacket and held up in exultation.
“That’s what’s called a straight to the jaw,” said 
Anglada, applauding. “Pure reason plus pure rea- 
son.”
“The way I see it, there are lives in which nothing 
happens by chance,” Pumita insisted.
“Look, if you mean me, you’re out of your mind,” 
said Mariana. “My home may be a mess, but that’s 
because of Carlos. He’s always spying on me.”
“In life nothing should happen by chance,” droned 
Croce’s mournful voice. “Without discipline, without 
a police force, we’d fall directly into Russian chaos, 
into the tyranny of the Cheka. Let’s face it—in the 
country of Ivan the Terrible, there’s no longer any 
such thing as free will.”
Visibly thoughtful, Ricardo finally said, “Things— 
things are what can’t happen accidentally. Without 
order, a cow would come flying in the window.” 
“Even those mystics who attain the greatest heights 
—a Saint Teresa, a Ruysbroeck, a Blosius—hew to the 
imprimatur of the church, to the ecclesiastical seal of 
approval,” Bonfanti affirmed.
The Commendatore pounded the table. “Bonfanti, 
I have no wish to offend you, but it’s pointless for you 
to hide. You are, in the full sense, a Catholic. You must 
know that we of the Great Sunrise of the Scottish Rite 
dress up like priests, and we have no reason to envy 
any man. My blood boils when I hear it said that a man 
can’t measure up to his fantasies.”
There was an uncomfortable silence. A minute or 
two later, pale as death, Anglada dared mutter, “A 
TKO. The first line of the determinists has been


smashed. We’re filling the breach; they flee in com- 
plete disorder. As far as the eye can see, the battlefield 
is littered with weapons and baggage.”
“Don’t pretend you won that argument, because it 
wasn’t you. You were tongue-tied,” said Mariana mer- 
cilessly.
“Just think,” Pumita said absentmindedly, “every- 
thing we say will find its way into the notebook that the 
Commendatore brought from Salerno.”
“And what does our friend Eliseo Requena have to 
say?” asked Croce, the gloomy administrator, trying 
to change the subject.
Requena, a huge young albino, answered in a mousy 
voice. “I’m a very busy man—Ricky’s about to finish 
his novel.”
Ricky blushed and clarified: “I work like a mole, but 
Pumita advises me to take my time.”
“If I were you, I’d put the draft away in a drawer and 
forget about it for nine years,” said Pumita.
“Nine years?” exclaimed the Commendatore, on 
the brink of an apoplectic fit. “Nine years? Dante pub- 
lished the Divine Comedy five hundred years ago.” 
Nobly, Bonfanti rushed to the aid of the Commen- 
datore. “Hear, hear,” he said. “Such hesitation is Nor- 
dic, worthy of a Hamlet. The Roman concept of art 
was altogether different. To them, writing was a har- 
monious act, a dance, not the gloomy discipline of the 
barbarian, who tries with monkish mortification to 
supply the salt that Minerva denies him.”
The Commendatore grew insistent. “He who does 
not put down in writing the ferment in his head is a 
eunuch of the Sistine Chapel. He is not a man.”
“I, too, am of the opinion that the writer must give 
wholly of himself,” said Requena. “Contradictions 
don’t matter. The thing is to spill out onto paper all


the muddle and confusion which is the human condi- 
tion.”
“When I write my mother if I once stop to think I 
can’t think of anything,” Mariana interrupted. “But if 
I let myself go it’s marvelous. I fill pages and pages 
without even realizing it. You yourself, Carlos, as- 
sured me that I was born to write.”
“Look, Ricky,” Pumita insisted, “if I were you I 
wouldn’t listen to any advice but mine. You can’t be 
too careful about what you publish. Remember Bustos 
Domecq, that man from Santa Fe who got a story 
published and then it turned out that it had already 
been written by Villiers de l’Isle Adam?”
“We made up only two hours ago,” Ricky snapped 
at her, “and there you go again.”
“Calm down, Pumita,” said Requena. “Ricky’s 
novel is nothing like Villiers’.”
“You don’t understand me, Rick. I’m doing this for 
your own good. I’m very nervous tonight, but tomor- 
row we’ll have a long talk.”
Bonfanti wanted to win a victory. “Ricky’s too sensi- 
ble to surrender to mere trendiness, which has no 
native Hispanic roots,” he pontificated. “The writer 
who does not feel the message of his blood and birth- 
place rising in his sap is déraciné, an outcast.”
“I hardly recognize you, Mario,” said the Commen- 
datore with approval. “This time you haven’t played 
the jester. True art is born of the earth. It’s a verifiable 
law. I have the noblest Maddaloni tucked away in my 
cellars. Throughout Europe and even America they’re 
stashing away the works of the great masters in bomb- 
proof cellars. Last week a reputable archeologist 
showed me a terra-cotta puma that he had in his suit- 
case and that he’d dug up in Peru. He let me have it


at cost, and now I keep it in the third drawer of my 
private desk.”
“A little puma?” Pumita said with surprise.
“That’s right,” said Anglada. “The Aztecs had a 
premonition about you. Let’s not demand too much of 
them. Futuristic as they may have been, they could 
never have imagined Mariana’s functional beauty.” 
(It was with a fair degree of accuracy that Carlos 
Anglada relayed this conversation to Parodi.)
III
On the following Friday, first thing in the morning, 
Ricardo San Giacomo was talking to don Isidro. The 
sincerity of his grief was obvious. He was pale, in 
mourning clothes, and unshaven. He said he hadn’t 
slept that night, nor had he got any sleep for several 
nights.
“It’s awful what’s happening to me,” he said gloom- 
ily. “It’s really awful. You, sir, who have been leading 
a more or less normal life, from rooming house to jail, 
so to speak, can’t begin to imagine what this means to 
me. I’ve been around, but I’ve never had any trouble 
I couldn’t smooth over at once. For example, when 
one of the Dolly sisters came to me with a story of her 
natural child, my old man, who looks like somebody 
incapable of understanding these things, took care of 
her instantly with six thousand pesos. Besides, it’s 
fairly obvious that I know how to look after myself. 
Some time ago, over in Montevideo, the roulette table 
cleaned me out of my last cent. It was tremendous. 
Guys were sweating just watching me play. In under 
twenty minutes I lost twenty thousand pesos. Look at 
the fix I was in. I didn’t even have the change to phone


Buenos Aires. Still, cool as can be, I strolled out onto 
the terrace. Would you believe that I solved the prob- 
lem on the spot? Out of the blue steps this little char- 
acter who talks through his nose and who’s been fol- 
lowing my game closely. He lends me five thousand 
pesos. The next day I was back at Villa Castellamare, 
having won back five thousand pesos of the twenty 
thousand that the Uruguayans had nicked me for. The 
little guy never saw me again.
“As for running around with women, don’t let me 
get started on that. If you want some fun, just ask 
Mickey Montenegro what sort of cat I am. I’m the 
same in everything. Find out how I study; I don’t even 
open the books. When exams come around I crack a 
 joke or two, and the examiners congratulate me. 
Now, to help me get over this bad experience with 
Pumita, the old man wants me to go into politics. Dr. 
Saponaro, who’s clever as a fox, says he isn’t sure yet 
which political party suits me best. But I’ll bet you 
anything you like that next half-time I’ll be running for 
Congress. It’s the same in polo. Who’s got the best 
ponies? Who’s the crack player in Tortuga Park? I’ll 
stop before I bore you.
“I don’t talk hot air like la Barcina, who was going 
to be my sister-in-law, or like her husband, who’s al- 
ways talking about soccer when he’s never laid eyes on 
a regulation ball. I want you to start getting clued in. 
I was about to marry Pumita. Sure, she had her downs, 
but she was really wonderful. Overnight, she’s poi- 
soned with cyanide—dead, to put it bluntly. First they 
let it out that she committed suicide. That’s crazy, 
because we were about to get married. You can be 
sure I wasn’t going to give my name to some suicidal 
nut. Then they said she took the poison by mistake— 
as if she didn’t have a brain in her head. Now they 
come out with something new—murder—which casts


a shadow over us all. What do you want me to say? 
Between murder and suicide, I’ll take suicide, even 
though that’s a load of rubbish.”
“Look here, young man,” said Parodi, “with all 
this talk this cell’s just like an election rostrum. As 
soon as I’m not looking, some clown slips in here 
with a tale about signs of the Zodiac, or about a train 
that doesn’t stop anywhere, or about a fiancée who 
never committed suicide, who never drank poison by 
mistake, and who never got murdered. I’m going to 
order Assistant Chief Grondona to clap the whole lot 
in the clink the next time he as much as catches a 
glimpse of them.”
“But I’m here to help you, Mr. Parodi. That is to say, 
I want to ask you to help me.”
“All right. That’s the way I like a man. Let’s see. Can 
we take it step by step now? Are you sure the deceased 
could stomach the idea of marrying you?”
“As sure as I’m my father’s son. Pumita had her 
moods, but she loved me.”
“Pay attention to my questions. Was she pregnant? 
Was she playing around with some other fool? Did she 
need money? Was she ill? Was she beginning to bore 
you?”
After thinking awhile, San Giacomo answered in the 
negative.
“Now explain to me this thing about the sleeping 
medicine.”
“Well, Dr. Parodi, we didn’t like her taking it. But 
she kept on buying it, and she hid it in her room.” 
“Did you have access to that room? Did anybody 
else?”
“Anyone could have got in,” the young man said. 
“All the bedrooms of that wing look out onto the 
circular lawn with its row of statues.”


IV
On the nineteenth of July, Mario Bonfanti burst into 
cell . Swiftly shedding his white mackintosh and 
doeskin trilby, he tossed his malacca cane onto the 
regulation cot, pulled out a cigarette lighter and lit a 
new meerschaum pipe. Then, taking an oblong piece 
of mustard-colored chamois out of a secret pocket, he 
vigorously wiped the lenses of his dark glasses. For a 
minute or two, his iridescent scarf and thick woolen 
waistcoat heaved under his audible breathing. 
Through the pipestem between his teeth, his fresh 
Italian voice, embellished with a Castilian lisp, 
sounded seductive and forceful.
“Maestro Parodi, I’m sure you know how the police 
operate—their style. Personally, I have to admit that, 
inclined as I am more to scholarship than to the in- 
tricacies of criminal investigation, all this took me by 
surprise. In short, here are the cops, absolutely con- 
vinced that Pumita’s suicide was a murder. The fact is 
that these back-room Edgar Wallaces have me under 
suspicion. Clearly, I’m forward-looking, a progressive. 
Some days ago, I deemed it wise to make a gracious 
perusal of certain love letters. I wanted to cleanse my 
mind, to unburden myself of all sentimental ballast. 
It’s superfluous to reveal the lady’s name. Neither you 
nor I, Isidro Parodi, have any interest in mere sur- 
names. Thanks to this briquet, if you’ll permit the Galli- 
cism,” Bonfanti added, brandishing his outsized ciga- 
rette lighter in triumph, “I made a conclusive epis- 
tolary pyre in the fireplace of my bedroom-study. 
Then look what happened. The bloodhounds made a 
great fuss about it. That innocent bonfire got me a 
weekend in jail, a harsh exile from the comforts of


home and from my accustomed daily newspaper. Of 
course, deep down inside I soared above it all. But 
now I’ve returned to earth. I can’t help thinking I’m 
going to meet up with these ugly brutes again. I ask 
you in all sincerity, do you consider me to be in dan- 
ger?”
“Yes, of going on and on until Doomsday,” an- 
swered Parodi. “If you don’t relax, you’ll be taken for 
a Spaniard. Pretend you aren’t drunk and tell me what 
you know about the death of Ricky San Giacomo.”
“All my expository abilities, my whole verbal cornu- 
copia, are at your disposal. In a jiffy, I’ll sketch you an 
outline of the case in broad strokes. I shall not try to 
conceal from your perspicacious intellect, my dear 
Parodi, that Pumita’s death had affected Ricky—not to 
say shattered him. Doña Mariana Ruiz Villalba de An- 
glada is by no means crazy when she declares, with 
that enviable grace of hers, that polo ponies are 
Ricardo’s be-all and end-all. Imagine our great sur- 
prise when we learned that, embittered and pining 
away, he had sold off those superb stables of his. Only 
yesterday they had been the apple of his eye and now 
he looked upon them without joy, without love. He 
was no longer wining and dining. Not even the publi- 
cation of his novel, The Sword at Noon, whose manu- 
script I personally spiced up for the press, raised his 
spirits. You, as an old hand at literary detection, will 
not have failed to notice and to applaud more than one 
trace of my highly personal style—each trace, I might 
add, the size of an ostrich egg. Now we’re getting 
down to one of the Commendatore’s kindly acts, to 
one of his long-standing schemes. In order to bring 
his son’s melancholy to an end, the father secretly 
speeded up the printing of the book and like greased 
lightning he surprised Ricky with six hundred and fifty


copies on Wathman paper, in Teufelsbible format. On 
the q.t., the Commendatore is like Proteus. He con- 
sults top doctors; he confers with his bank’s straw 
men; he refuses to contribute a farthing to the Baron- 
ess de Servus, who wields the peremptory scepter of 
the Anti-Semitic Relief Society. He divides his wealth 
in two parts, the larger, destined for his legitimate son 
—millions upon millions, which will triple in five years 
—he sinks into the new underground rapid transit 
system. The smaller part, slumbering in meager share 
certificates, he leaves to Eliseo Requena, his son fa- 
thered on the field of love. The Commendatore does 
all this while managing to postpone my fees indefi- 
nitely and to fall out with the manager of the print 
shop, an old debtor of his.
“A compliment is better than the truth. A week after 
the publication of The Sword at Noon, don José María 
Pemán wrote a tribute to it. Doubtless he was attracted 
to the book by certain ornaments and adornments that 
were obvious to any intelligent mind and that also 
stood out from Requena’s sledgehammer syntax and 
feeble vocabulary. Fortune smiled on Ricky, but he 
became both boring and inconsiderate, and persisted 
in his pointless mourning of Pumita. I can already hear 
you muttering to yourself, ‘Let the dead bury the 
dead.’ Without engaging in any sterile argument 
about the point of that remark, let me say that I myself 
suggested to Ricardo the need, what’s more the advis- 
ability, of burying his present grief and seeking com- 
fort in the bountiful wellsprings of the past, which is 
the arsenal and festive board of all new shoots. I ad- 
vised him to revive some little peccadillo that predated 
Pumita’s arrival on the scene. Good advice is half the 
battle. No sooner said than done. In no time at all, our 
Ricardo, revived and in good spirits, was piloting the


elevator up to the residence of the Baroness de Ser- 
vus. See that? I’m a top-flight reporter, and I’m not 
withholding genuine information—her actual name. 
History, moreover, reveals refined primitivism to be 
the undeniably exclusive possession of the Teutonic 
grande dame. The first act glides onto an aquatic, 
amphibious stage during that sultry spring of . 
Through nonchalant binoculars our Ricardo was spy- 
ing on the heats of a women’s sculling regatta—the 
Valkyries of Ruderverein versus the Columbines of 
Neptunia. All at once the intruding glass comes to 
rest; Ricardo gapes; thirstily he takes in the trim, 
graceful figure of Baroness de Servus, riding her clink- 
er-built craft. That same evening, an old copy of the 
Tatler was mutilated; that night a picture of the baron- 
ess, set off by her faithful Doberman pinscher, pre- 
sided over the young man’s insomnia. ‘Some wacky 
Frenchwoman is pestering me with phone calls,’ 
Ricardo told me a week later. ‘To make her stop, I’m 
going to see her.’ As you see, I’m repeating the very 
words of our conversation. Let me sketch the first 
night of love. Ricardo arrives at the aforesaid resi- 
dence. He goes up, vertically, in the elevator. He is 
escorted into an intimate sitting room. He is left alone; 
suddenly the light goes out. Two possibilities tug at 
the young man’s mind: a short circuit and a kidnap- 
ping. First he sobs, then he whimpers, then he curses 
the day he was born. At last he stretches out his arms. 
A weary voice entreats him gently but firmly. The dark 
is pleasant and the sofa inviting. Dawn, the eternal 
woman, restores his sight. I can no longer hold it back, 
my dear friend Parodi: Ricardo awoke in the arms of 
the Baroness de Servus.
“Your life and mine, more sedentary, perhaps more 
reflective, can do without this sort of thing. But 
Ricardo couldn’t.


“Trying to come to terms with Pumita’s death, he 
seeks out the baroness. Our Gregorio Martínez Sierra 
was harsh but just when he coined the phrase ‘Woman 
is the contemporary sphinx.’ Of course, you won’t ask 
me as a gentleman to reveal word for word the conver- 
sation that took place between this unpredictable 
grande dame and her importunate lover, who wanted 
a shoulder to cry on. These cosy little chats, these 
tidbits of gossip, are better suited to coarse, Fren- 
chified novelists, not to seekers after truth. Besides, I 
have no idea what they talked about. The fact is that 
half an hour later, shaken and crestfallen, Ricardo 
came down in the same Otis elevator which on previ- 
ous occasions had lifted him upward, so sure of him- 
self. Here is where the tragic dance begins. You’re 
losing yourself, Ricardo, you’re going over the edge! 
Careful, because you’re already sliding into the abyss 
of madness! I shan’t withhold from you a single station 
of this incomprehensible via crucis. After speaking to 
the baroness, Ricardo went to Miss Dollie Vavasour’s 
house. She was a third-rate touring actress who had no 
ties and who I know had had an affair with him. You’ll 
be annoyed, Parodi, if I dwell on, if I enlarge upon, 
this cheap slut. One stroke is enough to paint her 
life-size. I once paid her the compliment of sending 
her a copy of my Góngora Has Already Said It All, en- 
hanced by a dedication in my own hand and by my 
holograph signature. The rude woman never acknowl- 
edged the gift in spite of my efforts to entice her with 
offerings of chocolates, pastries, and sweet drinks, to- 
gether with which I included my Research into Aragon- 
isms in Some Pamphlets by J. Cejador y Frauca, in a deluxe 
edition, which I conveyed to her private residence by 
the Grand Splendid Messenger Service.
“I keep scouring my brain, asking myself over and 
over what aberration, what moral bankruptcy, induced


Ricardo to direct his steps to that den, which I am 
proud never to have entered and which is a well- 
known public dispensary for all kinds of sensual gra- 
tification. The punishment lies in the sin. After a bleak 
conversation with this Englishwoman, Ricardo left 
hurriedly and thoroughly depressed, swallowing over 
and over again the bitter fruit of his disillusion. The 
wings of insanity beat at his jaunty hat. Not far from 
the Englishwoman’s house—at the corner of Juncal 
and Esmeralda, to add a dash of local color—he took 
himself boldly in hand. He quickly boarded a taxi 
which eventually deposited him at the doorstep of a 
family boardinghouse in the  block of Maipú 
Street. A wind filled his sails. In that safe refuge— 
ignored by the crowds of passersby, who are motor- 
ized thanks to the almighty dollar—lived and still lives 
Miss Amy Evans. Miss Evans is a woman who, without 
renouncing her femininity, shuffles horizons and sniffs 
out climates or, in a word, works for an inter-American 
firm whose local head is Gervasio Montenegro and 
whose praiseworthy purpose is to foster the emigra- 
tion of the South American woman—‘our Latin sister,’ 
as Miss Evans graciously puts it—to Salt Lake City and 
the green farms round about. Miss Evans’ time is 
priceless. Nonetheless, this lady stole a mauvais quart 
d’heure from the pressures of the mail and with com- 
plete dignity received the friend who, following the 
trauma of a broken engagement, had once escaped 
her advances. Ten minutes of small talk with Miss 
Evans are quite enough to invigorate the feeblest 
mind.* Ricardo, poor fellow, made it to the elevator 
with his spirits dragging and with the word suicide
*Mario is sometimes so aggressive. [Footnote contributed by Doña 
Mariana Ruiz Villalba de Anglada.]


clearly etched in his eyes. Clear, that is, to anyone with 
a seer’s patience to decipher it.
“In times of black melancholy there’s no medicine 
like simple daily contact with nature, which, heedful of 
the lure of April, breaks out in summery profusion 
over the hills and plains. Broken by adversity, Ricardo 
sought rural solitude, heading straight for suburban 
Avellaneda. The old mansion of the Montenegros 
opened its heavily curtained French doors to receive 
him. The host, who in matters of hospitality is every 
inch a man’s man, accepted an extra-long Corona and, 
between puffs, spoke like an oracle. He revealed so 
much that our Ricardo, downhearted and disgruntled, 
was obliged to retreat to Villa Castellamare as if in 
flight from twenty thousand of the world’s most hid- 
eous devils.
“The gloomy antechambers of madness are the 
waiting rooms of suicide. That night Ricardo spoke to 
no one who might have lifted his spirits, neither com- 
rade nor fellow-writer. Instead, he sank into the first 
of a long series of conferences with the decrepit 
Croce, who was drier and duller than the figures in his 
account books.
“Our Ricardo wasted three days on those morbid 
discussions. On Friday, he returned to his senses, ap- 
pearing of his own free will in my bedroom-study. To 
disinfect his soul, I invited him to correct the proof- 
sheets of my new edition of Rodó’s Ariel, a master- 
piece which in González Blanco’s opinion ‘outdoes 
Valera in versatility, Pérez Galdós in elegance, Pardo 
Bazán in refinement, Pereda in modernity, Valle In- 
clán in didacticism, and Azorin in critical spirit.’ I sus- 
pect that anyone else would have prescribed a placebo 
for Ricardo rather than the lion marrow that I sug- 
gested. Nonetheless, only a minute or two of this rivet-


ing work were enough for the deceased to take his 
leave, comforted and at ease. I hadn’t quite put on my 
spectacles to continue my work when, from the other 
side of the circular lawn, the fatal shot rang out.
“Outside, I met Requena. Ricardo’s bedroom door 
was half shut. On the ground, sullying a soft blanket 
with its doomed blood, the body lay face up. Still 
warm, the revolver watched over Ricardo’s eternal 
sleep.
“I’ll say this openly. The decision was premedi- 
tated. This is proved and confirmed by the sad suicide 
note he left us. It was deficient, as if written by some- 
one ignorant of the resources of the language; poor, 
as if by a bungler who has no stock of adjectives at his 
disposal; insipid, as if by someone unaccustomed to 
playing with words. It clearly shows what I have more 
than once maintained from the podium: that the grad- 
uates of our so-called schools are unfamiliar with the 
mysteries of the dictionary. Let me read it to you. 
You’ll be the most ardent warrior in this crusade for 
better expression.”
This is the letter that Bonfanti read only moments 
before don Isidro threw him out:
The worst of it is that I have always been happy. 
Now everything has changed and will go on 
changing. I am taking my life because I no longer 
understand anything. My whole life has been a lie. 
I can’t say goodbye to Pumita because she’s al- 
ready dead. No other father in the world has done 
what my father has. I want everyone to know this. 
Goodbye and forget me.
(signed) 
Ricardo San Giacomo, 
Pilar,  July 


V
Shortly after, Parodi received a visit from Dr. Ber- 
nardo Castillo, the San Giacomo family doctor. Their 
conversation was long and confidential. The same can 
be said about the conversation that don Isidro had 
around that same time with the accountant Giovanni 
Croce.
VI
One year later, on Friday, the seventeenth of July, 
, Mario Bonfanti—wearing a loose-fitting mack- 
intosh, a battered trilby, a pale tartan tie, and a brand- 
new red sweatshirt—made a flustered entry into cell 
. He was encumbered by a vast serving platter 
covered with a spotless napkin.
“Fuel for the stomach!” he shouted. “Before I can 
count up to one on my finger, you’ll be licking yours, 
Parodi, my charming friend. Pancakes and honey! 
These meat pasties were baked by honest hands. The 
tray that bears them boasts the princess’s coat of arms 
and motto Hic jacet.”
A malacca cane checked him. It was brandished by 
that third musketeer, Gervasio Montenegro, who was 
dressed in a Houdin opera hat, a Chamberlain mono- 
cle, a sentimental black mustache, an overcoat with 
mink collar and cuffs, a stiff collar with a single Men- 
dax pearl, footwear by Nimbo, and gloves by Bulping- 
ton. “I’m so glad to find you in, my dear Parodi,” he 
exclaimed elegantly. “Please excuse my secretary’s 
 fadaise. We mustn’t let ourselves be put off by the 
sophisms of Ciudadela and San Fernando streets.


Every thinking man knows that Avellaneda ranks first 
on its own merits. I never tire of telling Bonfanti that 
his little aphorisms and archaisms are distinctly vieux 
 jeu, out of place. I guide his reading in vain. A strict 
regimen of Anatole France, Oscar Wilde, Toulet, don 
 Juan Valera, Fradique Mendes, and Roberto Gache 
has not penetrated his intractable mind. Bonfanti, 
don’t be stubborn and révolté and put down at once the 
pasty you’ve just taken, then get yourself to the Full- 
Blown Rose, the plumber’s, at  Costa Rica Street, 
and see if you can’t make yourself useful.”
Bonfanti murmured the words “Right away, sir,” 
and bowing and scraping he made a dignified exit.
“You, don Montenegro, who are riding a tame 
horse,” said Parodi, “be so kind as to open that air- 
shaft lest we be overcome by the smell of these little 
pasties, which must have been cooked in lard.”
Swift as a duelist, Montenegro climbed up onto a 
stool and obeyed the master’s order. He descended 
with a theatrical leap. “Well,” he said, staring at a 
stubbed-out cigarette, “the time has come around at 
last.” Drawing out a big gold watch, he wound it up 
and then consulted it. “Today’s the seventeenth of 
 July. It’s exactly one year ago that you solved the cruel 
puzzle of Villa Castellamare. In this friendly atmo- 
sphere, I raise my glass and remind you that you prom- 
ised me then that on this date, a year to the day, you 
would give a complete explanation of the mystery. I 
must tell you, dear Parodi, that as a dreamer, in mo- 
ments stolen from my business affairs and my writings, 
I have come up with a quite interesting and original 
theory. With your disciplined mind, you may be able 
to contribute something useful to this theory, to this 
lofty intellectual edifice. I am a free-form architect. I 
hold out my hand for your valuable grain of sand,


reserving—cela va sans dire—the right to reject any- 
thing too unsound or fantastic.”
“Don’t worry,” said Parodi. “Your grain of sand will 
turn out to be the same as mine—especially if I speak 
before you do. You start, friend Montenegro. The first 
fruits go to the birds.”
“By no means,” Montenegro hastened to reply. 
“Après vous, messieurs les anglais. Besides, I can’t pretend 
that my interest hasn’t almost evaporated. The Com- 
mendatore disappointed me. I considered him a man 
of greater substance. He died—prepare yourself for a 
strong metaphor—on his uppers. The disposal of his 
estate barely covered his debts. I don’t argue that 
Requena’s position isn’t enviable and that the huge 
Hamburg oratory and pair of live tapirs I bought in the 
auction for a ridiculous price haven’t given me a good 
deal of pleasure. The princess can’t complain either. 
She has rescued from foreign riffraff a terra-cotta ser- 
pent, a fouille from Peru which the Commendatore 
once cherished and kept in a drawer of his private desk 
and which now, rich with mythological overtones, pre- 
sides over our waiting room. Pardon. On a previous 
visit I told you about this disturbing ophidian. Man of 
taste that I am, I had kept a place in petto for a writhing 
bronze by Boccioni, a suggestive, dynamic monster 
that I had to do without, because dear Mariana—I 
mean, Mrs. Anglada—already had her eye on it, and 
I chose an honorable retreat. This gambit has been 
rewarded. The climate of our relationship is now dis- 
tinctly warm. But I digress and lead you astray, my 
dear Parodi. I eagerly await your summation, and in 
advance let me offer a word of encouragement. I speak 
to you proudly. No doubt what I’ve just said would 
bring a smile to the lips of more than one evil-minded 
person, but you know that my words are backed by


solid credit. I have carried out my part of the bargain. 
I’ve sketched you a raccourci of my efforts with the 
Baroness de Servus, Lola Vicuña de Kruif, and that 
distracting fausse maigre, Dolores Vavasour. By setting 
up a mélange of subterfuges and threats, I managed 
to have Giovanni Croce, that true Cato of accountants, 
 jeopardize his reputation by paying a visit to this penal 
institution only a short while before he fled the coun- 
try. I’ve put at your service no less than one copy of 
that viperous pamphlet which inundated Buenos Aires 
and its environs, and whose author, shielded by a mask 
of anonymity and standing before the still-unsealed 
cenotaph, made himself thoroughly ridiculous by al- 
leging that there were all kinds of absurd similarities 
between Ricardo’s novel and Pemán’s Santa Virreina, a 
work that his literary mentors, Eliseo Requena and 
Mario Bonfanti, chose as their strict model. This pam- 
phleteer showed that Ricardo’s little opus, despite 
poaching a few chapters of Pemán’s potboiler—a quite 
innocent coincidence in the early ferment of inspira- 
tion—should have been considered rather a copy of 
Paul Groussac’s Billete de lotería, reset in the seven- 
teenth century and esteemed for its continual remind- 
ers of the sensational discovery of the tonic properties 
of quinine.
“Parlons d’autre chose. Attentive to your senile whims, 
my dear Parodi, I’ve arranged for Dr. Castillo, the 
brown bread and gruel fanatic, to leave his hydro- 
pathic clinic for a moment and examine you with a 
professional eye.”
“Stop playing the fool,” said the criminologist. 
“The San Giacomo maze has more turns to it than a 
clock. I began tying up loose ends on the afternoon 
that don Anglada and Mrs. Barcina told me about the 
argument at the Commendatore’s on the eve of the


first death. What I was later told by the late Ricardo, 
by Mario Bonfanti, and by you, the accountant, and 
the doctor confirmed my suspicions. Even the letter 
that the poor boy left explained everything. As Er- 
nesto Poncio used to say,
‘Fate, in its tidiness,
ties off every stitch.’
“Even old San Giacomo’s death and that pamphlet 
written under the cover of anonymity help unravel the 
mystery. If I didn’t know don Anglada, I’d suspect that 
he was beginning to see the light. The proof is that in 
order to tell us about Pumita’s death he went all the 
way back to old man San Giacomo’s arrival in Rosario. 
God speaks through the mouths of fools. That time 
and place is where the story really begins. The police, 
who always stick to what’s under their noses, discov- 
ered nothing, because they were thinking about 
Pumita and Villa Castellamare and the year . But 
being so long behind bars I have turned historian, and 
I like looking back on those days when one was young 
and hadn’t yet been sent to jail and always had a little 
spending money. The story, as I say, goes a long way 
back, and the Commendatore is the key. Let’s size up 
this greenhorn. In , according to Anglada, he 
nearly went crazy. Let’s see what had happened to 
him. His immigrant wife, whom he had sent for from 
Italy, died. He barely knew her. Do you imagine a man 
like the Commendatore is going to go crazy over that? 
Step aside, I’m going to spit. Again according to An- 
glada, the death of his friend Count Isidoro Fosco also 
kept him awake nights. This I don’t believe, even if the 
Almanac swore to it. The count was a millionaire, a 
consul, and when San Giacomo was a garbage collec-


tor the count gave him nothing more than advice. The 
death of a friend like that is more of a relief, unless 
you’re looking for misery. Even in business San 
Giacomo did well. The entire Italian army gagged on 
his rhubarb, which he sold them at the price of real 
food and for which he was even made a Commen- 
datore. So what was the matter with him? The same 
old story, my friend. The Italian girl played him dirty 
with Count Fosco. What was worse, when San 
Giacomo found out about it the two sly ones were 
already dead.
“You know how revengeful and even bitter the 
Calabrians are. Worse than clerks from the Eighth 
Precinct. Since he couldn’t avenge himself on the 
woman or on the hypocrite who kept giving him ad- 
vice, the Commendatore avenged himself on their son 
—on Ricardo.
“Anybody else—you, for example—out to avenge 
yourself, would have been a bit hard on the alleged 
son and that would have been the end of it. But old 
San Giacomo became wild with hate. He concocted a 
plan which even ex-President Mitre would never have 
thought of. For a fine piece of long-range planning, 
you really have to take your hat off to the man. He 
mapped out Ricardo’s whole life, allotting the first 
twenty years to his happiness and the next twenty to 
his downfall. However fantastic this may seem, noth- 
ing in Ricardo’s life happened by chance.
“Let’s start by what you know all about—women. 
We have the Baroness de Servus, the sister, Dolores, 
and Vicuña. Every one of these affairs had been prear- 
ranged by the old man without Ricardo’s suspecting it. 
No need to tell you about this, don Montenegro, as 
I’m sure that with your cut you’ve grown sleek as a 
fatted calf. Even meeting Pumita seems more rigged


than a Rioja election. The same goes for his law- 
school exams. Ricardo made no effort, yet good 
grades just poured in. The same thing was about to 
happen to him in politics. With Saponaro in the 
driver’s seat, everybody makes it. Look, it’s a real 
laugh—it was always the same story. Remember the 
six thousand pesos to buy off the Dolly sister? Remem- 
ber the little guy who talked through his nose who 
suddenly popped up in Montevideo? He worked for 
San Giacomo. The proof is that he made no attempt 
to get back the five thousand Uruguayan pesos he lent 
Ricardo. And then take the case of the novel. You said 
yourself just now that Requena and Mario Bonfanti 
acted as Ricardo’s front men. On the eve of Pumita’s 
death, Requena himself let it slip, saying he was very 
busy because Ricardo was finishing his novel. He 
couldn’t have made it clearer—the one who was actu- 
ally writing the book was Requena. Then Bonfanti 
came along and puffed it up to the size of an ostrich 
egg.
“And so we come to the year . Ricardo thought 
he was acting of his own free will, like any of us, but 
the fact is that he was being manipulated like a chess 
piece. They got him engaged to Pumita, who, however 
you look at it, came from a good family. Everything 
went smoothly until the father, who’d had the arro- 
gance to think he could play God, discovered that God 
had been manipulating him. His health deteriorated. 
Dr. Castillo told him he had barely a year to live. As 
to what was actually wrong with him the doctor can say 
what he likes. Personally, I think he had a coronary. 
San Giacomo speeded up the dance. He had only one 
year left in which to pile on the last of the happiness 
and all the misery and disaster. The prospect did not 
daunt him. But during dinner on the twenty-third of


 June, Pumita let him know that she had discovered the 
plot. Of course, she never actually told him so. They 
were not alone. She spoke only about movies. She said 
of a certain Juárez that first they piled on the triumphs 
and then they turned his luck against him. San 
Giacomo wanted to change the subject, but Pumita 
insisted on repeating that in some people’s lives noth- 
ing happens by chance. She also brought up the sub- 
 ject of the notebook in which the old man kept his 
diary. She did this to let him know that she’d read it. 
In order to be sure, San Giacomo set a trap for her. 
He talked about a ceramic lizard that a Jew had sold 
him out of a suitcase and that he kept in his desk in the 
same drawer as the notebook. He lied that the lizard 
was a lion. Pumita, who knew it was a snake, was taken 
aback. Out of sheer jealousy, she’d been searching the 
old man’s desk drawers looking for Ricardo’s letters. 
She found the diary, and as she was in a studious mood 
she read it and discovered the plot. That night during 
the dinner conversation she was extremely careless. 
The most dangerous thing she said was that the next 
day she was going to talk to Ricardo. The old man, to 
salvage the plan he had devised with such painstaking 
hatred, decided to kill Pumita. He put poison in her 
sleeping medicine. You may remember that Ricardo 
had mentioned that the medicine was in her chest of 
drawers. It wasn’t hard getting into her bedroom. All 
the rooms opened onto the corridor with the statues.
“Let me turn to other aspects of that night’s conver- 
sation. The girl asked Ricardo to withhold publication 
of his so-called novel for a few years. San Giacomo 
openly disagreed. He wanted the book to appear so as 
to be able to distribute a pamphlet demonstrating that 
the novel was a complete plagiarism. In my opinion,


the pamphlet was written by Anglada when he said he 
was staying home to write a history of the movies. At 
the same time, he announced that somebody in the 
know was going to see that Ricardo’s novel was cop- 
ied.
“As the law didn’t allow San Giacomo to disinherit 
Ricardo, the Commendatore chose to lose his fortune. 
Requena’s share he put into government bonds, which 
although not very profitable were safe. Ricardo’s por- 
tion he invested in the subway. You only had to see the 
interest it earned to realize it was a risky investment. 
Croce robbed him left and right. The Commendatore 
let him get away with it so as to be quite sure that 
Ricardo would never get a bean.
“It wasn’t long before money began to grow scarce. 
Bonfanti was cut off the payroll. The baroness was 
sent packing. Ricardo had to sell his polo ponies.
“The poor guy! He’d never been down before. To 
lift his spirits he went to see the baroness. She, angry 
to have got nothing out of the affair, left him flat and 
swore that if she’d ever had any relationship with him 
it was because his father was paying her. Ricardo saw 
his luck change, but he couldn’t understand it. In his 
confusion he had a premonition. He went to question 
the Dolly sister and the Evans woman. Both of them 
admitted that if they’d had anything to do with him in 
the past it was because of an agreement they had with 
his father. Then he went to see you, Montenegro. You 
admitted that you had fixed things with those women 
and others. Isn’t that so?”
“Unto Caesar what is Caesar’s,” Montenegro de- 
clared, feigning a yawn. “I’m sure you know that the 
orchestration of those ententes cordiales has by now be- 
come second nature to me.”


“Worried by his lack of money, Ricardo consulted 
Croce. Their conversation proved that the Commen- 
datore was deliberately ruining himself.
“The realization that his whole life was a farce both 
bewildered and humiliated Ricardo. It was as if sud- 
denly you’d been told you were someone else. Ricardo 
had always thought a lot of himself. Now he saw that 
his past and all his successes had been staged by his 
father, and that his father, for some reason or other, 
was his enemy and was preparing a living hell for him. 
This was what made Ricardo think that life wasn’t 
worth living. He never complained, he never said a 
thing against the Commendatore, whom he still loved. 
But he left a farewell letter that his father was sure to 
understand. That letter said, ‘Now everything has 
changed and will go on changing. . . . No other father 
in the world has done what my father has.’
“Maybe it’s because I’ve been living in this estab- 
lishment for so long that I no longer believe in punish- 
ment. Everyone finds punishment enough in his own 
wrongdoing. It’s not right that honest men be other 
men’s executioners. The Commendatore had only a 
few months to live. Why spoil them by informing on 
him and pointlessly stirring up a hornet’s nest of law- 
yers, judges, and police chiefs?”
Pujato,
August , 


Tadeo Limardo’s 
Victim
To the memory of Franz Kafka
I
The convict in cell , don Isidro Parodi, received his 
visitor with a certain reluctance. Another hoodlum 
come to pester me, he thought. Parodi was unaware 
that twenty years earlier, before he had become an old 
established Argentine, he used to speak exactly like 
this man, drawing out his s’s and waving his arms 
about.
Savastano straightened his tie and tossed his brown 
hat onto the regulation cot. He was dark, good-look- 
ing, and slightly unpleasant.
“It was Mr. Molinari who said I should trouble you,” 
he explained. “I’ve come about the murder at the New 
Impartial Hotel—the mystery that’s baffled all the top 
brains. Please understand. I’m here as a disinterested 
party, but the police have their eyes on me, and I’ve 
heard that for solving a riddle there’s nobody like you. 
Let me tell you the facts grosso modo and quite frankly. 
That’s the kind of man I am.
“The ups and downs of life have forced me, for a 
while, to mark time. Right now I’m in the clear, just 
sitting back and waiting to see how things turn out. I


don’t get worked up about nothing. A man sizes things 
up, keeps cool, and, when the time’s right, he strikes. 
You’ll never believe me when I tell you I haven’t been 
anywhere near the Wholesale Market for a full year 
now. When they see me, the boys are going to say, 
‘Who is this guy?’ I bet you anything their mouths will 
fall open when I show up in my little pickup. But for 
the time being I’ve retired to winter quarters. To be 
perfectly frank, to the New Impartial Hotel, in the 
 block of Cangallo Street—a nook of Buenos 
Aires that has its own particular flavor. Personally, it’s 
not really my choice that I live in this part of town, and 
one of these fine days,
‘I’ll beat a hasty retreat,
whistling a waltz that’s slow and sweet.’
“Those lured by the sign in the doorway saying 
‘Beds for Gentlemen from -Cents Up’ get the idea 
that the place is some sort of fleabag. But please, don’t 
let that fool you, don Isidro. I myself have my own 
private room that I temporarily share with Simon 
Fineberg, commonly known as the Great Profile, but 
he’s always at the Catechist’s Club. Fineberg’s one of 
those birds of passage who turn up in Merlo one day 
and in Berazategui the next, and he was already occu- 
pying the room when I arrived there two years ago, 
and I don’t expect he’ll ever move out. I’m speaking 
to you with my hand on my heart. Stick-in-the-muds 
get on my nerves. We’re not in the oxcart age, and I’m 
one of those travelers who like a change of scene. And 
now to the point. Fineberg’s a bit out of his element. 
He thinks the world moves around his locked trunk, 
but when you’re broke do you think he’ll let an Argen- 
tine have a couple of pesos? The rest of the boys enjoy


themselves—it’s a real laugh a minute—while all a 
zombie like Fineberg gets is a sneer.
“You, here in your niche, in your lookout post, so 
to speak, will like the circus I’m about to present to 
you. The New Impartial has an atmosphere that would 
arouse the interest of any student of life. It’s a freak 
show that’ll make you split a gut. I’m always saying to 
Fineberg, ‘Why blow good money on Chaplin when 
we’ve got our own zoo right here?’ To be quite frank, 
his features give him away. He looks like a speckled 
egg with ginger hair. It’s no wonder that Juana Mu- 
sante gave him the brushoff. This Musante woman, 
you see, inasmuch as she’s Claudio Zarlenga’s mis- 
tress, is more or less the landlady. Mr. Vicente Reno- 
vales and the aforementioned Zarlenga are the pair 
who run the place. Three years ago, Renovales took 
Zarlenga in as a partner. The old man was tired of 
struggling on his own, and this injection of young 
blood gave the New Impartial a new lease on life. 
Between you and me, I’ll tell you something that’s an 
open secret. Things are worse now than before, and 
business is only a ghost of what it used to be.
“Coming as he did from the Province of La Pampa, 
Zarlenga’s arrival on the scene was a fateful event. I 
have an idea he’s on the lam. Work it out for yourself. 
Zarlenga had taken Musante away from a post office 
clerk back in Banderaló. This drain on the national 
budget, who was something of a strongarm man, was 
left with his mouth hanging open. Zarlenga, who 
knows that down in La Pampa people don’t play 
around with things like that, grabbed the first train and 
made his way here to Buenos Aires. He came to lose 
himself in the crowd, if you get my meaning. As for 
me, I didn’t need even a crosstown bus to make myself 
invisible. From dawn to dusk I spend the whole day


burrowed in my room, which is just a hole in the wall. 
I have to chuckle at Meat Juice’s gang, swaggering up 
and down the Wholesale Market and never so much as 
seeing hide nor hair of me. To be on the safe side, I 
once passed them on the bus and made a face so I’d 
be taken for someone else.
“Zarlenga is an animal with clothes on, uncouth, a 
big hood—no offense meant. I may as well admit it— 
he treats me with kid gloves. The only time he raised 
a hand to me was one time when he was drinking, and 
because it was my birthday I ignored him. Well, talk 
of giving a dog a bad name, Juana Musante got it into 
her head that I was taking advantage of the cover of 
darkness to slip out before supper and wander halfway 
down the block just to get a glimpse of the cute little 
number who works at the tire shop. It’s like I said. 
Musante sees everything through a cloud of jealousy. 
She knows I’m always here, ready to step into the 
breach so to speak, yet she went and told Zarlenga that 
I’d managed to nip into the laundry with sinful inten- 
tions. The man came at me like boiling milk, and he 
was right. If it hadn’t been for Mr. Renovales, who 
with his own hand put a piece of raw meat on my eye, 
I might have lost my temper. There’s nothing in all 
those stories of hers, though I must admit that Juana 
Musante has a knockout figure. But a guy like me 
who’s had one affair with a girl who is now a manicurist 
and another with a sixteen-year-old who was going to 
be a radio star, isn’t going to be bowled over by a 
bundle of curves that may attract attention in Ban- 
deraló but that leaves us city boys cold.
“As ‘Goggles’ says in his little column in the Evening 
Chronicle, the very arrival of Tadeo Limardo at the New 
Impartial is steeped in mystery. He appeared during 
carnival in a hail of pistols and stink bombs, but he


won’t see another carnival. They dressed him in a 
wooden overcoat and he took up residence in the 
graveyard. Where are the snows of yesteryear?
“With the beat of the town throbbing in my veins, 
I had swiped a bear costume from the kitchen boy, a 
misanthrope who doesn’t take to the milonga and 
doesn’t go to dances. Dressed in that costume, I 
figured I wouldn’t be spotted, and I amused myself 
taking a bow in the back patio before I walked out like 
a gentleman going for a stroll. As you know, that night 
the mercury hit a record high. It was so hot that people 
couldn’t help laughing. By evening there were nine 
sunstroke cases and other casualties of the heat wave. 
 Just picture it, me with my hairy muzzle, sweating 
blood, but tempted every now and again to take off my 
bear’s head down in some murky alley that if City Hall 
saw they’d hang their heads in shame. But I tell you, 
when I have a brainstorm I’m a fanatic. I swear I didn’t 
take that headpiece off just in case one of the boys 
from the market was around that neck of the woods, 
the Plaza del Once. By now my lungs were beginning 
to enjoy the air in the plaza that reeked of barbecue 
stands and roasting meat. Then I passed out right in 
front of an old man who was dressed up like Coco the 
Clown. For the last thirty-eight years he hasn’t let a 
single carnival go by without dousing the policeman 
who’s his neighbor out in Temperley. This old vet- 
eran, in spite of his white hairs, had ice water in his 
veins. With one fell swoop he removed my bear’s head 
but not my ears, because they were glued on. I think 
either he or his father, who was decked out in a bon- 
net, pinched my bear head, but I’m not holding it 
against them. They made me gulp down a thick soup 
that they forced into my mouth with a wooden spoon. 
It was so hot that I came to. The trouble is that now


the kitchen boy is no longer talking to me, because he 
suspects the bear’s head I lost is the same one that Dr. 
Rodolfo Carbone was photographed in on one of the 
floats. Speaking of floats, one of them, driven by some 
 joker with a pack of angels on the back, agreed to drop 
me off at home, seeing that carnivals have a way of 
straggling on and on and I couldn’t drag my feet an- 
other inch. My new friends threw me onto the back of 
the truck, and I quit the place with a chuckle of relief. 
I was riding the float like a prince, and I had to laugh. 
Skirting the wall by the railway tracks came this yokel 
on foot, a half-starved corpse with a pasty face, who 
was shuffling along with a little cardboard suitcase and 
half-open paper bag. One of the angels managed to 
butt in where it was none of his business and told the 
hayseed to climb aboard. Just to keep the game going, 
I shouted to the driver that this was no garbage truck. 
One of the girls laughed at my joke, and on the spot 
I made a date to meet her at the empty lot on 
Humahuaco Street, but I never made it because it was 
so close to the Wholesale Market. I said I lived around 
the Haymarket, so they wouldn’t think I was down- 
and-out. But Renovales, who has no finesse, bellowed 
at me from the sidewalk, because Big Jackoff had lost 
fifteen cents from his vest while he was in the toilet, 
and everyone accused me of spending it on ice cream. 
To make things worse, less than half a block away my 
clinical eye spotted the cadaver with the suitcase. He 
was stumbling along exhausted. Cutting short my 
goodbyes, which are always painful, I jumped off the 
float as best I could and slipped into the hotel doorway 
so as to avoid a casus belli with the exhausted man. But 
it’s what I always say. Try reasoning with a half-starved 
man. I was leaving the sixty-cent rooms, where I had 
 just exchanged the bear costume that was roasting me


alive for a vegetable salad and emulsion of homemade 
wine, when out in the front patio I ran straight into the 
yokel, who didn’t even return my greeting.
“What a coincidence. The cadaver spent exactly 
eleven days in the old drawing room, which, of course, 
opens onto the first patio. As you know, the people 
who sleep there are proud as peacocks. Take Big 
 Jackoff, for instance, who panhandles just for the fun 
of it, although some say he’s a millionaire. At first, 
there were plenty of know-it-alls who predicted that 
the yokel would soon be exposed, because he was out 
of his element. Their suspicions were proved wrong. 
I’ll bet you can’t name a single person in that room 
who made any complaints. Nobody spread any rumors 
or made a fuss. The newcomer behaved perfectly. He 
ate his stew on time, never pawned a single blanket, 
never shortchanged anyone, never littered the prem- 
ises with horsehair looking for the money that some 
romantics think will tumble out of mattresses. I openly 
offered him my services for any errands within the 
hotel itself. I remember that one foggy day I even 
fetched him a pack of Nobleza cigarettes from the 
barbershop, and he gave me one to put behind my ear. 
I never think of that without tipping my hat to him.
“One Saturday, when he had almost recovered, he 
told us that fifty cents was all he had left. I chuckled 
to myself at the thought that Sunday, first thing, Zar- 
lenga would confiscate his suitcase and then throw 
him into the street without a stitch on for not being 
able to pay for his bed. Like everything human, the 
New Impartial has its flaws, but from the point of view 
of discipline the hotel is more like a jail than anything 
else. Before dawn, I tried to wake up the three good- 
time Charlies who live in the attic room and spend the 
whole day making fun of the Great Profile and talking


about soccer. Believe it or not, these good-for-noth- 
ings missed the performance, but they can’t blame me 
for that. The night before, I tipped them off by cir- 
culating a note saying ‘Flash! Who are they going to 
toss out? The answer: Tune in tomorrow.’ But I have 
to admit that they didn’t miss much. Claudio Zarlenga 
let us down. His mind works like a bingo game, and 
nobody knows what he’ll come up with next. Until a 
little after nine in the morning I stuck to my guns, 
arguing with the cook about having skipped the soup 
course and making myself look suspicious to Juana 
Musante, who claimed that I’d been on the roof trying 
to make off with the laundry. If I try to add all this up, 
it comes to nothing. At about seven on the dot, fully 
dressed, the yokel came out into the patio, where Zar- 
lenga was sweeping. Do you think he stopped to con- 
sider that the other man held a broom in his hand? No, 
sir. He spoke like an open book. I didn’t hear what 
they were saying, but Zarlenga gave him a pat on the 
shoulder, and for me the show was over.
“I held my head and couldn’t believe it. I spent two 
more hours sweltering on the roof, in hopes of further 
developments, until the heat got the better of me. 
When I came down, the yokel was busy in the kitchen, 
and he didn’t hesitate to offer me a nice little bowl of 
soup. Being an open-minded man, I’ll talk to anyone. 
I started to chat, and after picking apart the topics of 
the day I found out where he came from. He came 
from Banderaló, and I figured he was a private eye 
sent by Juana Musante’s husband to spy on her. In 
order to clear up the doubt that nagged me, I told him 
of a case which is bound to thrill the listener. It’s the 
story of a shoe coupon—exchangeable for a fishnet 
undershirt—which Fineberg passed on to the draper’s


niece, pretending he hadn’t noticed that it was already 
redeemed. You’ll never believe it if I tell you that the 
hayseed wasn’t at all moved by my vivid account. And 
he didn’t keel over when I revealed that when Fine- 
berg turned in the coupon he was actually wearing the 
undershirt. His victim completely missed the signifi- 
cance of the garment he was wearing, as she was hyp- 
notized by his sweet talk and off-color stories. I found 
out that our yokel was engaged in a business that had 
him bound hand and foot. Point-blank, I asked what 
his name was. His back to the wall, my friend had no 
time to invent a lie, and told me his name was Tadeo 
Limardo, a fact I was equally quick to accept, since it 
was a piece of new merchandise, si vocé m’entende. If 
you’re a cop, I’ll be a cop and a half, I said to myself, 
and I followed him everywhere on the sly until I’d 
worn him out. That same afternoon he promised that 
if I kept following him like a dog he’d give me a taste 
of molar stew. My suspicions turned out to be fully 
 justified—the man had something to hide. Just imag- 
ine my position. I was on the heels of the mystery and 
at the same time had to remain confined in my cell of 
a room, just as if the cook was on one of his rampages.
“I assure you that the scene in the hotel that after- 
noon was pretty dull. The female element had suffered 
a great depletion, because Juana Musante had gone to 
Gorchs until the next day.
“On Monday I showed my face as if nothing had 
happened, and made a personal appearance in the 
dining room. The cook, true to his principles, passed 
by me with his pail of soup and didn’t serve me. I then 
realized that this tyrant was going to condemn me to 
a starvation siege because I’d played truant the eve- 
ning before. So I lied to him and said I wasn’t hungry.


The man, who’s a living contradiction, served me two 
huge helpings that will stick with me to the grave and 
left me feeling solid as a tree trunk.
“While the others were laughing their heads off, the 
yokel, with his mournful face that spoiled the party, 
shoved aside the bowl of soup with his elbow. On my 
father’s grave, Mr. Parodi, I swear I longed for the 
moment the cook would slam home a reminder that 
his soup lay untouched, but Limardo intimidated him 
with a stony look, and the cook had to pack up his 
fiddle. Me, I had to laugh. At that moment, Juana 
Musante came in, eyes flashing with fury and waggling 
those hips of hers that make me feel I need oxygen. 
She’s always after me, that filly, but I play the unknown 
soldier. With that crazy way she has of not looking at 
me, she started collecting the bowls and told the cook, 
alias the Enemy of Man, that if he wanted to fight with 
skunks like me he’d better do it and leave her to get 
on with the work. Suddenly she came face to face with 
Limardo, and was taken aback to see he hadn’t 
touched his soup. Limardo looked at her as if he had 
never seen a woman before. There was no doubt 
about it. The sleuth was struggling to fix in his eye that 
unforgettable face. The scene, so appealing in its 
human simplicity, fell apart when Juana told the 
gawker that since he’d obviously been sleeping alone 
for some time why didn’t he go back to the country for 
a breath of fresh air. Busy as he was making pellets of 
bread—an ugly habit the cook has cured me of— 
Limardo failed to respond to her considerate advice.
“A few hours later, a scene took place which if I 
describe will make you thank the law for keeping you 
locked up. At seven in the evening, following an old 
habit of mine, I had popped out into the first patio 
intending to intercept the stewed tripe that the ty-


coons in the old drawing room order from the corner 
shop. With all your brains, I’ll bet you still can’t guess 
who I saw. Pardo Salivazo in person, wearing a nar- 
row-brimmed hat, a tight-fitting suit, and Fray Mocho 
shoes. Seeing this old friend of mine from the Whole- 
sale Market was all I needed to make me lock myself 
in my room for a solid week. Three days later, Fine- 
berg told me I could come out, since Pardo had van- 
ished without paying. He’d also taken all the third 
patio’s light bulbs, except the one Fineberg had in his 
pocket. I figured Fineberg, with his mania for airing 
the room, had dreamed up this story just to get rid of 
me, but I stayed put as if I owned the place until the 
end of the week, when the cook drove me out. I must 
admit that this time the Profile had spoken the truth. 
My pleasure in discovering this was interrupted by a 
trivial—even negligible—event that only a man with a 
sharp eye could have spotted. Limardo had moved 
from the old drawing room into one of the sixty-cent 
bunks. As he couldn’t come up with the cash, they 
made him work for his keep. To me, a light sleeper, 
the whole affair smelled like a sleuth’s scheme to worm 
his way into the running of the establishment so he 
could collect information about the staff’s movements. 
He helped with the bookkeeping, and with this as an 
excuse the yokel spent the whole day poking around 
the office. I personally have no regular job in the place 
even if I sometimes give the cook a hand so as not to 
look too selfish. Anyway, I ambled up and down in 
front of his desk to emphasize the difference between 
us, until Mr. Renovales made a fatherly remark that 
sent me scurrying back to my room.
“Twenty days later, a well-founded rumor had it 
that Mr. Renovales wanted to throw Limardo out and 
that Zarlenga was against it. I wouldn’t swallow this,


even if I saw it in black and white. If you don’t mind, 
I’ll give you the facts the way I see them. Can you 
really picture Mr. Renovales punishing such a poor 
devil? Can you imagine Zarlenga, with his morals, sid- 
ing with justice even for a moment? Forget it, my dear 
friend; don’t delude yourself. The truth turned out to 
be the other way around. Zarlenga was always getting 
after Limardo. He was the one who wanted to throw 
the yokel out. It was Renovales who stood up for him. 
Let me leak it to you—this personal opinion of mine 
is backed up by the boys in the attic.
“In fact, it wasn’t long before Limardo was moving 
beyond the narrow limits of the office. He soon spread 
all over the hotel like spilled oil. One day he was 
mending the eternal leak in the ceiling of the sixty- 
cent rooms; the next, he was modernizing the banis- 
ters with a stippled paint job; then he cleaned a stain 
off Zarlenga’s trousers; and then they gave him the 
privilege of washing down the first patio every day, 
and of polishing the old drawing room like a mirror 
and clearing it of garbage.
“Because he stuck his nose in where it didn’t be- 
long, Limardo kept stirring up trouble. Take, for ex- 
ample, the day the attic gang were having fun painting 
the hardware-store lady’s tabby cat red. I had no part 
in it. Probably because they guessed I was busy leafing 
through my Superman comics, which Dr. Escudero 
had passed on to me. To someone in the know, the 
case is quite clear. The hardware lady, who’s easily 
upset, was about to accuse one of the gang of stealing 
a funnel and some corks. The boys resented it and 
decided to take it out on the person of the cat. 
Limardo became the fly in the ointment. He took the 
half-painted cat away from them and at the risk of a 
fractured skull and the intervention of the SPCA,


threw the animal into the back of the hardware store. 
Mr. Parodi, don’t remind me what they did to the 
yokel. The boys jumped him. They laid him on the 
floor, one sat on his stomach, another stepped on his 
face, the third made him gargle paint. I would gladly 
have contributed an additional wallop, but I swear I 
was scared the yokel might recognize me in spite of 
being dazed from the thrashing he got. Besides, you 
have to admit that the gang are very touchy, and if I 
butted in I might have got walloped myself. Then 
Renovales appeared, and everyone took off. Two of 
them managed to reach the pantry. Another tried to 
imitate my example and vanish into the chicken coop, 
but Renovales’ heavy hand gave him a warning. When 
I saw this fatherly reaction I wanted to applaud, but on 
second thought I only chuckled. The yokel picked 
himself up. He looked like hell, but he got what he 
deserved. With his own hand, Mr. Zarlenga brought 
him an eggnog and made him drink it right down, 
saying encouragingly, ‘Come on, now. Take it like a 
man.’
“Please, Mr. Parodi, don’t get the wrong idea about 
life in the hotel from the incident with the cat. We have 
our good times too, and if there are fights that are 
bitter at the time, later I can look back on them philo- 
sophically and laugh at the fun I’ve had. For example, 
let me tell you the story of the blue-penciled circular. 
There are cops who don’t miss a trick, but despite 
their brains and cunning they can bore you to death. 
Yet for picking up fresh news, juicy news, nobody 
holds a candle to me. One Tuesday, I cut out a few 
paper hearts, because a little bird told me that Jose- 
phine Mamberto, the draper’s niece, was going out 
with Fineberg in order to get back the coupon under- 
shirt. To let even the Impartial’s flies in on the news,


I wrote on each heart a witty note—of course, in a 
disguised hand—which said, ‘Flash! Who’s marrying 
 J.M. every second day? Answer: A boarder in an un- 
dershirt.’ I personally saw to the distribution of this 
 joke. When nobody was looking, I slipped it under all 
the doors, even the toilets. I’m telling you, that day I 
had about as much appetite for food as for kissing my 
own elbow. But I was itching to see how the joke had 
gone down, and, feeling obliged to confront the usual 
Tuesday meal of leftovers, I went to the dining room 
early. There I sat on my bit of the bench, large as life, 
in my undershirt, banging my spoon on the table to 
hurry things up. Just then the cook appeared, and I 
pretended to be absorbed in reading one of the hearts. 
You should have seen him move! Before I could get 
under the table he’d lifted me up with his right hand 
and with his left squashed my little hearts against my 
nose, wrinkling them all up. Don’t blame him for 
being burned up, Mr. Parodi. It was my fault. After 
having distributed that joke, there I was in an under- 
shirt, making matters worse.
“On the sixth of May, at some hour or other, a face 
chewing on a local cigar appeared a few inches from 
Zarlenga’s inkwell, the one with the statue of Napo- 
leon on it. Zarlenga, who can pull the wool over any 
customer’s eyes, was trying to convince an honest beg- 
gar of the hotel’s respectability. This man was the 
leading light of the Society for Distressed Gentlefolk, 
and even the Unzué Asylum would have been proud 
to have him at one of their open days. In an effort to 
lure the bearded man into taking room and board, 
Zarlenga had offered him the gasper. This character in 
sackcloth, who was nobody’s fool, plucked it from the 
air and lit it at once, just like a pope. No sooner had 
this selfish Smokaloni taken a trial puff when the con-


traption exploded, adding a new sooty smudge to his 
already grubby face. What a sorry sight he was. We all 
held our sides with laughter. After this hilarity, the 
man in the sack fled, depriving the cash register of a 
considerable sum. Zarlenga went into a rage and asked 
who was the joker who planted the cigar. My motto is 
never get mixed up with temperamental types. Nip- 
ping back to my room, I almost crashed headlong into 
the yokel, who stood there with his eyes popping out 
like he was in a trance. He must have been so scared 
he ran the wrong way, because he dived straight into 
the wolf’s mouth, that is to say into Zarlenga’s office. 
He burst in without knocking, which is always a bad 
thing, and, facing Zarlenga, said, ‘I’m responsible for 
the joke cigar. I just felt like it.’
“Vanity is Limardo’s downfall, I thought to myself. 
What was the point of doing that? Why didn’t he let 
someone else take the blame? A guy with his head 
screwed on never gives himself away. If you’d only 
seen what Zarlenga did. He shrugged his shoulders 
and spat on the floor just as if he weren’t in his own 
house. His anger suddenly vanished, and he seemed 
to drift into a daydream. I think he eased up afraid that 
if he gave Limardo what he deserved a few of us would 
have slipped out that very night, taking advantage of 
the deep sleep that follows heavy exercise. Limardo 
stood there looking like a loaf that nobody wants to 
buy, and the boss won a moral victory that made us all 
proud. Ipso facto I smelled a rat. The joke wasn’t the 
yokel’s doing, because everybody had seen Fineberg’s 
sister going out with one of the owners of the Joke 
Shop at the corner of Pueyrredon and Valentín 
Gómez.
“It pains me to tell you something that I know will 
touch you to the core, Mr. Parodi, but on the day after


the explosion a crisis shattered our peace and worried 
even those of us who never take anything seriously. 
It’s easy to talk about it, but you really needed to have 
been there. Zarlenga and Juana Musante had a fight. 
I can’t imagine what could possibly have started such 
a fracas in the New Impartial. Ever since the time that 
half-pint Turk, armed with a blunted pair of scissors 
and whooping like an Indian, did in Tigre Bengolea 
 just before the soup course, any disturbance, any ar- 
gument, is officially prohibited by the management. 
That’s why nobody hesitates to give the cook a hand 
when he’s pounding reason into a hooligan. But the 
example must come from above. If the top brass en- 
gage in lawlessness, what will become of the rest of us, 
the mass of boardinghouse lodgers? I can tell you that 
I’ve lived through bitter moments, with my spirits sag- 
ging, without moral guidance. You can say what you 
like about me, but when the chips are down you can’t 
say I’m defeatist. Why sow panic? My lips were sealed. 
Every few minutes, on some pretext or other, I 
marched up and down the corridor that led to the 
office where Zarlenga and Musante were going at it 
hot and heavy without once indulging in good old 
straightforward insult. And then I’d rush up to the 
garret, announcing with a superior air, ‘Gossip! Gos- 
sip!’ Deep in their game of rummy, these elitists paid 
no attention to me. But a persistent dog gets his bone. 
Limardo, who was picking the dirt out of Big Jackoff’s 
comb with his fingernail, was forced to listen. Before 
I could finish, he got up as if it was coffee break and 
disappeared in the direction of the office. I crossed 
myself and tailed him like a shadow. Suddenly he 
turned around and spoke in a voice that demanded 
obedience. ‘Make yourself useful and round up all the 
lodgers at once.’ He didn’t have to tell me twice. I


collected the whole filthy bunch. To a man, we gath- 
ered around, except for the Great Profile, who scam- 
pered off, and later we found out that the toilet chain 
was missing. That living gallery made up a cross-sec- 
tion of society. Rubbing shoulders were the introvert 
and the joker, the ninety-five center and the sixty, the 
con man and Big Jackoff, the beggar and the panhan- 
dler, the nameless pickpocket without portfolio and 
the renowned burglar. Once again the hotel seemed to 
be its old self. It was more a frieze than a picture—the 
people following their shepherd; all of us, in a state of 
utter confusion, convinced that Limardo was our 
leader. When he reached the office, he opened the 
door without bothering to knock. I whispered to my- 
self, ‘Savastano, back to your room.’ The voice of rea- 
son rang out in the wilderness, but I was surrounded 
by a wall of enthusiasts, who prevented my retreat.
“Though half blinded by nerves, I could still make 
out a scene that even a tango singer like Lorusso 
couldn’t have made clearer. Zarlenga was half hidden 
behind Limardo, but I could ogle the buxom Juana 
Musante as much as I liked. She was wearing her red 
bathrobe and bunny-fur slippers with pompoms, and 
I had to prop myself up against one of the ninety-five 
centers. Limardo, ready to burst, held the center of 
the stage. We all more or less understood that the 
Impartial was about to have a change of bosses. We 
could already feel our spines tingling at the blows that 
Limardo was going to deal Zarlenga.
“Instead, Limardo fell back on words, which are no 
use at all in solving a mystery. He spoke with his 
golden tongue, saying things that are still fermenting 
in my brain. At times like this, the speaker usually 
turns out to be a solemn quibbler, but Limardo, dis- 
pensing with all formality, fired a direct salvo in plain


language about disagreement and discord. He said 
that marriage was a unity, and one had to be terribly 
careful not to split it up. He insisted that Juana Mu- 
sante and Zarlenga should kiss in front of everyone so 
that the clientele would know they loved each other.
“You should have seen Zarlenga! Faced with such 
sensible advice, he stood there like a zombie and 
didn’t know what to do. But Musante, who has her 
head screwed on, isn’t the type to swallow such bou- 
quets. She shot up as if he had criticized her cooking. 
The sight of her towering rage was enough to make 
me a candidate for the loony bin. Juana Musante did 
not mince matters. She lashed into the yokel and said 
he should look after his own marriage if he had one, 
and if he poked his snout in her affairs again they’d 
chop it off. To put an end to the argument, Zarlenga 
admitted that Mr. Renovales—who at the time was 
around the corner having a beer—had been right in 
wanting to throw Limardo out. Zarlenga ordered him 
to leave on the spot, without considering that it was 
already after eight. Limardo, the poor fool, had to 
pack his suitcase and paper bag in a hurry, but his 
hands were so shaky that Simon Fineberg offered to 
help him. In the turmoil, the yokel lost a bone-handled 
 jackknife and a flannel undershirt. The yokel’s eyes 
filled with tears as he looked around for the last time 
at the place that had given him a roof. He nodded 
goodbye and disappeared into the night, destination 
unknown.
“Early the next morning, Limardo woke me, bring- 
ing a cup of maté that I greedily sipped without asking 
any questions about how he’d come back. That maté 
still burns my tongue. You may say that Limardo was 
behaving like an anarchist when he disobeyed the 
landlord. But it’s tough being deprived of a place


that’s become second nature to you after you’ve been 
through so much to get it.
“My hasty guzzling of the maté made me feel guilty, 
so I decided to stay in my room, playing sick. A few 
days later, when I ventured out again, one of the jok- 
ers informed me that Zarlenga had tried again to 
chuck Limardo out, but the yokel threw himself to the 
floor and let himself be kicked and beaten, overpower- 
ing Zarlenga by passive resistance. Fineberg never 
confirmed any of this. He selfishly hogs everything so 
as to keep me in the dark about even basic items of 
gossip. But from personal experience I know that 
Limardo was given a folding bed and a small can of 
kerosene in the broom closet under the stairs. The 
advantage was that he was able to hear everything that 
went on in Zarlenga’s room, because there was only a 
thin partition between them. I was the victim of this 
new move. The brooms, after having been counted 
and inventoried, were moved into my room thanks to 
Fineberg’s Machiavellian scheming. He had them 
placed in my half.
“This shows you what Fineberg’s like. He’s obvi- 
ously a fanatic when it comes to brooms. As for the 
peace and quiet of the hotel, first he provokes the 
 jokers and Limardo, then he gets them to bury the 
hatchet. Since the squabble over the red paint and the 
cat had long been forgotten, Fineberg had to refresh 
the memory of the warring parties, goading them on 
with insults and abuse. When there was nothing left 
for them but to throw their boots at each other or else 
kick each other with them on, Fineberg managed to 
turn their attention to the subject of medicinal wines. 
I must confess he knows a lot about them, because 
only a few days before Dr. Pertiné slipped him a pros- 
pectus with an order blank for bottles and half-bottles


of Apache, ‘a great health wine,’ so the label says, 
‘authorized by Dr. Pertiné.’ I’ve always said that alco- 
hol’s a great pacifier, although when used to excess it 
forces the New Impartial’s management to take action. 
The fact is that by telling them that it was three against 
one and the one carried a gun, Fineberg persuaded 
them that union was strength and that if they wanted 
to drink to it he’d provide the refreshment at a ridicu- 
lously low price. The pinchpenny impulse we all share 
came out. They bought twelve bottles and by the time 
they were bending elbows on the eighth they were 
already the Drunken Quartet. The jokers, who are 
selfishness itself, didn’t notice that I was hovering 
around with a little glass of my own, until the yokel 
pointed out in jest that they ought not to neglect me, 
because I wasn’t the only dog. I took advantage of 
their peals of laughter to take a gulp, although it 
wasn’t much more than a thimbleful, because you have 
to get used to wine, which soon comes to taste like 
honey, and your tongue thickens just as if you’d 
lapped up a pot of syrup. Fineberg, with his fondness 
for pawnbrokers, was also interested in firearms. He 
said they charged Limardo very little for the blunder- 
buss he carried in his belt, and Fineberg offered to get 
him another one just like it even cheaper. If their 
conversation had already become distinctly heated, 
you can imagine the effect when the Great Profile sent 
up this balloon. There were more opinions than you 
could shake a stick at. According to Big Jackoff, buying 
a new gun was a quick way of getting your name in the 
police records. A couple of the jokers argued about 
different shooting ranges. I put in the one about all 
guns being loaded by the devil. Limardo, who was 
completely sozzled, said he’d come with a revolver 
because he was planning to kill someone. Fineberg


told the story of a Jew who didn’t want to buy a gun 
from him, and the next night he and his friends gave 
the man a scare with a chocolate pistol.
“The following day, to show my interest, I sidled up 
to the hotel staff, who often met out in the patio to sip 
a few matés and talk over the day’s plan of action. Even 
the smartest lodger can learn something there, though 
you may have to put up with hearing a few home 
truths. And of course you run the risk of being caught 
eavesdropping. If that happens you’re taken apart like 
a Meccano toy. Anyway, there they were, the Holy 
Trinity, as the three jokers call them—Zarlenga, Mu- 
sante, and Renovales. The fact that they didn’t shoo 
me off encouraged me a bit. I ambled in nonchalantly 
and to make sure they wouldn’t throw me right out I 
promised them a plum of gossip. I told them all about 
the reconciliation, and I didn’t leave out the business 
of Limardo’s revolver or Fineberg’s medicinal wine 
either. You should have seen the sour faces. To be on 
the safe side I skedaddled before any gossipmonger 
could say I was telling tales to the management—a 
thing I’d never do.
“I beat a careful retreat, but kept a beady eye on the 
trio’s movements. Pretty soon Zarlenga strode off to 
the broom closet where the yokel slept. Agile as a 
monkey, I scrambled up the stairs and put my ear to 
the step so as not to lose a word of what was being said 
below. Zarlenga demanded that the yokel turn in the 
revolver. Limardo flatly refused. Zarlenga threatened 
to do something to him which I’d rather spare you 
from hearing, Mr. Parodi. With a sort of calm pride, 
Limardo said that threats couldn’t hurt him, because 
he was as invulnerable as if he were wearing a bullet- 
proof vest, and it would take more than one Zarlenga 
to scare him. Inter nos, the vest wasn’t much use to him,


if he had one, because it wasn’t too long before he was 
found dead in my room.”
“How did the argument end?” asked Parodi.
“The way everything ends. Zarlenga wasn’t going to 
waste time on a poor lunatic. He left as he came— 
inconspicuously.
“Now we arrive at the fatal Sunday. I’m sorry to say 
that’s always a dead day at the hotel. As I was bored 
stiff, I decided to pluck Fineberg from his abysmal 
ignorance and teach him to play truco, so as to save him 
from making a fool of himself in every corner bar. Mr. 
Parodi, as a teacher I’m a natural. The ipso facto proof 
is that my pupil won two pesos off me, of which he 
collected one peso forty in change, and to square the 
debt he asked me to invite him to a matinee at the 
Excelsior. They’re right when they say that Rosie 
Rosenberg is the queen of comedy. The audience 
laughed as if they were being tickled to death, but I 
couldn’t make out a word, because they were talking 
in some sort of Jewish lingo that nobody can under- 
stand, not even another Jew, and I was dying to get 
back to the hotel so that Fineberg could explain the 
 jokes. But it was no joke when I reached my room. 
What a sight my bed was! Both the spread and the 
blanket were one big stain and the pillow was no bet- 
ter. The blood had soaked right through to the mat- 
tress, and I wondered where I was going to sleep that 
night, because the late Tadeo Limardo was stretched 
out on the bed, deader than a salami.
“Naturally my first thought was for the hotel. I 
didn’t want anyone thinking it was me who’d carved 
Limardo up and stained all the bedclothes. It was obvi- 
ous that the corpse was not going to amuse Zarlenga 
at all. And it didn’t, because the cops questioned him 
until way past eleven, which is long after lights-out at


the New Impartial. While I was thinking this over, I 
was screaming at the top of my voice, because I’m like 
Napoleon when it comes to doing two things at once. 
I’m not exaggerating. The whole place came running, 
including the kitchen boy, who stuffed a rag in my 
mouth and almost had another corpse on his hands. 
Fineberg was there, and so was Juana Musante, the 
 jokers, the cook, Big Jackoff, and finally Mr. Reno- 
vales. We all spent the next day at the police station. 
I was in my element, answering everything they threw 
at me and giving such a fantastic performance that 
they were all thunderstruck. I didn’t forget a single 
clue. I produced Exhibit A, the fact that Limardo had 
been snuffed out with his own bone-handled jackknife 
at around five o’clock in the afternoon.
“Look, all these people who think this case is a mys- 
tery don’t know what they’re talking about, because it 
would have been far more mysterious if the crime had 
taken place at night, when the hotel’s full of strangers 
that I would hardly call residents, since they only pay 
for the use of a bed and an hour later disappear.
“Except for Fineberg and me, almost everyone was 
in the hotel when the murder took place. We only 
found out later that at the crucial moment Zarlenga 
wasn’t there. He’d been out in Saavedra, at a 
cockfight, where he was fighting Father Argañaraz’s 
white cock.”
II
A week later, an excited and happy Tulio Savastano 
burst into the cell. “I’ve done your little errand, sir,” 
he babbled out. “Here’s my boss!”


Savastano was followed by an asthmatic man, clean- 
shaven, with blue eyes and a thick mop of gray hair. 
His clothes were neat and dark. He wore a vicuña 
shawl, and Parodi noticed that his fingernails were 
polished. The two gentlemen sat at their ease on the 
pair of stools. Almost falling all over himself with ser- 
vility, Savastano paced up and down and up and down 
the small cell.
“Room Number , this fellow here, gave me your 
message,” said the gray-haired man. “Look, if it’s to 
talk about this Limardo business it has nothing to do 
with me. I’m sick of the whole thing. At the hotel 
nobody talks about anything else. If you know any- 
thing about it, sir, you’d better get in touch with young 
Pagola, who’s in charge of the case. I’m sure he’ll be 
very grateful, because the police are running around 
in circles like chickens with their heads off.”
“Who do you take me for, don Zarlenga?” said 
Parodi. “I steer clear of that Mafia. Of course, I have 
a few insights, which, if you’ll do me the honor of 
listening to, you may not regret.
“If you don’t mind, let’s start with Limardo. This 
young man here, Savastano, who’s as bright as they 
come, took him for a spy sent by Señora Juana Mu- 
sante’s husband. With all due respect, why drag a spy 
into the story?* Limardo was an employee of the Ban- 
deraló post office. In fact, he was the lady’s husband. 
You’re not going to deny this, are you?
“Look, I’m going to tell you the whole story as I see 
it. You ran off with Limardo’s wife and left him eating 
his heart out back in Banderaló. Three years later, the
*Entia non sunt multiplicanda praeter necessitate—Entities are not to be 
multiplied without necessity. [Footnote submitted by Dr. William Ock- 
ham.]


man couldn’t stand it any longer and decided to come 
to Buenos Aires. Somehow or other he made the jour- 
ney; all we know is that he arrived in a state of exhaus- 
tion during carnival. He’d put all his money and health 
into hock to make a desperate pilgrimage, and, what’s 
worse, all he got for his trouble was to be shut away 
for ten days before he could see the woman for whom 
he had beggared himself so far away. Those ten days 
at ninety cents each used up all his money.
“Partly out of bravado, partly out of pity, you spread 
it around that Limardo was quite a man. You even 
went as far as making him out to be a tough guy. Later, 
when you saw him come into your hotel, without a 
peso to his name, you went out of your way to be kind 
to him, adding insult to injury. This is where the coun- 
terpoint began. You were busy humiliating him; he, 
humiliating himself. You relegated him to a sixty-cent 
room in the garret, and on top of that made him look 
after the books. Nothing was too much for him, so 
after a few days he was mending the roof and even 
cleaning your trousers. The first time she clapped eyes 
on him, his wife told him to get out.
“Renovales agreed, fed up with the man’s behavior 
and with your treatment of him. Limardo stayed on in 
the hotel and sought new humiliations. One day, a few 
 jobless wonders were painting a cat. Limardo inter- 
fered, not out of compassion but because he was look- 
ing for a beating. They beat him up all right, and on 
top of it you made him swallow an eggnog and more 
than one insult. Then we come to the cigar. The Jew’s 
 joke cost your hotel the custom of a genuine beggar. 
Limardo took the blame, but this time you didn’t pun- 
ish him, because you were beginning to suspect that 
he might be up to something very ugly with all his 
self-humiliation. But up until then it had only been a


matter of blows and insults. Limardo was out for 
something closer to home. When you and your wife 
were fighting, the man collected an audience and 
asked you to make up and kiss in front of everyone. 
 Just imagine what that meant—a husband gathering 
onlookers to ask his wife and her paramour to love 
each other again. You threw him out. The next day he 
was back, serving maté to the most pathetic creep in 
the hotel. Then came passive resistance, which is just 
a way of getting yourself kicked. To wear him down, 
you allotted him that mousehole next to your room, 
where he could hear every word you two whispered to 
each other.
“Later on, Limardo let the Jew make peace between 
him and the jokers. He went along with this, since his 
plan was to be humiliated by everyone. He even in- 
sulted himself, placing himself on the same level as 
this gent here. He called himself a dog. That evening 
drink loosened his tongue, and he said he’d brought 
a revolver with him to kill someone. A certain gossip- 
monger relayed this tale to the hotel management. 
You wanted to throw Limardo out again, but he stood 
up to you and told you he was invulnerable. You didn’t 
quite understand what he was talking about, but you 
got scared. Now we come to the tricky bit.”
Savastano squatted down to hear better. Parodi 
looked at him distractedly and asked him politely to 
leave, for perhaps it might be unwise for him to hear 
the rest. Dumbfounded, Savastano could hardly get to 
the door fast enough.
Parodi went on unhurriedly. “A few days earlier, 
this young man who’s just favored us with his absence, 
had discovered some sort of involvement between 
Fineberg and a Miss Josephine Mamberto of the drap- 
ery shop. He wrote a bit of nonsense on some little 
paper hearts, and instead of names he used initials.


Your lady wife, who saw those hearts, took J.M. to be 
 Juana Musante. She made your cook beat Savastano 
up, and on top of that she held a grudge against him. 
She too had suspected there was something behind 
Limardo’s self-humiliation. When she learned he had 
a revolver and intended to kill someone, she knew she 
wasn’t threatened. Her fear was for you. She knew 
Limardo was a coward. She figured he was piling igno- 
miny upon ignominy so as to put himself in an impos- 
sible situation where he would have to kill. The lady 
was right. The man was determined to kill. But not you 
—somebody else.
“Sunday was a dead day in the hotel, as your com- 
panion said. You had gone out. You were in Saavedra 
with Father Argañaraz’s fighting cock. Limardo made 
his way into your room with the revolver in his hand. 
Mrs. Musante, who saw him, thought he’d come to kill 
you. She loathed him so much that she had no qualms 
about stealing his knife when he was thrown out. Now 
she used that knife to kill him. Limardo, even with the 
gun in his hand, offered no resistance. Juana Musante 
put the body on Savastano’s cot to get back at him for 
the tale of the hearts. As you may remember, Savas- 
tano and Fineberg were at the movies.
“In the end, Limardo got what he wanted. It was 
true that he had brought a gun to kill someone, but 
that someone was himself. He had come a long way. 
For months and months, he had begged for abuse and 
insult in order to strengthen his nerve to kill himself, 
because death was what he longed for. I also think that 
before he died he wanted to see his wife.”
Pujato,
September , 


Tai An’s Long Search
To the memory of Ernest Bramah
I
That’s all I needed, thought Isidro Parodi, almost out 
loud. A four-eyed Japanese!
Without relinquishing his straw hat and umbrella, 
Dr. Shu T’ung, accustomed to the ways of the great 
embassies, kissed the hand of the inmate of cell .
“Will you permit the body of a foreigner to abuse 
this honorable stool?” he asked with a voice like a bird 
in perfect Spanish. “The quadruped is wooden and 
has no objection. My humble name is Shu T’ung and, 
in the face of universal opprobrium, I hold the office 
of cultural attaché at the Chinese Embassy, an un- 
worthy and unwholesome hovel. My shapeless narra- 
tive has already grated each of Dr. Montenegro’s most 
wise ears. This phoenix of criminal investigation is as 
unfailing as the tortoise, but he is also as majestic and 
ponderous as an astronomical observatory won- 
drously buried by the sands of the barren desert. It is 
true to say that in order to catch a grain of rice nine 
fingers on each hand are not a superfluous endow- 
ment. I, who by the tacit agreement of barbers and 
hatters have but one head, aspire to crown myself with


two heads renowned for their shrewdness—Dr. Mon- 
tenegro’s, which is considerable, and yours, which is 
the size of a porpoise. With all his palaces and librar- 
ies, even the Yellow Emperor was forced to admit that 
a bream plucked from the ocean is unlikely to enjoy 
old age and the veneration of its grandchildren. Far 
from being an old bream, I am scarcely a young man. 
What am I to do now that the abyss is opening like a 
succulent oyster to devour me? And yet this is not 
merely about my wretched self. The extraordinary Ma- 
dame Hsin, owing to the pillars of the law—whose 
tireless vigilance causes her despair and inconve- 
nience—has been dosing herself with veronal night 
after night. The police seem not to have taken into 
consideration that her protector has been murdered in 
very disquieting circumstances, and that she, now a 
helpless orphan, has been left in charge of the Bewil- 
dered Dragon, a flourishing dance hall located near 
the waterfront, at the corner of Leandro Alem and 
Tucumán Street. Ah, the stoical and many-faceted Ma- 
dame Hsin! While her right eye weeps for the loss of 
a friend, her left eye must laugh to excite the sailors.
“Ah, your poor ears! To expect eloquence and in- 
formation from my mouth is to expect the caterpillar 
to speak with the composure of the dromedary or even 
with the range of crickets in a cage wrought of card- 
board and painted in the twelve prescribed colors. I 
am not the extraordinary Meng-tse who, in foretelling 
the appearance of the new moon before the College 
of Astronomy, spoke for twenty-nine years at a stretch, 
until his children were obliged to take over. It cannot 
be denied that I don’t have the same amount of time 
at my disposal, nor am I a Meng-tse, nor is the number 
of your many and praiseworthy ears greater than that 
of the busy ants who tunnel the earth. I am no orator.


My speech will be as short as if delivered by a dwarf. 
I have no five-stringed instrument. My speech will be 
both inaccurate and tedious.
“You may submit me to the most refined instru- 
ments of torture hoarded in this many-faceted palace 
should I again reveal to your well-stocked memory the 
secret rites of the cult of the Demon of the Terrible 
Awakening. This, as you were just about to say, is a 
magical deistic sect, which recruits disciples from the 
guild of beggars and actors and which only a sinologist 
like you, a European surrounded by the tinkle of tea- 
cups, knows like your own back.
“Nineteen years ago there took place the dastardly 
deed which weakened the legs of the world and echoes 
of which reached this horrified city. My tongue, which 
is clumsier than a brick, has remembered the theft of 
the goddess’s talisman. In the middle of Yunnan is a 
secret lake; in the middle of this lake, an island; in the 
middle of the island, a sanctuary. In the sanctuary the 
statue of the goddess stands in its splendor; in the
 
 
statue’s halo glows the talisman. To describe this jewel 
in a rectangular room is unwise. I shall say only that 
it is of jade, that it casts no shadow, that its exact size 
is that of a walnut, and that its essential powers are 
wisdom and magic. Minds perverted by the missionar- 
ies pretend to deny the existence of these powers, but 
should any mortal seize the talisman and hold it out- 
side the temple for twenty years he will become the 
secret king of the world. Yet this is idle speculation. 
From the earliest dawn of time until the last sunset, 
the jewel will remain in the sanctuary, even if for the 
past eighteen years—the fleeting present—a thief has 
kept it hidden.
“The head priest entrusted the magician Tai An 
with the restoration of the jewel. As everyone knows,


he sought a favorable conjunction of the planets, un- 
dertook the necessary procedures, and put his ear to 
the ground. He heard distinctly the footsteps of every 
man on earth, and at once recognized those of the 
thief. These distant footsteps wandered the length 
and breadth of a remote city—a city of mud and para- 
dise trees, without wooden pillows or porcelain tow- 
ers, surrounded by wastes of grass and dark water. 
The city was hidden in the West beyond many sunsets. 
In order to reach it, Tai An faced the risks of a steam- 
ship propelled by smoke. He disembarked in Sema- 
rang after twenty-three days in the bowels of a Danish 
ship with a herd of pigs and no food or drink other 
than an inexhaustible succession of Dutch cheeses. In 
Capetown, he joined the honorable guild of garbage 
collectors, and he played his part in the Fetid Week 
strike. A year later, an ignorant mob clamored in the 
streets and alleyways of Montevideo for the meager 
cornstarch wafers sold by a young man dressed like a 
foreigner. This nutritive young man was Tai An. After 
a bloody struggle with the indifference of these car- 
nivores, the magician moved to Buenos Aires, which 
he guessed would be more receptive to the doctrine of 
the wafers and where he quickly set up a thriving char- 
coal business. This sooty establishment brought him 
to poverty’s long, empty table. Weary of these feasts 
of hunger, Tai An said to himself, ‘For the demanding 
palate, an edible dog; for a man, the Celestial Empire.’ 
And he rushed into business with Samuel Nemirovsky, 
a highly regarded cabinetmaker who, at the very cen- 
ter of the Once Square, fashions all the wardrobes and 
screens which his admiring customers ‘receive direct 
from Peking.’ The humble shop prospered. Tai An 
moved from a coalshed to a furnished apartment, 
located exactly at  Deán Funes Street. The steady


production of screens and wardrobes did not distract 
him from his main aim—the recovery of the jewel. He 
knew for sure that the thief was in Buenos Aires, the 
remote city that the magical circles and triangles had 
revealed to him from the island of the temple.
“The athlete of literacy leafs through newspapers in 
order to keep fit. Less far-ranging and felicitous, Tai 
An restricted himself to the shipping columns, fearing 
that the thief might escape or that a ship might bring 
an accomplice to whom the talisman would be passed 
on. Tai An was getting as close to the thief as the rings 
around a stone when it is first thrown into water. Sev- 
eral times he changed his name and quarters. Magic, 
like the other exact sciences, is little more than the 
firefly that guides our vain stumbling in the vast night. 
Tai An’s calculations marked the general area where 
the thief was hiding, but gave no clue as to his house 
or his identity. Nonetheless, the magician persisted in 
his tireless aim.”
“Neither does the veteran of the Salon Doré tire, 
and he too persists,” Gervasio Montenegro exclaimed 
with an air of spontaneity. He had been spying on all 
fours, an eye at the keyhole and his whalebone cane 
between his teeth. Now, he erupted into the cell wear- 
ing a spotless white suit and a straw boater. “De la 
mesure avant toute chose. I’m not exaggerating. I have 
not yet discovered the murderer’s address, but I have 
found the address of this timid client. Cheer him up, 
my dear Parodi, cheer him up. With all the authority 
that I am the first to grant you, tell him how this 
self-made detective called Gervasio Montenegro 
saved a princess’s jewel on an express train and later 
offered her his hand. But let us direct our powerful 
spotlights on the all-devouring future. Messieurs, faites


vos jeux. I’ll lay two to one that our diplomatic friend 
is not here just for the pleasure—praiseworthy, of 
course—of paying his respects. My now proverbial in- 
tuition whispers to me that Dr. T’ung’s presence is not 
unconnected with the strange murder on Deán Funes 
Street. Ha, ha, ha! I’ve hit the bull’s-eye. But I must 
not rest on my laurels. Here comes my second salvo; 
I already see the success of my first one. I’ll wager that 
the doctor has spiced up his story with Oriental mys- 
tery, which is the hallmark both of his interesting 
monosyllables and his color and appearance. Far be it 
from me to censure him with biblical language, full of 
sermons and parables. I suspect, however, that you 
would rather listen to my compte rendu—all nerve, mus- 
cle, and bone—than to my client’s ponderous meta- 
phors.”
Once again Dr. Shu T’ung spoke up in his humble 
way. “Your voluble colleague speaks with the elo- 
quence of an orator who displays a double row of 
golden teeth. Let me pick up the evil thread of my 
story and state modestly that just as the sun sees every- 
thing while its own brilliance is invisible, Tai An, loyal 
and tenacious, persisted in his implacable search. He 
studied the comings and goings of everyone in the 
Chinese community, while remaining almost unknown 
to them all. Woe unto the weakness of man! Not even 
the tortoise is perfect, meditating under its shell 
dome. The magician’s secrecy had one flaw. On a win- 
ter’s night in , under the arcades of the Once 
Square, he saw a circle of tramps and beggars laughing 
at a poor wretch who was lying on the stone pavement, 
suffering hunger and cold. Tai An’s pity was doubled 
when he found that the object of their contempt was 
Chinese. The golden man can lend even a tea leaf


without losing face. Tai An took home the stranger, 
whose descriptive name is Fang She, and put him up 
in Nemirovsky’s cabinetmaker’s shop.
“I can give neither a very refined nor a pleasant- 
sounding account of Fang She. If the most lettered of 
the daily newspapers is not mistaken, he is a native of 
Yunnan, and he reached this city in —one year 
before the magician. Several times he received me on 
Deán Funes Street, always displaying his inherent 
courtesy. Together we practiced the art of calligraphy 
in the shade of a weeping willow tree that grows in the 
patio. Its delicacy reminded him, he once told me, of 
the thick forests that adorn the banks of the rippling 
Ling-Kiang.”
“Why don’t you shut up about calligraphy and 
adornment,” remarked the detective, “and tell me 
about the people in the house.”
“A good actor never comes on stage before the 
theater is built,” replied Shu T’ung. “Firstly, I shall 
make a feeble attempt to describe the house. Then I 
shall fail dismally to sketch a portrait of its inhabi- 
tants.”
“Allow me a word of encouragement,” said Mon- 
tenegro impetuously. “The building on Deán Funes 
Street is an interesting masure, dating from the turn of 
the century—one of the many examples of our vernac- 
ular architecture, in which the naïve contribution of 
the Italian bricklayer holds its own almost untouched 
by Le Corbusier’s stark Latin principles. I recall it 
precisely. You can already see the place. On today’s 
façade, yesterday’s pale blue has become white and 
aseptic. Within, the quiet patio of our childhood— 
where we once saw the black slave girl bustling about 
with the silver maté cup—endures the tide of prog- 
ress, which floods it with exotic dragons and thou-


sand-year-old lacquers, offspring of the industrialized 
Nemirovsky’s phony brush! At the rear stands the 
wooden shed where Fang She lives. Beside it is the 
green melancholy of the willow tree, which with its 
leafy hand caresses the exile’s homesickness. A heavy 
wire pig fence, five feet high, separates our property 
from an empty lot—one of those picturesque baldíos, 
to use the inimitable Argentine word, which still exist 
unvanquished in the heart of the city and where the 
alley cat sometimes comes in search of medicinal 
grasses to ease his pain, the pain of a rooftop céliba- 
taire. The ground floor is dedicated to the salesroom 
and the atelier.* The upper floor—I mean, cela va sans 
dire, before the fire—served as the hearth and home, 
the inviolable chez lui of Fang She, that particle of the 
Far East transplanted to the Argentine capital com- 
plete with all his native character and failings.”
“In the tutor’s shoe the pupil puts his foot,” said Dr. 
Shu T’ung. “Following the nightingale’s victory, the 
ears hear and pardon the quacking of the duck. Dr. 
Montenegro has constructed the house. My thick, un- 
qualified tongue will sketch the people in it. I reserve 
the highest throne for Madame Hsin.”
“It’s my lead,” said Montenegro just then. “Don’t 
make a mistake that you’ll regret, my dear Parodi. 
Don’t dream of confusing Madame Hsin with those 
poules de luxe that you must have endured and adored 
in the great hotels of the Riviera, where they display 
their frivolous affluence with an ugly Pekinese and a 
spotless forty-horsepower motorcar. Madame Hsin is 
quite another matter. In her we have the formidable
*Not at all. We—contemporaries of the machine gun and biceps— 
repudiate this delicate rhetoric. I should say, with the finality of a bullet, 
“I put salesroom and atelier on the ground floor. I lock the Chinamen 
upstairs.” [Footnote written in the hand of Carlos Anglada.]


combination of a great society woman and an Oriental 
tigress. With her slanted eyes, she winks at us, this 
eternal Venus, this temptress. Her mouth is a single 
crimson flower. Her hands are silk and ivory. Her 
figure, set off by a Victorian cambrure, is a coquettish 
vanguard of the yellow peril, and already it has taken 
over Paquin’s canvasses and Schiaparelli’s sketches. 
But a thousand pardons, my dear confrere. The poet 
has outrun the historian in me. To pencil Madame 
Hsin’s portrait I have resorted to pastels. For a like- 
ness of Tai An I shall turn to the virility of the etching. 
No prejudice, however ingrained, will distort my vi- 
sion. I shall stick to the photographic documentation 
of the latest editions of the newspapers. Besides, the 
race obliterates the individual. We murmur ‘China- 
man’ and persist in our feverish pursuit of a yellow 
phantom, perhaps unaware of the banal or grotesque 
but invincibly human tragedy of this exotic character. 
Let this same portrait stand for Fang She, whose ap- 
pearance I still remember perfectly, who has always 
been receptive to my fatherly advice, whose hands 
have shaken my kid glove. Now comes a contrast—in 
the fourth portrait in my gallery we glimpse a dis- 
tinctly Oriental character. I have neither summoned 
him nor told him to stay away. He is the foreigner, the 
 Jew, who lurks in the dark background of my story 
and, so long as wise legislation does not strike him 
down, will go on lurking at the carrefours of history. In 
this case, our guest is called Samuel Nemirovsky. Let 
me spare you even the slightest detail concerning this 
extremely vulgar cabinetmaker: his serene, clear brow; 
the sad dignity in his eyes; his black prophet’s beard; 
and his height the same as mine.”
“Daily commerce in elephants makes even the most 
discriminating eye insensitive to the ridiculous fly,”


Dr. Shu T’ung suddenly remarked. “I note with 
squeals of pleasure that my own unworthy portrait 
does not clutter Mr. Montenegro’s gallery. Still, if the 
voice of a crab means anything, I too have demeaned 
the house on Deán Funes Street with my presence, 
although my own imperceptible dwelling place hides 
from men and gods alike at the corner of Rivadavia 
and Jujuy. One of my pastimes is the door-to-door sale 
of mantelpieces, screens, beds, and sideboards, which 
the prolific Nemirovsky is forever churning out. The 
charity of this artisan allows me to keep and use the 
furniture until it is sold. Just now I sleep inside a 
would-be Sung Dynasty vase, since an overstock of 
double beds has displaced me from my bedroom and 
a single folding throne denies me my dining room.
“I have dared include myself in the honorable circle 
of Deán Funes Street, since Madame Hsin indirectly 
encouraged me to ignore the justified curses of the 
others and from time to time to step across her thresh- 
old. This incomprehensible indulgence did not obtain 
the unconditional support of Tai An, who night and 
day was Madame Hsin’s tutor, her master in magic. 
But my ephemeral paradise did not last as long as the 
years of the tortoise or the toad. Loyal to the magi- 
cian’s interests, Madame Hsin devoted herself to 
pleasing Nemirovsky so as to make his happiness com- 
plete and at the same time to make the quantity of 
furniture he produced exceed the permutations of one 
person seated at a number of tables. Fighting off nau- 
sea and boredom, she unselfishly endured the proxim- 
ity of that bearded Western face, although, to make 
her martyrdom more bearable, she preferred seeing 
him in the dark or in the Loria movie house.
“This noble routine linked the furniture factory 
forever to the centipede of commercial prosperity. Re-


nouncing his acquisitive nature, Nemirovsky spent on 
rings and fox furs the banknotes that now made his 
wallet fat as a pig. At the risk of being branded repeti- 
tive by some viperous critic, he piled these gifts on 
Madame Hsin’s fingers and neck.
“Mr. Parodi, before continuing allow me an obvious 
clarification. Only a man whose head has been struck 
off could have imagined that these painful, usually 
evening, activities would come between Tai An and his 
shapely disciple. I admit to my illustrious contradic- 
tors that the lady did not stand rigid as an axiom in the 
magician’s house. When her own face was unable to 
watch over and serve him, since several city blocks lay 
between them, she delegated these tasks to another 
face and a most inferior one—the face I humbly hold 
aloft, the face that now greets you and smiles.* I per- 
formed this delicate mission with genuine servility. So 
as not to bother the magician, I tried to moderate my 
presence; so as not to bore him, I changed costumes. 
Sometimes, hanging from a coathanger, I pretended 
with scant success to be the woolen overcoat that hid 
me. Other times, hastily disguised as a piece of furni- 
ture, I would appear in the corridor on all fours with 
a vase of flowers on my back. Unfortunately, an old 
monkey does not climb a rotten pole. Tai An, a cabi- 
netmaker after all, recognized me only moments be- 
fore unleashing a kick that forced me to impersonate 
other inanimate objects.
“But the Celestial Vault is more envious than the 
man who has just found out that one of his neighbors 
has acquired a sandalwood crutch and another a mar- 
ble eye. Even the moment we observe a single sesame 
seed is not eternal, for so much happiness must come
*In fact, the doctor smiled and gave a greeting. [Author’s note.]


to an end. The seventh of October brought us the 
conflagration that threatened Fang She’s personal 
anatomy, broke up forever our little circle, burned 
down the house imperfectly, and devoured an inesti- 
mable number of wooden lamps. Do not dig in search 
of water, Mr. Parodi; do not dehydrate your honorable 
organism. The fire was put out. Alas, the instructive 
warmth of our circle has also been put out. Madame 
Hsin and Tai An moved by automobile to Cerrito 
Street. Nemirovsky used the insurance money to 
found a fireworks business. Fang She, quiet as an end- 
less succession of identical teapots, remained in the 
wooden shed beside the lone willow tree.
“I did not betray any of the thirty-nine supplemen- 
tary articles of truth when I admitted that the fire had 
been quenched, but only a priceless vessel of water 
could boast of quenching its memory. From early 
dawn, Nemirovsky and the magician were busy making 
fragile bamboo lamps of an indefinite and perhaps 
infinite number. Considering without bias the small- 
ness of my house and the uninterrupted flow of furni- 
ture, I began to think that the artisans’ vigil was point- 
less and that some of these lamps would never be lit. 
My goodness, before the night was out I had to admit 
my error. At eleven-fifteen p.m., all the lamps were 
burning, together with the bin of shavings and a 
wooden grille whose surface was painted green. The 
brave man is not he who treads on a tiger’s tail but he 
who lies in ambush for it in the jungle, waiting for the 
moment preordained from the beginning of the uni- 
verse to spring out in deadly assault. That is what I 
did. I persevered by climbing into the willow, ready as 
a salamander to leap into the fire at the first soft cry 
from Madame Hsin. It is well said that a fish on a roof 
sees better than a pair of eagles on the floor of the sea.


Without claiming to dub myself with the title of fish, 
I saw many distressing sights, but I endured them 
without falling, sustained by the pleasant prospect of 
reporting them scientifically to you. I saw the thirst 
and the hunger of the fire. I saw Nemirovsky, his face 
distorted by horror, trying to appease the fire with 
offerings of sawdust and newsprint. I saw the 
ceremonious Madame Hsin, who was following the 
magician’s every move the way happiness follows 
rockets. Finally I saw the magician, who, after helping 
Nemirovsky, ran to the back shed and saved Fang She, 
whose happiness that night was frustrated on account 
of his hay fever. This rescue is all the more marvelous 
if we list its twenty-eight outstanding details, of which, 
with miserly brevity, I shall give only four.
“(a) The discredited fever which accelerated Fang 
She’s pulse was not sufficiently outstanding to im- 
mobilize him in bed and prevent his elegant flight.
“(b) The colorless person who is now grunting out 
this account was perched in the willow tree, ready to 
flee with Fang She if the conflagration made it advisa- 
ble.
“(c) The total immolation of Fang She would not 
have hurt Tai An, who fed and housed him.
“(d) As in man’s body the tooth does not see, the 
eye not scratch, and the toenail not chew, so in the 
body which by convention we call a nation it is not 
proper that one individual usurp the role of another. 
The emperor does not abuse his position to sweep 
streets. The prisoner does not compete with the vaga- 
bond and wander about all over the place. In rescuing 
Fang She, Tai An usurped the role of the firemen at 
the grave risk of offending them and of being soaked 
by their copious hoses.
“It is well said that after the lawsuit is lost the hang-


man must be paid. After the fire, the dispute began. 
The magician and the cabinetmaker fell out. In im- 
mortal monosyllables General Su Wu has celebrated 
the pleasure of contemplating a bear hunt, but every- 
one knows he was shot in the back by the arrows of his 
own infallible bowmen and then overtaken and de- 
voured by his angry prey. This imperfect analogy also 
fits Madame Hsin, who, like the general, was caught 
between two forces. She tried in vain to reconcile the 
two friends and, like a goddess who watches over the 
ruins of her temple, kept running from Tai An’s 
charred bedroom to Nemirovsky’s now limitless office. 
The Book of Changes notes that to please an angry man 
it is pointless to fire rockets and parade large numbers 
of floats. Madame Hsin’s pleas and coaxings did not 
resolve the incomprehensible dispute; they may even 
have rekindled it. This situation drew on the map of 
Buenos Aires an interesting shape not unlike that of 
a triangle. Tai An and Madame Hsin honored an 
apartment on Cerrito Street with their presence. 
Nemirovsky, with his fireworks business, enjoyed 
bright new horizons at number  Catamarca Street. 
Fang She remained constantly in the shed.
“If the artisan and magician had heeded that trian- 
gle, I should not now be indulging in the undeserved 
pleasure of talking to you two. Unfortunately, Nemi- 
rovsky did not want to let Columbus Day go by without 
paying a visit to his old colleague. When the police 
arrived an ambulance had to be called. The mental 
balance of the opponents was so upset that Nemi- 
rovsky, paying no attention to an interminable nose- 
bleed, intoned didactive verses from the Tao Te 
Ching, while the magician, unmindful of the loss of 
one of his upper canines, cracked an endless series of 
 Jewish jokes.


“Madame Hsin was so grieved over their falling out 
that she frankly banned me from the door of her 
house. The adage says that the beggar expelled from 
the kennel takes up residence in the palace of memory. 
To outwit my loneliness I made a pilgrimage to the 
ruins on Deán Funes Street. Behind the willow the 
afternoon sun went down as in my diligent boyhood. 
Fang She received me with resignation and offered me 
a cup of plain tea, pine nuts, walnuts, and vinegar. The 
ubiquitous and solid figure of Madame Hsin did not 
prevent me from noticing an enormous steamer trunk 
which looked like a venerable ancestor in a state of 
putrefaction. Betrayed by the trunk, Fang She con- 
fessed to me that fourteen years spent in this paradise 
of a country hardly equaled a single minute of the 
most unbearable torture, and that he had already got 
from our consul a rectangular cardboard ticket home 
on the Yellow Fish, which sailed for Shanghai the fol- 
lowing week. The garish dragon of his joy betrayed a 
single defect—the certainty of thwarting Tai An. In 
fact, if to assess the value of a priceless mink coat 
trimmed with sealskin the greatest expert takes into 
account the number of moths that dwell therein, so 
too a man’s loneliness is assessed by the exact number 
of beggars who feed off him. Fang She’s emigration 
would doubtless undermine Tai An’s solid credit. To 
prevent that, Tai An was not beyond resorting to locks 
and watchmen, knots and drugs. Fang She countered 
these arguments with an amiable languor and begged 
me by all my maternal ancestors not to burden Tai An 
with the insignificant news of his departure. As the 
Books of Rites demands, I added the dubious guarantee 
of my paternal lineage, and the two of us embraced 
under the willow, not without a tear or two.


“Minutes later a taxicab deposited me on Cerrito 
Street. Undeterred by the imprecations of the butler, 
who was a mere tool of Madame Hsin and Tai An, I 
took cover in the corner drugstore. In this venal insti- 
tution they attended to my eye and lent me a tele- 
phone. I dialed. As Madame Hsin did not answer, I 
confided to Tai An himself that his protégé proposed 
to flee. My reward was an eloquent silence, which 
lasted until I was thrown out of the pharmacy.
“It is well said that the fleet-footed postman who 
hastens to deliver his mail is more worthy of praise and 
dithyrambs than his colleague who drowses beside a 
fire fueled with the same mail. Tai An reacted quickly 
and efficiently. To nip in the bud his protégé’s escape, 
he hastened to Deán Funes Street as if the stars had 
endowed him with more than one foot and more than 
one oar. At the house, two surprises awaited him. The 
first was to find Fang She out; the second was to find 
Nemirovsky in. Nemirovsky told him that some local 
merchants had seen Fang She load himself and a trunk 
onto a horse-drawn cart and disappear northward at a 
leisurely pace. In vain the two men searched for him. 
Then they took leave of each other, Tai An to go off 
to a furniture auction on Maipú Street and Nemi- 
rovsky to meet me at the Western Bar.”
“Halte lá!” Montenegro ejaculated. “The drunkard 
rides roughshod over the artist. Look at the picture, 
Parodi. The duelists gravely lay down their weapons, 
touched in some common chord by the loss they both 
feel. I emphasize a strange thing. The cause that moti- 
vates them is one and the same, but the characters are 
fiercely dissimilar. Dismal premonitions probably fan 
Tai An’s brow. He seeks, he interrogates, he asks 
questions. I confess that it’s the third character who


intrigues me. This jemenfoutiste who rides away from 
the action of our story in an open car is a fascinating 
mystery.”
“Gentlemen,” continued Dr. Shu T’ung mildly, 
“my laborious narrative has reached the memorable 
night of October fourteenth. I take the liberty of call- 
ing it memorable because my uncivil, old-fashioned 
stomach could not appreciate the double helping of 
mush which was the ornament and only dish of Nemi- 
rovsky’s table. My innocent aim had been: (a) to dine 
at Nemirovsky’s; (b) to go to the Once Cinema and 
 judge three musicals which, according to Nemirovsky, 
had not satisfied Madame Hsin; (c) to savor an anise 
liqueur at La Perla café; (d) to return home. The all 
too vivid and painful evocation of the mush forced me 
to give up items b and c and to subvert the natural 
order of your reputable alphabet, skipping from a to 
d. A secondary result was that I did not leave home all 
night in spite of insomnia.”
“These remarks do you credit,” said Montenegro. 
“Although our childhood’s dishes are, in their way, 
priceless trouvailles of our Argentine heritage, I 
warmly agree with Dr. Shu T’ung. At the pinnacle of 
haute cuisine, the French chef admits no rival.”
“On the fifteenth, two detectives personally awak- 
ened me,” Shu T’ung continued, “and they invited me 
to keep them company to police headquarters. There 
I found out what you two already know. A little before 
daybreak the affectionate Nemirovsky, uneasy about 
Fang She’s sudden mobility, had entered the house on 
Deán Funes Street. It is well said in the Book of Rites 
that if your honorable concubine cohabits in blazing 
summer with persons of low rank, one of your children 
will be a bastard. If you abuse your friends’ palaces 
outside the established hours, an enigmatic smile will


beautify the porters’ faces. Nemirovsky felt in his own 
flesh the sting of this adage. He not only did not find 
Fang She, but instead came upon the magician’s body, 
half buried under the willow tree.”
“Perspective, my worthy Parodi, is the Achilles’ heel 
of all great Oriental painters,” Montenegro suddenly 
pontificated. “Between two blue mouthfuls of smoke, 
I will enhance the album of your mind with a swift 
raccourci of the scene. On Tai An’s shoulder, death’s 
haughty kiss had left the mark of its lipstick—a knife 
wound some four inches wide. Of the guilty weapon, 
not a trace. Someone had vainly attempted to make up 
for this missing clue with the burial spade, the com- 
monest of garden tools, relegated, quite rightly, to a 
position a few yards away. On the rough handle of this 
tool, the police (incapable of any flight of imagination 
and sticklers for detail) have found some of Nemi- 
rovsky’s fingerprints. The savant, the intuitive mind, 
laughs at this cooked-up scientific nonsense. It is the 
role of such a mind to build up, piece by piece, an 
enduring, elegant edifice. Let me slow down. I shall 
hold off until tomorrow the moment for revealing and 
engraving my insights.”
“Always assuming your morrow will dawn,” broke 
in Shu T’ung. “Let me again perpetrate my humble 
story. Tai An’s safe entry into the house on Deán 
Funes Street went unnoticed by the unobservant 
neighbors, who slumbered like a shelf of classics in a 
library. It is thought, however, that he must have come 
in after eleven, because at a quarter to he was seen 
poking about the inexhaustible auction room on 
Maipú Street.”
“I corroborate that fact,” said Montenegro. “Let me 
whisper to you, inter nos, that the Buenos Aires grape- 
vine reported the fleeting appearance of an exotic


character. So here are the positions of the pieces on 
the board. At around eleven p.m., the queen—and I 
refer to Madame Hsin—shows her slanted eyes and 
shapely figure in the midst of the multicolored hubbub 
of the Bewildered Dragon. Between eleven and twelve 
she received at home a client who remains anony- 
mous. Le coeur à des raisons. As to the shifty Fang She, 
the police claim that before eleven o’clock he took 
lodgings in the renowned ‘old drawing room,’ or ‘mil- 
lionaires’ room,’ at the New Impartial Hotel, an unde- 
sirable warren in our slum district, about which nei- 
ther you nor I, my dear confrére, know a thing. On the 
fifteenth of October, he sailed on the Yellow Fish, 
bound for the mystery and glamour of the East. He 
was arrested in Montevideo, and he now vegetates 
inconspicuously here in Moreno Street at the disposal 
of the authorities. ‘And what about Tai An?’ the skep- 
tic might ask. Deaf to the frivolous curiosity of the 
police, hermetically sealed in a typically bright-col- 
ored coffin, he rows and rows in the quiet hold of the 
Yellow Sunset, bound on his eternal voyage for ancient, 
ritualistic China.”
II
Four months later, Fang She came to visit Isidro 
Parodi. He was a tall, flabby man. His face was round, 
empty, and somewhat mysterious. He wore a black 
straw hat and a white trench coat.
“Just in time,” said Parodi.* “If you’ve nothing
*The duelists have crossed swords. The reader can already hear the 
clash of rival steel. [Marginal note by Gervasio Montenegro.]


against it, let me tell you what I know and what I don’t 
know about the Deán Funes Street affair. Your fellow- 
countryman, Dr. Shu T’ung, who isn’t here, gave us a 
long, confused account of it. From what he said I un- 
derstand that in  some blasphemer or other stole 
a relic from a statue of miraculous powers that you 
Chinese worship in your country. The priests were 
horror-struck at the news and sent a missionary to 
punish the heretic and to recover the relic. The doctor 
revealed that Tai An, on his own avowal, was the man 
sent on the mission. But let me stick to the facts, wise 
Merlin would say. The missionary Tai An kept chang- 
ing his name and address. From the newspapers he 
knew about every ship that arrived in Buenos Aires, 
and he kept a watch on every Chinaman who disem- 
barked. A person behaving in this way might be look- 
ing for something, or, equally, trying to hide. You 
reached Buenos Aires first; Tai An came later. Anyone 
would have thought that you were the thief and he the 
pursuer. But Dr. Shu T’ung himself said that Tai An 
had already been in Uruguay for a year trying to sell 
wafers. So, as you see, the first to arrive in South 
America was Tai An.
“Look, let me tell you what I’ve figured out. If I’m 
mistaken, please say, ‘You’re off the track, brother,’ 
and put me right. I take it for granted that Tai An is 
the thief and you the missionary, otherwise the whole 
thing makes no sense.
“For a long time, Fang She, my friend, Tai An had 
been giving you the slip. That’s why he kept changing 
his name and address. In the end, he got tired. He 
thought up a plan that was so bold it was foolproof, 
and he had the determination and the guts to carry it 
out. He started with a daring act. He made you go and 
live in his house. That was where the Chinese lady,


who was his mistress, and the Jewish cabinetmaker 
lived. The lady was after the jewel, too. Every time she 
went out with the Jew, who also had a thing going with 
her, she left the doctor behind as her spy. The fellow 
was so resourceful that when necessary he’d put a 
flowerpot on his behind and become a piece of furni- 
ture in disguise. Spending so much on movie tickets 
and other things left the Jew without a cent. He pulled 
the old, old number and set fire to the furniture shop 
to collect the insurance money. Tai An was in cahoots 
with him. He helped him make the lamps that served 
as kindling for the blaze, and then the doctor, who was 
clinging as tightly to the willow as a salamander, 
caught the two helping the fire along with old newspa- 
pers and sawdust. Now let’s see what everyone did 
during the fire. The lady followed Tai An like a 
shadow, waiting for the moment he’d take the jewel 
from its hiding place. But Tai An wasn’t particularly 
concerned about the jewel. Instead, he saves you. This 
move can be looked at in two ways. One is to think 
you’re the thief and they save you so the secret doesn’t 
die with you. But as I see it, Tai An did what he did 
to stop you from pursuing him—to buy you off mor- 
ally, if I make myself clear.”
“That’s so,” Fang She said simply. “But I did not let 
myself be bought off.”
“The first idea didn’t satisfy me,” Parodi went on. 
“Had you been the thief, who was it who feared you’d 
die with the secret? Besides, if there had been any real 
danger the doctor would have arrived on the scene 
like a telegram, flowerpot and all.
“The next day everyone went off, leaving you be- 
hind lonelier than one glass eye. Tai An pretended to 
fall out with Nemirovsky. I see two reasons for this. 
The first was to make everyone believe that he wasn’t


in cahoots with the Jew and that he deplored the fire. 
The second was to take the lady away, thus parting her 
from the Jew. A short time later, the Jew started taking 
her out again, and then he and Tai An began fighting 
in earnest.
“You were in a tight corner. The talisman might 
have been hidden anywhere. At first glance, one place 
seemed beyond suspicion—the house. There were 
three reasons for disregarding it. One, you were living 
there. Two, that’s where they left you living alone after 
the fire. And three, Tai An had set fire to it himself. 
Still, I expect that Tai An went a bit too far. In your 
shoes, don Pancho, I would have been suspicious of all 
that proof to demonstrate something that didn’t need 
demonstrating.”
Fang She got to his feet and said gravely, “What you 
have said is true, but there are some things you can’t 
possibly know. Let me tell you what they are. After 
everyone left, I was convinced that the talisman was 
hidden in the house. I didn’t look for it. I asked our 
Chinese consul to repatriate me, and I confided the 
news of my journey to Dr. Shu T’ung, who, as one 
might have expected, immediately told Tai An. I left, 
put my trunk aboard the Yellow Fish, and returned to 
the house. I entered through the empty lot out back 
and hid. Sometime later, Nemirovsky arrived. The 
neighbors told him about my departure. Then Tai An 
arrived. Together they pretended to be looking for 
me. Tai An said he had to go to a furniture auction on 
Maipú Street. Each went his own way. Tai An had lied. 
A minute or two later he was back. He went into the 
shed and came out with the spade that I myself had so 
often used in the garden.* There in the moonlight, he
*A bucolic touch. [Original note by José Formento.]


began digging beside the willow. I’m not sure how 
much time passed. He unearthed something shiny, 
and at last I saw the goddess’s talisman. I threw myself 
onto the thief and carried out the necessary punish- 
ment.
“I knew I’d be arrested sooner or later. But I had to 
save the talisman. I hid it in the dead man’s mouth. 
Now the jewel is on its way home, on its way back to 
the shrine of the goddess, where my compatriots will 
find it when they cremate the body. After that I looked 
up the day’s auction sales in a newspaper. There were 
two or three furniture auctions on Maipú Street. I 
looked in on one of them. At five minutes to eleven, 
I was already at the New Impartial Hotel. That’s my 
story. Now you can hand me over to the authorities.”
“Not a chance,” said Parodi. “People nowadays ex- 
pect the government to do everything for them. If 
you’re poor the government has to find you a job. If 
you fall ill the government has to pay your hospital 
bill. Kill someone and instead of paying for it yourself 
you ask the government to punish you. You may say 
that I’m a fine one to talk like this, since the state is 
keeping me. But I still believe, sir, that a man has to 
shift for himself.”
“I too believe that, Mr. Parodi,” Fang She said de- 
liberately. “Many men are dying in the world today in 
defense of that belief.”
Pujato,
October , 


H. Bustos Domecq
We transcribe below a biographical outline by the schoolteacher 
Miss Adelma Badoglio:
Dr. Honorio Bustos Domecq was born in the hamlet 
of Pujato, in the province of Santa Fe, in the year . 
After an interesting primary-school education, he 
moved with his family to the Chicago section of 
Buenos Aires. In , the newspaper columns of Ro- 
sario accepted the early writings of this modest friend 
of the Muses without suspecting his age. The follow- 
ing compositions date from that period: “Vanitas,” 
“The March of Progress,” “Our Homeland, Blue and 
White,” “To Her,” “Nocturnes.” In , he read his 
“Ode to the ‘Elegy on the Death of His Father’ by 
 Jorge Manrique” before a select audience at the Ma- 
 jorcan Club, an achievement which won him noisy but 
ephemeral fame. That same year he published Citizen!, 
a work of sustained imagination marred, unfortu- 
nately, by certain Gallicisms which may be blamed on 
the author’s youth and the shortsightedness of the 
times. In , he wrote Fata Morgana, a slim volume 
of occasional verse whose final stanzas herald the 
lively prose stylist of Let’s Speak Properly! () and 
Among Books and Papers (). During the Labruna


government, he was first appointed Inspector of 
Schools and later Counsel for the Destitute. Away 
from the comforts of home, contact with harsh reality 
provided him with that experience which may be the 
principal source of his work. Among his books, let us 
list these: The Eucharistic Congress, an Argentine Organ for 
the Propagation of the Faith; The Life and Death of Don 
Chicho Grande; Now I Can Read! (by appointment of the 
City of Rosario School Board); The Contribution of Santa 
Fe to the War of Independence; and New Stars: Azorín, Ga- 
briel Miró, Bontempelli. His detective stories reveal a 
new vein in this many-faceted, prolific writer. In them, 
he attempts to combat the cold intellectualism in 
which Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, Ottolenghi, etc., have 
immersed this genre. Tales of Pujato, as the author 
affectionately calls them, are not the filigree of a Byz- 
antine locked in an ivory tower but are the voice of 
a true contemporary, who is sensitive to the human 
pulsebeat and from whose generous pen flows the 
torrent of his truths.


