
Penguin Books
The Book of Imaginary Beings
Jorge Luis Borges was born in Buenos Aires in  
and was educated in Europe. One of the major 
writers of our time, he has published many 
collections of poems, essays, and short stories. In 
, Borges shared the International Publishers’ 
Prize with Samuel Beckett. The Ingram Merrill 
Foundation granted him its Annual Literary Award 
in  for his ‘outstanding contribution to 
literature’. Recently, he was awarded the degree of 
Doctor of Letters, honoris causa, from both 
Columbia and Oxford, and the same year won the 
fifth biennial Jerusalem Prize. Time has called him 
‘the greatest living writer in the Spanish language 
today’, while the New York Herald Tribune has 
described him as ‘unquestionably the most brilliant 
South American writing today’. He is Director of 
the Argentine National Library.
Norman Thomas di Giovanni is an American now 
living in Scotland. He worked with Borges in 
Buenos Aires from  to , and, to date, has 
produced six volumes of Borges’s verse and prose 
in English.


Jorge Luis Borges
with Margarita Guerrero
The Book of Imaginary Beings
Revised, enlarged and translated by 
Norman Thomas di Giovanni 
in collaboration with the author
Penguin Books

Penguin Books Ltd, Harmondsworth,
Middlesex, England
Penguin Books Australia Ltd, Ringwood,
Victoria, Australia
El libro de los seres imaginarios 
First published in Buenos Aires  
Translation published in the U.S.A. 
First published in Great Britain by Jonathan Cape  
Published in Penguin Books 
Copyright © Editorial Kier, S.A., Buenos Aires,  
Translation copyright © Jorge Luis Borges and 
Norman Thomas di Giovanni,  
Assistance for the translation was given by the Center 
for Inter-American Relations
Made and printed in Great Britain by
Cox & Wyman Ltd, London, Reading and Fakenham
Set in Linotype Pilgrim
This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall 
not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, 
hired out, or otherwise circulated without the 
publisher’s prior consent in any form of binding or 
cover other than that in which it is published 
and without a similar condition including this condition 
being imposed on the subsequent purchaser

Grateful acknowledgement is made for permission to 
reprint the following material:
‘An Animal Imagined by Kafka’, reprinted by 
permission of Schocken Books Inc., from Dearest Father 
by Franz Kafka, ©  by Schocken Books Inc.
‘An Animal Imagined by C. S. Lewis’ and ‘A Creature 
Imagined by C. S. Lewis’, reprinted by permission of 
C. S. Lewis, from Perelandra, ©  by C. S. Lewis. 
Published by The Macmillan Company, New York, and 
The Bodley Head, London.
‘A Crossbreed’, reprinted by permission of Shocken 
Books Inc., from Description of a Struggle by Franz 
Kafka, © ,  by Schocken Books Inc.
‘The Odradek’, reprinted by permission of Schocken 
Books Inc., from The Penal Colony by Franz Kafka,
©  by Schocken Books Inc.
The following pieces first appeared in the New Yorker, 
October th, : ‘A Bao A Qu’, ‘The Barometz’, ‘The 
Celestial Stag’, ‘The Chinese Dragon’, ‘The Elves’, ‘Fauna 
of Mirrors’, ‘Haniel, Kafziel, Azriel, and Aniel’, ‘The 
Hundred-Heads’, ‘The Leveler’, ‘The Lunar Hare.’
‘The Nymphs’, ‘The Pygmies’, ‘The Rain Bird’, ‘The Shaggy 
Beast of La Ferté-Bernard’, ‘The Sphinx’, ‘Swedenborg’s 
Angels’, ‘Swedenborg’s Devils’, ‘Thermal Beings’, ‘Two 
Metaphysical Beings’, ‘The Western Dragon’.


Contents
Preface    
Preface to the  edition    
Preface to the  edition    
A Bao A Qu    
Abtu and Anet    
The Amphisbaena    
An Animal Imagined by Kafka    
An Animal Imagined by C. S. Lewis    
The Animal Imagined by Poe    
Animals in the Form of Spheres    
Antelopes with Six Legs    
The Ass with Three Legs    
Bahamut    
Baldanders    
The Banshee    
The Barometz    
The Basilisk    
Behemoth    
The Brownies    
Burak    
The Carbuncle    
The Catoblepas    
The Celestial Stag    
The Centaur    
Cerberus    
The Cheshire Cat and the Kilkenny Cats    
The Chimera    
The Chinese Dragon    
The Chinese Fox    
The Chinese Phoenix    
Chronos or Hercules    

A Creature Imagined by C. S. Lewis     
The Crocotta and the Leucrocotta     
A Crossbreed     
The Double     
The Eastern Dragon     
The Eater of the Dead     
The Eight-Forked Serpent     
The Elephant That Foretold the Birth of the 
Buddha     
The Eloi and the Morlocks     
The Elves    
An Experimental Account of What Was Known, 
Seen, and Met by Mrs. Jane Lead in London 
in      
The Fairies     
Fastitocalon     
Fauna of Chile     
Fauna of China     
Fauna of Mirrors     
Fauna of the United States     
Garuda     
The Gnomes     
The Golem     
The Griffon    
Haniel, Kafziel, Azriel, and Aniel    
Haokah, the Thunder God    
Harpies    
The Heavenly Cock    
The Hippogriff    
Hochigan    
Humbaba    
The Hundred-Heads    
The Hydra of Lerna    
Ichthyocentaurs    
Jewish Demons    
The Jinn    

The Kami    
A King of Fire and His Steed     
The Kraken     
Kujata    
The Lamed Wufniks     
The Lamias     
Laudatores Temporis Acti     
The Lemures     
The Leveller     
Lilith    
The Lunar Hare    
The Mandrake    
The Manticore    
The Mermecolion    
The Minotaur    
The Monkey of the Inkpot    
The Monster Acheron    
The Mother of Tortoises    
The Nagas    
The Nasnas    
The Norns    
The Nymphs    
The Odradek    
An Offspring of Leviathan    
One-Eyed Beings    
The Panther    
The Pelican    
The Peryton    
The Phoenix    
The Pygmies    
The Rain Bird    
The Remora    
The Rukh    
The Salamander    
The Satyrs    
Scylla    

The Sea Horse    
The Shaggy Beast of La Ferté-Bernard     
The Simurgh     
Sirens    
The Sow Harnessed with Chains 
and Other Argentine Fauna     
The Sphinx     
The Squonk     
Swedenborg’s Angels     
Swedenborg’s Devils     
The Sylphs     
Talos     
The T’ao T’ieh     
Thermal Beings     
The Tigers of Annam     
The Trolls     
Two Metaphysical Beings     
The Unicorn     
The Unicorn of China     
The Uroboros     
The Valkyries     
The Western Dragon     
Youwarkee     
The Zaratan     
Index    

Preface
As we all know, there is a kind of lazy pleasure in useless 
and out-of-the-way erudition. The compilation and trans- 
lation of this volume have given us a great deal of such 
pleasure; we hope the reader will share something of the fun 
we felt when ransacking the bookshelves of our friends and 
the mazelike vaults of the Biblioteca Nacional in search of 
old authors and abstruse references. We have done our best 
to trace all our quoted material back to original sources and 
to translate it from the original tongues - medieval Latin, 
French, German, Italian, and Spanish. Lemprière and the 
Loeb and Bohn collections have, as is their wont, proved 
most helpful with the classics. As for our invincible ignor- 
ance of Eastern languages, it enables us to be grateful for the 
labours of such men as Giles, Burton, Lane, Waley, and Scho- 
lem.
The first edition of this book, containing eighty-two 
pieces, was published in Mexico in . It was called then 
Manual de zoología fantástica (Handbook of Fantastic Zo- 
ology). In , a second edition - El libro de los seres im- 
aginarios - was published in Buenos Aires with thirty-four 
additional articles. Now, for this English-language edition, 
we have altered a good number of the original articles, cor- 
recting, adding, or revising material, and we have also com- 
piled a few brand-new ones. This latest edition contains  
pieces.
We extend warm thanks for their help to Marian Sked- 
gell, of E. P. Dutton, and to José Edmundo Clemente, As- 
sistant Director of the Argentine National Library.
Buenos Aires,  May  
  j.l.b. n.t. di g.


Preface to the  Edition
The title of this book would justify the inclusion of Prince 
Hamlet, of the point, of the line, of the surface, of n-di- 
mensional hyperplanes and hypervolumes, of all generic 
terms, and perhaps of each one of us and of the godhead. In 
brief, the sum of all things - the universe. We have limited 
ourselves, however, to what is immediately suggested by the 
words ‘imaginary beings’; we have compiled a handbook of 
the strange creatures conceived through time and space by 
the human imagination.
We are ignorant of the meaning of the dragon in the same 
way that we are ignorant of the meaning of the universe, 
but there is something in the dragon’s image that fits man’s 
imagination, and this accounts for the dragon’s appearance 
in different places and periods.
A book of this kind is unavoidably incomplete; each new 
edition forms the basis of future editions, which themselves 
may grow on endlessly.
We invite the eventual reader in Colombia or Paraguay to 
send us the names, accurate description, and most con- 
spicuous traits of their local monsters.
As with all miscellanies, as with the inexhaustible 
volumes of Robert Burton, of Frazer, or of Pliny, The Book 
of Imaginary Beings is not meant to be read straight 
through; rather, we should like the reader to dip into these 
pages at random, just as one plays with the shifting patterns 
of a kaleidoscope.
The sources of this collection are manifold; they are re- 
corded in each piece. May we be forgiven any accidental 
omission.
Martínez, September  
j.l.b. m.g.


Preface to the  Edition
A small child is taken to the zoo for the first time. This child 
may be any one of us or, to put it another way, we have 
been this child and have forgotten about it. In these grounds
- these terrible grounds - the child sees living animals he has 
never before glimpsed; he sees jaguars, vultures, bison, and - 
what is still stranger - giraffes. He sees for the first time the 
bewildering variety of the animal kingdom, and this spec- 
tacle, which might alarm or frighten him, he enjoys. He 
enjoys it so much that going to the zoo is one of the 
pleasures of childhood, or is thought to be such. How can we 
explain this everyday and yet mysterious event?
We can, of course, deny it. We can suppose that children 
suddenly rushed off to the zoo will become, in due time, 
neurotic, and the truth is there can hardly be a child who 
has not visited the zoo and there is hardly a grown-up who is 
not a neurotic. It may be stated that all children, by 
definition, are explorers, and that to discover the camel is in 
itself no stranger than to discover a mirror or water or a 
staircase. It can also be stated that the child trusts his 
parents, who take him to this place full of animals. Besides, 
his toy tiger and the pictures of tigers in the encyclopedia 
have somehow taught him to look at the flesh-and-bone tiger 
without fear. Plato (if he were invited to join in this dis- 
cussion) would tell us that the child had already seen the 
tiger in a primal world of archetypes, and that now on 
seeing the tiger he recognizes it. Schopenhauer (even more 
wondrously) would tell us that the child looks at the tigers 
without fear because he is aware that he is the tigers and the 
tigers are him or, more accurately, that both he and the 
tigers are but forms of that single essence, the Will.
Let us pass now from the zoo of reality to the zoo of


mythologies, to the zoo whose denizens are not lions but 
sphinxes and griffons and centaurs. The population of this 
second zoo should exceed by far the population of the first, 
since a monster is no more than a combination of parts of 
real beings, and the possibilities of permutation border on 
the infinite. In the centaur, the horse and man are blended; in 
the Minotaur, the bull and man (Dante imagined it as having 
the face of a man and the body of a bull); and in this way it 
seems we could evolve an endless variety of monsters - com- 
binations of fishes, birds, and reptiles, limited only by our 
own boredom or disgust. This, however, does not happen; 
our monsters would be stillborn, thank God. Flaubert had 
rounded up, in the last pages of his Temptation of Saint 
Anthony, a number of medieval and classical monsters and 
has tried - so say his commentators - to concoct a few new 
ones; his sum total is hardly impressive, and but few of them 
really stir our imaginations. Anyone looking into the pages 
of the present handbook will soon find out that the zoology 
of dreams is far poorer than the zoology of the Maker.
We are as ignorant of the meaning of the dragon as we are 
of the meaning of the universe, but there is something in the 
dragon’s image that appeals to the human imagination, and 
so we find the dragon in quite distinct places and times. It is, so 
to speak, a necessary monster, not an ephemeral or accidental 
one, such as the three-headed chimera or the catoblepas.
Of course, we are fully aware that this book, perhaps the 
first of its kind, does not exhaust the sum total of imaginary 
animals. We have delved into classical and Oriental litera- 
tures, but we feel that our subject goes on for ever.
We have deliberately excluded the many legends of men 
taking the shapes of animals: the lobisón, the werewolf, 
and so on.
We wish to acknowledge the help given us by Leonor 
Guerrero de Coppola, Alberto D’Aversa, and Rafael López 
Pellegri.
Martínez,  January  
j.l.b. m.g.


A Bao A Qu
If you want to look out over the loveliest landscape in the 
world, you must climb to the top of the Tower of Victory in 
Chitor. There, standing on a circular terrace, one has a 
sweep of the whole horizon. A winding stairway gives 
access to this terrace, but only those who do not believe in 
the legend dare climb up. The tale runs:
On the stairway of the Tower of Victory there has lived 
since the beginning of time a being sensitive to the many 
shades of the human soul and known as the A Bao A Qu. It 
lies dormant, for the most part on the first step, until at the 
approach of a person some secret life is touched off in it, and 
deep within the creature an inner light begins to glow. At 
the same time, its body and almost translucent skin begin to 
stir. But only when someone starts up the spiralling stairs is 
the A Bao A Qu brought to consciousness, and then it sticks 
close to the visitor’s heels, keeping to the outside of the turn- 
ing steps, where they are most worn by the generations of 
pilgrims. At each level the creature’s colour becomes more 
intense, its shape approaches perfection, and the bluish form 
it gives off is more brilliant. But it achieves its ultimate form 
only at the topmost step, when the climber is a person who 
has attained Nirvana and whose acts cast no shadows. 
Otherwise, the A Bao A Qu hangs back before reaching the 
top, as if paralysed, its body incomplete, its blue growing 
paler, and its glow hesitant. The creature suffers when it 
cannot come to completion, and its moan is a barely audible 
sound, something like the rustling of silk. Its span of life is 
brief, since as soon as the traveller climbs down, the A Bao A 
Qu wheels and tumbles to the first steps, where, worn out 
and almost shapeless, it waits for the next visitor. People say 
that its tentacles are visible only when it reaches the middle


of the staircase. It is also said that it can see with its whole 
body and that to the touch it is like the skin of a peach.
In the course of centuries, the A Bao A Qu has reached the 
terrace only once.
This legend is recorded by C. C. Iturvuru in an appendix 
to his now classic treatise On Malay Witchcraft ().
Abtu and Anet
As all Egyptians knew, Abtu and Anet were two life-sized 
fishes, identical and holy, that swam on the lookout for 
danger before the prow of the sun god’s ship. Their course 
was endless; by day the craft sailed the sky from east to 
west, from dawn to dusk, and by night made its way under- 
ground in the opposite direction.
The Amphisbaena
The Pharsalia (IX, -) catalogues the real or imaginary 
reptiles that Cato’s soldiers met up with on their scorching 
march across the African desert. Among them are the 
Pareas, ‘content with its tail to cleave its track’ (or as a 
seventeenth-century Spanish poet has it, ‘which makes its 
way, erect as a staff’), and the Jaculi, which darts from trees 
like javelins, and ‘the dangerous Amphisbaena, also, that 
moves on at both of its heads’. Pliny uses nearly the same 
words to describe the Amphisbaena, adding: ‘as though one 
mouth were not enough for the discharge of all its venom’


Brunetto Latini’s Tesoro - the encyclopedia which Latini 
recommended to his old disciple in the seventh circle of Hell
- is less terse and clearer: The Amphisbaena is a serpent 
having two heads, the one in its proper place and the other 
in its tail; and it can bite with both, and run with agility, and 
its eyes glare like candles.’ Sir Thomas Browne in his Vulgar 
Errors () wrote that there is no species without a 
bottom, top, front, back, left, and right, and he denied the 
existence of the Amphisbaena, ‘for the senses being placed at 
both extreams, doth make both ends anterior, which is im- 
possible . . . And therefore this duplicity was ill contrived to 
place one head at both extreams . . .’ Amphisbaena, in Greek 
means ‘goes both ways’. In the Antilles and in certain parts 
of America, the name is given to a reptile commonly known 
as the doble andadora (Both ways goer), the ‘two-headed 
snake’, and ‘mother of ants’. It is said that ants nourish it. 
Also that if it is chopped in half, its two parts will join 
again.
The Amphisbaena’s medicinal properties were celebrated 
by Pliny.
An Animal Imagined by Kafka
It is the animal with the big tail, a tail many yards long 
and like a fox’s brush. How I should like to get my hands 
on this tail some time, but it is impossible, the animal is 
constantly moving about, the tail is constantly being flung 
this way and that. The animal resembles a kangaroo, but 
not as to the face, which is flat almost like a human face, 
and small and oval; only its teeth have any power of ex- 
pression, whether they are concealed or bared. Sometimes 
I have the feeling that the animal is trying to tame me.


What other purpose could it have in withdrawing its tail 
when I snatch at it, and then again waiting calmly until I 
am tempted again, and then leaping away once more?
Franz Kafka: Dearest Father
(Translated from the German by 
Ernst Kaiser and Eithne Wilkins)
An Animal Imagined by 
C. S. Lewis
The noise was very loud now and the thicket very dense 
so that he could not see a yard ahead, when the music 
stopped suddenly. There was a sound of rustling and 
broken twigs and he made hastily in that direction, but 
found nothing. He had almost decided to give up the 
search when the song began again a little farther away. 
Once more he made after it; once more the creature 
stopped singing and evaded him. He must have played 
thus at hide-and-seek with it for the best part of an hour 
before his search was rewarded.
Treading delicately during one of the loudest bursts of 
music he at last saw through the flowery branches a black 
something. Standing still whenever it stopped singing, and 
advancing with great caution whenever it began again, he 
stalked it for ten minutes. At last it was in full view, and 
singing, and ignorant that it was watched. It sat upright 
like a dog, black and sleek and shiny, but its shoulders 
were high above Ransom’s head, and the forelegs on 
which they were pillared were like young trees and the 
wide soft pads on which they rested were large as those of 
a camel. The enormous rounded belly was white, and far


up above the shoulders the neck rose like that of a horse. 
The head was in profile from where Ransom stood - the 
mouth wide open as it sang of joy in thick-coming trills, 
and the music almost visibly rippled in its glossy throat. 
He stared in wonder at the wide liquid eyes and the quiver- 
ing, sensitive nostrils. Then the creature stopped, saw him, 
and darted away, and stood, now a few paces distant, on 
all four legs, not much smaller than a young elephant, 
swaying a long bushy tail. It was the first thing in Per- 
elandra which seemed to show any fear of man. Yet it was 
not fear. When he called to it it came nearer. It put its 
velvet nose into his hand and endured his touch; but 
almost at once it darted back and, bending its long neck, 
buried its head in its paws. He could make no headway 
with it, and when at length it retreated out of sight he did 
not follow it. To do so would have seemed an injury to its 
fawn-like shyness, to the yielding softness of its ex- 
pression, its evident wish to be for ever a sound and only a 
sound in the thickest centre of untravelled woods. He re- 
sumed his journey: a few seconds later the song broke 
out behind him, louder and lovelier than before, as if in a 
paean of rejoicing at its recovered privacy.
The beasts of that kind have no milk [said Perelandra] 
and always what they bring forth is suckled by the she- 
beast of another kind. She is great and beautiful and 
dumb, and till the young singing beast is weaned it is 
among her whelps and is subject to her. But when it is 
grown it becomes the most delicate and glorious of all 
beasts and goes from her. And she wonders at its song.’
C. S. Lewis: Perelandra


The Animal Imagined by Poe
In his Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket, pub- 
lished in , Edgar Allan Poe attributed to certain Ant- 
arctic islands an astounding yet credible fauna. In Chapter 
XVIII, we read:
We also picked up a bush, full of red berries, like those of 
the hawthorn, and the carcass of a singular-looking land- 
animal. It was three feet in length, and but six inches in 
height, with four very short legs, the feet armed with long 
claws of a brilliant scarlet, and resembling coral in sub- 
stance. The body was covered with a straight silky hair, 
perfectly white. The tail was peaked like that of a rat, and 
about a foot and a half long. The head resembled a cat’s, 
with the exception of the ears; these were flapped like the 
ears of a dog. The teeth were of the same brilliant scarlet 
as the claws.
No less remarkable was the water found in those southern 
regions. Towards the close of the chapter, Poe writes:
On account of the singular character of the water, we 
refused to taste it, supposing it to be polluted . . . I am at a 
loss to give a distinct idea of the nature of this liquid, and 
cannot do so without many words. Although it flowed 
with rapidity in all declivities where common water 
would do so, yet never, except when falling in a cascade, 
had it the customary appearance of limpidity. It was, 
nevertheless, in point of fact, as perfectly limpid as any 
limestone water in existence, the difference being only in 
appearance. At first sight, and especially in cases where 
little declivity was found, it bore resemblance, as regards 
consistency, to a thick infusion of gum-arabic in common


water. But this was only the least remarkable of its extra- 
ordinary qualities. It was not colourless, nor was it of any 
one uniform colour - presenting to the eye, as it flowed, 
every possible shade of purple, like the hues of a change- 
able silk . . . Upon collecting a basinful, and allowing it to 
settle thoroughly, we perceived that the whole mass of 
liquid was made up of a number of distinct veins, each of 
a distinct hue; that these veins did not commingle; and 
that their cohesion was perfect in regard to their own 
particles among themselves, and imperfect in regard to 
neighbouring veins. Upon passing the blade of a knife ath- 
wart the veins, the water closed over it immediately, as 
with us, and also, in withdrawing it, all traces of the pass- 
age of the knife were instantly obliterated. If, however, 
the blade was passed down accurately between the two 
veins, a perfect separation was effected, which the power 
of cohesion did not immediately rectify.
Animals in the Form of Spheres
The sphere is the most uniform of solid bodies since every 
point on its surface is equidistant from its centre. Because of 
this, and because of its ability to revolve on an axis without 
straying from a fixed place, Plato (Timaeus, ) approved 
the judgement of the Demiurge, who gave the world a 
spherical shape. Plato thought the world to be a living being 
and in the Laws () stated that the planets and stars were 
living as well. In this way, he enriched fantastic zoology 
with vast spherical animals and cast aspersions on those 
slow-witted astronomers who failed to understand that the 
circular course of heavenly bodies was voluntary.
In Alexandria over five hundred years later, Origen, one


of the Fathers of the Church, taught that the blessed would 
come back to life in the form of spheres and would enter 
rolling into Heaven.
During the Renaissance, the idea of Heaven as an animal 
reappeared in Lucilio Vanini; the Neoplatonist Marsilio 
Ficino spoke of the hair, teeth, and bones of the earth; and 
Giordano Bruno felt that the planets were great peaceful 
animals, warm-blooded, with regular habits, and endowed 
with reason. At the beginning of the seventeenth century, 
the German astronomer Johannes Kepler debated with the 
English mystic Robert Fludd which of them had first con- 
ceived the notion of the earth as a living monster, ‘whose 
whalelike breathing, changing with sleep and wakefulness, 
produces the ebb and flow of the sea’. The anatomy, the 
feeding habits, the colour, the memory, and the imaginative 
and shaping faculties of the monster were sedulously studied 
by Kepler.
In the nineteenth century, the German psychologist 
Gustav Theodor Fechner (a man praised by William James 
in his A Pluralistic Universe) rethought the preceding ideas 
with all the earnestness of a child. Anyone not belittling his 
hypothesis that the earth, our mother, is an organism - an 
organism superior to plants, animals, and men - may look 
into the pious pages of Fechner’s Zend-Avesta. There we 
read, for example, that the earth’s spherical shape is that of 
the human eye, the noblest organ of our body. Also, that ‘if 
the sky is really the home of angels, these angels are obvi- 
ously the stars, for the sky has no other inhabitants’.


Antelopes with Six Legs
It is said that Odin’s horse, the grey-coated Sleipnir - who 
travels on land, in the air, and down into the regions of Hell
- is provided (or encumbered) with eight legs; a Siberian 
myth attributes six legs to the first Antelopes. With such an 
endowment it was difficult or impossible to catch them; 
Tunk-poj, the divine huntsman, made some special skates 
with the wood of a sacred tree which creaked incessantly 
and that the barking of a dog had revealed to him. The skates 
creaked too and flew with the speed of an arrow; to control 
or restrain their course, he found it necessary to wedge into 
the skates some blocks made of the wood of another magic 
tree. All over heaven Tunk-poj hunted the Antelope. The 
beast, tired out, fell to the ground, and Tunk-poj cut off its 
hindmost pair of legs.
‘Men,’ said Tunk-poj, ‘grow smaller and weaker every 
day. How are they going to hunt six-legged Antelopes if I 
myself am barely able to?’
From that day on, Antelopes have been quadrupeds.
The Ass with Three Legs
Pliny attributes to Zarathustra, founder of the religion still 
professed by the Parsis of Bombay, the composition of two 
million verses; the Arab historian al-Tabari claims that Zara- 
thustra’s complete works as set down by pious calligraphers 
cover some twelve thousand cowhides. It is well known that 
Alexander of Macedonia had these parchments burned in


Persepolis, but thanks to the retentive memory of the priests, 
it was possible to preserve the basic texts, and from the 
ninth century these have been supplemented by an encyc- 
lopedic work, the Bundahish, which contains this page:
Of the three-legged ass it is said that it stands in the middle 
of the ocean and that three is the number of its hooves 
and six the number of its eyes and nine the number of its 
mouths and two the number of its ears and one the 
number of its horn. Its coat is white, its food is spiritual, 
and its whole being is righteous. And two of its six eyes 
are in the place where eyes should be and two on the 
crown of its head and two in its forehead; through the 
keenness of its six eyes it triumphs and destroys.
Of its nine mouths, three are placed in the face and 
three in the forehead and three on the inside of its loins . . . 
Each hoof, laid on the ground, covers the space of a flock 
of a thousand sheep, and under each of its spurs up to a 
thousand horsemen can manoeuvre. As to its ears, they 
overshadow [the north Persian province of] Mazanderan. 
Its hom is as of gold and is hollow, and from it a thousand 
branchlets have grown. With this horn will it bring down 
and scatter all the machinations of the wicked.
Amber is known to be the dung of the three-legged ass. In 
the mythology of Mazdaism, this beneficent monster is one 
of the helpers of Ahura Mazdah (Ormuzd), the principle of 
Life, Light, and Truth.


Bahamut
Behemoth’s fame reached the wastes of Arabia, where men 
altered and magnified its image. From a hippopotamus or 
elephant they turned it into a fish afloat in a fathomless sea; 
on the fish they placed a bull, and on the bull a ruby moun- 
tain, and on the mountain an angel, and over the angel six 
hells, and over these hells the earth, and over the earth seven 
heavens. A Moslem tradition runs:
God made the earth, but the earth had no base and so 
under the earth he made an angel. But the angel had no 
base and so under the angel’s feet he made a crag of ruby. 
But the crag had no base and so under the crag he made a 
bull endowed with four thousand eyes, ears, nostrils, 
mouths, tongues and feet. But the bull had no base and so 
under the bull he made a fish named Bahamut, and under 
the fish he put water, and under the water he put dark- 
ness, and beyond this men’s knowledge does not reach.
Others have it that the earth has its foundation on the 
water; the water, on the crag; the crag, on the bull’s fore- 
head; the bull, on a bed of sand; the sand, on Bahamut; Baha- 
mut, on a stifling wind; the stifling wind on a mist. What lies 
under the mist is unknown.
So immense and dazzling is Bahamut that the eyes of man 
cannot bear its sight. All the seas of the world, placed in one 
of the fish’s nostrils, would be like a mustard seed laid in the 
desert. In the th night of the Arabian Nights we are told 
that it was given to Isa (Jesus) to behold Bahamut and that, 
this mercy granted, Isa fell to the ground in a faint, and 
three days and their nights passed before he recovered his 
senses. The tale goes on that beneath the measureless fish is a 
sea; and beneath the sea, a chasm of air; and beneath the air,


fire; and beneath the fire, a serpent named Falak in whose 
mouth are the six hells.
The idea of the crag resting on the bull, and the bull on 
Bahamut, and Bahamut on anything else, seems to be an 
illustration of the cosmological proof of the existence of 
God. This proof argues that every cause requires a prior 
cause, and so, in order to avoid proceeding into infinity, a 
first cause is necessary.
Baldanders (whose name we may translate as Soon-another 
or At-any-moment-something-else) was suggested to the 
master shoemaker Hans Sachs (-) of Nuremburg 
by that passage in the Odyssey in which Menelaus pursues 
the Egyptian god Proteus, who changes himself into a lion, a 
serpent, a panther, a huge wild boar, a tree, and flowing 
water. Some ninety years after Sachs’s death, Baldanders 
makes a new appearance in the last book of the picaresque- 
fantastic novel by Grimmelshausen, The Adventuresome 
Simplicissimus (). In the midst of a wood, the hero 
comes upon a stone statue which seems to him an idol from 
some old Germanic temple. He touches it and the statue tells 
him he is Baldanders and thereupon takes the forms of a 
man, of an oak tree, of a sow, of a fat sausage, of a field of 
clover, of dung, of a flower, of a blossoming branch, of a 
mulberry bush, of a silk tapestry, of many other things and 
beings, and then, once more, of a man. He pretends to teach 
Simplicissimus the art ‘of conversing with things, which by 
their nature are dumb, such as chairs and benches, pots and 
pans’; he also makes himself into a secretary and writes these 
words from the Revelation of St John: ‘I am the first and the

Baldanders

last’, which are the key to the coded document in which he 
leaves the hero his instructions. Baldanders adds that his 
emblem (like that of the Turk, and with more right to it than 
the Turk) is the inconstant moon.
Baldanders is a successive monster, a monster in time. The 
title page of the first edition of Grimmelshausen’s novel 
takes up the joke. It bears an engraving of a creature having 
a satyr’s head, a human torso, the unfolded wings of a bird, 
and the tail of a fish, and which, with a goat’s leg and vul- 
ture’s claws, tramples on a heap of masks that stand for the 
succession of shapes he has taken. In his belt he carries a 
sword and in his hands an open book showing pictures of a 
crown, a sailing boat, a goblet, a tower, a child, a pair of 
dice, a fool’s cap with bells, and a piece of ordnance.
The Banshee
Nobody seems to have laid eyes on this ’woman of the 
fairies’. She is less a shape than a mournful screaming that 
haunts the Irish night and (according to Sir Walter Scott’s 
Demonology and Witchcraft) the Scottish highlands. Be- 
neath the windows of the visited house, she foretells the 
death of one of the family. She is held to be a token of pure 
Celtic blood, with no mixture of Latin, Saxon, or Danish. 
The Banshee has also been heard in Wales and in Brittany. 
Her wail is called keening.


The vegetable Lamb of Tartary, also named Barometz and 
Lycopodium barometz and Chinese lycopodium, is a plant 
whose shape is that of a lamb bearing a golden fleece. It 
stands on four or five root stalks. Sir Thomas Browne gives 
this description of it in his Pseudodoxia Epidemica ():
Much wonder is made of the Boramez, that strange plant- 
animal or vegetable Lamb of Tartary, which Wolves de- 
light to feed on, which hath the shape of a Lamb, 
affordeth a bloody juyce upon breaking, and liveth while 
the plants be consumed about it.
Other monsters are made up by combining various kinds of 
animals; the Barometz is a union of animal and vegetable 
kingdoms.
This brings to mind the mandrake, which cries out like a 
man when it is ripped from the earth; and in one of the 
circles of the Inferno, the sad forest of the suicides, from 
whose torn limbs blood and words drip at the same time; 
and that tree dreamed by Chesterton, which devoured the 
birds nesting in its branches, and when spring came put out 
feathers instead of leaves.
The Basilisk
Down through the ages, the Basilisk (also known as the 
Cockatrice) grows increasingly ugly and horrendous until 
today it is forgotten. Its name comes from the Greek and 
means ‘little king’; to the Elder Pliny (VIII, ), it was a


serpent bearing a bright spot in the shape of a crown on its 
head. Dating from the Middle Ages, it becomes a four-legged 
cock with a crown, yellow feathers, wide thorny wings, and 
a serpent’s tail ending either in a hook or in another cock’s 
head. The change in its image is reflected in a change in its 
name; Chaucer in The Persone’s Tale’ speaks of the ‘basili- 
cok’ (‘the basilicok sleeth folk by the venim of his sighte’). 
One of the plates illustrating Aldrovandi’s Natural History 
of Serpents and Dragons gives the Basilisk scales instead of 
feathers, and the use of eight legs. (According to the Younger 
Edda, Odin’s horse Sleipnir also had eight legs.)
What remains constant about the Basilisk is the deadly 
effect of its stare and its venom. The Gorgons’ eyes turned 
living beings into stone; Lucan tells us that from the blood of 
one of them all the serpents of Libya sprang - the asp, the 
amphisbaena, the ammodyte, and the Basilisk. We give the 
following passages, in a literal translation, from Book IX of 
Pharsalia:
In this body [Medusa’s] first did noxious nature produce 
deadly plagues; from those jaws snakes poured forth 
whizzing hisses with vibrating tongues, which, after the 
manner of a woman’s hair flowing along the back, flapped 
about the very neck of the delighted Medusa. Upon her 
forehead turned towards you erect did serpents rise, and 
viper’s venom flowed from her combed locks.
What avails a Basilisk being pierced by the spear of the 
wretched Murrus? Swift flies the poison along the 
weapon, and fastens upon the hand; which, instantly, with 
sword unsheathed, he smites, and at the same moment 
severs it entirely from the arm; and, looking upon the 
dreadful warning of a death his own, he stands in safety, 
his hand perishing.
The Basilisk dwelled in the desert; or, more accurately, it 
made the desert. Birds fell dead at its feet and the earth’s


fruits blackened and rotted; the water of the streams where 
it quenched its thirst remained poisoned for centuries. That 
its mere glance split rocks and burned grass has been attested 
by Pliny. Of all animals, the weasel alone was unaffected by 
the monster and could be counted on to attack it on sight; it 
was also believed that the crowing of a rooster sent the Basi- 
lisk scurrying. The seasoned traveller was careful to provide 
himself with either a caged rooster or a weasel before ven- 
turing into unknown territory. Another weapon was the 
mirror, its own image would strike the Basilisk dead.
Isidore of Seville and the compilers of the Speculum Trip- 
lex (Threefold Mirror) rejected Lucan’s fables and sought a 
rational explanation for the Basilisk’s origin. (They could 
not deny its existence, since the Vulgate translates the 
Hebrew word Tsepha, the name of a poisonous reptile, as 
‘cockatrice’.) The theory that gained most favour was that of 
a misshapen egg laid by a cock and hatched by a snake or a 
toad. In the seventeenth century, Sir Thomas Browne found 
this explanation as farfetched as the monster itself. At much 
the same time, Quevedo wrote his romance ’The Basilisk’, in 
which we read:
Si está vivo quien te vio,
Toda su historia es mentira,
Pues si no murió, te ignora,
Y si murió no lo afirma.
[If the man who saw you is still alive, your whole story is 
a lie, since if he has not died he cannot have seen you, and 
if he has died, he cannot tell what he saw.]


Behemoth
Four centuries before the Christian era, Behemoth was a 
magnification of the elephant or of the hippopotamus, or a 
mistaken and alarmist version of these animals; it is now - 
precisely - the ten famous verses describing it in Job (XL: 
-) and the huge being which these lines evoke. The rest 
is wrangling and philology.
The word ‘Behemoth’ is plural; scholars tell us it is the 
intensive plural form of the Hebrew b’hemah, which means 
‘beast’. As Fray Luis de León wrote in his Exposición del 
Libro de Job: ‘Behemoth is a Hebrew word that stands for 
“beasts”; according to the received judgement of learned 
men, it means the elephant, so called because of its inor- 
dinate size; and being but a single animal it counts for 
many.’
We are also reminded of the fact that in the first verse of 
Genesis in the original text, the Hebrew name for God, 
Elohím, is plural, though the form of the verb it takes is 
singular - Bereshit bará Elohím et hashamáim veet 
haáretz. Trinitarians, by the way, have used this incon- 
gruity as an argument for the concept of the godhead being 
Three-in-One.
We give the ten verses in the translation from the Latin 
Vulgate by Father Knox (XL: -):
Here is Behemoth, my creature as thou art, fed on the 
same grass the oxen eat; yet what strength in his loins, 
what lustihood in the navel of his belly! Stiff as cedar- 
wood his tail, close-knit the sinews of his groin, bones like 
pipes of bronze, gristle like plates of steel! None of God’s 
works can vie with him, no weapon so strong in the hands 
of its maker; whole mountainsides, the playground of his


fellow beasts, he will lay under tribute, as he lies there 
under the close covert of the marsh-reeds, thick boughs 
for his shadow, among the willows by the stream. The 
flooded river he drinks unconcerned; Jordan itself would 
have no terrors for that gaping mouth. Like a lure it 
would charm his eye, though it should pierce his nostrils 
with sharp stakes.
The Brownies
Brownies are helpful little men of a brownish hue, which 
gives them their name. It is their habit to visit Scottish farms 
and, while the household sleeps, to perform domestic chores. 
One of the tales by the Grimms deals with the same sub- 
ject.
The famous writer Robert Louis Stevenson said he had 
trained his Brownies in the craft of literature. Brownies 
visited him in his dreams and told him wondrous tales; for 
instance, the strange transformation of Dr Jekyll into the 
diabolical Mr Hyde, and that episode of Olalla, in which the 
scion of an old Spanish family bites his sister’s hand.
Burak
In George Sale’s translation (), the opening verse of 
Chapter XVII of the Koran consists of these words: ‘Praise be 
unto him, who transported his servant by night, from the 
sacred temple of Mecca to his farther temple of Jerusalem,


the circuit of which we have blessed, that we might show 
him some of our signs . . .’ Commentators say that the one 
praised is God, that his servant is Mohammed, that the 
sacred temple is that of Mecca, that the distant temple is 
that of Jerusalem, and that from Jerusalem the Prophet was 
transported to the seventh heaven. In the oldest versions of 
the legend, Mohammed is guided by a man or an angel; in 
those of a later date he is furnished with a heavenly steed, 
larger than an ass and smaller than a mule. This steed is 
Burak, whose name means ‘shining’. According to Richard 
Burton, translator of The Book of a Thousand Nights and a 
Night, Moslems in India usually picture Burak with a man’s 
face, the ears of an ass, a horse’s body, and the wings and tail 
of a peacock.
One of the Islamic legends tells that Burak, on leaving the 
ground, tipped a jar of water. The Prophet was taken up to 
the seventh heaven, along the way speaking in each of the 
heavens with the patriarchs and angels living there, and he 
crossed the Unity and felt a coldness that chilled his heart 
when the Lord laid a hand on his shoulder. Man’s time is not 
commensurate with God’s time; on his return the Prophet 
raised the jar, out of which not a single drop had yet been 
spilled.
Miguel Asm Palacios, the twentieth-century Spanish 
Orientalist, speaks of a mystic from Murcia of the s 
who, in an allegory entitled the Book of the Night Journey 
to the Majesty of the All-Generous, has seen in Burak, a 
symbol of divine love. In another text he speaks of the 
‘Burak of the pureness of heart’.


The Carbuncle
In mineralogy the carbuncle, from the Latin carbunculus, ‘a 
little coal’, is a ruby; as to the carbuncle of the ancients, it is 
supposed to have been a garnet.
In sixteenth-century South America, the name was given 
by the Spanish conquistadors to a mysterious animal - mys- 
terious because nobody ever saw it well enough to know 
whether it was a bird or a mammal, whether it had feathers 
or fur. The poet-priest Martín del Barco Centenera, who 
claims to have seen it in Paraguay, describes it in his Ar- 
gentina () only as ‘a smallish animal, with a shining 
mirror on its head, like a glowing coal . . .’ Another con- 
quistador, Gonzalo Fernández del Oviedo, associates this 
mirror or light shining out of the darkness - two of which he 
glimpsed in the Strait of Magellan - with the precious stone 
that dragons were thought to have hidden in their brain. He 
took his knowledge from Isidore of Seville, who wrote in his 
Etymologies:
it is taken from the dragon’s brain but does not harden 
into a gem unless the head is cut from the living beast; 
wizards, for this reason, cut the heads from sleeping 
dragons. Men bold enough to venture into dragon lairs 
scatter grain that has been doctored to make these beasts 
drowsy, and when they have fallen asleep their heads are 
struck off and the gems plucked out.
Here we are reminded of Shakespeare’s toad (As You Like It, 
II, i), which, though ‘ugly and venomous, Wears yet a 
precious jewel in his head . . .’
Possession of the Carbuncle’s jewel offered fortune and 
luck. Barco Centenera underwent many hardships hunting 
the reaches of Paraguayan rivers and jungles for the elusive


creature; he never found it. Down to this day we know 
nothing more about the beast and its secret head stone.
The Catoblepas
Pliny (VIII, ), relates that somewhere on the borders of 
Ethiopia, near the head of the Nile,
there is found a wild beast called the catoblepas; an 
animal of moderate size, and in other respects sluggish in 
the movement of the rest of its limbs; its head is remark- 
ably heavy, and it only carries it with the greatest 
difficulty, being always bent down towards the earth. 
Were it not for this circumstance, it would prove the de- 
struction of the human race; for all who behold its eyes, 
fall dead upon the spot.
Catoblepas, in Greek, means ‘that which looks downward’. 
The French naturalist Cuvier has conjectured that the gnu 
(contaminated by the basilisk and the gorgon) suggested the 
Catoblepas to the ancients. At the close of The Temptation 
of Saint Anthony, Flaubert describes it and has it speak in 
this way:
black buffalo with the head of a hog, hanging close to the 
ground, joined to its body by a thin neck, long and loose 
as an emptied intestine.
It wallows in the mud, and its legs are smothered under 
the huge mane of stiff bristles that hide its face.
‘Obese, downhearted, wary, I do nothing but feel under 
my belly the warm mud. My head is so heavy that I 
cannot bear its weight. I wind it slowly around my body; 
with half-open jaws, I pull up with my tongue poisonous


plants dampened by my breath. Once, I ate up my fore- 
legs unawares.
‘No one, Anthony, has ever seen my eyes; or else, those 
who have seen them have died. If I were to lift my eyelids
- my pink and swollen eyelids - you would die on the 
spot.’
We know absolutely nothing about the appearance of the 
Celestial Stag (maybe because nobody has ever had a good 
look at one), but we do know that these tragic animals live 
underground in mines and desire nothing more than to reach 
the light of day. They have the power of speech and implore 
the miners to help them to the surface. At first, a Celestial 
Stag attempts to bribe the workmen with the promise of 
revealing hidden veins of silver and gold; when this gambit 
fails, the beast becomes troublesome and the miners are 
forced to overpower it and wall it up in one of the mine 
galleries. It is also rumoured that miners outnumbered by 
the Stags have been tortured to death.
Legend has it that if the Celestial Stag finds its way into the 
open air, it becomes a foul-smelling liquid that can breed 
death and pestilence.
The tale is from China and is recorded by G. Willoughby- 
Meade in his book Chinese Ghouls and Goblins.
The Celestial Stag


The Centaur
The Centaur is the most harmonious creature of fantastic 
zoology. ‘Biform’ it is called in Ovid’s Metamorphoses, but 
its heterogeneous character is easily overlooked, and we 
tend to think that in the Platonic world of ideas there is an 
archetype of the Centaur as there is of the horse or the man. 
The discovery of this archetype took centuries; early archaic 
monuments show a naked man to whose waist the body and 
hind quarters of a horse are uncomfortably fixed. On the 
west façade of the Temple of Zeus at Olympia, the Cen- 
taurs already stand on the legs of a horse, and from the place 
where the animal’s neck should start we find a human 
torso.
Centaurs were the offspring of Ixion, a king of Thessaly, 
and a cloud which Zeus had given the shape of Hera (or 
Juno); another version of the legend asserts that they were 
the offspring of Centaurus, Apollo’s son, and Stilbia; a third, 
that they were the fruit of a union of Centaurus with the 
mares of Magnesium. (It is said that centaur is derived from 
gandharva; in Vedic myth, the Gandharvas are minor gods 
who drive the horses of the sun.) Since the art of riding was 
unknown to the Greeks of Homeric times, it has been con- 
jectured that the first Scythian horseman they came across 
seemed to them all one with his horse, and it has also been 
alleged that the cavalry of the conquistadors were Centaurs 
to the Indians. A text quoted by Prescott runs as follows:
One of the riders fell off his horse; and the Indians, seeing 
the animal fall asunder, up to now having deemed the 
beast all one, were so filled with terror that they turned 
and fled, crying out to their comrades that the animal had 
made itself into two and wondering at this: wherein we


may detect the secret hand of God; since, had this not 
happened, they might have slaughtered all the Chris- 
tians.
But the Greeks, unlike the Indians, were familiar with the 
horse; it is more likely that the Centaur was a deliberate 
invention and not a confusion born of ignorance.
The best known of the Centaur fables is the one in which 
they battle with the Lapiths followed a quarrel at a marriage 
celebration. To the Centaurs wine was now a new ex- 
perience; in the midst of the banqueting an intoxicated Cen- 
taur insulted the bride and, overturning the tables, started 
the famous Centauromachy that Phidias, or a disciple of his, 
would carve on the Parthenon, that Ovid would com- 
memorate in Book XII of the Metamorphoses, and that 
would inspire Rubens. Defeated by the Lapiths, the Cen- 
taurs were forced to leave Thessaly. Hercules, in a second 
encounter with them, all but annihilated the race of Cen- 
taurs with his arrows.
Anger and rustic barbarism are symbolized in the Cen- 
taur, but Chiron, ‘the most righteous of the Centaurs’ (Iliad, 
XI, ), was the teacher of Achilles and Aesculapius, whom 
he instructed in the arts of music, hunting, and war, as well 
as medicine and surgery. Chiron stands out in Canto XII of 
the Inferno, generally known as the ‘Canto of the Centaurs’. 
The acute observations of Momigliano in his  edition of 
the Commedia should interest the curious.
Pliny (VII, ) says he saw a Hippocentaur embalmed in 
honey that had been brought to Rome from Egypt in the 
reign of Claudius.
In the ‘Feast of the Seven Sages’, Plutarch humorously tells 
that one of the shepherds of Periander, a tyrant of Corinth, 
brought his master, in a leather pouch, a newborn creature 
that a mare had given birth to and whose face, neck, and 
arms were human while its body was that of a horse. It cried 
like a baby, and everyone thought it to be a frightening


omen. The sage Thales examined it, chuckled, and said to 
Periander that really he could not approve his herdsmen’s 
conduct.
In Book V of his poem De rerum natura, Lucretius de- 
clares the Centaur impossible since the equine species 
reaches maturity before the human, and at the age of three 
the Centaur would be a full-grown horse and a babbling 
child. The horse would die fifty years before the man.
Cerberus
If Hell is a house, the house of Hades, it is natural that it 
have its watchdog; it is also natural that this dog be fearful. 
Hesiod’s Theogony gives it fifty heads; to make things 
easier for the plastic arts, this number has been reduced and 
Cerberus’ three heads are now a matter of public record. 
Virgil speaks of its three throats; Ovid of its threefold bark; 
Butler compares the triple-crowned tiara of the Pope, who is 
Heaven’s doorman, with the three heads of the dog who is 
the doorman of Hell (Hudibras, IV, ). Dante lends it human 
characteristics which increase its infernal nature: a filthy 
black beard, clawed hands that in the lashing rain rip at the 
souls of the damned. It bites, barks, and bares its teeth.
Bringing Cerberus up into the light of day was the last of 
Hercules’ tasks. (‘He drow out Cerberus, the hound of helle,’ 
writes Chaucer in ‘The Monke’s Tale’.) Zachary Grey, an Eng- 
lish writer of the eighteenth century, in his commentary on 
Hudibras interprets the adventure in this way:
This Dog with three Heads denotes the past, the present, 
and the Time to come; which receive, and, as it were, 
devour all things. Hercules got the better of him, which 
shews that heroick Actions are always victorious over


Time, because they are present in the Memory of Pos- 
terity.
According to the oldest texts, Cerberus greets with his tail 
(which is a serpent) those entering into Hell, and tears to 
pieces those who try to get out. A later legend has him biting 
the newly arrived; to appease him a honeycake was placed 
in the coffin of the departed.
In Norse mythology, a blood-spattered dog, Garmr, keeps 
watch over the house of the dead and will fight against the 
gods when hell’s wolves devour the moon and sun. Some 
give this dog four eyes; the dogs of Yama, the Brahman god 
of death, also have four eyes.
Both Brahmanism and Buddhism offer hells full of dogs, 
which, like Dante’s Cerberus, are torturers of souls.
The Cheshire Cat 
and the Kilkenny Cats
Everyone is familiar with the phrases ‘grin like a Cheshire 
cat’, which means of course to put on a sardonic face. Many 
explanations of its origin have been attempted. One is that 
in Cheshire cheeses were sold in the shape of the grinning 
head of a cat. Another, that Cheshire is a Palatine county or 
earldom and that this mark of nobility provoked the hilarity 
of its cats. Still another is that in the time of Richard III 
there was a gamewarden named Caterling who used to 
break into an angry smile whenever he crossed swords with 
poachers.
In Alice in Wonderland, published in , Lewis Carroll 
endowed the Cheshire Cat with the faculty of slowly disap-


pearing to the point of leaving only its grin - without teeth 
and without a mouth. Of the Kilkenny Cats it is told that 
they got into raging quarrels and devoured each other, leav- 
ing behind no more than their tails. This story goes back to 
the eighteenth century.
The first mention we have of the Chimera is in Book VI of 
the Iliad. There Homer writes that it came of divine stock 
and was a lion in its foreparts, a goat in the middle, and a 
serpent in its hindparts, and that from its mouth it vomited 
flames, and finally was killed by the handsome Bellerophon, 
the son of Glaucus, following the signs of the gods. A lion’s 
head, goat’s belly, and serpent’s tail is the most obvious 
image conveyed by Homer’s words, but Hesiod’s Theogony 
describes the Chimera as having three heads, and this is the 
way it is depicted in the famous Arezzo bronze that dates 
from the fifth century. Springing from the middle of the 
animal’s back is the head of a goat, while at one end it has a 
snake’s head and at the other a lion’s.
The Chimera reappears in the sixth book of the Aeneid, 
‘armed with flame’; Virgil’s commentator Servius Honoratus 
observed that, according to all authorities, the monster was 
native to Lycia, where there was a volcano bearing its name. 
The base of this mountain was infested with serpents, higher 
up on its flanks were meadows and goats, and towards its 
desolate top, which belched out flames, a pride of lions had 
its resort. The Chimera would seem to be a metaphor of 
this strange elevation. Earlier, Plutarch suggested that Chim- 
era was the name of a pirate captain who adorned his ships 
with the images of a lion, a goat, and a snake.
The Chimera


These absurd hypotheses are proof that the Chimera was 
beginning to bore people. Easier than imagining it was to 
translate it into something else. As a beast it was too het- 
erogeneous; the lion, goat, and snake (in some texts, dragon) 
do not readily make up a single animal. With time the Chim- 
era tended to become ‘chimerical’; a celebrated joke of Rabe- 
lais (‘Can a chimera, swinging in the void, swallow second 
intentions?’) clearly marks the transition. The patchwork 
image disappeared but the word remained, signifying the 
impossible. A vain or foolish fancy is the definition of Chim- 
era that we now find in dictionaries.
The Chinese Dragon
Chinese cosmogony teaches that the Ten Thousand Beings or 
Archetypes (the world) are born of the rhythmic con- 
junction of the two complementary eternal principles, the 
yin and the yang. Corresponding to the yin are con- 
centration, darkness, passivity, even numbers, and cold; to 
the yang, growth, light, activity, odd numbers, and heat. 
Symbols of the yin are women, the earth, the colour orange, 
valleys, riverbeds, and the tiger; of the yang, men, the sky, 
blue, mountains, pillars, the dragon.
The Chinese Dragon, the lung, is one of the four magic 
animals. (The others are the unicorn, the phoenix, and the 
tortoise.) At best, the Western Dragon spreads terror; at 
worst, it is a figure of fun. The lung of Chinese myth, how- 
ever, is divine and is like an angel that is also a lion. We read 
in the Historical Record of Ssu-ma Ch’ien that Confucius 
went to consult the archivist or librarian Lao-tzu, and after 
his visit said:
Birds fly, fish swim, animals run. The running animal


can be caught in a trap, the swimmer in a net, and the 
flyer by an arrow. But there is the Dragon; I don’t know 
how it rides on the wind or how it reaches the heavens. 
Today I met Lao-tzu and I can say that I have seen the 
Dragon.
It was a Dragon, or a Dragon Horse, which emerged from 
the Yellow River to reveal to an emperor the famous cir- 
cular diagram symbolizing the reciprocal play of the yang 
and yin. A certain king had in his stables saddle Dragons and 
draft Dragons; one emperor fed on Dragons, and his king- 
dom prospered. A famous poet, to illustrate the risks of 
greatness, wrote: ‘The unicorn ends up coldcuts; the dragon 
as meat pie.’
In the I Ching or Book of Changes, the Dragon signifies 
wisdom. For centuries it was the imperial emblem. The em- 
peror’s throne was called the Dragon Throne, his face the 
Dragon Face. On announcing an emperor’s death, it was said 
that he had ascended to heaven on the back of a Dragon.
Popular imagination links the Dragon to clouds, to the 
rainfall needed by farmers, and to great rivers. The earth 
couples with the dragon’ is a common phrase for rain. About 
the sixth century, Chang Seng-yu executed a wall painting 
that depicted four Dragons. Viewers complained that he had 
left out their eyes. Annoyed, Chang picked up his brushes 
again and completed two of the twisted figures. Then ‘the air 
was filled with thunder and lightning, the wall cracked and 
the Dragons ascended to heaven. But the other two eyeless 
Dragons remained in place’.
The Chinese Dragon has horns, claws, and scales, and its 
backbone prickles with spines. It is commonly pictured with 
a pearl, which it swallows or spits up. In this pearl lies its 
power; the Dragon is tamed if the pearl is taken from it.
Chuang Tzu tells us of a determined man who at the end 
of three thankless years mastered the art of slaying Dragons, 
and for the rest of his days was not given a single chance to 
put his art into practice.


The Chinese Fox
In everyday zoology the Chinese Fox differs little from other 
Foxes, but not so in fantastic zoology. Statistics give it a life- 
span that varies between eight hundred and a thousand 
years. The animal is considered a bad omen, and each part of 
its anatomy enjoys some special power. It has only to strike 
the ground with its tail to start a fire; it can see into the 
future; and it can change into many forms, preferably into 
old men, young ladies, and scholars. It is astute, wary, and 
sceptical; its pleasures lie in playing pranks and in causing 
torment. Men, when they die, may transmigrate with the 
body of a Fox. Its dwelling is close by graves. There are 
thousands of stories and legends concerning it; we transcribe 
one, a tale by the ninth-century poet Niu Chiao, which is not 
without its humorous side:
Wang saw two Foxes standing on their hind legs and lean- 
ing against a tree. One of them held a sheet of paper in its 
hand, and they laughed together as though they were shar- 
ing a joke. Wang tried to frighten them off but they stood 
their ground, and finally he shot at the one holding the page. 
The Fox was hit in the eye and Wang took away the piece of 
paper. At the inn Wang told the story to the other guests. 
While he spoke a gentleman having a bandaged eye came in. 
He listened to Wang’s story with interest and asked if he 
might not be shown the paper. Wang was just about to pro- 
duce it when the innkeeper noticed that the newcomer had a 
tail. ‘He’s a Fox!’ he shouted, and on the spot the gentleman 
turned into a Fox and fled. The Foxes tried time after time to 
recover the paper, which was filled with indecipherable 
writing, but were repeatedly set back. Wang decided at last 
to return home. On the road he met his whole family, who 
were on their way to the capital. They said that he had


ordered them to undertake the journey, and his mother 
showed him the letter in which he asked them to sell off all 
their property and join him in the city. Wang, studying the 
letter, saw that the page was blank. Although they no longer 
had a roof over their heads, he ordered, ‘Let’s go back.’
One day a younger brother appeared whom everyone had 
given up for dead. He asked about the family’s misfortunes 
and Wang told him the whole story. ‘Ah,’ said the brother 
when Wang came to the part about the Foxes, ‘there lies the 
root of all the evil.’ Wang showed him the page in question. 
Tearing it from Wang’s hand, the brother stuffed the sheet 
into his pocket and said, ‘At last I have back what I wanted.’ 
Then, changing himself into a Fox, he made his escape.
The Chinese Phoenix
The sacred books of the Chinese may be disappointing for 
the reason that they lack the pathetic element to which we 
have been accustomed by the Bible. But occasionally, all at 
once in their even-tempered discourse, we are moved by 
some intimacy. This one, for instance, recorded in Book VII 
of the Confucian Analects (Waley translation):
The Master said, How utterly have things gone to the 
bad with me! It is long now indeed since I dreamed that I 
saw the Duke of Chou.
Or this one from Book IX:
The Master said, The phoenix does not come; the river 
gives forth no chart. It is all over with me!
The chart, or sign (explain the commentaries), refers to an 
inscription on the back of a magical tortoise. As for the


Phoenix, it is a bird of brilliant colours, not unlike the phea- 
sant and peacock. In prehistoric times it visited the gardens 
and palaces of virtuous emperors as a visible token of cel- 
estial favour. The male (Feng), which had three legs, lived in 
the sun. The female is the Huang; together they are the 
emblem of everlasting love.
In the first century a.d., the daring unbeliever Wang 
Ch’ung denied that the Phoenix constituted a determined 
species. He said that just as the serpent turns into a fish and 
the rat into a tortoise, the stag in times of widespread pros- 
perity takes the form of the unicorn, and the goose that of 
the Phoenix. He explained these mutations by the ‘well- 
known liquid’ which, some , years b.c., in the courtyard 
of Yao - who was one of the model emperors - had made the 
grass grow scarlet. As may be seen, his information was 
deficient, or rather, excessive.
In the Infernal Regions there is an imaginary structure 
known as the Tower of the Phoenix.
Chronos or Hercules
The treatise Difficulties and Solutions of First Principles by 
the Neoplatonist Damascus (born about a.d. ) records a 
strange version of the theogony and cosmogony of Orphism, 
in which Chronos - or Hercules - is a monster:
According to Hieronymus and Hellanicus (if the two are 
not one), Orphic doctrine teaches that in the beginning 
there was water and mud, with which the earth was 
shaped. These two principles were taught to be the first: 
water and earth. From them came the third, a winged 
dragon, which in its foreparts had the head of a bull, in its 
hindparts the head of a lion, and in its middle the face of a


god; this dragon was named the Unageing Chronos and 
also Heracles. With him Necessity, also known as the In- 
evitable, was born and spread to the boundaries of the 
Universe . . . Chronos, the dragon, drew from himself a 
threefold seed: moist Ether, limitless Chaos, and misty 
Erebus. Under them he laid an egg, from which the world 
was to hatch. The last principle was a god who was man 
and woman, with golden wings on its back, and bulls’ 
heads on its sides, and on its head a huge dragon, like all 
manner of beasts . . .
Perhaps because what is excessively monstrous seems less 
fitting to Greece than to the East, Walter Kranz attributes an 
Oriental origin to these fancies.
Slowly, shakily, with unnatural and inhuman movements 
a human form, scarlet in the firelight, crawled out on to 
the floor of the cave. It was the Un-man, of course: drag- 
ging its broken leg and with its lower jaw sagging open 
like that of a corpse, it raised itself to a standing position. 
And then, close behind it, something else came up out of 
the hole. First came what looked like branches of trees, 
and then seven or eight spots of light, irregularly grouped 
like a constellation. Then a tubular mass which reflected 
the red glow as if it were polished. His heart gave a great 
leap as the branches suddenly resolved themselves into 
long wiry feelers and the dotted lights became the many 
eyes of a shell-helmeted head and the mass that followed 
it was revealed as a large roughly cylindrical body.

A Creature Imagined 
by C. S. Lewis

Horrible things followed - angular, many jointed legs, and 
presently, when he thought the whole body was in sight, a 
second body came following it and after that a third. The 
thing was in three parts, united only by a kind of wasp’s 
waist structure - three parts that did not seem to be truly 
aligned and made it look as if it had been trodden on - a 
huge, many legged, quivering deformity, standing just 
behind the Un-man so that the horrible shadows of both 
danced in enormous and united menace on the wall of 
rock behind them.
C. S. Lewis: Perelandra
The Crocotta 
and the Leucrocotta
Ctesias, physician to Artaxerxes Mnemon in the fourth cen- 
tury b.c., made use of Persian sources to compile a 
description of India, a work of incalculable value if we are 
curious as to how Persians under Artaxerxes Mnemon im- 
agined India. In Chapter , he gives an account of the cy- 
nolycus, or dog-wolf, from which Pliny seems to have 
evolved his Crocotta. Pliny writes (VIII, ) that the Cro- 
cotta is ‘an animal which looks as though it had been produced 
by the coupling of the wolf and the dog, for it can break 
anything with its teeth, and instantly on swallowing it 
digest it with the stomach He goes on to describe 
another Indian animal, the Leucrocotta, as follows:
a wild beast of great swiftness, the size of the wild ass, 
with the legs of a stag, the neck, tail, and breast of a lion, 
the head of a badger, a cloven hoof, the mouth slit up as 
far as the ears, and one continuous bone instead of teeth;


it is said, too, that this animal can imitate the human 
voice.
Later authorities seem to feel that Pliny’s Leucrocotta is a 
cumbersome blend of the Indian antelope and the hyena. All 
of these animals Pliny has fit into an Ethiopian landscape, 
where he also lodges a wild bull with convenient movable 
horns, a hide as hard as flint, and hair turned contrariwise.
I have a curious animal, half-cat, half-lamb. It is a legacy 
from my father. But it only developed in my time; form- 
erly it was far more lamb than cat. Now it is both in about 
equal parts. From the cat it takes its head and claws, from 
the lamb its size and shape; from both its eyes, which are 
wild and changing, its hair, which is soft, lying close to its 
body, its movements, which partake both of skipping and 
slinking. Lying on the window-sill in the sun it curls itself 
up in a ball and purrs; out in the meadow it rushes about 
as if mad and is scarcely to be caught. It flies from cats 
and makes to attack lambs. On moonlight nights its 
favourite promenade is the tiles. It cannot mew and it 
loathes rats. Beside the hen-coop it can lie for hours in 
ambush, but it has never yet seized an opportunity for 
murder.
I feed it on milk; that seems to suit it best. In long 
draughts it sucks the milk into it through its teeth of a 
beast of prey. Naturally it is a great source of entertain- 
ment for children. Sunday morning is the visiting hour. I 
sit with the little beast on my knees, and the children of 
the whole neighbourhood stand round me.
Then the strangest questions are asked, which no

A Crossbreed

human being could answer: Why there is only one such 
animal, why I rather than anybody else should own it, 
whether there was ever an animal like it before and what 
would happen if it died, whether it feels lonely, why it 
has no children, what it is called, etc.
I never trouble to answer, but confine myself without 
further explanation to exhibiting my possession. Some- 
times the children bring cats with them; once they actu- 
ally brought two lambs. But against all their hopes there 
was no scene of recognition. The animals gazed calmly at 
each other with their animal eyes, and obviously accepted 
their reciprocal existence as a divine fact.
Sitting on my knees the beast knows neither fear nor 
lust of pursuit. Pressed against me it is happiest. It remains 
faithful to the family that brought it up. In that there is 
certainly no extraordinary mark of fidelity, but merely the 
true instinct of an animal which, though it has countless 
step-relations in the world, has perhaps not a single blood 
relation, and to which consequently the protection it has 
found with us is sacred.
Sometimes I cannot help laughing when it sniffs round 
me and winds itself between my legs and simply will not 
be parted from me. Not content with being lamb and cat, 
it almost insists on being a dog as well. Once when, as 
may happen to any one, I could see no way out of my 
business difficulties and all that depends on such things, 
and had resolved to let everything go, and in this mood 
was lying in my rocking-chair in my room, the beast on 
my knees, I happened to glance down and saw tears drop- 
ping from its huge whiskers. Were they mine, or were 
they the animal’s? Had this cat, along with the soul of a 
lamb, the ambitions of a human being? I did not inherit 
much from my father, but this legacy is worth looking at.
It has the restlessness of both beasts, that of the cat and 
that of the lamb, diverse as they are. For that reason its 
skin feels too narrow for it. Sometimes it jumps up on the


armchair beside me, plants its front legs on my shoulder, 
and puts its muzzle to my ear. It is as if it were saying 
something to me, and as a matter of fact it turns its head 
afterwards and gazes in my face to see the impression its 
communication has made. And to oblige it I behave as if I 
had understood and nod. Then it jumps to the floor and 
dances about with joy.
Perhaps the knife of the butcher would be a release for 
this animal; but as it is a legacy I must deny it that. So it 
must wait until the breath voluntarily leaves its body, 
even though it sometimes gazes at me with a look of 
human understanding, challenging me to do the thing of 
which both of us are thinking.
Franz Kafka: Description of a Struggle
(Translated from the German by 
Tania and James Stern)
The Double
Suggested or stimulated by reflections in mirrors and in 
water and by twins, the idea of the Double is common to 
many countries. It is likely that sentences such as A friend is 
another self by Pythagoras or the Platonic Know thyself were 
inspired by it. In Germany this Double is called Dop- 
pelgänger, which means ’double walker’. In Scotland 
there is the fetch, which comes to fetch a man to bring him 
to his death; there is also the Scottish word wraith for an 
apparition thought to be seen by a person in his exact image 
just before death. To meet oneself is, therefore, ominous. 
The tragic ballad ‘Ticonderoga’ by Robert Louis Stevenson 
tells of a legend on this theme. There is also the strange 
picture by Rossetti (‘How They Met Themselves’) in which


two lovers come upon themselves in the dusky gloom of a 
wood. We may also cite examples from Hawthorne 
(‘Howe’s Masquerade’), Dostoyevsky, Alfred de Musset, 
James (‘The Jolly Corner’), Kleist, Chesterton (‘The Mirror of 
Madmen’), and Hearn (Some Chinese Ghosts).
The ancient Egyptians believed that the Double, the ka, 
was a man’s exact counterpart, having his same walk and 
his same dress. Not only men, but gods and beasts, stones 
and trees, chairs and knives had their ka, which was in- 
visible except to certain priests who could see the Doubles 
of the gods and were granted by them a knowledge of things 
past and things to come.
To the Jews the appearance of one’s Double was not an 
omen of imminent death. On the contrary, it was proof of 
having attained prophetic powers. This is how it is explained 
by Gershom Scholem. A legend recorded in the Talmud tells 
the story of a man who, in search of God, met himself.
In the story ‘William Wilson’ by Poe, the Double is the 
hero’s conscience. He kills it and dies. In a similar way, 
Dorian Gray in Wilde’s novel stabs his portrait and meets his 
death. In Yeats’s poems the Double is our other side, our 
opposite, the one who complements us, the one we are not 
nor will ever become.
Plutarch writes that the Greeks gave the name other self 
to a king’s ambassador.
The Eastern Dragon
The Dragon has the ability to assume many shapes, but these 
are inscrutable. Generally, it is imagined with a head some- 
thing like a horse’s, with a snake’s tail, with wings on its 
sides (if at all), and with four claws, each furnished with


four curved nails. We read also of its nine resemblances: its 
horns are not unlike those of a stag, its head that of a camel, 
its eyes those of a devil, its neck that of a snake, its belly that 
of a clam, its scales those of a fish, its talons those of an 
eagle, its footprints those of a tiger, and its ears those of an 
ox. There are specimens of the Dragon that lack ears and 
hear with their horns. It is customary to picture them with a 
pearl, which dangles from their necks and is a symbol of the 
sun. Within this pearl lies the Dragon’s power. The beast 
is rendered helpless if its pearl is stolen from it.
History traces the earliest emperors back to Dragons. 
Their teeth, bones, and saliva all possess medicinal qualities. 
According to its will, the Dragon can become visible or in- 
visible. In springtime it ascends into the skies; in the fall it 
dives down into the depths of the seas. Some Dragons lack 
wings yet fly under their own impetus. Science distinguishes 
several kinds. The Celestial Dragon carries on its back the 
palaces of the gods that otherwise might fall to earth, de- 
stroying the cities of men; the Divine Dragon makes the 
winds and rains for the benefit of mankind; the Terrestrial 
Dragon determines the course of streams and rivers; the Sub- 
terranean Dragon stands watch over treasures forbidden to 
men. The Buddhists affirm that Dragons are no fewer in 
number than the fishes of their many concentric seas; some- 
where in the universe a sacred cipher exists to express their 
exact number. The Chinese believe in Dragons more than in 
any other deities because Dragons are frequently seen in the 
changing formations of clouds. Similarly, Shakespeare has 
observed, ‘Sometime we see a cloud that’s dragonish.’
The Dragon rules over mountains, is linked to geomancy, 
dwells near tombs, is connected with the cult of Confucius 
is the Neptune of the seas and appears also on terra firma.
The Sea-Dragon Kings live in resplendent underwater 
palaces and feed on opals and pearls. Of these Kings there 
are five: the chief is in the middle, the other four correspond 
to the cardinal points. Each stretches some three or four


miles in length; on changing position, they cause mountains 
to tumble. They are sheathed in an armour of yellow scales, 
and their muzzles are whiskered. Their legs and tail are 
shaggy, their forehead juts over their flaming eyes, their ears 
are small and thick, their mouths gape open, their tongues 
are long, and teeth sharp. Their breath boils up and roasts 
whole shoals of fishes. When these Sea Dragons rise to the 
ocean surface, they cause whirlpools and typhoons; when 
they take to the air they blow up storms that rip the roofs 
off the houses of entire cities and flood the countryside. The 
Dragon Kings are immortal and can communicate among 
themselves, without recourse to words, in spite of any dis- 
tance that separates them. It is during the third month that 
they make their annual report to the upper heavens.
The Eater of the Dead
There is a strange literary genre which, spontaneously, has 
sprung up in various lands and at various times. This is the 
manual for the guidance of the dead through the Other 
World. Heaven and Hell by Swedenborg, the writings of the 
Gnostics, the Tibetan Bardo Thödol (which, according to 
Evans-Wentz, should be translated as ‘Liberation by Hearing 
on the After-Death Plane’), and the Egyptian Book of the 
Dead do not exhaust the possible examples. The similarities 
and differences of the latter two books have attracted the 
attention of esoteric scholarship; for us, let it be enough to 
recall that in the Tibetan manual the Other World is as illus- 
ory as this one, while to the Egyptians it has a real and 
objective existence.
In both texts there is a Judgement Scene before a jury of 
deities, some with the heads of apes; in both, a symbolical


weighing of evil and good deeds. In the Book of the Dead, a 
heart and a feather are weighed against each other, ‘the 
heart representing the conduct or conscience of the deceased 
and the feather righteousness or truth’. In the Bardo 
Thödol, white pebbles and black pebbles are placed on 
either side of the balance. The Tibetans have demons or 
devils who lead the condemned to the place of purgation in 
a hell-world; the Egyptians have a grim monster attending 
their wicked, an Eater of the Dead.
The dead man swears not to have caused hunger or 
sorrow, not to have killed or to have made others kill for 
him, not to have stolen the food set aside for the dead, not to 
have used false weights, not to have taken the milk from a 
baby’s mouth, not to have driven livestock from their pas- 
turage, not to have netted the birds of the gods.
If he lies, the forty-two judges deliver him to the Eater, 
‘who has the head of a crocodile, the trunk of a lion, and the 
hinder parts of a hippopotamus’. The Eater is assisted by 
another animal Babaí, of whom we know only that he is 
frightening and that Plutarch identifies him with the Titan 
who fathered the Chimera.
The Eight-Forked Serpent
The Eight-Forked Serpent of Koshi is prominent in the 
mythical cosmogony of Japan. It was eight-headed and 
eight-tailed; its eyes were red as the winter cherry, and pine 
trees and mosses grew on its back, while firs sprouted on 
each of its heads. As it crawled, it stretched over eight 
valleys and eight hills, and its belly was always flecked with 
blood. In seven years this beast had devoured seven maidens, 
the daughters of a king, and in the eighth year was about to


eat up the youngest daughter, named Princess-Comb- 
Ricefield. The Princess was saved by a god who bore the 
name of Brave-Swift-Impetuous-Male. This knight built a cir- 
cular enclosure of wood with eight gates and eight plat- 
forms at each gate. On the platforms he set tubs of rice beer. 
The Eight-Forked Serpent came and, dipping a head into 
each of the tubs, gulped down the beer and was soon fast 
asleep. Then Brave-Swift-Impetuous-Male lopped the heads. 
A river of blood sprang from the necks. In the Serpent’s tail a 
sword was found that to this day commands veneration in 
the Great Shrine of Atsuta. These events took place on the 
mountain formerly named Serpent-Mountain and now 
called Eight-Cloud Mountain. The number eight in Japan is a 
magic number and stands for many, just as forty (‘When 
forty winters shall besiege thy brow’) did in Elizabethan 
England. Japanese paper currency still commemorates the 
killing of the Serpent.
It is superfluous to point out that the redeemer married 
the redeemed, as in Hellenic myth Perseus married An- 
dromeda.
In his English rendering of the cosmogonies and the- 
ogonies of old Japan (The Sacred Scriptures of the 
Japanese), Post Wheeler also records analogous legends of 
the Hydra of Greek myth, of Fafnir from the Germanic, and 
of the Egyptian goddess Hathor, whom a god made drunk 
with blood-red beer so that mankind would be saved from 
annihilation.


The Elephant That Foretold 
the Birth of the Buddha
Five centuries before the Christian era, Queen Maya, in 
Nepal, had a dream that a white Elephant, which dwelled on 
the Golden Mountain, had entered her body. This visionary 
beast was furnished with six tusks. The King’s soothsayers 
predicted that the Queen would bear a son who would 
become either ruler of the world or the saviour of mankind. 
As is common knowledge, the latter came true.
In India the Elephant is a domestic animal. White stands 
for humility and the number six is sacred, corresponding to 
the six dimensions of space: upward, downward, forward, 
back, left, and right.
The Eloi and the Morlocks
The hero of the novel The Time Machine, which a young 
writer Herbert George Wells published in , travels on a 
mechanical device into an unfathomable future. There he 
finds that mankind has split into two species: the Eloi, who 
are frail and defenceless aristocrats living in idle gardens and 
feeding on the fruits of the trees; and the Morlocks, a race of 
underground proletarians who, after ages of labouring in 
darkness, have gone blind, but driven by the force of the 
past, go on working at their rusted intricate machinery that 
produces nothing. Shafts with winding staircases unite the


two worlds. On moonless nights, the Morlocks climb up out 
of their caverns and feed on the Eloi.
The nameless hero, pursued by Morlocks, escapes back 
into the present. He brings with him as a solitary token of 
his adventure an unknown flower that falls into dust and 
that will not blossom on earth until thousands and thou- 
sands of years are over.
The Elves
The Elves are of Nordic origin. Little is known about what 
they look like, except that they are tiny and sinister. They 
steal cattle and children and also take pleasure in minor acts 
of devilry. In England, the world ‘elflock’ was given to a 
tangle of hair because it was supposed to be a trick of the 
Elves. An Anglo-Saxon charm, which for all we know may 
go back to heathen times, credits them with the mischievous 
habit of shooting, from afar, miniature arrows of iron that 
break the surface of the skin without a trace and are at the 
root of sudden painful stitches. In the Younger Edda, a dis- 
tinction is noted between Light Elves and Dark: ‘The Light 
Elves are fairer than a glance of the sun, the Dark Elves 
blacker than pitch.’ The German for nightmare is Alp; ety- 
mology traces the word back to ‘elf’, since it was commonly 
believed in the Middle Ages that Elves weighed heavily upon 
the breast of sleepers, giving them bad dreams.


An Experimental Account of What 
Was Known, Seen, and Met by 
Mrs Jane Lead in London in 
Among the many writings of the blind English mystic Jane 
Lead (or Leade) is to be found The Wonders of God’s Cre- 
ation manifested in the variety of Eight Worlds, as they 
were known experimentally unto the Author (London, 
). About this time, as Mrs Lead’s fame spread through- 
out Holland and Germany, her work was done into Dutch 
by an eager young scholar, H. van Ameyden van Duym. But 
later on when, due to the jealousies of her disciples, the 
authenticity of certain manuscripts was disputed, it became 
necessary for the van Duym versions to be retranslated into 
English. On page  ( B) of the Eight Worlds, we read:
Salamanders have their appointed Dwelling in Fire; 
Sylphs in the Air; Nymphs in the flowing Waters; and 
Gnomes in Earthen-burrows, but the creature whose sub- 
stance is Bliss is everywhere at home. All sounds, even to 
the roaring of Lions, the screeching of the nightly Owls, 
the laments and groans of those entrapped in Hell, are as 
sweet Musick to her. All odours, even to the foulest stench 
of Corruption, are to her as the delight of roses and Lilies. 
All savours, even to the banquet-table of the Harpys of 
heathen lore, are as Sweet loaves and spiced Ale. Wander- 
ing at noon through the Waste-Places of the world, it 
seems to her she is refreshed by Canopies of flocking 
Angels. The earnest seeker will look for her in All places, 
however dim and sordid, of this world or in the seven 
others. Thrust a keen Sword-blade through her and it will


seem as a fountain of Divine and Pure pleasure. These 
eyes, by Translation, have been given to see her ways; and 
an equal gift as revealed by Wisdom is sometimes granted 
the Child.
The Fairies
They meddle magically in human affairs, and their name is 
linked to the Latin word latum (fate, destiny). It is said that 
the Fairies are the most numerous, the most beautiful, and 
the most memorable of the minor supernatural beings. They 
are not restricted to a particular place or particular period. 
Ancient Greeks, Eskimos, and Red Indians all tell stories of 
heroes who have won the love of these creatures of the im- 
agination. Such fortunes hold their perils; a Fairy, once its 
whim is satisfied, may deal death to its lovers.
In Ireland and Scotland ‘the people of Faery’ are assigned 
underground dwelling places, where they confine children 
and men whom they have kidnapped. Believing that the flint 
arrowheads they dig up in the fields once belonged to Fairies. 
Irish farmers endow these objects with unfailing medical 
powers. Yeats’s early tales abound in accounts of village 
people among the Fairies. In one a countrywoman tells him 
that
she did not believe either in Hell or in ghosts. Hell was an 
invention got up by the priest to keep people good; and 
the ghosts would not be permitted, she held, to go ‘trapsin’ 
about the earth’ at their own free will; ‘but there are 
faeries and little leprechauns, and water-horses, and fallen 
angels’.
Fairies are fond of song and music and the colour green.


Yeats notes that ‘The [little] people and faeries in Ireland are 
sometimes as big as we are, sometimes bigger, and some- 
times, as I have been told, about three feet high.’ At the end 
of the seventeenth century a Scots churchman, the Reverend 
Robert Kirk of Aberfoyle, wrote a work entitled The Secret 
Commonwealth; or an Essay on the Nature and Actions of 
the Subterranean (and for the most part) Invisible People 
heretofoir going under the name of Faunes and Fairies, or 
the lyke, among the Low Country Scots, as they are de- 
scribed by those who have the second sight. In , Sir 
Walter Scott had the book reprinted. Of Mr Kirk it is told 
that the Fairies snatched him away because he had revealed 
their mysteries.
On the seas off Italy, especially in the Strait of Messina, 
the fata morgana contrives mirages to confuse sailors and 
lure them aground.
Fastitocalon
The Middle Ages attributed to the Holy Ghost the com- 
position of two books. The first was, as is well known, the 
Bible; the second, the whole world, whose creatures had 
locked up in them moral teachings. In order to explain these 
teachings, Physiologi, or Bestiaries, were compiled in which 
accounts of birds and beasts and fishes were laid over with 
allegorical applications. Out of an Anglo-Saxon bestiary, we 
take the following text, translated by R. K. Gordon:
Now by my wit I will also speak in a poem, a song, 
about a kind of fish, about the mighty whale. He to our 
sorrow is often found dangerous and fierce to all seafaring 
men. The name Fastitocalon is given him, the floater on 
ocean streams. His form is like a roughstone, as if the


greatest of seaweeds, girt by sand-banks, were heaving by 
the water’s shore, so that seafarers suppose they behold 
some island with their eyes; and then they fasten the high- 
prowed ships with cables to the false land, tie the sea 
steeds at the water’s edge, and then undaunted go up into 
that island. The ships remain fast by the shore, en- 
compassed by water. Then, wearied out, the sailors 
encamp, look not for danger. On the island they kindle 
fire, build a great blaze; the men, worn out, are in glad- 
ness, longing for rest. When he, skilled in treachery, feels 
that the voyagers are set firmly upon him, are encamped, 
rejoicing in the clear weather, then suddenly the ocean 
creature sinks down with his prey into the salt wave, 
seeks the depths, and then delivers the ships and the men 
to drown in the hall of death.
He, the proud voyager, has another habit, yet more 
wondrous. When on the ocean hunger harries him . . . 
then the warden of the ocean opens his mouth, his lips 
wide. A pleasant smell comes from within, so that other 
kinds of fish are betrayed thereby; they swim swiftly to 
where the sweet smell issues forth. They enter there in a 
thoughtless throng, till the wide jaw is filled. Then sud- 
denly the fierce jaws snap together, enclosing the plun- 
der. Thus is it for every man who . . . lets himself be 
snared by a sweet smell, a false desire, so that he is guilty 
of sins against the King of glory.
This same story is told in the Arabian Nights, in St Bren- 
dan’s legend, and in Milton’s Paradise Lost, which shows us 
the whale ‘slumbering on the Norway foam’. Professor 
Gordon tells us that ‘In earlier versions the creature was a 
turtle and was named Aspidochelone. In course of time the 
name became corrupted, and the whale replaced the 
turtle.’


Fauna of Chile
Our chief authority on animals incubated by the Chilean 
imagination is Julio Vicuña Cifuentes, whose Myths and 
Superstitions collects a number of legends drawn from oral 
tradition. All of the following extracts but one are taken 
from this work. The Calchona is recorded in Zorobabel 
Rodríguez’ Dictionary of Chileanisms, published in San- 
tiago de Chile in .
The Alicanto is a nocturnal bird that seeks its food in 
veins of gold and silver. The variety that feeds on gold 
may be identified by the golden light that gleams from its 
wings when it runs with them open (for it cannot fly); the 
silver-feeding Alicanto is known, as one might expect, by 
a silvery light.
The fact that the bird is flightless is not due to its wings, 
which are perfectly normal, but to the heavy metallic 
meals that weigh down its crop. When hungry it runs 
swiftly; when gorged it is hardly able to crawl.
Prospectors or mining engineers believe their fortune is 
made if they are lucky enough to have an Alicanto for a 
guide, since the bird may lead them to the discovery of 
hidden ore. Nevertheless, the prospector should be very 
careful, for, if the bird suspects it is being followed, it dims 
its light and slips away in the dark. It may also suddenly 
change its path and draw its pursuer towards a chasm.
The Calchona is a kind of Newfoundland dog woollier 
than an unshorn ram and more bearded than a billy goat. 
White in colour, it chooses dark nights to appear before 
mountain travellers, snatching their lunch baskets from 
them and muttering sullen threats; it also scares horses, 
hunts down outlaws, and works all sorts of evil.


The Chonchón has the shape of a human head; its ears, 
which are extremely large, serve as wings for its flight on 
moonless nights. Chonchónes are supposed to be endowed 
with all the powers of wizards. They are dangerous when 
molested, and many fables are told about them.
There are several ways to bring these flying creatures 
down when they pass overhead intoning their ominous 
tué, tué, tué, the only sign that betrays their presence, 
since they are invisible to anyone not a wizard. The 
following are judiciously advised: to recite or sing a 
prayer known only to a few who stubbornly refuse to 
divulge it; to chant a certain twelve words twice over; to 
mark a Solomon’s seal on the ground; and lastly, to spread 
open a waistcoat and lay it out in a specified way. The 
Chonchón falls, flapping its wings furiously, and cannot 
lift itself again no matter how hard it tries until another 
Chonchón comes to its aid. Generally, the incident does 
not conclude here, for sooner or later the Chonchón 
wreaks its vengeance on whomever has mocked at 
it.
Creditable witnesses have told the following story. In 
a house in Limache where visitors had gathered one night, 
the disorderly cries of a Chonchón were suddenly heard 
outside. Someone made the sign of Solomon’s seal, and a 
heavy object fell into the backyard; it was a large bird the 
size of a turkey and had a head with red wattles. They 
cut the head off, gave it to a dog, and threw the body up 
on the roof. At once they heard a deafening uproar of 
Chonchónes, at the same time noting that the dog’s belly 
had swollen as though the animal had gulped down the 
head of a person. The next morning they searched in vain 
for the Chonchón body; it had disappeared from the roof. 
Somewhat later the town gravedigger reported that on 
that same day several unknown persons had come to bury 
a body which, when they had gone away, he found to be 
headless.


The Hide is an octopus that lives in the sea and has the 
dimensions and appearance of a cowhide stretched out 
flat. Its edges are furnished with numberless eyes, and, in 
that part which seems to be its head, it has four more eyes 
of a larger size. Whenever persons or animals enter the 
water, the Hide rises to the surface and engulfs them with 
an irresistible force, devouring them in a matter of 
moments.
The Huallepén is an amphibious animal that is fierce, 
powerful, and shy; under three feet tall, it has a calf’s 
head and a sheep’s body. On the spur of the moment it 
mounts sheep and cows, fathering in them offspring of the 
same species as the mother but which can be spotted by 
their twisted hooves and sometimes by their twisted 
muzzles. A pregnant woman who sees a Huallepén, or 
hears its bellow, or who dreams of it three nights in a row, 
gives birth to a deformed child. The same happens if she 
sees an animal begotten by the Huallepén.
The Strong Toad is an imaginary animal different from 
other toads in that its back is covered with a shell like that 
of a turtle. This Toad glows in the dark like a firefly and is 
so tough that the only way to kill it is to reduce it to 
ashes. It owes its name to the great power of its stare, 
which it uses to attract or repel whatever is in its range.
Fauna of China
The following list of strange animals is taken from the T’ai 
P’ing Kuang Chi (Extensive Records Made in the Period of 
Peace and Prosperity), completed in the year  and pub- 
lished in :


The Celestial Horse is like a white dog with a black 
head. It has fleshy wings and can fly.
The Chiang-liang has a tiger’s head, a man’s face, long 
limbs, four hooves, and a snake between its teeth.
In the region to the west of the Red Water dwells the 
beast known as the Ch’ou-t’i, which has a head both front 
and back.
The denizens of Ch’uan-T’ou have human heads, the 
wings of a bat, and a bird’s beak. They feed exclusively on 
raw fish.
In the Country of Long Arms, the hands of the inhabi- 
tants dangle to the ground. They live by catching fish at 
the edge of the sea.
The Hsiao is similar to the owl but has a man’s face, an 
ape’s body, and a dog’s tail. Its presence foretells pro- 
longed drought.
The Hsing-hsing are like apes. They have white faces 
and pointed ears. They walk upright, like men, and climb 
trees.
The Hsing-t’ien is a being that was decapitated for 
having fought against the gods, and so it has remained 
forever headless. Its eyes are in its chest and its navel is its 
mouth. It hops up and down and jumps about in clearings 
and other open places, and brandishes a shield and axe.
The Hua-fish, or flying snakefish, appears to be a fish 
but has the wings of a bird. Its appearance forebodes a 
period of drought.
The mountain Hui looks like a dog with a human head. 
It is a fine jumper and moves with the swiftness of an 
arrow; this is why its appearance is held to foretell the 
coming of typhoons. On beholding a man, the Hui laughs 
mockingly.


The Musical Serpent has a serpent’s head and four 
wings. It makes sounds like those of the Musical Stone.
The Ocean Men have human heads and arms, and the 
body and tail of a fish. They come to the surface in stormy 
weather.
The Ping-feng, which lives in the country of Magical 
Water, resembles a black pig with a head at each end.
In the region of the Queer Arm, people have a single 
arm and three eyes. They are exceptionally skilful and 
build flying chariots in which they travel on the winds.
The Ti-chiang is a supernatural bird dwelling in the 
Mountains of the Sky. Its colour is bright red, it has six 
feet and four wings, but has neither face nor eyes.
Fauna of Mirrors
In one of the volumes of the Lettres édifiantes et curieuses 
that appeared in Paris during the first half of the eighteenth 
century, Father Fontecchio of the Society of Jesus planned a 
study of the superstitions and misinformation of the 
common people of Canton; in the preliminary outline he 
noted that the Fish was a shifting and shining creature that 
nobody had ever caught but that many said they had 
glimpsed in the depths of mirrors. Father Fontecchio died in 
, and the work begun by his pen remained unfinished; 
some  years later Herbert Allen Giles took up the inter- 
rupted task. According to Giles, belief in the Fish is part of a 
larger myth that goes back to the legendary times of the 
Yellow Emperor.
In those days the world of mirrors and the world of men


were not, as they are now, cut off from each other. They 
were, besides, quite different; neither beings nor colours nor 
shapes were the same. Both kingdoms, the specular and the 
human, lived in harmony; you could come and go through 
mirrors. One night the mirror people invaded the earth. 
Their power was great, but at the end of bloody warfare the 
magic arts of the Yellow Emperor prevailed. He repulsed the 
invaders, imprisoned them in their mirrors, and forced on 
them the task of repeating, as though in a kind of dream, all 
the actions of men. He stripped them of their power and of 
their forms and reduced them to mere slavish reflections. 
Nonetheless, a day will come when the magic spell will be 
shaken off.
The first to awaken will be the Fish. Deep in the mirror we 
will perceive a very faint line and the colour of this line will 
be like no other colour. Later on, other shapes will begin to 
stir. Little by little they will differ from us; little by little 
they will not imitate us. They will break through the bar- 
riers of glass or metal and this time will not be defeated. Side 
by side with these mirror creatures, the creatures of water 
will join the battle.
In Yunnan they do not speak of the Fish but of the Tiger 
of the Mirror. Others believe that in advance of the invasion 
we will hear from the depths of mirrors the clatter of 
weapons.
Fauna of the United States
The yarns and tall tales of the lumber camps of Wisconsin 
and Minnesota include some singular creatures, in which, 
surely, no one ever believed.
There is the Hidebehind, which is always hiding behind


something. No matter how many times or whichever way a 
man turns, it is always behind him, and that’s why nobody 
has been able to describe it, even though it is credited with 
having killed and devoured many a lumberjack.
Then there is the Roperite. This animal is about the size of 
a pony. It has a ropelike beak which it uses to snare even the 
fleetest of rabbits.
The Teakettler owes its name to the noises it makes, 
much like those of a boiling teakettle. Vaporous clouds fume 
from its mouth and it walks backward. It has been seen very 
few times.
     The Axehandle Hound has a hatchet-shaped head, a 
handle-shaped body, and stumpy legs. This North Woods 
dachshund eats only the handles of axes.
Among the fish of this region we find the Upland Trout. 
They nest in trees and are good fliers but are scared of 
water.
     There’s another fish, the Goofang, that swims backward 
 to keep the water out of its eyes. It’s described as ‘about the 
size of a sunfish, only much bigger’.
We shouldn’t forget the Goofus Bird that builds its nest 
upside down and flies backward, not caring where it’s going, 
only where it’s been.
The Gillygaloo nested on the slopes of Paul Bunyan’s 
famed Pyramid Forty, laying square eggs to keep them from 
rolling down the steep incline and breaking. These eggs were 
coveted by lumberjacks, who hard-boiled them and used 
them as dice.
And finally there’s the Pinnacle Grouse, which had a 
single wing. This enabled it to fly in one direction only, 
circling the top of a conical hill. The colour of its plumage 
varied according to the season and according to the con- 
dition of the observer.


Garuda
Vishnu, second god of the triad that rules over the Hindu 
pantheon, rides either on the serpent that fills the seas or on 
the back of Garuda. Pictorially, Vishnu is represented as 
blue and with four arms, holding in each hand the club, the 
shell, the sphere, and the lotus. Garuda is half vulture and 
half man, with the wings, beak, and talons of the one and 
body and legs of the other. His face is white, his wings of a 
bright scarlet, and his body golden. Figures of Garuda, 
worked in bronze or stone, are worshipped in the temples of 
India. One is found in Gwalior, erected more than a hun- 
dred years before the Christian era by a Greek, Heliodorus, 
who became a follower of Vishnu.
In the Garuda Purana - one of the many Puranas, or tra- 
ditions, of Hindu lore - Garuda expounds at length on 
the beginnings of the universe, the solar essence of Vishnu, 
the rites of his cult, the genealogies of the kings descended 
from the sun and the moon, the plot of the Ramayana, and 
various minor topics, such as the craft of verse, grammar, 
and medicine.
In a seventh-century drama called the Mirth of the Snakes 
and held to be the work of a king, Garuda kills and each day 
devours a snake (probably the hooded cobra) until a Bud- 
dhist prince teaches him the value of abstinence. In the last 
act, the penitent Garuda brings back to life the bones of the 
many generations of serpents he has fed upon. Eggeling 
holds that this work may be a Brahman satire on Bud- 
dhism.
Nimbarka, a mystic whose date is uncertain, has written 
that Garuda is a soul saved forever, as are his crown, his 
earrings, and his flute.


The Gnomes
The Gnomes are older than their name, which is Greek but 
which was unknown to the ancients, since it dates from the 
sixteenth century, Etymologists attribute it to the Swiss al- 
chemist Paracelsus in whose writings it appears for the first 
time.
They are sprites of the earth and hills. Popular im- 
agination pictures them as bearded dwarfs of rough and gro- 
tesque features; they wear tight-fitting brown clothes with 
monastic hoods. Like the griffons of Greece and of the East 
and the dragons of Germanic lore, the Gnomes watch over 
hidden treasure.
Gnosis, in Greek, means knowledge; and Paracelsus may 
have called them Gnomes because they know the exact 
places where precious metals are to be found.
In a book inspired by infinite wisdom, nothing can be left to 
chance, not even the number of words it contains or the 
order of the letters; this is what the Kabbalists thought, and 
they devoted themselves to the task of counting, combining, 
and permutating the letters of the Scriptures, fired by a 
desire to penetrate the secrets of God. Dante stated that 
every passage of the Bible has a fourfold meaning - the lit- 
eral, the allegorical, the moral, and the spiritual. Johannes 
Scotus Erigena, closer to the concept of divinity, had already 
said that the meanings of the Scriptures are infinite, like the

The Golem

hues in a peacock’s tail. The Kabbalists would have ap- 
proved this view; one of the secrets they sought in the Bible 
was how to create living beings. It was said of demons that 
they could make large and bulky creatures like the camel, 
but were incapable of creating anything delicate or frail, 
and Rabbi Eliezer denied them the ability to produce any- 
thing smaller than a barley grain. ‘Golem’ was the name 
given to the man created by combinations of letters; the 
word means, literally, a shapeless or lifeless clod.
In the Talmud (Sanhedrin, b) we read:
If the righteous wished to create a world, they could do 
so. By trying different combinations of the letters of the 
ineffable names of God, Raba succeeded in creating a 
man, whom he sent to Rabbi Zera. Rabbi Zera spoke to 
him, but as he got no answer, he said: ‘You are a creature 
of magic; go back to your dust.’
Rabbi Hanina and Rabbi Oshaia, two scholars, spent 
every Sabbath eve studying the Book of Creation, by 
means of which they brought into being a three-year-old 
calf that they then used for the purposes of supper.
Schopenhauer, in his book Will in Nature, writes 
(Chapter ): ‘On page  of the first volume of his Zauber- 
bibliothek [Magic Library], Horst summarizes the teachings 
of the English mystic Jane Lead in this way: Whoever pos- 
sesses magical powers can, at will, master and change the 
mineral, vegetable, and animal kingdoms; consequently, 
a few magicians, working in agreement, could make this 
world of ours return to the state of Paradise.’
The Golem’s fame in the West is owed to the work of the 
Austrian writer Gustav Meyrink, who in the fifth chapter of 
his dream novel Der Golem () writes:
It is said that the origin of the story goes back to the 
seventeenth century. According to lost formulas of the 
Kabbalah, a rabbi [Judah Loew ben Bezabel] made an 
artificial man - the aforesaid Golem - so that he would


ring the bells and take over all the menial tasks of the 
synagogue.
He was not a man exactly, and had only a sort of dim, 
half-conscious, vegetative existence. By the power of a 
magic tablet which was placed under his tongue and 
which attracted the free sidereal energies of the universe, 
this existence lasted during the daylight hours.
One night before evening prayer, the rabbi forgot to 
take the tablet out of the Golem’s mouth, and the creature 
fell into a frenzy, running out into the dark alleys of the 
ghetto and knocking down those who got in his way, 
until the rabbi caught up with him and removed the 
tablet.
At once the creature fell lifeless. All that was left of 
him is the dwarfish clay figure that may be seen today in 
the New Synagogue.
Eleazar of Worms has preserved the secret formula for 
making a Golem. The procedures involved cover some 
twenty-three folio columns and require knowledge of the 
‘alphabets of the  gates’, which must be recited over each 
of the Golem’s organs. The word Emet, which means ‘Truth’, 
should be marked on its forehead; to destroy the creature, 
the first letter must be obliterated, forming the word met, 
 whose meaning is ‘death’.
Winged monsters, says Herodotus of the Griffons in his ac- 
counts of their continual warfare with the one-eyed Ar- 
imaspians; almost as sketchy, Pliny speaks of their ears and 
their hooked beaks, yet judges them fabulous (X, ). 
Perhaps the most detailed description of the Griffon comes

The Griffon

from the problematic Sir John Mandeville in Chapter  of 
his famous Travels:
From this land men shal go unto the land of Bactry, 
where are many wicked men & fell, in that land are trees 
that beare wol, as it were shepe, of which they make 
cloth. In this land are ypotains [hippopotamuses] that 
dwel sometime on land, sometime on water, and are halfe 
a man and halfe a horse, and they eate not but men, when 
they may get them. In this land are many gryffons, more 
than in other places, and some say they haue the body 
before as an Egle, and behinde as a Lyon, and it is trouth, 
for they be made so; but the Griffen hath a body greater 
than viii Lyons and stall worthier than a hundred Egles. 
For certainly he wyl beare to his nest flying, a horse and a 
man upon his back, or two Oxen yoked togither as they 
go at plowgh, for he hath large nayles on hys fete, as great 
as it were homes of Oxen, and of those they make cups 
there to drynke of, and of his rybes they make bowes to 
shoote with.
In Madagascar, another famous traveller, Marco Polo, 
heard the rukh spoken of and at first understood this as a 
reference to the uccello grifone, the Griffon bird (Travels,
III ).
In the Middle Ages, the symbolism of the Griffon is con- 
tradictory. An Italian bestiary says that it stands for the 
Devil; usually it is an emblem of Christ, and this is how 
Isidore of Seville explains it in his Etymologies: ‘Christ is a 
lion because he reigns and has great strength; and an eagle 
because, after the Resurrection, he ascended to heaven.’
In Canto XXIX of the Purgatorio, Dante has a vision of a 
triumphal chariot (the Church), drawn by a Griffon; its eagle 
portion is golden, its lion portion white mixed with red in 
order to signify - according to the commentaries - Christ’s 
human nature. (White slightly reddened gives the colour of 
human flesh.) The commentators are recalling the descrip-


tion of the beloved in the Song of Solomon (V: -): ‘My 
beloved is white and ruddy . . . His head is as the most fine 
gold . . .’
Others feel that Dante wished to symbolize the Pope, who 
is both priest and king. Didron, in his Manuel d’iconographie 
chrétienne (), writes: ‘The pope, as pontiff or eagle, is 
borne aloft to the throne of God to receive his commands, 
and as lion or king walks on earth with strength and 
might.’
Haniel, Kafziel, Azriel, and Aniel
In Babylon, the prophet Ezekiel saw in a vision four beasts or 
angels, ‘And every one had four faces, and every one had 
four wings’ and ‘As for the likeness of their faces, they four 
had the face of a man, and the face of a lion, on the right 
side: and they four had the face of an ox on the left side; 
they four also had the face of an eagle.’ They went where 
the spirit carried them, ‘every one straight forward’, or as 
the first Spanish Bible () has it, cada uno caminaua end- 
erecho de su rostro (‘each one went in the direction of his 
face’) which of course is so unimaginable as to be uncanny. 
Four wheels or rings, ‘so high that they were dreadful’ went 
with the angels and ‘were full of eyes round about 
them . . .’
An echo from Ezekiel may have been in the mind of St 
John the Divine when he spoke of animals in the fourth 
chapter of Revelations:
And before the throne there was a sea of glass like unto 
crystal: and in the midst of the throne, and round about 
the throne, were four beasts full of eyes before and 
behind.


And the first beast was like a lion, and the second beast 
like a calf, and the third beast had a face as a man, and the 
fourth beast was like a flying eagle.
And the four beasts had each of them six wings about 
him; and they were full of eyes within: and they rest not 
day and night, saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Al- 
mighty, which was, and is, and is to come.
In the most important of Kabbalistic works, the Zohar or 
Book of Splendour, we read that these four beasts are called 
Haniel, Kafziel, Azriel, and Aniel and that they face east, 
north, south, and west. Stevenson remarked that if such 
beings were to be found in Heaven, what might not be ex- 
pected of Hell.
A beast full of eyes is sufficiently awful, but Chesterton 
went further in the poem ‘A Second Childhood’:
But I shall not grow too old to see 
Enormous night arise,
A cloud that is larger than the world 
And a monster made of eyes.
The fourfold angels in Ezekiel are called Hayoth, or Living 
Beings; according to the Sefer Yeçirah, another of the Kab- 
balist books, they are the ten numbers that were used by 
God, together with the twenty-two letters of the alphabet, to 
create the world; according to the Zohar, they came down 
from Heaven crowned with letters.
The Evangelists drew their symbols from the four faces of 
the Hayoth: to Matthew fell the man’s face, sometimes 
bearded; to Mark, the lion’s; to Luke, the calf’s; and to John, 
the eagle’s. St Jerome in his commentary on Ezekiel has 
attempted to reason out these attributions. Matthew was 
given the man’s face because he emphasized the humanity 
of Christ; Mark the lion’s because he declared Christ’s royal 
standing; Luke the calf’s because it is an emblem of sacrifice; 
John the eagle’s because of Christ’s soaring spirit.


A German scholar, Dr Richard Hennig, looks for the 
remote origin of these symbols in four zodiacal signs which 
lie ninety degrees apart. The lion and the calf give no 
trouble; the man has been linked to Aquarius, who has a 
man’s face; and the eagle is evidently Scorpio considered an 
ill omen and therefore changed. Nicholas de Vore, in his En- 
cyclopedia of Astrology, sustains the same hypothesis and 
remarks that the four figures come together in the sphinx, 
which may have a human head, the body of a bull, the claws 
and tail of a lion, and the wings of an eagle.
Among the Dakota Sioux, Haokah used the wind as sticks to 
beat the thunder drum. His horned head also marked him as 
a hunting god. He wept when he was happy and laughed in 
his sadness; heat made him shiver and cold made him 
sweat.
In Hesiod’s Theogony, the Harpies are winged divinities 
who wear long loose hair and are swifter than the birds and 
winds, in the Aeneid (Book III), they are vultures with a 
woman’s face, sharp curved claws and filthy underparts, 
and are weak with a hunger they cannot appease. They 
swoop down from the mountains and plunder tables laid 
for feasts. They are invulnerable and emit an infectious

Haokah the Thunder God
Harpies

smell; they gorge all they see, screeching the whole while 
and fouling everything with excrement. Servius, in his com- 
mentaries on Virgil, writes that just as Hecate is Proserpina 
in hell, Diana on earth, and Luna in heaven, and is called a 
threefold goddess, so the Harpies are Furies in hell, Harpies 
on earth, and Dirae (or Demons) in heaven. They are also 
confused with the Parcae, or Fates.
By order of the gods, the Harpies harried a Thracian king 
who unveiled men’s futures, or who bought a long life with 
the price of his eyes, for which he was punished by the sun, 
whose works he had insulted by choosing blindness. He had 
prepared a banquet for all his court and the Harpies con- 
taminated and devoured the dishes. The Argonauts put the 
Harpies to flight; Apollonius of Rhodes and William Morris 
(The Life and Death of Jason) tell the fantastic story. Ariosto 
in Canto XXXIII of the Furioso transforms the Thracian 
king into Prester John, fabled emperor of the Abyssinians.
Harpy comes from the Greek harpazein to snatch or carry 
away. In the beginning they were wind goddesses, like the 
Maruts of Vedic myth, who wielded weapons of gold (the 
lightning) and milked the clouds.
According to the Chinese, the Heavenly Cock is a golden- 
plumed fowl that crows three times a day. The first, when 
the sun takes its morning bath on the horizons of the sea; the 
second, when the sun is at its height; the last, when it sinks 
in the west. The first crowing shakes the heavens and stirs 
mankind from sleep. Among the offspring of the Cock is the 
yang, the male principle of the universe. The Cock has three 
legs and perches in the fu-sang tree, which grows in the

The Heavenly Cock

lands of sunrise and whose height is measured by thousands 
of feet. The Heavenly Cock’s crowing is very loud, and its 
bearing, lordly. It lays eggs out of which are hatched chicks 
with red combs, who answer his song every morning. All the 
roosters on earth are descended from the Heavenly Cock, 
whose other name is the Bird of Dawn.
To signify impossibility or incongruence, Virgil spoke of 
breeding horses with griffons. Four centuries later, his com- 
mentator Servius explained that the griffon is an animal 
which in the top half of its body is an eagle and in the bottom 
half a lion. To strengthen his text he added that they detest 
horses. In time, the expression Jungentur jam grypes equis 
(‘To cross griffons with horses’) came to be proverbial; at the 
beginning of the sixteenth century, Ludovico Ariosto, re- 
membering it, invented the Hippogriff. Eagle and lion are 
united in the griffon of the ancients; horse and griffon in 
Ariosto’s Hippogriff, which makes it a second generation 
monster or invention. Pietro Micheli notes that it is more 
harmonious than the winged horse Pegasus.
A detailed description of the Hippogriff, written as for a 
handbook of fantastic zoology, is given in Orlando Furioso 
(IV, ):
The steed is not imagined but real, for it was sired by a 
Griffon out of a mare: like its father’s were its feathers 
and wings, its forelegs, head, and beak; in all its other 
parts it resembled its mother and was called Hippogriff; 
they come, though rarely, from the Rhiphaean Moun- 
tains, far beyond the icebound seas.

The Hippogriff

The first mention of the strange beast is deceptively casual 
(II, ):
And by the Rhone I came upon a man in arms, reining in a 
great winged horse.
Other stanzas give us the wonder of this creature that 
flies. The following (IV, ) is well known:
E vede l’oste e tutta la famiglia,
E chi a finestre e chi fuor ne la via,
Tener levati al ciel gli occhi e le ciglia,
Come l’Ecclisse o la Cometa sia.
Vede la Donna un’alta maraviglia,
Che di leggier creduta non saria:
Vede passar un gran destriero alato,
Che porta in aria un cavalliero armato.
[And she saw the landlord and all his house, and some at 
the windows and some in the street, their eyes and brows 
lifted to the sky as though it were an Eclipse or Comet. 
The Lady saw a wonder on high not easily to be believed: 
she saw pass over a great winged steed, bearing through 
the air a knight in arms.]
Astolpho, in one of the last cantos, unsaddles and un- 
bridles the Hippogriff and sets it free.
Ages ago, a certain South African bushman, Hochigan, hated 
animals, which at that time were endowed with speech. One 
day he disappeared, stealing their special gift. From then on, 
animals have never spoken again.

Hochigan

Descartes tells us that monkeys could speak if they 
wished to, but that they prefer to keep silent so that they 
won’t be made to work. In , the Argentine writer 
Lugones published a story about a chimpanzee who was 
taught how to speak and died under the strain of the 
effort.
Humbaba
What was the giant Humbaba like, who guards the moun- 
tain cedars in that pieced-together Assyrian epic Gilgamesh, 
which may be the world’s oldest poem? Georg Burckhardt 
has attempted to reconstruct it, and from his German ver- 
sion, published in Wiesbaden in , we give this pass- 
age:
Enkidu swung his axe and cut down one of the cedars. An 
angry voice rang out: Who has entered my forest and cut 
down one of my trees?’ Then they saw Humbaba himself 
coming: he had the paws of a lion and a body covered 
with horny scales; his feet had the claws of a vulture, and 
on his head were the horns of a wild bull; his tail and male 
member each ended in a snake’s head.
In one of the later cantos of Gilgamesh, we are introduced 
to creatures called Men-Scorpions who stand guard at the 
gate of the mountain Mashu. ‘Its twin peaks [in an English 
version by N. K. Sandars] are as high as the wall of heaven 
and its paps reach down to the underworld.’ It is into this 
mountain that the sun goes down at night and from which it 
returns at dawn. The Man-Scorpion is human in the upper 
part of its body, while its lower part ends in a scorpion’s 
tail.


The Hundred-Heads
The Hundred-Heads is a fish created by a hundred ill-tem- 
pered words uttered in the course of an otherwise blameless 
life. A Chinese biography of the Buddha tells that he once 
met some fishermen who were dragging in a net. After much 
toil they hauled up on to the shore a huge fish with one head 
of an ape, another of a dog, another of a horse, another of a 
fox, another of a hog, another of a tiger, and so on, up to 
one hundred. The Buddha asked the fish:
‘Are you Kapila?’
‘Yes, I am,’ the Hundred-heads answered before dying.
The Buddha explained to his disciples that in a previous 
incarnation Kapila was a Brahman who had become a monk 
and whose knowledge of the holy texts was unrivalled. 
Upon occasion, when his fellow students misread a word, 
Kapila would call them ape-head, dog-head, horse-head, and 
so forth. After his death, the karma of those many insults 
caused him to be reborn as a sea monster, weighed down by 
all the heads he had bestowed upon his companions.
The Hydra of Lerna
Typhon (the misshapen son of Tartarus and Terra) and Ec- 
hidna, who was half beautiful woman and half serpent, gave 
birth to the Hydra of Lerna. Lemprière tells us that ‘It had 
 heads, according to Diodorus; fifty according to 
Simonides; and nine according to the more received opinion 
of Apollodorus, Hyginus &c.’ But what made the creature still


more awful was that as soon as one of its heads was cut off, 
two more sprouted up in their place. It was said that the 
heads were human and that the middle one was everlasting. 
The Hydra’s breath poisoned the waters and turned the 
fields brown. Even when it slept, the pollution in the air 
surrounding it could cause a man’s death. Juno fostered the 
Hydra in her efforts to lessen Hercules’ fame.
This monster appears to have been destined for eternity. 
Its den lay among the marshes near the lake of Lerna. Her- 
cules and Iolaus went in search of it; Hercules lopped its 
heads and Iolaus applied a burning iron to the bleeding 
wounds, for only fire would stop the growth of the new 
heads. The last head, which was deathless, Hercules buried 
under a great boulder, and where it was buried it remains to 
this day, hating and dreaming.
In succeeding tasks with other beasts, Hercules inflicted 
deadly wounds with arrows dipped in the gall of the 
Hydra.
A sea crab friendly to the Hydra nipped Hercules’ heel 
when he stepped on it during his struggle with the many- 
headed monster. Juno placed the crab in the heavens where 
it is now a constellation and the sign of Cancer.
Ichthyocentaurs
Lycophron, Claudian, and the Byzantine grammarian John 
Tzetzes have each at some time referred to the Ichthy- 
ocentaur; there are no other allusions to it in classical writ- 
ings. Ichthyocentaur may be translated as ‘Centaur-Fish’. 
The word is applied to beings that mythologists have also 
called Centaur-Tritons. The image abounds in Greek and 
Roman sculpture. They are human down to their waist,


with the tail of a dolphin, and have the forelegs of a horse 
or a lion. Their place is among the gods of the ocean, close to 
the sea horses.
Jewish Demons
Between the world of the flesh and the world of the spirit, 
Jewish superstition imagined a middle ground inhabited by 
angels devils. A census of its population left the bounds 
of arithmetic far behind. Throughout the centuries, Egypt, 
Babylonia, and Persia all enriched this teeming middle 
world. Maybe because of Christian influence (suggests Trach- 
tenberg), demonology, or the lore of devils, became of less 
account than angelology, or the lore of angels.
Let us, however, single out Keteb Mereri, Lord of the 
Noontide and of Scorching Summers. Some children on their 
way to school once met up with him; all but two died. 
During the thirteenth century Jewish demonology swelled 
its ranks with Latin, French, and German intruders who 
ended up becoming thoroughly integrated with the natives 
recorded in the Talmud.
The Jinn
According to Moslem tradition, Allah created three different 
species of intelligent beings: Angels, who are made of light; 
Jinn (‘Jinnee’ or ‘Genie’ in the singular), who are made of 
fire; and Men, who are made of earth. The Jinn were created


of a black smokeless fire some thousands of years before 
Adam, and consist of five orders. Among these orders we 
find good Jinn and evil, male Jinn and female. The cos- 
mographer al-Qaswini says that ‘the Jinn are aerial animals, 
with transparent bodies, which can assume various forms’. 
At first they may show themselves as clouds or as huge 
undefined pillars; when their form becomes condensed, they 
become visible, perhaps in the bulk of a man, a jackal, a 
wolf, a lion, a scorpion, or a snake. Some are true believers; 
others, heretics or atheists. The English Orientalist Edward 
William Lane writes that when Jinn take the shape of 
human beings they are sometimes of an enormously gigantic 
size and ‘if good, they are generally resplendently hand- 
some: if evil, horribly hideous.’ They are also said to become 
invisible at pleasure ‘by a rapid extension or rarefaction of 
the particles which compose them’, when they may disap- 
pear into the air or earth or through a solid wall.
The Jinn often attain the lower heavens, where they over- 
hear the conversations of angels about future events. This 
enables them to help wizards and soothsayers. Certain schol- 
ars attribute to them the building of the Pyramids or, under 
the orders of Solomon, the great Temple of Jerusalem.
The usual dwelling-places of Jinn are ruined houses, water 
cisterns, rivers, wells, crossroads, and markets. The Egyp- 
tians say that the pillarlike whirlwinds of sand raised in the 
desert are caused by the flight of an evil Jinnee. They also 
say that shooting stars are arrows hurled by Allah against 
evil Jinn. Among the acts perpetrated by these evil-doers 
against human beings, the following are traditional: the 
throwing of bricks and stones at passers-by from roofs and 
windows, the abduction of beautiful women, the per- 
secution of anyone who tries to live in an uninhabited 
house, and the pilfering of provisions. Invoking the name of 
Allah the All Merciful, the Compassionate, is usually enough 
to secure one against such depredations, however.
The ghoul, which haunts burial grounds and feeds upon


dead human bodies, is thought to be an inferior order of the 
Jinn. Iblis is the father of the Jinn and their chief.
In , young Victor Hugo wrote a tumultuous fifteen- 
stanza poem ‘Les Djinns’ about a gathering of these beings. 
With each stanza, as the Jinn cluster together, the lines grow 
longer and longer, until the eighth, when they reach their 
fullness. From this point on they dwindle to the close of the 
poem, when the Jinn vanish.
Burton and Noah Webster link the word ‘Jinn’ and the 
Latin ‘genius’, which is from the verb ‘beget’. Skeat con- 
tradicts this.
The Kami
In a passage from Seneca, we read that Thales of Miletus 
taught that the earth floats in a surrounding sea, like a ship, 
and that these waters when tossed and driven by the tem- 
pests are the cause of earthquakes. Historians or mytho- 
logists of eighth-century Japan offer us a rather different 
seismological system. In the Sacred Scriptures it is written:
Now beneath the Fertile-Land-of-Reed-Plains lay a Kami 
in the form of a great cat-fish, and by its movement it 
caused the earth to quake, till the Great Deity of Deer- 
Island thrust his sword deep into the earth and transfixed 
the Kami’s head. So, now, when the evil Kami is violent, 
he puts forth his hand and lays it upon the sword till the 
Kami becomes quiet.
The hilt of this sword, carved in granite projects some three 
feet out of the ground near the shrine of Kashima. In the 
seventeenth century, a feudal lord dug for six days without 
reaching the tip of the blade.


In popular belief, the Jinshin-Uwo, or Earthquake-Fish, is 
an eel seven hundred miles long that holds Japan on its back. 
It runs from north to south, its head lying beneath Kyoto 
and its tail beneath Awomori. Some logical thinkers have 
argued for the reverse of this order, for it is in the south of 
Japan that earthquakes are more frequent, and it is easier to 
equate this with the lashing of the eel’s tail. This animal is 
not unlike the Bahamut of Moslem tradition or the Miõ- 
garõsormr of the Eddas.
In certain regions the Earthquake-Fish is replaced, with 
little apparent advantage, by the Earthquake-Beetle (Jinshin- 
Mushi). It has a dragon’s head, ten spider legs, and a scaly 
body. It is an underground, not an undersea, creature.
A King of Fire and His Steed
Heraclitus taught us that the primal element, or root, is fire, 
but this hardly means that there are beings made of fire, 
carved of the shifting substance of flames. This almost unim- 
aginable fancy was attempted by William Morris in the tale 
‘The Ring Given to Venus’ from his cycle The Earthly Para- 
dise (-). It runs as follows:
Most like a mighty king was he,
And crowned and sceptred royally;
As a white flame his visage shone,
Sharp, clear-cut as a face of stone;
But flickering flame, not flesh, it was;
And over it such looks did pass 
Of wild desire, and pain, and fear,
As in his people’s faces were,
But tenfold fiercer: furthermore,


A wondrous steed the master bore,
Unnameable of kind or make,
Not horse, nor hippogriff, nor drake.
Like and unlike to all of these,
And flickering like the semblances 
Of an ill dream . . .
Perhaps in the above lines there is an echo of the delib- 
erately ambiguous personification of Death in Paradise Lost 
(II, -):
The other shape,
If shape it might be called that shape had none 
Distinguishable in member, joint, or limb.
Or substance might be call’d that shadow seem’d,
For each seem’d either; black it stood as Night,
Fierce as ten Furies, terrible as Hell,
And shook a dreadful Dart; what seem’d his head 
The likeness of a Kingly Crown had on.
The Kraken
The Kraken is a Scandinavian version of the zaratan and of 
the sea dragon, or sea snake of the Arabs.
In -, the Dane Erik Pontoppidan, Bihsop of Bergen, 
published a Natural History of Norway, a work famous for 
its hospitality or gullibility. In its pages we read that the 
Kraken’s back is a mile and a half wide and that its tentacles 
are capable of encompassing the largest of ships. The huge 
back protrudes from the sea like an island. The Bishop form- 
ulates this rule: ‘Floating islands are invariably Krakens.’ He 
also writes that the Kraken is in the habit of turning the sea 
murky with a discharge of liquid. This statement has in-


spired the hypothesis that the Kraken is an enlargement of 
the octopus.
Among Tennyson’s juvenilia we find this poem to the 
curious creature:
The Kraken
Below the thunders of the upper deep,
Far, far beneath the abysmal sea,
His ancient, dreamless, uninvaded sleep 
The Kraken sleepeth: faintest sunlights flee 
About his shadowy sides; above him swell 
Huge sponges of millennial growth and height;
And far away into the sickly light,
From many a wondrous grot and secret cell 
Unnumber’d and enormous polypi 
Winnow with giant arms the slumbering green.
There hath he lain for ages, and will lie 
Battening upon huge sea-worms in his sleep,
Until the latter fire shall heat the deep;
Then once by man and angels to be seen,
In roaring he shall rise and on the surface die.
In Moslem cosmology, Kujata is a huge bull endowed with 
four thousand eyes, ears, nostrils, mouths, and feet. To get 
from one ear to another or from one eye to another, no more 
than five hundred years are required. Kujata stands on the 
back of the fish Bahamut; on the bull’s back is a great rock of 
ruby, on the rock an angel, and on the angel rests our earth. 
Under the fish is a mighty sea, under the sea a vast abyss of

Kujata

air, under the air fire, and under the fire a serpent so great 
that were it not for fear of Allah, this creature might swal- 
low up all creation.
The Lamed Wufniks
There are on earth, and always were, thirty-six righteous 
men whose mission is to justify the world before God. They 
are the Lamed Wufniks. They do not know each other and 
are very poor. If a man comes to the knowledge that he is a 
Lamed Wufnik, he immediately dies and somebody else, 
perhaps in another part of the world, takes his place. Lamed 
Wufniks are, without knowing it, the secret pillars of the 
universe. Were it not for them, God would annihilate the 
whole of mankind. Unawares, they are our saviours.
This mystical belief of the Jews can be found in the works 
of Max Brod. Its remote origin may be the eighteenth chap- 
ter of Genesis, where we read this verse: ‘And the Lord said, 
If I find in Sodom fifty righteous within the city, then I will 
spare all the place for their sakes.’
The Moslems have an analogous personage in the Kutb.
The Lamias
According to the Greeks and Romans, Lamias lived in Africa. 
From the waist up their form was that of a beautiful 
woman; from the waist down they were serpents. Many 
authorities thought of them as witches; others as evil mon-


sters. They lacked the ability to speak, but they made a 
whistling sound which was musical, and in the spaces of the 
desert beguiled travellers in order to devour them. Their 
remote origin was divine, having sprung from one of the 
many loves of Zeus. In that section of his Anatomy of Mel- 
ancholy () that deals with the power of love, Robert 
Burton writes:
Philostratus, in his Fourth Book de vita Apollonii, hath a 
memorable instance in this kind, which I may not omit, of 
one Menippus Lycius a young man  years of age, that 
going betwixt Cenchreoe and Corinth, met such a phan- 
tasm in the habit of a fair gentlewoman, which, taking 
him by the hand, carried him home to her house in the 
suburbs of Corinth, and told him she was a Phoenician by 
birth, and if he would tarry with her, he should hear her 
sing and play, and drink such wine as never any drank, 
and no man should molest him; but she being fair and 
lovely would live and die with him, that was fair and 
lovely to behold. The young man, a Philosopher, other- 
wise staid and discreet, able to moderate his passions, 
though not this of love, tarried with her a while to his 
great content, and at last married her, to whose wedding, 
among other guests, came Apollonius, who by some prob- 
able conjectures found her out to be a serpent, a Lamia, 
and that all her furniture was like Tantalus’ gold de- 
scribed by Homer, no substance, but mere illusions. When 
she saw herself descried, she wept, and desired Apollonius 
to be silent, but he would not be moved, and thereupon 
she, plate, house, and all that was in it, vanished in an 
instant: many thousands took notice of this fact, for it 
was done in the midst of Greece.
Shortly before his death, John Keats was moved by this 
reading of Burton to compose his extensive poem ’Lamia’.


Laudatores Temporis Acti
The seventeenth-century Portuguese sea captain, Luiz da Sil- 
veira, in his De Gentibus et Moribus Asiae (Lisbon, ) 
refers somewhat obliquely to an Eastern sect - whether 
Indian or Chinese we are not told - which he calls, using a 
Latin tag, Laudatories Temporis Acti. The good captain is no 
metaphysician or theologian, but he none the less makes 
clear the nature of time past as conceived by the Worship- 
pers. The past to us is merely a section of time, or a series of 
sections that were once the present and that may now be 
approximately recalled by memory or by history. Both 
memory and history make these sections, of course, part of 
the present. To the Worshippers, the past is absolute; it 
never had a present, nor can it be remembered or even 
guessed at. Neither unity nor plurality can be ascribed to it, 
since these are attributes of the present. The same may be 
said of its denizens - if the plural be allowed - with respect 
to their colour, size, weight, shape, and so on. Nothing about 
the beings of this Once That Never Was can be either 
affirmed or denied.
Silveira remarks on the utter hopelessness of the sect; the 
Past, as such, could have no inkling of its being worshipped 
and could afford no help or comfort to its votaries. Had the 
captain given us the native name or some other clue about 
this curious community, further investigation would be 
easier. We know they had neither temples nor sacred books. 
Are there still any Worshippers - or do they now, together 
with their dim belief, belong to the past?


The Lemures
The ancients supposed that men’s souls after death wan- 
dered all over the world and disturbed the peace of its 
inhabitants. The good spirits were called Lares familiares, 
and the evil ones were known by the name of Larvae, or 
Lemures. They terrified the good, and continually haunted 
the wicked and impious; and the Romans had the custom 
of celebrating festivals in their honour, called Lemuria, or 
Lemuralia, in the month of May. They were first insti- 
tuted by Romulus to appease the ghost of his brother 
Remus, from whom they were called Remuria, and, by 
corruption, Lemuria. These solemnities continued three 
nights, during which the temples of the gods were shut 
and marriages were prohibited. It was usual for the 
people to throw black beans on the graves of the de- 
ceased, or to burn them, as the smell was supposed to be 
insupportable to them. They also muttered magical 
words, and, by beating kettles and drums, they believed 
that the ghosts would depart and no longer come to ter- 
rify their relations upon earth.
Lemprière: Classical Dictionary
The Leveller
Between  and , the Father of Light (whom we may 
also call the Inner Voice) granted the Bavarian musician and 
schoolteacher Jakob Lorber an unbroken series of trust- 
worthy revelations concerning the human population, the


fauna, and the flora of the celestial bodies of our solar 
system. Among the domestic animals we have knowledge 
of, thanks to these revelations, is found the Leveller, or 
Ground-Flattener 
(Bodendrücker), 
which 
renders 
im- 
measurable services on Miron, the planet identified with 
Neptune by Lorber’s most recent editors.
The Leveller has ten times the girth of the elephant, to 
which it bears a striking resemblance. It is provided with a 
rather stumpy trunk and with long straight tusks; its hide is 
of a sickly green. Its limbs, pyramid-shaped, widen enor- 
mously at the hoof; the apexes of these pyramids appear to 
be pinned to the body. This noted plantigrade, in advance of 
builders and bricklayers, is led to the rough terrain of a con- 
struction site, where, with the aid of its hooves, its trunk, 
and its tusks, it proceeds to flatten out and tramp the 
ground.
The Leveller feeds on roots and herbage and has no 
enemies outside of one or two species of insects.
Lilith
‘For before Eve was Lilith’, we read in an old Hebrew text. 
This legend moved the English poet Dante Gabriel Rossetti 
(-) to write the poem ‘Eden Bower’. Lilith was a ser- 
pent; she was Adam’s first wife and gave him
Shapes that coiled in the woods and waters,
Glittering sons and radiant daughters.
It was later that God created Eve; Lilith, to revenge herself 
on Adam’s human wife, urged Eve to taste the forbidden 
fruit and to conceive Cain, brother and murderer of Abel. 
Such is the early form of the myth followed and bettered by


Rossetti. Throughout the Middle Ages the influence of the 
word layil, Hebrew for ‘night’, gave a new turn to the myth. 
Lilith is no longer a serpent; she becomes an apparition of 
the night. At times she is an angel who rules over the pro- 
creation of mankind, at times a demon who assaults those 
who sleep alone or those who travel lonely roads. In popular 
imagination she is a tall silent woman with long black hair 
worn loose.
The Lunar Hare
In the blotches of the moon, the English believe they make 
out the form of a man; in A Midsummer Night’s Dream there 
are two or three references to the ‘man in the moon’. Shake- 
speare mentions its bundle, or bush, of thorn; in the last lines 
of Canto XX of the Inferno, Dante had already spoken of 
Cain and of these thorns. The commentary by Tommaso 
Casini cites the Tuscan fable in which the Lord banished 
Cain to the moon, condemning him to carry a bundle of 
thorns to the end of time. Others have seen in the moon the 
Holy Family; Leopoldo Lugones wrote in his Lunario sen- 
timental:
Y está todo: la Virgen con el niño; al flanco,
San José (algunos tienen la buena fortuna 
De ver su vara); y el buen burrito bianco 
Trota que trota los campos de la luna.
[And everything is there: Virgin and Child; by her side, 
Saint Joseph (some are lucky enough to see his staff); and 
the good little white donkey that trots and trots over the 
acres of the moon.]
The Chinese speak of a Lunar Hare. Buddha, in one of his


former lives, suffered hunger; in order to feed him, a Hare 
leaped into a fire. The Buddha in gratitude sent the Hare’s 
soul to the moon. There, under an acacia, the Hare pounds in 
a magical mortar the herbs that make up the elixir of life. In 
the common speech of certain provinces, this Hare is called 
the Physician or the Precious Hare or the Hare of Jade.
The ordinary Hare is believed to live for a thousand years 
and to turn white in its old age.
Shakespeare, by the way, refers to a dead mooncalf in The 
Tempest (II, ii). This creature, according to commentators, is 
an uncouth monster begotten on earth under the moon’s 
influence.
The Mandrake
Like the barometz, the plant known as the Mandrake 
borders on the animal kingdom, since it gives a cry when it 
is torn up; this cry can drive those who hear it mad. We read 
in Shakespeare (Romeo and Juliet, IV, iii):
And shrieks like mandrakes torn out of the earth,
That living mortals, hearing them, run mad . . .
Pythagoras called the plant anthropomorphic; the Roman 
agronomist Lucius Columella called it semi-human; and Al- 
bertus Magnus wrote that the Mandrake is like man himself, 
down to the distinction between the sexes. Earlier, Pliny had 
said that the white Mandrake is the male and the black the 
female. Also, that those who root it out first trace three 
circles on the ground with a sword and look westward; the 
smell of its leaves is so strong that ordinarily it can deprive 
men of the power of speech. To uproot it was to run the risk 
of terrible calamities. In the last book of his History of the


Jewish Wars, Flavius Josephus advises us to employ a 
trained dog; the plant dug up, the dog dies, but the leaves are 
useful as a narcotic, a laxative, and for the purposes of magic.
The Mandrake’s supposed human form has suggested the 
superstition that it grows at the foot of the gallows. Sir 
Thomas Browne (Pseudodoxia Epidemica, ) speaks of 
the grease of hanged men; the once popular German writer 
Hanns Heinz Ewers wrote a novel (Alraune, ) around 
the idea of the hanged man’s seed being injected into a 
harlot and producing a beautiful witch. In German, ‘man- 
drake’ is Alraune; earlier it was Alruna, a word that comes 
originally from ‘rune’, which stood for ‘whisper’ or ‘buzz’. 
Hence (according to Skeat) it meant ‘a mystery . . . a writing, 
because written characters were regarded as a mystery 
known to the few’. Perhaps, more simply, the idea of a vis- 
ible mark standing for a sound baffled the Nordic mind, and 
therein lay the mystery.
Genesis (XXX: -) has this strange account of the re- 
productive powers of the Mandrake:
And Reuben went in the days of wheat harvest, and 
found mandrakes in the field, and brought them unto his 
mother Leah. Then Rachel said to Leah, Give me, I pray 
thee, of thy son’s mandrakes.
And she said unto her, Is it a small matter that thou hast 
taken my husband? and wouldest thou take away my 
son’s mandrakes also? And Rachel said, Therefore he shall 
lie with thee tonight for thy son’s mandrakes.
And Jacob came out of the field in the evening, and 
Leah went out to meet him, and said, Thou must come in 
unto me; for surely I have hired thee with my son’s man- 
drakes. And he lay with her that night.
And God hearkened unto Leah, and she conceived, and 
bare Jacob the fifth son.
In the twelfth century, a German-Jewish commentator on 
the Talmud wrote this paragraph:


A kind of cord comes out of a root in the ground and 
tied to the cord by its navel, like a squash or melon, is the 
animal known as the yadu’a, but the yadu’a is in all re- 
spects like a man: face, body, hands, and feet. It uproots 
and destroys all things around it as far as the cord reaches. 
The cord should be cut by an arrow, and the animal 
dies.
The physician Dioscorides (second century a.d.) identified 
the Mandrake with the circea, or herb of Circe, of which we 
read in the tenth book of the Odyssey:
At the root it was black, but its flower was like milk. 
Moly the gods call it, and it is hard for mortal man to dig; 
but the gods are all-powerful.
The Manticore
Pliny (VIII, ) informs us that according to Ctesias, the 
Greek physician of Artaxerxes Mnemon, among the Eth- 
iopians
there is an animal found, which he calls the mantichora; it 
has a triple row of teeth, which fit into each other like 
those of a comb, the face and ears of a man, and azure eyes, 
is of the colour of blood, has the body of the lion, and a 
tail ending in a sting, like that of the scorpion. Its voice 
resembles the union of the sound of the flute and the trum- 
pet; it is of excessive swiftness, and is particularly fond of 
human flesh.
Flaubert has improved upon this description, and in the 
last pages of The Temptation of Saint Anthony, we read:
The Manticore a gigantic red lion with a human face 
and three rows of teeth.


‘The iridescence of my scarlet hide blends into the shim- 
mering brightness of the desert sands. Through my nos- 
trils I exhale the horror of the lonely places of the earth. I 
spit out pestilence. I consume armies when they venture 
into the desert.
‘My nails are twisted into talons, like drills, and my 
teeth are cut like those of a saw; my restless tail prickles 
with darts, which I shoot left and right, before me, behind. 
Watch!’
The Manticore shoots the quills of its tail, which spread 
out like arrows on every hand. Drops of blood drip down, 
spattering the leaves of the trees.
The Mermecolion
The Mermecolion is an inconceivable animal defined by Flau- 
bert in this way: ‘lion in its foreparts, ant in its hindparts, 
with the organs of its sex the wrong way’. The history of 
this monster is also strange. In the Scriptures (Job IV: II) we 
read: ‘The old lion perisheth for lack of prey.’ The Hebrew 
text has layish for lion; this word, an uncommon one for the 
lion, seems to have produced an equally uncommon trans- 
lation. The Septuagint version, harking back to an Arabian 
lion that Aelian and Strabo call myrmex, forged the word 
Mermecolion. After centuries, the origin of this was for- 
gotten. Myrmex, in Greek, means ant; out of the puzzling 
words The ant-lion perisheth for lack of prey’ grew a fan- 
tasy (translated below by T. H. White) that medieval besti- 
aries succeeded in multiplying:
The Physiologus said: It had the face (or fore-part) of a
lion and the hinder parts of an ant. Its father eats flesh,


but its mother grains. If then they engender the ant-lion, 
they engender a thing of two natures, such that it cannot 
eat flesh because of the nature of its mother, nor grains 
because of the nature of its father. It perishes, therefore, 
because it has no nutriment.
The Minotaur
The idea of a house built so that people could become lost in 
it is perhaps more unusual than that of a man with a bull’s 
head, but both ideas go well together and the image of the 
labyrinth fits with the image of the Minotaur. It is equally 
fitting that in the centre of a monstrous house there be a 
monstrous inhabitant.
The Minotaur, half bull and half man, was born of the 
furious passion of Pasiphae, Queen of Crete, for a white bull 
that Neptune brought out of the sea. Daedalus, who inven- 
ted the artifice that carried the Queen’s unnatural desires to 
gratification, built the labyrinth destined to confine and 
keep hidden her monstrous son. The Minotaur fed on human 
flesh and for its nourishment the King of Crete imposed on 
the city of Athens a yearly tribute of seven young men and 
seven maidens. Theseus resolved to deliver his country from 
this burden when it fell to his lot to be sacrificed to the 
Minotaur’s hunger. Ariadne, the King’s daughter, gave him a 
thread so that he could trace his way out of the windings of 
the labyrinth’s corridors; the hero killed the Minotaur and 
was able to escape from the maze.
Ovid in a line that is meant to be clever speaks of the 
Semibovemque virum, semivirumque bovem (‘the man half 
bull, the bull half man’). Dante, who was familiar with the 
writings of the ancients but not with their coins or monu-


ments, imagined the Minotaur with a man’s head and a bull’s 
body (Inferno, XII, -).
The worship of the bull and of the two-headed axe (whose 
name was labrys and may have been at the root of the word 
labyrinth) was typical of pre-Hellenic religions, which held 
sacred bullfights. Human forms with bull heads figured, to 
judge by wall paintings, in the demonology of Crete. Most 
likely the Greek fable of the Minotaur is a late and clumsy 
version of far older myths, the shadow of other dreams still 
more full of horror.
The Monkey of the Inkpot
This animal, common in the north, is four or five inches 
long; its eyes are scarlet and its fur is jet black, silky, and 
soft as a pillow. It is marked by a curious instinct - the 
taste for India ink. When a person sits down to write, the 
monkey squats cross-legged near by with one forepaw 
folded over the other, waiting until the task is over. Then 
it drinks what is left of the ink, and afterwards sits back 
on its haunches, quiet and satisfied.
Wang Tai-hai ()
The Monster Acheron
Only one person, one time, ever saw the monster Acheron; 
this took place in the twelfth century in the Irish town of 
Cork. The original version of the story, written in Gaelic, is 
now lost, but a Benedictine monk from Regensburg


(Ratisbon) translated it into Latin, and from this translation 
the tale passed into a number of languages, among them 
Swedish and Spanish. Of the Latin version there are some 
fifty-odd manuscripts extant, agreeing in all the essentials. 
Visio Tundali (Tundal’s Vision) is the story’s name, and it has 
been considered one of the sources of Dante’s poem.
Let us begin with the word ‘Acheron’. In the tenth book of 
the Odyssey it is one of the rivers of hell, flowing somewhere 
on the western borders of the inhabited world. Its name is re- 
echoed in the Aeneid, in Lucan’s Pharsalia, and in Ovid’s 
Metamorphoses. Dante engraves it in a line: Su la trista rivi- 
era d’Acheronte (‘On the sad shores of the Acheron’).
In one myth, Acheron is a Titan suflering punishment; in 
another, dating earlier, he is placed close to the South Pole, 
below the constellations of the antipodes. The Etruscans had 
‘books of fate’ that taught divination and ‘books of Acheron’ 
that taught the ways of the soul after bodily death. In time, 
Acheron came to stand for hell.
Tundal was an Irish gentleman, well-mannered and brave, 
but of hardly irreproachable habits. He once fell ill while at 
the home of a lady friend, and for three days and nights was 
taken for dead, except for a bit of warmth in his heart. 
When he recovered his senses, he told that his guardian 
angel had shown him the lands beyond this world. Of the 
many wonders he saw, the one which interests us here is the 
monster Acheron.
He is bigger than any mountain. His eyes flame and his 
mouth is so large that nine thousand persons could fit in it. 
Two damned men, like pillars or atlantes, prop it open; one 
stands on his feet, the other on his head. Three throats lead 
inside and belch undying fire. From deep in the beast’s belly 
comes the continuous wailing of the countless lost souls 
who are being devoured. Devils tell Tundal that the monster 
is called Acheron. His guardian angel deserts him, and 
Tundal is swept inside with the others. There he finds him- 
self in the midst of tears, darkness, gnashing teeth, fire, un-


bearable burning, icy cold, dogs, bears, lions, and snakes. In 
this legend, hell is a beast with other beasts inside it.
In , Emanuel Swedenborg wrote: ‘It has not been 
granted me to perceive Hell’s general shape, but I have been 
told that in the same way that Heaven has a human shape. 
Hell has the shape of a devil.’
The Mother of Tortoises
Twenty-two centuries before the Christian era, the good em- 
peror Yü the Great travelled and measured with his steps 
the Nine Mountains, the Nine Rivers, and the Nine Marshes, 
and divided the land into Nine Provinces fit for virtue and 
agriculture. In this way he held back the Waters that threat- 
ened to flood Heaven and Earth, and left us this account of 
his Public Works (Legge’s translation):
I mounted my four conveyances (carts, boats, sledges, and 
spiked shoes), and all along the hills hewed down the 
woods, at the same time, along with Yi, showing the 
multitudes how to get flesh to eat. I opened passages for 
the streams throughout the nine provinces, and conducted 
them to the sea. I deepened the channels and canals, and 
conducted them to the streams, at the same time, along 
with Chi, sowing grain, and showing the multitudes how 
to procure the food of toil in addition to flesh meat.
Historians tell that the manner in which he divided his ter- 
ritory was revealed to him by a supernatural or sacred Tor- 
toise that arose from the bed of a river. There are those who 
claim that this amphibious creature, the mother of all Tor- 
toises, was made of water and fire; others attribute a less 
common substance to it: starlight of the constellation


Sagittarius. On the Tortoise’s shell could be read a cosmic 
treatise called the Hong Fan (Universal Rule), or a diagram 
made of black and white dots of the Nine Subdivisions of 
that treatise.
To the Chinese, the heavens are hemispherical and the 
earth quadrangular, and so, in the Tortoise with its curved 
upper shell and flat lower shell, they find an image or model 
of the world. Moreover, Tortoises share in cosmic longevity; 
it is therefore fitting that they should be included among the 
spiritually endowed creatures (together with the unicorn, 
the dragon, the phoenix, and the tiger) and that soothsayers 
read the future in the pattern of their shells.
Than-Qui (Tortoise-Spirit) is the name of the creature that 
revealed the Hong Fan to the emperor.
Nagas belong to the mythology of India. They are serpents 
but often take the form of a man.
In one of the books of the Mahabharata, Arjuna is pur- 
sued by Ulupi, the daughter of a Naga king, and firmly but 
gently has to remind her of his vow of chastity; the maiden 
tells him that his duty lies in soothing the unhappy. The hero 
grants her a night. The Buddha, meditating under a fig tree, 
is chastised by the wind and the rain; a Naga out of pity 
coils itself around him in a sevenfold embrace and opens 
over him its seven heads so as to form a kind of umbrella. 
The Buddha converts him to the Faith.
Kern in his Manual of Indian Buddhism, speaks of the 
Nagas as cloudlike serpents. They live underground in deep 
palaces. Believers in the Greater Vehicle tell that the Buddha 
preached one law to mankind and another to the gods, and

The Nagas

that this latter - the secret law - was kept in the heavens 
and palaces of the serpents, who revealed it centuries later 
to the monk Nagarjuna.
We give an Indian legend set down by the Chinese pilgrim 
Fa-hsien early in the fifth century:
King Asoka came to a lake near whose edge stood a 
lofty pagoda. He thought of pulling it down in order to 
raise a higher one. A Brahman let him into the tower and 
once inside told him:
‘My human form is an illusion. I am really a Naga, a 
dragon. My sins condemn me to inhabit this frightful 
body, but I obey the law preached by the Buddha and 
hope to work my redemption. You may pull down this 
shrine if you believe you can build a better one.’
The Naga showed him the vessels of the altar. The king 
looked at them with alarm, for they were quite unlike 
those made by the hands of men, and he left the pagoda 
standing.
The Nasnas
Among the monstrous creatures of the Temptation is the 
Nasnas, which ‘has only one eye, one cheek, one hand, one 
leg, half a torso and half a heart’. A commentator, Jean- 
Claude Margolin, credits the invention of this beast to Flau- 
bert, but Lane in the first volume of The Arabian Nights’ 
Entertainments () says it is believed to be the offspring 
of the Shikk, a demonical creature divided longitudinally, 
and a human being. The Nasnas, according to Lane (who 
gives it as Nesnás), resembles ‘half a human being; having 
half a head, half a body, one arm, and one leg, with which it 
hops with much agility . . .’ It is found in the woods and


desert country of Yemen and Hadhramaut, and is endowed 
with speech. One race has its face in the breast, like the 
blemies, and a tail like that of a sheep. Its flesh is sweet and 
much sought after. Another variety of Nasnas, having the 
wings of a bat, inhabits the island of Ráïj (perhaps Borneo) 
at the edge of the China seas. ‘But God,’ adds the sceptical 
authority, ‘is All-Knowing.’
In medieval Norse mythology the Norns are the Fates. Snorri 
Sturluson, who at the beginning of the thirteenth century 
brought order to the scattered Northern myths, tells us that 
the Norns are three and that their names are Urth (the past), 
Verthandi (the present), and Skuld (the future). These three 
heavenly Norns ruled the fate of the world, while at the birth 
of every man three individual Norns were present, casting 
the weird of his life. It may be suspected that the names of 
the Norns are a refinement or addition of a theological 
nature; ancient Germanic tribes were incapable of such ab- 
stract thinking. Snorri shows us three maidens by a fountain 
at the base of the World Tree, Yggdrasil. Inexorably, they 
weave our fate.
Time (of which they are made) seemed to have quite for- 
gotten them, but around  William Shakespeare wrote 
the tragedy of Macbeth, in whose first scene they appear. 
They are the three witches who predict what fate holds in 
store for Banquo and Macbeth. Shakespeare calls them the 
weird sisters (I, iii):
The weird sisters, hand in hand,
Posters of the seas and land,
Thus do go about, about . . .

The Norns

Wyrd among the Anglo-Saxons was the silent goddess who 
presided over the destiny of gods and men.
Paracelsus limited their dominion to water, but the ancients 
thought the world was full of Nymphs. They distinguished 
them by names according to the places they haunted. The 
Dryads, or Hamadryads, dwelled in trees, without being 
seen, and died with them. Other Nymphs were held to be 
immortal or, as Plutarch obscurely intimates, lived for 
above , years. Among these were the Nereids and the 
Oceanids, which presided over the sea. Nymphs of the lakes 
and streams were Naiads; those of mountains and caves, 
Oreads. There were also Nymphs of the glens, called Nap- 
aeae, and of groves called Alseids. The exact number of the 
Nymphs is unknown; Hesiod gives us the figure three thou- 
sand. They were earnest young women and very beautiful; 
their name may mean simply ‘marriageable woman’. 
Glimpsing them could cause blindness and, if they were 
naked, death. A line of Propertius affirms this.
The ancients made them offerings of honey, olive oil, and 
milk. They were minor goddesses, but no temples were erec- 
ted in their honour.

The Nymphs

The Odradek
Some say the word Odradek is of Slavonic origin, and try 
to account for it on that basis. Others again believe it to be 
of German origin, only influenced by Slavonic. The uncer- 
tainty of both interpretations allows one to assume with 
justice that neither is accurate, especially as neither of 
them provides an intelligent meaning of the word.
No one, of course, would occupy himself with such 
studies if there were not a creature called Odradek. At 
first glance it looks like a flat star-shaped spool for thread, 
and indeed it does seem to have thread wound upon it; to 
be sure, they are only old, broken-off bits of thread, knot- 
ted and tangled together, of the most varied sorts and 
colours. But it is not only a spool, for a small wooden 
crossbar sticks out of the middle of the star, and another 
small rod is joined to that at a right angle. By means of 
this latter rod on one side and one of the points of the star 
on the other, the whole thing can stand upright as if on 
two legs.
One is tempted to believe that the creature once had 
some sort of intelligible shape and is now only a broken- 
down remnant. Yet this does not seem to be the case; at 
least there is no sign of it; nowhere is there an unfinished 
or unbroken surface to suggest anything of the kind; the 
whole thing looks senseless enough, but in its own way 
perfectly finished. In any case, closer scrutiny is impos- 
sible, since Odradek is extraordinarily nimble and can 
never be laid hold of.
He lurks by turns in the garret, the stairway, the 
lobbies, the entrance hall. Often for months on end he is 
not to be seen; then he has presumably moved into other 
houses; but he always comes faithfully back to our house


again. Many a time when you go out of the door and he 
happens just to be leaning directly beneath you against 
the banisters you feel inclined to speak to him. Of course, 
you put no difficult questions to him, you treat him - he is 
so diminutive that you cannot help it - rather like a child. 
‘Well, what’s your name?’ you ask him. ‘Odradek,’ he says. 
‘And where do you live?’ ‘No fixed abode,’ he says and 
laughs; but it is only the kind of laughter that has no lungs 
behind it. It sounds rather like the rustling of fallen leaves. 
And that is usually the end of the conversation. Even 
these answers are not always forthcoming; often he stays 
mute for a long time, as wooden as his appearance.
I ask myself, to no purpose, what is likely to happen to 
him? Can he possibly die? Anything that dies has had 
some kind of aim in life, some kind of activity, which has 
worn out; but that does not apply to Odradek. Am I to 
suppose, then, that he will always be rolling down the 
stairs, with ends of thread trailing after him, right before 
the feet of my children, and my children’s children? He 
does no harm to anyone that one can see; but the idea that 
he is likely to survive me I find almost painful.
Franz Kafka: The Penal Colony 
(Translated from the German by 
Willa and Edwin Muir)
[This piece was originally titled Die Sorge des Hausvaters - 
‘The Cares of a Family Man’.]


An Offspring of Leviathan
In the Golden Legend, a thirteenth-century compendium of 
lives of the saints written by the Dominican friar Jacobus de 
Voragine, read and re-read in the Middle Ages but now 
neglected, we find much curious lore. The book went 
through numerous editions and translations, among them 
the one into English printed by William Caxton. Chaucer’s 
‘Second Nonne’s Tale’ has its source in the Legenda aurea; 
Longfellow also was inspired by the work of Jacobus, taking 
the, title from the Golden Legend for one of the books of his 
trilogy Christus.
Out of Jacobus’ medieval Latin, we translate the fol- 
lowing from the chapter on St Martha (CV []):
There was at that time, in a certain wood above the 
Rhone between Arles and Avignon, a dragon that was half 
beast and half fish, larger than an ox and longer than a 
horse. Armed with a pair of tusks that were like swords 
and pointed as horns, it lay in wait in the river, killing 
all wayfarers and swamping boats. It had come, however, 
from the sea of Galatia in Asia Minor and was begotten by 
Leviathan, the fiercest of all water serpents, and by the 
Wild Ass, which is common to those shores . . .
One-Eyed Beings
Before it became the name of an optical instrument, the 
word ‘monocle’ was applied to beings who had a single eye. 
So, in a sonnet composed at the beginning of the seventeenth 
century, Góngora writes of the Monóculo galán de Gal-


atea (‘The monocle who yearns for Galatea’) - referring, of 
course, to Polyphemus, of whom he had previously written 
in his Fábula de Polifemo:
Un monte era de miembros eminente 
Este que, de Neptuno hijo fiero,
De un ojo ilustra el orbe de su frente,
Émulo casi del mayor lucero;
Cíclope a quien el pino más valiente 
Bastón le obedecía tan ligero,
Y al grave peso junco tan delgado,
Que un día era bastón y otro caiado.
Negro el cabello, imitador undoso 
De las oscuras aguas del Leteo,
Al viento que le peina proceloso 
Vuela sin orden, pende sin aseo;
Un torrente es su barba impetuoso 
Que, adusto hijo de este Pirineo,
Su pecho inunda, o tarde o mal o en vano 
Surcada aún de los dedos de su mano.
[An eminent peak of limbs he was, this uncouth son of 
Neptune, lighting the orb of his forehead with an eye 
almost rivalling the greatest star; a Cyclops to whom the 
stoutest pine obeyed as a light cane, and was to his bulky 
mass a reed so slender that one day it was a walking-stick 
and the next a shepherd’s crook.
Jet black his hair, a wavy imitator of the dark waters of 
the Lethe, in the wind which stormily combs it, blowing in 
a tangle and dangling in disorder; a plunging torrent is his 
beard, which - stern son of this Pyrenee - overflows his 
breast, too late or badly or in vain furrowed by the fingers 
of his hand.]
These lines outdo and are weaker than others from the 
third book of the Aeneid (praised by Quintilian), which in 
turn outdo and are weaker than still other lines from the


ninth book of the Odyssey. This literary decline matches a 
decline in the poet’s faith; Virgil wishes to impress us with 
his Polyphemus, but scarcely believes in him; and Góngora 
believes only in words or in verbal trickery.
The Cyclops were not the only race of men having one 
eye; Pliny (VII, ) also mentions the Arimaspians,
a nation remarkable for having but one eye, and that 
placed in the middle of the forehead. This race is said to 
carry on a perpetual warfare with the Griffons, a kind of 
monster, with wings as they are commonly represented, 
for the gold which they dig out of the mines, and which 
these wild beasts retain and keep watch over with a singu- 
lar degree of cupidity, while the Arimaspi are equally de- 
sirous to get possession of it.
Five hundred years earlier, the first encyclopedist, 
Herodotus of Halicarnassus, had written (III, ):
This is also plain, that to the north of Europe there is by 
far more gold than elsewhere. In this matter again I cannot 
with certainty say how the gold is got; some will have it 
that one-eyed men called Arimaspians steal it from 
griffons. But this too I hold incredible, that there can be 
men in all else like other men, yet having but one eye.
The Panther
In medieval bestiaries the word ‘panther’ deals with a very 
different animal from the carnivorous mammal of present- 
day zoology. Aristotle had written that it gives off a sweet 
smell attractive to other animals; Aelian - the Roman author 
nicknamed ‘Honey-Tongued’ for his perfect command of 
Greek, a language he preferred to Latin - stated that this


odour was also pleasant to men. (In this characteristic some 
see a confusion of the Panther with the civet cat.) Pliny 
endowed the Panther’s back with a large circular spot that 
waxed and waned with the moon. To these marvellous cir- 
cumstances came to be added the fact that the Bible, in the 
Septuagint version, uses the word ‘panther’ in a verse 
(Hosea, V: ) that may be a prophetic reference to Jesus: ‘I 
am become as a panther to Ephraim.’
In the Anglo-Saxon bestiary of the Exeter Book, the Pan- 
ther is a gentle, solitary beast with a melodious voice and 
sweet breath (likened elsewhere to the smell of allspice) that 
makes its home in a secret den in the mountains. Its only foe 
is the dragon, with which it fights incessantly. After a full 
meal it sleeps and ‘On the third day when he wakes, a lofty, 
sweet, ringing sound comes from his mouth, and with the 
song a most delightful stream of sweet-smelling breath, 
more grateful than all the blooms of herbs and blossoms of 
the trees.’ Multitudes of men and animals flock to its den 
from the fields and castles and towns, drawn on by the 
fragrance and the music. The dragon is the age-old enemy, 
the Devil; the waking is the resurrection of the Lord; the 
multitudes are the community of the faithful; and the Pan- 
ther is Jesus Christ.
To attenuate the amazement this allegory can awaken, let 
us remember that the Panther was not a wild beast to the 
Saxons but an exotic sound unsupported by any very con- 
crete image. It may be added, as a curiosity, that Eliot’s 
poem ‘Gerontion’ speaks of ‘Christ the tiger’.
Leonardo da Vinci notes:
The African panther is like a lion, but with longer legs, 
and a more slender body. It is completely white, spattered 
with black spots like rosettes. Its beauty delights the other 
animals, which would all flock to it were it not for the 
panther’s terrible stare. Aware of this, the panther lowers 
its eyes; other animals approach it to drink in such


beauty, and the panther pounces on the nearest of 
them.
The Pelican
The Pelican of everyday zoology is a water bird with a wing- 
span of some six feet and a very long bill whose lower man- 
dible distends to form a pouch for holding fish. The Pelican 
of fable is smaller and its bill is accordingly shorter and 
sharper. Faithful to popular etymology - pelicanus, white- 
haired - the plumage of the former is white while that of 
the latter is yellow and sometimes green. (The real origin of 
pelican is from the Greek ‘I hew with an axe’, in a confusion 
of its large bill with that of the woodpecker’s.) But more 
unusual than its appearance are its habits.
With its bill and claws, the mother bird caresses her 
offspring with such devotion that she kills them. After three 
days the father arrives and, despairing over the deaths of his 
young, rips at his own breast with his bill. The blood that 
spills from his wounds revives the dead birds. This is the 
account given in medieval bestiaries, though St Jerome in a 
commentary on the nd Psalm (‘I am like a pelican of the 
wilderness: I am like an owl of the desert’) attributes the 
death of the nestlings to the serpent. That the Pelican opens 
its breast and feeds its young with its own blood is the 
common version of the fable.
Blood that gives life to the dead suggests the Eucharist and 
the cross, and so a famous line of the Paradiso (XXV, ) 
calls Jesus Christ nostro Pellicano - mankind’s Pelican. The 
Latin commentary by Benvenuto of Imola amplifies this 
point: ‘He is called pelican because he opened his side for our 
salvation, like the pelican that revives its dead brood with


the blood of its breast. The pelican is an Egyptian Bird.’ 
The Pelican is common in ecclesiastical heraldry and it is 
still engraved on chalices. The bestiary by Leonardo da Vinci 
describes the Pelican in this way:
It is greatly devoted to its young and, finding them in 
the nest killed by snakes, tears at its breast, bathing them 
with its blood to bring them back to life.
The Peryton
The Sibyl of Erythraea, it is said, foretold that the city of 
Rome would finally be destroyed by the Perytons. In the 
year a.d. 642 the record of the Sibyl's prophecies was con- 
sumed in the great conflagration of Alexandria; the gram­
marians who undertook the task of restoring certain charred 
fragments of the nine volumes apparently never came upon 
the special prophecy concerning the fate of Rome.
In time it was deemed necessary to find a source that 
would throw greater light upon this dimly remembered tra- 
dition. After many vicissitudes it was learned that in the 
sixteenth century a rabbi from Fez (in all likelihood Jakob 
Ben Chaim) had left behind a historical treatise in which he 
quoted the now lost work of a Greek scholiast, which in- 
cluded certain historical facts about the Perytons obviously 
taken from the oracles before the Library of Alexandria was 
burned by Omar. The name of the learned Greek has not 
come down to us, but his fragments run:
The Perytons had their original dwelling in Atlantis and 
are half deer, half bird. They have the deer’s head and 
legs. As for its body, it is perfectly avian, with cor- 
responding wings and plumage . . .


Its strangest trait is that, when the sun strikes it, instead 
of casting a shadow of its own body, it casts the shadow of 
a man. From this, some conclude that the Perytons are the 
spirits of wayfarers who have died far from their homes 
and from the care of their gods . . .
. . . and have been surprised eating dry earth . . . flying 
in flocks and have been seen at a dizzying height above 
the Columns of Hercules.
. . . they [Perytons] are mortal foes of the human race; 
when they succeed in killing a man, their shadow is that 
of their own body and they win back the favour of their 
gods.
. . . and those who crossed the seas with Scipio to 
conquer Carthage came close to failure, for during the 
passage a formation of Perytons swooped down on the 
ships, killing and mangling many . . . Although our 
weapons have no effect against it, the animal - if such it 
be - can kill no more than a single man.
. . . wallowing in the gore of its victims and then fleeing 
upward on its powerful wings.
. . . in Ravenna, where they were last seen, telling of 
their plumage which they described as light blue in 
colour, which greatly surprised me for all that is known 
of their dark green feathers.
Though these excerpts are sufficiently explicit, it is to be 
lamented that down to our own time no further intelligence 
about the Perytons has reached us. The rabbi’s treatise, 
which preserved this description for us, had been on deposit 
until before the last World War in the library of the Univer- 
sity of Dresden. It is painful to say that this document has 
also disappeared, and whether as a consequence of bom- 
bardment or of the earlier book burning of the Nazis, it is 
not known. Let us hope that one day another copy of the 
work may be discovered and again come to adorn the 
shelves of some library.


The Phoenix
In monumental effigies, in pyramids of stone, and in trea- 
sured mummies, the Egyptians sought eternity. It is there- 
fore appropriate that their country should have given rise to 
the myth of a cyclical and deathless bird, though its sub- 
sequent elaboration is the work of Greece and of Rome. 
Adolf Erman writes that in the mythology of Heliopolis, the 
Phoenix (benu) is the lord of jubilees or of long cycles of 
time. Herodotus, in a famous passage (II, ), tells with in- 
sistent scepticism an early form of the legend:
Another bird also is sacred; it is called the phoenix. I 
myself have never seen it, but only pictures of it; for the 
bird comes but seldom into Egypt, once in five hundred 
years, as the people of Heliopolis say. It is said that the 
phoenix comes when his father dies. If the picture truly 
shows his size and appearance, his plumage is partly 
golden and partly red. He is most like an eagle in shape 
and bigness. The Egyptians tell a tale of this bird’s devices 
which I do not believe. He comes, they say, from Arabia 
bringing his father to the Sun’s temple enclosed in myrrh, 
and there buries him. His manner of bringing is this: first 
he moulds an egg of myrrh as heavy as he can carry, and 
when he has proved its weight by lifting it he then 
hollows out the egg and puts his father in it, covering over 
with more myrrh the hollow in which the body lies; so 
the egg being with his father in it of the same weight as 
before, the phoenix, after enclosing him, carries him to 
the temple of the Sun in Egypt. Such is the tale of what is 
done by this bird.
Some five hundred years later, Tacitus and Pliny took up 
the wondrous tale; the former justly observed that all


antiquity is obscure, but that a tradition has fixed the inter- 
vals of the Phoenix’s visits at , years (Annals, VI, ). 
The latter also looked into the Phoenix’s chronology; Pliny 
records (X, ) that, according to Manilius, the bird’s life co- 
incides with the period of the Platonic year, or Great Year. A 
Platonic year is the time required by the sun, the moon, and 
the five planets to return to their initial position; Tacitus in 
his Dialogus de Oratoribus gives this as , common 
years. The ancients believed that, upon fulfilment of this 
vast astronomical cycle, the history of the world would 
repeat itself in all its details under the repeated influence of 
the planets; the Phoenix would be a mirror or an image of 
this process. For a closer analogy between the cosmos and 
the Phoenix, it should be recalled that, according to the 
Stoics, the universe dies in fire and is reborn in fire and that 
the cycle had no beginning and will have no end.
Time simplified the method of the Phoenix’s generation. 
Herodotus speaks of an egg and Pliny of a maggot, but the 
poet Claudian at the end of the fourth century already cele- 
brates an immortal bird that rises out of its own ashes, an 
heir to itself and a witness of the ages.
Few myths have been as widespread as that of the Phoe- 
nix. In addition to the authors already cited, we may add: 
Ovid (Metamorphoses, XV), Dante (Inferno, XXIV), Pellicer 
(The Phoenix and its Natural History), Quevedo (Spanish 
Parnassus, VI), and Milton (Samson Agonistes, in fine). 
Shakespeare at the close of Henry VIII (V, iv) wrote these 
fine verses:
But as when 
The bird of wonder dies, the maiden phoenix,
Her ashes new create another heir,
As great in admiration as herself . . .
We may also mention the Latin poem ‘De Arte Phoenice’, 
which has been attributed to Lactantius, and an Anglo- 
Saxon imitation of it dating from the eighth century. Ter-


tulius, St Ambrose, and Cyrillus of Jerusalem have used the 
Phoenix as a proof of the resurrection of the flesh. Pliny 
pokes fun at the physicians who prescribe pills compounded 
of the nest and ashes of the Phoenix.
The Pygmies
In the knowledge of the ancients, this nation of dwarfs - 
measuring twenty-seven inches in height - dwelled in the 
mountains beyond the utmost limits of India or of Ethi- 
opia. Pliny states that they built their cabins of mud mixed 
with feathers and eggshells. Aristotle allots them under- 
ground dens. For the harvest of wheat they wielded axes, as 
though they were out to chop down a forest. Each year they 
were attacked by flocks of cranes whose home lay on the 
Russian steppe. Riding rams and goats, the Pygmies re- 
taliated by destroying the eggs and nests of their foes. These 
expeditions of war kept them busy for the space of three 
months out of every twelve.
Pygmy was also the name of a Carthaginian god whose 
face was carved as a figurehead on warships in order to 
spread terror among the enemy.
The Rain Bird
When rain is needed, Chinese farmers have at their disposal 
- besides the dragon - the bird called the shang yang. It has 
only one leg. Long ago, children hopped up and down on 
one foot, wrinkling their brows and repeating: ‘It will


thunder, it will rain, ’cause the shang yang’s here again!’ The 
tradition runs that the bird drew water from the rivers with 
its beak and blew it out as rain on the thirsting fields.
An ancient wizard had tamed it and used to carry it per- 
ched on his sleeve. Historians tell us that it once paraded 
back and forth before the throne of the Prince of Ch’i, hop- 
ping about and flapping its wings. The Prince, greatly taken 
aback, sent his chief minister to the Court of Lu to consult 
Confucius. The Sage foretold that the shang yang would 
cause the whole countryside and near-by regions to be 
flooded unless dikes and channels were built at once. The 
Prince was not deaf to the Sage’s warning, and so in his 
domain countless damage and disaster were avoided.
The Remora
Remora, in Latin, means ‘delay’ or ‘hindrance’. This is the 
strict meaning of the word which was figuratively applied to 
the Echeneis, a genus of sucking fishes credited with the 
power of holding a ship fast by clinging to it. The Remora is 
a fish of an ashen hue; on the top of its head it has a car- 
tilaginous disc with which it creates a vacuum that enables 
it to cling to other underwater creatures. Here is Pliny’s ac- 
clamation of its powers (IX, ):
There is a quite small fish that frequents rocks, called 
the sucking-fish. This is believed to make ships go more 
slowly by sticking to their hulls, from which it has re- 
ceived its name; and for this reason it also has an evil 
reputation for supplying a love-charm and for acting as a 
spell to hinder litigation in the courts, which accusations 
it counterbalances only by its laudable property of stop- 
ping fluxes of the womb in pregnant women and holding


back the offspring till the time of birth. It is not included 
however among articles of diet. It is thought by some to 
have feet, but Aristotle denies this, adding that its limbs 
resemble wings.
(Pliny then goes on to describe the murex, a variety of 
purple fish also credited with bringing ships under full sail to 
a standstill: ‘. . . it is a foot long and four inches wide, and 
hinders ships, and moreover . . . when preserved in salt it has 
the power of drawing out gold that has fallen into the deep- 
est wells when it is brought near them.’)
It is remarkable how from the idea of delaying ships the 
Remora came to be associated with delays in lawsuits and 
later with delayed births. Elsewhere, Pliny tells that a 
Remora decided the fate of the Roman Empire in the Battle 
of Actium, detaining the galley in which Mark Antony was 
reviewing his fleet, and that another Remora stopped Cali- 
gula’s ship despite the efforts of its four hundred oarsmen. 
‘Winds blow and storms rage,’ exclaims Pliny, ‘but the 
Remora overmasters their fury and holds ships fast, achiev- 
ing what the heaviest of anchors and the thickest of hawsers 
could never achieve.’
‘The mightiest power does not always prevail. A ship may 
be detained by a small remora,’ repeats the fine Spanish 
writer Diego de Saavedra Fajardo in his Political Emblems 
().
The Rukh
The Rukh (or as it is sometimes given, roc) is a vast 
magnification of the eagle or vulture, and some people have 
thought that a condor blown astray over the Indian Ocean 
or China seas suggested it to the Arabs. Lane rejects this idea


and considers that we are dealing rather with a ‘fabulous 
species of a fabulous genus’ or with a synonym for the Per- 
sian Simurgh. The Rukh is known to the West through the 
Arabian Nights, The reader will recall that Sindbad (on his 
second voyage), left behind by his shipmates on an island, 
found
a huge white dome rising in air and of vast compass. I 
walked all around it, but found no door thereto, nor could 
I muster strength or nimbleness by reason of its exceeding 
smoothness and slipperiness. So I marked the spot where I 
stood and went round about the dome to measure its cir- 
cumference which I found fifty good paces.
Moments later, a huge cloud hid the sun from him and
lifting my head . . . I saw that the cloud was none other 
than an enormous bird, of gigantic girth and inordinately 
wide of wing . . .
The bird was a Rukh and the white dome, of course, was its 
egg. Sindbad lashes himself to the bird’s leg with his turban, 
and the next morning is whisked off into flight and set down 
on a mountaintop, without having excited the Rukh’s atten- 
tion. The narrator adds that the Rukh feeds itself on serpents 
of such great bulk that they would have made but one gulp 
of an elephant’.
In Marco Polo’s Travels (III, ) we read:
The people of the island [of Madagascar] report that at 
a certain season of the year, an extraordinary kind of 
bird, which they call a rukh, makes its appearance from 
the southern region. In form it is said to resemble the eagle 
but it is incomparably greater in size; being so large and 
strong as to seize an elephant with its talons, and to lift it 
into the air, from whence it lets it fall to the ground, in 
order that when dead it may prey upon the carcase. 
Persons who have seen this bird assert that when the wings


are spread they measure sixteen paces in extent, from 
point to point; and that the feathers are eight paces in 
length, and thick in proportion.
Marco Polo adds that some envoys from China brought 
the feather of a Rukh back to the Grand Khan. A Persian 
illustration in Lane shows the Rukh bearing off three eleph- 
ants in beak and talons; ‘with the proportion of a hawk and 
field mice’, Burton notes.
The Salamander
Not only is it a small dragon that lives in fire, it is also 
(according to one dictionary) ‘an insectivorous batrachian 
with intensely black smooth skin and yellow spots’. Of these 
two characters, the better known is the imaginary, and the 
Salamander’s inclusion in this book will surprise no one.
In Book X of his Natural History, Pliny states that the 
Salamander ‘is so intensely cold as to extinguish fire by its 
contact, in the same way that ice does’; later he thinks this 
over, observing sceptically that if what magicians said about 
the Salamander were true, it would be used to put out house 
fires. In Book XI, he speaks of a four-footed, winged insect - 
called the ‘pyrallis’ or ‘pyrausta’ - living ‘in the copper- 
smelting furnaces of Cyprus, in the very midst of the fire’; if 
it comes out into the air and flies a short distance, it will 
instantly die. The Salamander in man’s memory has incor- 
porated this now forgotten animal.
The phoenix was used as an argument by theologians to 
prove the resurrection of the flesh; the Salamander, as a 
proof that bodies can live in fire. In Book XXI of the City of 
God by St Augustine, there is a chapter called Whether an


earthly body may possibly be incorruptible by fire, and it 
opens in this way:
What then shall I say unto the unbelievers, to prove 
that a body carnal and living may endure undissolved 
both against death and the force of eternal fire. They will 
not allow us to ascribe this unto the power of God, but 
urge us to produce it to them by some example. We shall 
answer them that there are some creatures that are in- 
deed corruptible, because mortal, and yet do live un- 
touched in the middle of the fire.
Poets, also, flock to the Salamander and phoenix as 
devices of rhetorical emphasis. Quevedo in the sonnets of 
the fourth book of his Spanish Parnassus, which ‘celebrates 
the exploits of love and beauty’, writes:
Hago verdad la Fénix en la ardiente 
Llama, en que renaciendo me renuevo;
Y la virilidad del fuego pruebo,
Y que es padre y que tiene descendiente.
La Salamandra fría, que desmiente 
Noticia docta, a defender me atrevo,
Cuando en incendios, que sediento bebo,
Mi corazón habita y no los siente.
[I testify to the truth of the Phoenix in burning flames, 
since I also burn and renew myself, and I prove the male- 
ness of fire, which can be a father and have offspring.
I dare as well defend the cold Salamander, refuted by men 
of learning, since my heart dwells in fires, which thirstily I 
drink, and feels no pain.]
In the middle of the twelfth century, a forged letter sup- 
posedly sent by Prester John, the king of kings, to the Em- 
peror of Byzantium, made its way all over Europe. This 
epistle, which is a catalogue of wonders, speaks of gigantic 
ants that dig gold, and of a River of Stones, and of a Sea of


Sand with living fish, and of a towering mirror that reflects 
whatever happens in the kingdom, and of a sceptre carved 
of a single emerald, and of pebbles that make a man invisible 
or that light up the night. One of its paragraphs states: ‘Our 
realm yields the worm known as the salamander. Salaman- 
ders live in fire and make cocoons, which our court ladies 
spin and use to weave cloth and garments. To wash and 
clean these fabrics, they throw them into flames.’
Of these indestructible linens or textiles, which are 
cleansed by fire, there is mention in Pliny (XIX, ) and in 
Marco Polo (I, ). The latter attests that the Salamander is a 
substance, not an animal. Nobody, at first, believed him; 
goods woven of asbestos and sold as the skins of Salaman- 
ders were an unanswerable proof of the Salamander’s exist- 
ence.
Somewhere in his Autobiography, Benvenuto Cellini 
writes that at the age of five he saw a tiny animal like a 
lizard playing in the fire. He told this to his father, who said 
that the animal was a Salamander and gave his son a sound 
beating so that the remarkable vision, seldom vouchsafed to 
man, would stick forever in the boy’s memory.
To the alchemists the Salamander was the spirit of the 
element fire. In this symbol and in an argument of 
Aristotle’s, preserved for us by Cicero in the first book of his 
On the Nature of the Gods, we find the reason why men 
believed in the Salamander of legend. The Sicilian physician 
Empedocles of Agrigentum had formulated the proposition 
of the four ‘roots’, or elements of matter, whose opposition 
and affinity, governed by Discord and Love, made up the 
cosmic process. There is no death; there are only particles of 
‘roots’, which the Romans were to call ‘elements’, and which 
are either falling apart or coming together. These elements 
are fire, earth, air, and water. They are eternal and none is 
stronger than any other. Now we know (now we think we 
know) that this doctrine is false, but men once thought it 
valuable, and it is generally held that it was on the whole


beneficial. Theodor Gomperz has written that ‘The four el- 
ements which make up and support the world, and which 
still survive in poetry and in popular imagination, have a 
long and glorious history.’ The system demanded parity: 
since there were animals of earth and water, animals of fire 
were needed. For the dignity of science it was essential that 
Salamanders exist. In a parallel fashion, Aristotle speaks of 
animals of the air.
Leonardo da Vinci had it that the Salamander fed on fire 
and in this way renewed its skin.
Satyrs was the Greek name for them; Rome called them 
Fauns, Pans, and Sylvans. In the lower part of the body they 
were goats; their torso, arms, and head were human. Satyrs 
were thickly covered with hair and had short horns, pointed 
ears, active eyes, and hooked noses. They were lascivious 
and fond of their wine. They attended Bacchus in his rollick- 
ing and bloodless conquest of India. They set ambushes for 
nymphs, relished dancing, and their instrument was the 
flute. Country people paid homage to them, offering them 
the first fruits of the harvest. Lambs were also sacrificed in 
their honour.
In Roman times, a specimen of these demigods was sur- 
prised asleep in his mountain den in Thessaly by some of 
Sulla’s soldiers, who brought him before their general. The 
Satyr uttered inarticulate sounds and was so loathsome to 
the eyes and nostrils that Sulla had him at once sent back to 
the wilderness.
A memory of the Satyrs lived on in the medieval image of 
devils. The word ‘satire’ seems to have no connection with

The Satyrs

satyr; most etymologists trace satire back to satura lanx, a 
composite dish, hence a mixed literary composition, like the 
writings of Juvenal.
Before becoming a monster and then turned into rocks, 
Scylla was a nymph with whom Glaucus, one of the sea 
gods, had fallen in love. In order to win her, Glaucus sought 
the help of Circe whose knowledge of herbs and incan- 
tations was well known. But Circe became attached to 
Glaucus on sight, only she was unable to get him to forget 
Scylla, and so to punish her rival she poured the juice of 
poisonous herbs into the fountain where the nymph bathed. 
At this point, according to Ovid (Metamorphoses, XIV,
Scylla comes and wades waist-deep into the water; when 
all at once she sees her loins disfigured with barking mon- 
ster-shapes. And at the first, not believing that these are 
parts of her own body, she flees in fear and tries to drive 
away the boisterous, barking things. But what she flees 
she takes along with her; and, feeling for her thighs, her 
legs, her feet, she finds in place of these only gaping dogs’- 
heads, such as a Cerberus might have. She stands on rav- 
ening dogs, and her docked loins and her belly are en- 
closed in a circle of beastly forms.
She then found herself supported by twelve feet, and she had 
six heads, each with three rows of teeth. This meta- 
morphosis so terrified her that she threw herself into the 
strait separating Italy and Sicily, where the gods changed 
her into rocks. During storms, sailors speak of the dreadful
-)’

Scylla

roaring of the breakers when driven into the uneven cavities 
of the rock.
This legend is also found in the pages of Homer and Pau- 
sanias.
The Sea Horse
Unlike most other imaginary animals, the Sea Horse is not a 
composite creature; it is no more than a wild horse whose 
dwelling place is the sea and who comes ashore only on 
moonless nights when the breezes bring him the smell of 
mares. On some undetermined island - maybe Borneo - the 
herders hobble the king’s finest mares along the coast and 
hide themselves underground. Here Sindbad saw the stallion 
that rose from the sea, watched it leap on to the female, and 
heard its cry.
The definitive edition of the Book of a Thousand and One 
Nights dates, according to Burton, from the thirteenth cen- 
tury; in this same century lived the cosmographer Zakariyya 
al-Qaswini who in his treatise Wonders of Creation wrote 
these words: ‘The sea horse is like the horse of dry land, but 
its mane and tail grow longer; its colour is more lustrous and 
its hooves are cleft like those of wild oxen, while its height is 
no less than the land horse’s and slightly larger than the ass’s.’ 
He remarks that a cross between the sea and land species 
produces a very beautiful breed, and singles out a certain 
dark pony ‘with white spots like pieces of silver’.
An eighteenth-century Chinese traveller, Wang Tai-hai, 
writes:
The sea horse usually appears along the coast in search 
of a mare; sometimes he is caught. His coat is black and


shining, his tail is long and sweeps the ground. On dry 
land he goes like any other horse, is very tame, and in a 
day can travel hundreds of miles. But it is well not to 
bathe him in the river, for as soon as he sees water he 
recovers his ancient nature and swims off.
Ethnologists have looked for the origin of this Islamic 
fiction in the Greco-Roman fiction of the wind that makes 
mares fertile. In the third book of the Georgics, Virgil has set 
this belief to verse. Pliny’s explanation (VIII, ) is more 
rigorous:
It is known that in Lusitania in the neighbourhood of 
Lisbon and along the Tagus, mares, when a west wind is 
blowing, stand facing towards it and conceive the breath 
of life; this produces a foal, and this is the way to breed a 
very swift colt, but it does not live more than three 
years.
The historian Justinus ventures the guess that the hyper- 
bole ‘sons of the wind’, applied to very fast horses, gave rise 
to this fable.
The Shaggy Beast of 
La Ferté-Bernard
Along the banks of the Huisne, an otherwise peaceful 
stream, there roamed during the Middle Ages a creature that 
became known as the Shaggy Beast (La velue). This animal 
had somehow managed to survive the Flood despite its ex- 
clusion from the Ark. It was the size of a bull, and it had a 
snake’s head and a round body buried under long green fur. 
The fur was armed with stingers whose wound was deadly.


The creatures also had very broad hooves that were similar 
to the feet of the tortoise, and its tail, shaped like a serpent, 
could kill men and cattle alike. When its anger was aroused, 
the Shaggy Beast shot out flames that withered crops. At 
night it raided stables. Whenever the farmers attempted to 
hunt it down, it hid in the waters of the Huisne, causing the 
river to flood its banks and drown the valley for miles.
The Shaggy Beast had a taste for innocent creatures, and 
devoured maidens and children. It would choose the purest 
of young womanhood, some Little Lamb (L’agnelle). One 
day, it waylaid one such Little Lamb and dragged her, 
mauled and bloody, to its lair in the riverbed. The victim’s 
sweetheart tracked the monster, and with a sword sliced 
into the Shaggy Beast’s tail, its only vulnerable spot, and cut 
it in two. The creature died at once. It was embalmed and its 
death was celebrated with fifes and drums and dancing.
The Simurgh
The Simurgh is an immortal bird that nests in the branches 
of the Tree of Knowledge; Burton compares it with the eagle 
which, according to the Younger Edda, has knowledge of 
many things and makes its nest in the branches of the 
World Tree, Yggdrasil.
Both Southey’s Thalaba () and Flaubert’s Temptation 
of Saint Anthony () speak of the Simorg Anka; Flaubert 
reduces the bird’s status to that of an attendant to the Queen 
of Sheba, and describes it as having orange-coloured feathers 
like metallic scales, a small silver-coloured head with a 
human face, four wings, a vulture’s talons, and a long, long 
peacock’s tail. In the original sources the Simurgh is a far 
more important being. Firdausi in the Book of Kings, which


compiles and sets to verse ancient Iranian legends, makes the 
bird the foster father of Zal, father of the poem’s hero; Farid 
al-Din Attar, in the twelfth century, makes it a symbol of 
the godhead. This takes place in the Mantiq al-Tayr (Par- 
liament of Birds). The plot of this allegory, made up of some 
, couplets, is striking. The distant king of birds, the 
Simurgh, drops one of his splendid feathers somewhere in 
the middle of China; on learning of this, the other birds, tired 
of their present anarchy, decide to seek him. They know 
that the king’s name means ‘thirty birds’; they know that his 
castle lies in the Kaf, the mountain or range of mountains 
that ring the earth. At the outset, some of the birds lose 
heart: the nightingale pleads his love for the rose; the parrot 
pleads his beauty, for which he lives caged; the partridge 
cannot do without his home in the hills, nor the heron with- 
out his marsh, nor the owl without his ruins. But finally, 
certain of them set out on the perilous venture; they cross 
seven valleys or seas, the next to last bearing the name Bewil- 
derment, the last the name Annihilation. Many of the pil- 
grims desert; the journey takes its toll among the rest. 
Thirty, made pure by their sufferings, reach the great peak 
of the Simurgh. At last they behold him; they realize that 
they are the Simurgh, and that the Simurgh is each of them 
and all of them.
Edward FitzGerald translated portions of the poem under 
the playful title The Bird-parliament; A bird’s-eye view of 
Faríd-Uddín Attar’s Bird-parliament.
The cosmographer al-Qaswini, in his Wonders of Cre- 
ation, states that the Simorg Anka lives for seventeen hun- 
dred years and that, upon the coming of age of its son, the 
father burns himself on a funeral pyre. ‘This,’ observes Lane, 
‘reminds us of the phoenix.’


Sirens
Through the course of time the image of the Sirens has 
changed. Their first historian, Homer, in the twelfth book of 
the Odyssey, does not tell us what they were like; to Ovid, 
they are birds of reddish plumage with the faces of young 
girls; to Apollonius of Rhodes, in the upper part of the body 
they are women and in the lower part seabirds; to the Span- 
ish playwright Tirso de Molina (and to heraldry), ‘half 
woman, half fish’. No less debatable is their nature. In his 
classical dictionary Lemprière calls them nymphs; in 
Quicherat’s they are monsters, and in Grimal’s they are 
demons. They inhabit a western island, close to Circe’s, but 
the dead body of one of them, Parthenope, was found 
washed ashore in Campania and gave her name to the famed 
city now called Naples. Strabo, the geographer, saw her 
grave and witnessed the games held periodically in her 
memory.
The Odyssey tells that the Sirens attract and shipwreck 
seamen, and that Ulysses, in order to hear their song and yet 
remain alive, plugged the ears of his oarsmen with wax and 
had himself lashed to the mast. The Sirens, tempting him, 
promised him knowledge of all the things of this world:
For never yet has any man rowed past this isle in his black 
ship until he has heard the sweet voice from our lips. Nay, 
he has joy of it, and goes his way a wiser man. For we 
know all the toils that in wide Troy the Argives and 
Trojans endured through the will of the gods, and we 
know all things that come to pass upon the fruitful earth.
A legend recorded by the mythologist Apollodorus in his 
Bibliotheca, tells that Orpheus, aboard the Argonauts’ ship, 
sang more sweetly than the Sirens and that because of this


these creatures threw themselves into the sea and were 
changed into rocks, for their fate was to die whenever their 
spell went unheeded. The sphinx, also, threw herself from 
a precipice when her riddle was solved.
In the sixth century, a Siren was caught and baptized in 
northern Wales, and in certain old calendars took her place 
as a saint under the name Murgen. Another, in , slipped 
through a breach in a dike and lived in Haarlem until the 
day of her death. Nobody could make out her speech, but 
she was taught to weave and she worshipped the cross as if 
instinctively. A chronicler of the sixteenth century argued 
that she was not a fish because she knew how to weave and 
that she was not a woman because she was able to live in 
water.
The English language distinguishes between the classical 
Siren and the mermaid, which has the tail of a fish. The 
making of this later image may have been influenced by the 
Tritons, who were lesser divinities in the court of Poseidon.
In the tenth book of Plato’s Republic, eight Sirens rule 
over the revolution of the eight concentric heavens.
Siren: a supposed marine animal, we read in a brutally 
frank dictionary.
The Sow Harnessed with Chains 
and other Argentine Fauna
On page  of his Dictionary of Argentine Folklore, Felix 
Coluccio records:
In the northern part of Cordoba, especially around Quil- 
inos, people speak of a sow harnessed with chains which 
commonly makes its presence known in the hours of


night. Those living close to the railroad station maintain 
that the sow slides on the tracks, and others assured us 
that it is not unusual for the sow to run along the tele- 
graph wires, producing a deafening racket with its 
‘chains’. As yet, nobody has caught a glimpse of the 
animal, for as soon as you look for it, it vanishes unac- 
countably.
Belief in the Sow Harnessed with Chains (chancha con 
cadenas), which also goes by the name of the Tin Pig (chan- 
cho de lata), is prevalent as well in the Province of Buenos 
Aires in slums and towns along the riverside.
There are two Argentine versions of the werewolf. One of 
them, common also to Uruguay and to southern Brazil, is the 
lobisón; but since no wolves inhabit these regions, men are 
supposed to take the shapes of swine or dogs. In certain 
towns of Entre Ríos, girls shun young men who live in the 
vicinity of stockyards because on Saturday nights they are 
said to turn into the aforementioned animals. In the midland 
provinces, we find the tigre capiango. This beast is not a 
jaguar but a man who, at will, can take the jaguar’s form. 
Usually his purpose is to frighten friends in a spirit of rustic 
jesting, but highwaymen have also availed themselves of the 
guise. During the civil wars of the last century, General Fac- 
undo Quiroga was popularly supposed to have under his 
command an entire regiment of capiangos.
The Sphinx of Egyptian monuments (called by Herodotus 
androsphinx, or man-sphinx, in order to distinguish it from 
the Greek Sphinx) is a lion having the head of a man and 
lying at rest; it stood watch by temples and tombs, and is

The Sphinx

said to have represented royal authority. In the halls of 
Karnak, other Sphinxes have the head of a ram, the sacred 
animal of Amon. The Sphinx of Assyrian monuments is a 
winged bull with a man’s bearded and crowned head; this 
image is common on Persian gems. Pliny in his list of Ethi- 
opian animals includes the Sphinx, of which he details no 
other features than ‘brown hair and two mammae on the 
breast’.
The Greek Sphinx has a woman’s head and breasts, the 
wings of a bird, and the body and feet of a lion. Some give it 
the body of a dog and a snake’s tail. It is told that it de- 
populated the Theban countryside asking riddles (for it had 
a human voice) and making a meal of any man who could 
not give the answer. Of Oedipus, the son of Jocasta, the 
Sphinx asked, ‘What has four legs, two legs, and three legs, 
and the more legs it has the weaker it is?’ (So runs what 
seems to be the oldest version. In time the metaphor was 
introduced which makes of man’s life a single day. Nowa- 
days the question goes, ‘Which animal walks on four legs in 
the morning, two legs at noon, and three in the evening?’) 
Oedipus answered that it was a man who as an infant crawls 
on all fours, when he grows up walks on two legs, and in old 
age leans on a staff. The riddle solved, the Sphinx threw 
herself from a precipice.
De Quincey, around , suggested a second interpret- 
ation, which complements the traditional one. The subject 
of the riddle according to him is not so much man in general 
as it is Oedipus in particular, orphaned and helpless at birth, 
alone in his manhood, and supported by Antigone in his 
blind and hopeless old age.


The Squonk
(Lacrimacorpus dissolvens)
The range of the squonk is very limited. Few people out- 
side of Pennsylvania have ever heard of the quaint beast, 
which is said to be fairly common in the hemlock forests 
of that State. The squonk is of a very retiring disposition, 
generally travelling about at twilight and dusk. Because of 
its misfitting skin, which is covered with warts and moles, 
it is always unhappy; in fact it is said, by people who are 
best able to judge, to be the most morbid of beasts. 
Hunters who are good at tracking are able to follow a 
squonk by its tear-stained trail, for the animal weeps con- 
stantly. When cornered and escape seems impossible, or 
when surprised and frightened, it may even dissolve itself 
in tears. Squonk hunters are most successful on frosty 
moonlight nights, when tears are shed slowly and the 
animal dislikes moving about; it may then be heard weep- 
ing under the boughs of dark hemlock trees. Mr J. P. 
Wentling, formerly of Pennsylvania, but now at St An- 
thony Park, Minnesota, had a disappointing experience 
with a squonk near Mont Alto. He made a clever capture 
by mimicking the squonk and inducing it to hop into a 
sack, in which he was carrying it home, when suddenly 
the burden lightened and the weeping ceased. Wentling 
unslung the sack and looked in. There was nothing but 
tears and bubbles.
William T. Cox: 
Fearsome Creatures of the Lumberwoods, 
With a Few Desert and Mountain Beasts


Swedenborg’s Angels
For the last twenty-five years of his studious life, the emi- 
nent philosopher and man of science Emanuel Sweden- 
borg (-) resided in London. But as the English are 
not very talkative, he fell into the habit of conversing 
with devils and Angels. God granted him the privilege of 
visiting the Other World and of entering into the lives of its 
inhabitants. Christ had said that souls, in order to be ad- 
mitted into Heaven, must be righteous. Swedenborg added 
that they must also be intelligent; later on Blake stipulated 
that they should be artists and poets. Swedenborg’s Angels 
are those souls who have chosen Heaven. They need no 
words; it is enough that an Angel only think of another in 
order to have him at his side. Two people who have loved 
each other on earth become a single Angel. Their world is 
ruled by love; every Angel is a Heaven. Their shape is that of 
a perfect human being; Heaven’s shape is the same. The 
Angels, in whatever direction they look - north, east, south, 
or west - are always face to face with God. They are, above 
all, divines; their chief delight lies in prayer and in the un- 
ravelling of theological problems. Earthly things are but 
emblems of heavenly things. The sun stands for the godhead. 
In Heaven there is no time; the appearance of things changes 
according to moods. The Angels’ garments shine according 
to their intelligence. The souls of the rich are richer than the 
souls of the poor, since the rich are accustomed to wealth. In 
Heaven, all objects, furniture, and cities are more physical 
and more complex than those of our earth; colours are more 
varied and splendid. Angels of English stock show a ten- 
dency to politics; Jews to the sale of trinkets; Germans tote 
bulky volumes which they consult before venturing an 
answer. Since Moslems venerate Mohammed, God has


provided them with an Angel who impersonates the Prophet. 
The poor in spirit and hermits are denied the pleasures of 
Heaven, for they would be unable to enjoy them.
In the works of the famous eighteenth-century Swedish 
visionary, we read that Devils, like angels, are not a species 
apart but derive from the human race. They are indi- 
viduals who after death choose Hell. There, in that region 
of marshlands, of desert wastes, of tangled forests, of 
towns levelled by fire, of brothels, and of gloomy dens, 
they feel no special happiness, but in Heaven they would 
be far unhappier still. Occasionally, a ray of heavenly 
light falls on them from on high; the Devils feel it as a 
burning, a scorching, and it reaches their nostrils as a 
stench. Each thinks himself handsome, but many have the 
faces of beasts or have shapeless lumps of flesh where faces 
should be; others are faceless. They live in a state of mutual 
hatred and of armed violence, and if they come together it is 
for the purpose of plotting against one another or of de- 
stroying each other. God has forbidden men and angels to 
draw a map of Hell, but we know that its general outline 
follows that of a Devil, just as the outline of Heaven follows 
that of an angel. The most vile and loathsome Hells lie to the 
west.

Swedenborg’s Devils

The Sylphs
To each of the four roots, or elements, into which the Greeks 
divided all matter, a particular spirit was later made to cor- 
respond. Paracelsus, the sixteenth-century Swiss alchemist 
and physician, gave them their names: the Gnomes of earth, 
the Nymphs of water, the Salamanders of fire, and the Sylphs, 
or Sylphides, of air. All of these words come from the Greek. 
The French philologist Littré traced the etymology of ‘sylph’ 
to the Celtic languages, but it seems quite unlikely that Para- 
celsus, who gave us the name, knew anything about those 
tongues.
No one any longer believes in the Sylphs, but the word is 
used as a trivial compliment applied to a slender young 
woman. Sylphs occupy an intermediate place between 
supernatural and natural beings; Romantic poets and the 
ballet have not neglected them.
Living beings made of metal or stone make up some of fan- 
tastic zoology’s most alarming species. Let us recall the 
angry bulls with brass feet and horns that breathed flames 
and that Jason, helped by the magic arts of Medea, yoked to 
the plough; Condillac’s psychological statue of sensitive 
marble; the boatman in the Arabian Nights, ‘a man of brass 
with a tablet of lead on his breast inscribed with talismans 
and characts’, who rescued the third Kalandar from the 
Magnet Mountain; the ‘girls of mild silver, or of furious

Talos

gold’, which a goddess in William Blake’s mythology caught 
in silken nets for the delight of her lover; and the metal birds 
who nursed Ares.
To this list we may also add a draft animal, the swift wild 
boar Gullinbursti, whose name means ‘golden-bristled’. The 
mythologist Paul Herrmann writes: This living piece of 
metalwork came from the forge of skilful dwarfs; they 
threw a pigskin into the fire and drew out a golden boar 
with the power of travelling on land, sea, and air. However 
dark the night, there is always light enough in the boar’s 
path.’ Gullinbursti pulled the chariot of Freya, the Norse 
goddess of love, marriage, and fertility.
And then there is Talos, the warden of the island of Crete. 
Some consider this giant the work of Vulcan or of Daedalus; 
Apollonius of Rhodes tells us about him in his Argonautica 
(IV, -):
And Talos, the man of bronze, as he broke off the rocks 
from the hard cliff, stayed them from fastening hawsers 
to the shore, when they came to the roadstead of Dicte’s 
haven. He was of the stock of bronze, of the men sprung 
from ash-trees, the last left among the sons of the gods; 
and the son of Cronos gave him to Europa to be the 
warder of Crete and to stride round the island thrice a day 
with his feet of bronze. Now in all the rest of his body and
 limbs was he fashioned of bronze and invulnerable; but 
beneath the sinew by his ankle was a blood-red vein; and 
this, with its issues of life and death, was covered by a 
thin skin.
It was through this vulnerable heel, of course, that Talos met 
his end. Medea bewitched him with a hostile glance, and 
when the giant again began heaving boulders from his cliff, 
‘he grazed his ankle on a pointed crag, and the ichor gushed 
forth like melted lead; and not long thereafter did he stand 
towering on the jutting cliff’.
In another version of the myth, Talos, burning red-hot,


would put his arms around a man and kill him. The bronze 
giant this time met death at the hands of Castor and Pollux, 
the Dioscuri, who were led on by the sorceress Medea.
The T’ao T’ieh
Poets and mythology seem to have ignored it, but everyone 
at some time has discovered a T’ao T’ieh for himself at the 
corner of a capital or in the middle of a frieze, and felt a 
slight uneasiness. The dog that guarded the flocks of the 
threefold Geryon had two heads and a single body, and luck- 
ily was killed by Hercules. The T’ao T’ieh inverts this order 
and is still more horrible: its huge head is connected to one 
body on the right and another on the left. Generally it has 
six legs since the front pair serves for both bodies. Its face 
may be a dragon’s, a tiger’s, or a person’s; art historians call 
it an ‘ogre’s mask’. It is a formal monster, inspired by the 
demon of symmetry for sculptors, potters, and ceramicists. 
Some fourteen hundred years b.c., under the Shang Dynasty, 
it already figured on ceremonial bronzes.
T’ao T’ieh means ‘glutton’ and it embodies the vices of 
sensuality and avarice. The Chinese paint it on their dishes 
in order to warn against self-indulgence.
Thermal Beings
It was revealed to the visionary and theosophist Rudolf Stei- 
ner (-) that this planet, before it was the earth we 
now know, passed through a solar stage, and before that 
through a Saturnian stage. Man today is composed of a


physical body, of an ethereal body, of an astral body, and of 
an ego; at the start of the Saturnian period he was a physical 
body only. This body was neither visible nor tangible, since 
at that time there were on earth neither solids nor liquids 
nor gases. There were only states of heat, thermal forms, 
defining in cosmic space regular and irregular figures; each 
man, each being, was an organism made of changing tem- 
peratures. According to the testimony of Steiner, mankind 
during the Saturnian period was a blind, deaf, and insen- 
sitive multitude of articulated states of heat and cold. ‘To 
the investigator, heat is but a substance still subtler than a 
gas,’ we read in one page of Steiner’s Die Geheimwissens- 
chaft im Umriss (Outline of Occult Science). Before the solar 
stage, fire spirits, or archangels, animated the bodies of those 
‘men’, who began to glow and shine.
Did Steiner dream these things? Did he dream them be- 
cause they had occurred ages earlier? What is undeniable is 
that they are far stranger than the demiurges, serpents, and 
bulls of other cosmogonies.
The Tigers of Annam
To the Annamites, tigers, or spirits who dwell in tigers, 
govern the four corners of space. The Red Tiger rules over 
the South (which is located at the top of maps); summer and 
fire belong to him. The Black Tiger rules over the North; 
winter and water belong to him. The Blue Tiger rules over 
the East; spring and plants belong to him. The White Tiger 
rules over the West; autumn and metals belong to him.
Over these Cardinal Tigers is a fifth tiger, the Yellow Tiger, 
who stands in the middle governing the others, just as the 
Emperor stands in the middle of China and China in the


middle of the World. (That’s why it is called the Middle 
Kingdom; that’s why it occupies the middle of the map that 
Father Ricci, of the Society of Jesus, drew at the end of the 
sixteenth century for the instruction of the Chinese.)
Lao-tzu entrusted to the Five Tigers the mission of waging 
war against devils. An Annamite prayer, translated into 
French by Louis Cho Chod, implores the aid of the Five 
Heavenly Tigers. This superstition is of Chinese origin; Sin- 
ologists speak of a White Tiger that rules over the remote 
region of the western stars. To the South the Chinese place a 
Red Bird; the East, a Blue Dragon; to the North, a Black 
Tortoise. As we see, the Annamites have preserved the 
colours but have made the animals one.
The Bhils, a people of Central India, believe in hells for 
Tigers; the Malays tell of a city in the heart of the jungle 
with beams of human bones, walls of human skin, and eaves 
of human hair, built and inhabited by Tigers.
In England, after the advent of Christianity, the Valkyries 
(or ‘Choosers of the Slain’) were relegated to the villages and 
there degenerated into witches; in the Scandinavian coun- 
tries the giants of heathen myth, who lived in Jotunnheim 
and battled against the god Thor, were reduced to rustic 
Trolls. In the cosmogony opening the Elder Edda, we read 
that in the Twilight of the Gods, the giants, allied with a 
wolf and a serpent, will scale the rainbow Bifrost, which 
will break under their weight, thereby destroying the world. 
The Trolls of popular superstition are stupid, evil elves who 
dwell in mountain crannies or in ramshackle huts. Trolls of 
distinction may bear two or three heads.

The Trolls

Henrik Ibsen’s dramatic poem Peer Gynt () assures 
them their immortality. Ibsen depicts the Trolls as, above 
all, nationalists. They think, or do their best to think, that 
the foul concoction they brew is delicious and that their 
hovels are palaces. So that Peer Gynt would not witness the 
sordidness of his surroundings and the ugliness of the prin- 
cess he is about to marry, the Trolls offer to put out his 
eyes.
Two Metaphysical Beings
The mystery of the origin of ideas brings a pair of strange 
creatures to imaginary zoology. One was evolved towards 
the middle of the eighteenth century, the other a hundred 
years later.
The first is Condillac’s sensitive statue. Descartes pro- 
fessed the Platonic doctrine of innate ideas; Étienne Bonnot 
de Condillac, for the purposes of refuting him, conceived a 
marble statue in the likeness of the human body and inhabi- 
ted by a soul that had never perceived or thought. Condillac 
begins by conferring on his statue a single sense, perhaps the 
least complex of all - that of smell. A whiff of jasmine is the 
start of the statue’s biography; for one moment there is 
nothing but this odour in the whole universe - or, to be more 
accurate, this odour is the universe, which a moment later 
will be the odour of a rose, then of a carnation. In the 
statue’s consciousness, once there is a single odour we have 
attention; once an odour lasts after the stimulus has ceased 
we have memory; once a present and a past impression 
occupy the statue’s attention we have the ability to com- 
pare; once the statue perceives likeness and unlikeness we 
have judgement; once the ability to compare and judgement


occur a second time we have reflection; once a pleasant 
memory is more vivid than an unpleasant impression we 
have imagination. Once the faculty of understanding is born, 
the faculty of the will will be born: love and hate (attraction 
and repulsion), hope and fear. The consciousness of having 
passed through many states of mind will give the statue the 
abstract notion of numbers; the consciousness of being the 
odour of carnation and of having been the odour of jasmine, 
the notion of the I.
The author will then endow his hypothetical man with 
hearing, taste, sight, and finally, touch. This last sense will 
reveal to him that space exists and that in space he exists in 
a body; sounds, smells, and colours had been to him, before 
this stage, mere variations or modifications of his con- 
sciousness.
The allegory just related is called Traité des sensations 
and dates from ; for this summary we have made use of 
the second volume of Bréhier’s Histoire de la philosophie.
The other creature raised by the problem of consciousness 
is the ‘hypothetical animal’ of Rudolf Hermann Lotze. Lone- 
lier than the statue that smells roses and finally becomes a 
man, this being has in its skin but one movable sensitive 
point - at the extremity of an antenna. Its structure denies 
it, as is obvious, more than one perception at a time. Lotze 
argues that the ability to retract or extend its sensitive an- 
tenna will enable this all but bereft animal to discover the 
external world (without the aid of the Kantian categories of 
time and space) and distinguish a stationary from a moving 
object. This fiction may be found in the book Medizinische 
Psychologie (); it has been praised by Hans Vaihinger.


The Unicorn
The first version of the Unicorn is nearly identical with the 
latest. Four hundred years b.c., the Greek historian and 
physician Ctesias told that among the kingdoms of India 
there were very swift wild asses with white coats, purple 
heads, blue eyes, and in the middle of their foreheads a 
pointed horn whose base was white, whose tip was red, and 
whose middle was black. Pliny, more precise, wrote (VIII, 
):
the fiercest animal is the unicorn, which in the rest of 
the body resembles a horse, but in the head a stag, in the 
feet an elephant, and in the tail a boar, and has a deep 
bellow, and a single black horn three feet long projecting 
from the middle of the forehead. They say that it is impos- 
sible to capture this animal alive.
Around , the Orientalist Schrader conjectured that the 
Unicorn might have been suggested to the Greeks by certain 
Persian bas-reliefs depicting bulls in profile with a single 
horn.
In Isidore of Seville’s Etymologies, composed at the be- 
ginning of the seventh century, we read that one thrust of 
the Unicorn’s horn may kill an elephant; this perhaps is 
echoed in the similar victory, in Sindbad’s second voyage, of 
the Karkadan, or rhinoceros, which can ’carry off a great 
elephant on its horn’. (We also find here that the rhino- 
ceros’s horn ‘cleft in twain, is the likeness of a man’; al- 
Qaswini says it is the likeness of a man on horseback, and 
others have spoken of birds and fishes.) Another of the Uni- 
corn’s enemies was the lion, and a stanza in the tangled 
allegory The Faerie Queene records the manner of their duel 
in this way:


Like as a Lyon, whose imperiall powre 
A prowd rebellious Unicom defyes,
T’ avoide the rash assault and wrathful stowre 
Of his fiers foe, him to a tree applyes,
And when him ronning in full course he spyes,
He slips aside; the whiles that furious beast 
His precious horne, sought of his enimyes,
Strikes in the stocke, ne thence can be releast,
But to the mighty victor yields a bounteous feast.
These lines (Book II, Canto V, Stanza X) date from the six- 
teenth century; at the beginning of the eighteenth century, 
the union of the Kingdom of England with the Kingdom of 
Scotland brought together on the heraldic arms of Great 
Britain the English Leopard, or Lion, and the Scottish Uni- 
corn.
In the Middle Ages, bestiaries taught that the Unicorn 
could be captured by a maiden; in the Greek Physiologus 
we read: ‘How it is captured. A virgin is placed before it and 
it springs into the virgin’s lap and she warms it with love 
and carries it off to the palace of kings.’ One of Pisanello’s 
medals and many famous tapestries illustrate this victory 
whose allegorical applications are obvious. Leonardo da 
Vinci attributes the Unicorn’s capture to its lust, which 
makes it forget its fierceness, lie in a girl’s lap, and so be 
taken by hunters. The Holy Ghost, Jesus Christ, mercury, 
and evil have all been represented by the Unicorn. In his 
Psychologie und Alchemie (), Jung gives a history and an 
analysis of these symbols.
A small white horse with the forelegs of an antelope, a 
goat’s beard, and a long twisted horn projecting straight out 
from its forehead is the picture usually given of this imagin- 
ary animal.


The Unicorn of China
The Chinese Unicorn, the k’i-lin, is one of the four animals 
of good omen; the others are the dragon, the phoenix, and 
the tortoise. The Unicorn is foremost of all the  creatures 
that live on land. It has the body of a deer, the tail of an ox, 
and the hooves of a horse. Its short horn, which grows out of 
its forehead, is made of flesh; its coat, on its back, is of five 
mixed colours, while its belly is brown or yellow. It is so 
gentle that when it walks it is careful not to tread on the 
tiniest living creature and will not even eat live grass but 
only what is dead. Its appearance foretells the birth of an 
upright ruler. To wound the Chinese Unicorn or to come 
across its dead body is unlucky. The span of this animal’s 
natural life is a thousand years.
When Confucius’ mother bore him in her womb, the 
spirits of the five planets brought her an animal ‘having the 
shape of a cow, scales of a dragon, and a horn on its fore- 
head’. This is the way Soothill reports the annunciation; a 
variant of this given by Wilhelm tells that the animal ap- 
peared on its own and spat out a jade tablet on which these 
words were read:
Son of mountain crystal [or of the essence of water], when 
the dynasty crumbles, thou shalt rule as a throneless 
king.
Seventy years later, some hunters killed a k’i-lin which still 
had a bit of ribbon around its horn that Confucius’ mother 
had tied there. Confucius went to look at the Unicorn and 
wept because he felt what the death of this innocent and 
mysterious animal foretold, and because in that ribbon lay 
his past.
In the thirteenth century, a scouting expedition of the


Emperor Genghis Khan, who had undertaken the invasion of 
India, met a creature in the desert ‘like a deer, with a head 
like that of a horse, one horn on its forehead, and green hair 
on its body’, which addressed them, saying, ‘It is time for 
your master to return to his own land.’ One of Genghis’ 
Chinese ministers, upon consultation, explained to him that 
the animal was a chio-tuan, a variety of the k’i-lin. ‘For four 
years the great army has been warring in western regions,’ 
he said. ‘Heaven, which has a horror of bloodshed, gives 
warning through the Chio-tuan. Spare the Empire for 
Heaven’s sake; moderation will give boundless pleasure.’ 
The Emperor desisted in his war plans.
Twenty-two centuries before the Christian era, one of the 
judges of the Emperor Shun was in possession of a ‘one- 
horned goat’ which refused to attack the wrongly accused 
but would butt the guilty.
Margoulies’ Anthologie raisonné de la littérature chin- 
oise () includes this mysterious, soft-spoken allegory, 
the work of a ninth-century writer of prose:
It is universally held that the unicorn is a supernatural 
being and of auspicious omen; so say the odes, the annals, 
the biographies of worthies, and other texts whose 
authority is unimpeachable. Even village women and chil- 
dren know that the unicorn is a lucky sign. But this 
animal does not figure among the barnyard animals, it is 
not always easy to come across, it does not lend itself to 
zoological classification. Nor is it like the horse or bull, 
the wolf or deer. In such circumstances we may be face to 
face with a unicorn and not know for sure that we are. 
We know that a certain animal with a mane is a horse and 
that a certain animal with horns is a bull. We do not 
know what the unicorn looks like.


The Uroboros
To us the ocean is a sea or a system of seas; to the Greeks it 
was a simple circular river that ringed the land mass. All 
streams flowed from it and it had neither outlets nor sources. 
It was also a god or a Titan, perhaps the most ancient of all 
Titans, since Sleep in Book XIV of the Iliad calls it the source 
from whom the gods are sprung. In Hesiod’s Theogony, it is 
the father of all the world’s rivers - three thousand in 
number - the leading of which are the Alpheus and the Nile. 
An old man with a flowing beard was the usual per- 
sonification of the river-ocean; after centuries men found a 
better symbol.
Heraclitus had said that in the circumference the be- 
ginning and the end are a single point. A third-century Greek 
amulet, preserved in the British Museum, gives us the image 
which best illustrates this endlessness: the serpent that bites 
its own tail or, as the Argentine poet Martínez Estrada so 
beautifully put it, ‘that begins at the end of its tail’. A story 
runs that Mary Queen of Scots had engraved on a gold ring 
the inscription ‘In my end is my beginning,’ meaning per- 
haps that real life begins after death. Uroboros (Greek for 
‘the one that devours its tail’) is the learned name of this 
creature which became the symbol adopted by alchemists 
in the Middle Ages. The curious may read further in Jung’s 
study Psychologie und Alchemie.
A world-circling serpent is also found in Norse cosmology; 
it is called the Miogarosormr - literally, the middle-yard’s- 
worm, middle-yard standing for the earth. In the Younger 
Edda, Snorri Sturluson recorded that Loki fathered a wolf 
and a serpent. An oracle warned the gods that these creatures 
would be the earth’s downfall. The wolf, Fenrir, was kept on 
a cord woven of six imaginary things: ‘the noise of a cat’s


footfall, the beards of women, the roots of stones, the sinews 
of bears, the breath of fish, and the spittle of birds.’ The 
serpent, Jormungard, ‘was thrown into the sea surrounding 
the land and there it has grown so large that now it too 
surrounds the earth and bites its own tail.’
In Jotunnheim, the land of giants, Utgard-Loki challenges 
the god Thor to pick up a cat; Thor, using all his strength, 
barely manages to lift one of the cat’s paws off the ground. 
The cat is really the serpent. Thor has been tricked by 
magic.
At the Twilight of the Gods the serpent will devour the 
earth and the wolf the sun.
The Valkyries
Valkyrie means, in early German languages, the ‘chooser of 
the slain’. We do not know how the people of Germany and 
of Austria imagined them; in Norse mythology they are 
lovely maidens who bear weapons. Their usual number was 
three, though in the Eddas the names of more than a dozen 
are given.
In popular myth they took the souls of those slain in battle 
and brought them to Odin’s epic paradise. There, in the Hall 
of the Slain, Valhalla, whose ceiling was of gold and was 
lighted by drawn swords and not lamps, the warriors battled 
from daybreak to sunset. Then those of them who had been 
killed were brought back to life, and all shared a divine feast 
in which they were served the meat of an immortal wild 
boar and inexhaustible hornfuls of mead. This idea of an 
endless battle seems to be Celtic in origin.
An Anglo-Saxon charm against the pain of sudden stitches


describes the Valkyries without naming them; the lines, as 
translated by Stopford A. Brooke, run this way:
Loud were they, lo! loud, as over the land they rode;
Fierce of heart were they, as over the hill they rode! 
For the mighty maidens have mustered up their 
strength . . .
Under the spreading influence of Christianity, the name 
Valkyrie degenerated; in medieval England a judge had 
burned at the stake an unlucky woman charged with being a 
Valkyrie, that is to say, a witch.
The Western Dragon
A tall-standing, heavy serpent with claws and wings is 
perhaps the description that best fits the Dragon. It may be 
black, but it is essential that it also be shining; equally essen- 
tial is that it belch forth fire and smoke. The above descrip- 
tion refers, of course, to its present image; the Greeks seem 
to have applied the name Dragon to any considerable rep- 
tile. Pliny informs us that in summer the Dragon craves ele- 
phant blood, which is notably cool. It will make a sudden 
foray on the elephant, coil round it, and plunge its teeth into 
it. The bloodless elephant rolls on the ground and dies; so 
does the Dragon, crushed under the weight of its victim. We 
also read that Ethiopian Dragons, in search of better pas- 
turage, regularly cross the Red Sea and migrate to Arabia. To 
accomplish this, four or five Dragons coil together and form 
a kind of craft, with their heads lifted out of the water. In 
Pliny there is also a chapter devoted to remedies derived


from the Dragon. Here we read that its eyes, dried and then 
stirred with honey, make a liniment that is effective against 
nightmares. The fat of the Dragon’s heart stored in the hide 
of a gazelle and tied to the arm with the sinews of a stag 
assures success in litigation; Dragon teeth, also bound to the 
body, ensure the indulgence of masters and the mercy of 
kings. With some scepticism Pliny cites a preparation that 
renders men invincible. It is concocted of the skin of a lion, a 
lion’s marrow, the froth of a horse which has just won a 
race, the nails of a dog, and the tail and head of a Dragon.
In the eleventh book of the Iliad we read that there was a 
blue three-headed Dragon on Agamemnon’s shield; centuries 
later Norse pirates painted Dragons on their shields and 
carved Dragon heads on the prows of their long ships. 
Among the Romans, the Dragon was the insignia of the 
cohort, as the eagle was of the legion; this is the origin of 
present-day dragoons. On the standards of the Saxon kings 
of England there were Dragons; the object of such images 
was to impart fear to enemy ranks. In the ballad of Athis, 
we read:
Ce souloient Romains porter,
Ce nous fait moult à redouter.
[This was what the Romans used to bear, this which
makes us so feared.]
In the West, the Dragon was always thought of as evil. 
One of the stock exploits of heroes (Hercules, Sigurd, St 
Michael, St George) was to overcome and slay a Dragon. In 
Germanic myth, the Dragon kept watch over precious 
objects. And so in Beowulf, written in England in the sev- 
enth or eighth century, there is a Dragon that stands guard 
over a treasure for some three hundred years. A runaway 
slave hides in its lair and steals a cup. On waking, the 
Dragon notices the theft and resolves to kill the thief, but 
every once in a while goes back inside to make sure the cup


has not been merely mislaid. (How strange of the poet to 
attribute to his monster so human a misgiving.) The Dragon 
begins to ravage the kingdom; Beowulf searches it out, 
grapples with it, and kills it, dying himself soon after from a 
mortal wound inflicted by the Dragon’s tusks.
People believed in the reality of the Dragon. In the middle 
of the sixteenth century, the Dragon is recorded in Conrad 
Gesner’s Historia Animalium, a work of a scientific 
nature.
Time has notably worn away the Dragon’s prestige. We 
believe in the lion as reality and symbol; we believe in the 
Minotaur as symbol but no longer as reality. The Dragon is 
perhaps the best known but also the least fortunate of fan- 
tastic animals. It seems childish to us and usually spoils the 
stories in which it appears. It is worth remembering, how- 
ever, that we are dealing with a modern prejudice, due 
perhaps to a surfeit of Dragons in fairy tales. In the Revel- 
ations, St John speaks twice of the Dragon, ‘that old serpent, 
called the Devil and Satan . . .’ In the same spirit, St August- 
ine writes that the Devil ‘is lion and dragon; lion for its rage, 
dragon for its cunning’. Jung observes that in the Dragon are 
the reptile and the bird - the elements of earth and of air.
Youwarkee
In his Short History of English Literature, Saintsbury finds 
the flying girl Youwarkee one of the most charming hero- 
ines of the eighteenth-century novel. Half woman and half 
bird, or - as Browning was to write of his dead wife, 
Elizabeth Barrett - half angel and half bird, she can open her 
arms and make wings of them, and a silky down covers her 
body. She lives on an island lost in Antarctic seas and was


discovered there by Peter Wilkins, a shipwrecked sailor, who 
marries her. Youwarkee is a gawry (or flying woman) and 
belongs to a race of flying people known as glumms. Wilkins 
converts them to Christianity and, after the death of his 
wife, succeeds in making his way back to England.
The story of this strange love affair may be read in the 
novel Peter Wilkins () by Robert Paltock.
There is one story that has ranged the whole of geography 
and all epochs - the tale of mariners who land on an un- 
known island which then sinks into the sea and drowns 
them because it is a living creature. This invention is found 
in the first voyage of Sindbad and in Canto VI, Stanza , of 
Orlando Furioso (Ch’ella sia una isoletta ci credemo - ‘We 
believed it [the whale] to be a small island’); in the Irish 
legend of St Brendan and in the Greek bestiary of Alex- 
andria; in the Historia de Gentibus Septentrionalibus 
(Rome, ) by the Swedish ecclesiastic Olaus Magnus and 
in this passage from the opening of Paradise Lost, in which 
Satan, ‘stretched out huge in length’, is compared to a whale 
(-):
Him haply slumbering on the Norway foam,
The pilot of some small night-foundered skiff 
Deeming some island, oft, as seamen tell,
With fixed anchor in his scaly rind,
Moors by his side under the lee, while night 
Invests the sea . . .
Paradoxically, one of the earliest versions of the legend 
gives it in order to refute it. This is recorded in the Book of

The Zaratan

Animals by al-Jahiz, the ninth-century Moslem zoologist. 
We translate its words from the Spanish version by Miguel 
Asín Palacios:
As for the zaratan, I never met anyone who actually 
saw it with his own eyes.
There are sailors who assert that they have drawn 
alongside certain sea islands, seeing wooded valleys and 
crevices in the rock, and landed to light a big fire; and 
when the heat of the flames reached the zaratan’s spine, 
the beast began to slip under the waters with them on top 
of him, and with all the plants growing on him, until only 
   those able to swim away were saved. This outdoes even 
the boldest, most imaginative piece of fiction.
Let us now consider a thirteenth-century text by al-Qas- 
wini, the Persian cosmographer who wrote in Arabic. It 
comes from a work of his entitled Wonders of Creation, and 
runs this way:
As for the sea turtle, it is of such huge size that people on 
shipboard take it for an island. One merchant has re- 
ported:
‘Rising out of the sea we discovered an island with 
green plants, and we went ashore and dug pits for a cook- 
ing fire, and the island began to move and the sailors said: 
“Back to the ship! It’s a turtle! The heat of the fires has 
wakened him and we’ll be lost!” ’
This story is repeated in the Navigation of St Brendan:
And than they sayled forth, and came soone after to 
that lond; but bycause of the lytell depthe in some place, 
and in some place were grete rockes, but at the last they 
wente upon an ylonde, wenynge to them they had ben 
safe, and made theron a fyre for to dresse theyr dyner, but 
saynt Brandon abode styll in the shyppe. And whan the 
fyre was ryght hote, and the meet nygh soden, than this


 ylonde began to move; whereof the monkes were aferde, 
and fledde anone to the shyppe, and lefte the fyre and 
meet behynde them, and mervayled sore of the movying. 
And saynt Brandon comforted them, and sayd that it was 
a grete fisshe named Jasconye, whiche laboureth nyght 
and daye to put his tayle in his mouth, but for gretnes he 
may not.
In the Anglo-Saxon bestiary of the Exeter Book, the 
dangerous island is a whale, ‘skilled in treachery’, that delib- 
erately tricks seafarers. They camp on its back seeking rest 
from their labours at sea; suddenly the Ocean’s Guest sinks 
down and the men drown. In the Greek bestiary, the whale 
stands for the whore of the Proverbs (‘Her feet go down to 
death, her steps take hold on hell’); in the Anglo-Saxon besti- 
ary it stands for the Devil and Evil. These same symbolic 
values will be found in Moby Dick, written ten centuries 
later.


Index
A Bao A Qu, - 
Abel,  
Aberfoyle,  
Abtu,  
Abyssinia,  
Acheron, - 
Achilles,  
Actium,  
Adam, , 
Adventuresome Simplicissi-
mus, The, 
Aelian, , 
Aeneid, , , , 
Aesculapius, 
Africa, , , 
Agamemnon, 
Agnelle, l’, 
Ahura Mazdah, 
Albertus Magnus, 
Alchemists, , , , 
Aldrovandi, Ulisse, 
Alexander of Macedonia, 
Alexandria, , , 
Alice in Wonderland, 
Allah, , , 
Alpheus, 
Alraune, 
Alseids, 
Ambrose, St, 
America, 
Ammodyte, 
Amon, 
Amphisbaena, -,  
Analects, 
Anatomy of Melancholy,  
Andromeda,  
Androsphinx,  
Anet, 
Angels, , , , , , ,
, , , , , , , 
-, ,  
Anglo-Saxons, , , ; 
bestiaries, , , ; 
charms, , - 
Aniel, - 
Annals,  
Annam, - 
Antarctic islands, ,  
Antelopes, , ,  
Anthologie raisonnée de la 
littérature chinoise,  
Antigone,  
Antilles,  
Ant-lion,  
Antony, Mark,  
Ants, , ,  
Apes, , , . See also 
Chimpanzee, Monkeys 
Apollo,  
Apollodorus, ,  
Apollonius of Rhodes, , , 

Apollonius of Tyana,  
Arabia, , ,  
Arabian Nights, , , , , 
,  
Ares,  
Arezzo,  
Argentina,  
Argentine fauna, - 
Argives,  
Argonautica,  
Argonauts, ,  
Ariadne,  
Arimaspians, ,  
Ariosto, , 
Aristotle, , , , , 



Ark,  
Arles, 
Artaxerxes Mnemon, ,  
Asia Minor,  
Asín Palacios, Miguel, ,  
Asoka, King,  
Asp, 
Aspidochelone,  
Asses, -, , , , , 

Assyria, ,  
Astolpho,  
As You Like It,  
Athens,  
Athis,  
Atlantis,  
Atsuta, 
Attar, Farid al-Din,  
Augustine, St, -,  
Autobiography (Benvenuto 
Cellini),  
Avignon,  
Awomori,  
Azriel, -
Babaí,  
Babylonia, ,  
Bacchus,  
Bactry,  
Badger, 
Bahamut, -, ,  
Baldanders, - 
Banquo,  
Banshee, 
Barco Centenera, Martín del 
-
Bardo Thödol, ,  
Barometz, ,  
Basilisk, -,  
Bat, ,  
Bears, ,  
Beetle, 
Behemoth, , -
Bellerophon,  
Ben Chaim, Jakob,  
Benu, 
Benvenuto of Imola,  
Beowulf, - 
Bergen, 
Bestiaries, , , , , , 
, , ,  
Bezabel, Judah Loew ben, - 
Bhils, 
Bible, , , , , , ,  
Bibliotheca,  
Bifrost, 
Bird-Parliament . . ., The,  
Birds, , , , , , , , 
, , , , , , , , 
, , , -, ,
, , , , , , 
, , . See also names 
of species 
Bison, 
Blake, William, ,  
Blemies,  
Boar, , , ,  
Bodendrücker,  
Bombay,  
Book of Animals,  
Book of a Thousand and one 
Nights and a Night, The. See 
Arabian Nights 
Book of Kings, - 
Book of the Dead, ,  
Book of the Night Journey . . .,

Borneo, ,  
Brahmanism, , , ,  
Brave-Swift-Impetuous-Male,

Brazil,  
Brehier, Emile,  
Brendan, St, , , - 
British Museum,  
Brittany, 


Brod, Max, 
Brooke, Stopford A.,  
Browne, Sir Thomas, , , 
,  
Brownies, 
Browning, Elizabeth Barrett, 

Browning, Robert,  
Bruno, Giordano,  
Buddha, , , , ,  
Buddhism, , ,  
Buenos Aires, Province of,  
Buffalo, 
Bulls, , , , , , , , 
, -, , , , 
, ,  
Bundahish,  
Bunyan, Paul,  
Burak, - 
Burckhardt, Georg,  
Burton, Richard, , , , 
,  
Burton, Robert, , ,  
Bushmen,  
Butler, Samuel,  
Byzantium, , 
Cain, ,  
Caligula,  
Camel, , , ,  
Campania,  
Canton,  
Carbuncle, - 
Carroll, Lewis,  
Carthage, ,  
Casini, Tommaso,  
Castor,  
Caterling,  
Cato, 
Catoblepas, , - 
Cats, , , , , ; Che- 
shire, -, Kilkenny,  
Caxton, William, 
Cellini, Benvenuto,  
Centaurs, , -; Centaur- 
Fish, ; Centaur-Tritons, 

Centaurus,  
Cerberus, -,  
Chang Seng-yu,  
Charms, , - 
Chaucer, Geoffrey, , ,  
Chesterton, G. K., , ,  
Chilean fauna, - 
Chimera, , -,  
Chimpanzee, . See also Apes, 
Monkeys 
China, , -, -, , -, 
, , , , , ,
, , -, , , 
-, - 
Chinese fauna, - 
Chinese Ghouls and Goblins, 

Chinese lycopodium,  
Chio-tuan,  
Chiron,  
Chitor, 
Cho Chod, Louis,  
Christ. See Jesus Christ 
Christus,  
Chronos, - 
Chuang Tzu,  
Cicero,  
Circe, , ,  
City of God, - 
Civet cat,  
Clam,  
Claudian, ,  
Claudius,  
Cobra,  
Cock, , , - 
Cockatrice, ,  
Colombia,  
Coluccio, Felix,  
Columella, Lucius, 


Condillac, Étienne Bonnot de,

Condillac’s statue, ,  
Condor, 
Confucius, -, , , , 

Conquistadores, ,  
Cordoba,  
Corinth, ,  
Cork,  
Cow, ,  
Cox, William T.,  
Crab,  
Cranes,  
Crete, , ,  
Crocodile,  
Crocotta, - 
Cronos,  
Ctesias, , ,  
Cuvier, Baron Georges,  
Cyclops, ,  
Cynolycus,  
Cyprus, 
Cyrillus of Jerusalem, 
Daedalus, ,  
Damascius, 
Dante Alighieri, , , , , 
,  , -, ,  
Deer, , ,  
De Gentibus et Moribus Asiae, 

Demiurges, ,  
Demonology, ,  
Demonology and Witchcraft,

Demons, , , , , , , 

De Quincey, Thomas,  
De rerum natura,  
Descartes, René, ,  
Devils, , , , , , , 
, , , , , 
Dialogus de Oratoribus,  
Diana, 
Dictionary of Argentine Folk- 
lore,  
Dictionary of Chileanisms,  
Didron, 
Difficulties and Solutions of 
First Principles,  
Diodorus,  
Dioscorides,  
Dioscuri,  
Dirae, 
Divina Commedia,  
Doble andadora,  
Dogs, , , , -, , , 
, , , , , , , 
, , ,  
Dog-wolf,  
Dolphin,  
Donkey, 
Dostoyevsky, Fyodor,  
Doubles, -
Dragons, , , , -, , 
, -, , , , , , 
, , , , , ,
, - 
Dresden,  
Dryads,  
Dwarfs, , , 
Eagle, , , , , , ,
, , , ,  
Earthly Paradise, The,  
Eater of the Dead, - 
Echeneis,  
Echidna, 
Eddas, , ; Elder, ;
Younger, , , ,  
Eel,  
Eggeling, 
Egypt, , , , , , , 
, , , , ,  
Eleazer of Worms, 


Elephants, , , , , ,
, , ,  
Eliot, T. S.,  
Eloi, - 
Elves, ,  
Empedocles,  
Encyclopedia of Astrology,  
England, , , , , , 
,  
Enkidu,  
Entre Rios,  
Ephraim, 
Erigena, Johannes Scotus,  
Erman, Adolph,  
Eskimos, 
Ethiopia, , , , , ,

Etruscans,  
Etymologies, , ,  
Eucharist,  
Europa,  
Evans-Wenz,  
Eve, 
Ewers, Hanns Heinz,  
Exeter Book, ,  
Exposición del Libro de Job,  
Ezekiel, , 
Fabula de Polifemo,  
Faerie Queen, The,  
Fafnir,  
Fa-hsien,  
Fairies, , - 
Falak,  
Fastitocalon, - 
Fata morgana,  
Fates, ,  
Fathers of the Church,  
Fauna: of Argentina, -; of 
Chile, -; of China, -; 
of United States, - 
Fauns, , 
Fechner, Gustav Theodor, 
Fenrir, 
Fernández de Oviedo, Gonzalo,

Ferté-Bernard, La, - 
Fez, 
Ficino, Marsilio,  
Firdausi, - 
Fishes, , , , , , , 
, , , , , , , , 
, , , , , , , 
, , , ,  
Fitzgerald, Edward,  
Flaubert, Gustave, , , , 
, ,  
Flood,  
Fludd, Robert,  
Fontecchio, Father,  
Foxes, , ; Chinese Fox, 
-
Frazer, Sir James,  
Freya,  
Furies, , 
Galatea,  
Galatia,  
Gandharvas,  
Garmr,  
Garuda,  
Garuda Purana,  
Gawry,  
Gazelle, 
Geheimwissenschaft im Um- 
riss, Die,  
Genesis, , ,  
Genghis Khan, ,  
George, St,  
Georgics, 
Germany, , , , , , , 
, , ,  
Geryon,  
Gesner, Conrad,  
Ghoul, 
Giants, , , , 


Giles, Herbert Allen, ,  
Gilgamesh,  
Giraffe,  
Glaucus, , 
Glumms,  
Gnomes, , ,  
Gnostics,  
Gnu, 
Goats, , , , , , , 
,  
God, , , , , , , , 
, , , , , , , 
, - 
Golden Legend,  
Golem, - 
Golem, Der, - 
Gomperz, Theodor,  
Góngora y Argote, Luis de, 
-,  
Goose, 
Gordon, R. K., ,  
Gorgons, ,  
Greater Vehicle,  
Greece, , , , , , , 
, , , , , , , 
, ,  
Grey, Zachary,  
Griffons, , , -, ,  
Grimal, 
Grimmelshausen, Hans von, 
,  
Grimm brothers, the,  
Ground-Flattener,  
Gullinbursti,  
Gwalior, 
Haarlem,  
Hades,  
Hadhramaut,  
Hamadryads,  
Hamlet, Prince,  
Haniel, -
Haokah,  
Hare, - 
Harpies, , - 
Hathor,  
Hawk, 
Hawthorne, Nathaniel,  
Hayoth,  
Hearn, Lafcadio,  
Heaven, , , , , , , 
, , , , , ,
-, 
Heaven and Hell,  
Hecate,  
Heliodorus,  
Heliopolis, 
Hell, , , , , , , , 
, , , , , , , 
,  
Hellanicus,  
Hennig, Richard,  
Henry VIII,  
Hera. See Juno 
Heracles. See Hercules 
Heraclitus, ,  
Heraldry, , ,  
Hercules, , , -, , ,

Hercules, Columns of,  
Herodotus, , , , , 
 
Heron,  
Herrmann, Paul,  
Hesiod, , , , ,  
Hieronymus,  
Hinduism,  
Hippocentaur,  
Hippogriff, -,  
Hippopotamus, , , ,  
Histoire de la philosophie,  
Historia Animalium,  
Historia de Gentibus Septen- 
trionalibus,  
Historical Record, 


History of the Jewish Wars, 
- 
Hochigan, 
Hog, , . See also Pig, Sow 
Holland,  
Holy Ghost, ,  
Homer, , , , ,  
Hong Fan, 
Horses, , , , , , ,
, , , , , , , 
-, , , , , 
 
Horst,  
Hosea,  
Hudibras,  
Hugo, Victor,  
Huisne,  
Humbaba,  
Hundred-Heads,  
Hydra, , - 
Hyena,  
Hyginus, 
Hypothetical animal,  
Iblis, 
Ibsen, Henrik,  
I Ching,  
Ichthyocentaurs, - 
Iliad, , , ,  
India, , , , , , , 
, , , , ,  
Indians, American, , ,  
Inferno, , , , ,  
Iolaus,  
Iran, 
Ireland, , , ,  
Isa, 
Isidore of Seville, , , ,

Islam. See Moslemism 
Italy, 
Iturvuru, C. C.,  
Ixion, 
Jackal,  
Jacob,  
Jaculi,  
Jaguar, ,  
Jahiz, al-,  
James, Henry,  
James, William,  
Japan, , , - 
Jasconye,  
Jason,  
Jerome, St, ,  
Jerusalem, ; Temple of,  
Jesus Christ, , , , , 
, ,  
Jews, , , ,  
Jinn, - 
John, St, 
John the Divine, St, ,  
Job, ,  
Jocasta,  
Jordan,  
Jormungard,  
Joseph, St,  
Josephus, Flavius,  
Jotunnheim, ,  
Jung, Carl, , ,  
Juno, ,  
Justinus,  
Juvenal, 
Kabbalah, Kabbalists, , ,  
Kaf, 
Kafka, Franz, -, -, 
- 
Kafziel, - 
Kalandar,  
Kami, - 
Kangaroo,  
Kantian categories,  
Kapila,  
Karkadan,  
Karnak,  
Kashima, 


Keats, John,  
Kepler, Johannes,  
Kern,  
Keteb Mereri,  
K’i-lin, - 
Kings, Book of,  
Kirk, Robert,  
Kleist, Heinrich von,  
Knowledge, Tree of,  
Knox, Father Ronald,  
Koran,  
Koshi,  
Kraken, - 
Kranz, Walter,  
Kujata,  
Kutb,  
Kyoto, 
Labyrinths,  
Lacrimacorpus dissolvens,  
Lactantius,  
Lamb of Tartary,  
Lambs, , , , . See also 
Ram, Sheep 
Lamed Wufniks,  
Lamias, -
Lane, William Edward, , , 
, -, ,  
Lao-tzu, , ,  
Lapiths,  
Lares familiares,  
Larvae,  
Latini, Brunetto,  
Laudatores Temporis Acti,  
Laws, 
Lead, Jane, -,  
Leah, 
Legenda aurea,  
Legge, James,  
Lemprière, John, , , ,  
Lemures,  
León, Fray Luis de, 
Leonardo da Vinci, , ,
,  
Leopard,  
Leprechauns, Co 
Lerna,  
Lethe, 
Lettres édifiantes et curieuses,

Leucrocotta, - 
Leveller, - 
Leviathan,  
Lewis, C. S., -, - 
Libya, 
Life and Death of Jason, The, 

Lilith, -
Lion, , , , , , , , 
, -, , , , , 
. , , , , , , 
, , ,  
Lisbon, ,  
Littré, Maximilien,  
Lobisón, ,  
Loki,  
London, ,  
Longfellow, Henry Wads- 
worth,  
Lorber, Jakob,  
Lord. See God 
Lotze, Rudolf Hermann,  
Lucan, , , 
Lucretius, 
Lugones, Leopoldo, ,  
Luke, St,  
Luna, 
Lunario sentimental,  
Lusitania,  
Lycia,  
Lycophron,  
Lycopodium barometz, 
Macbeth,  
Madagascar, , 


Magellan, Strait of,  
Magnesium,  
Magnet Mountain,  
Mahabharata,  
Malays, 
Mandeville, Sir John,  
Mandrake, , - 
Manilius, Marcus,  
Manticore, - 
Mantiq al-Tayr,  
Manual of Indian Buddhism, 

Manuel d’iconographie chréti- 
enne,  
Margolin, Jean-Claude,  
Margoulies,  
Mark, St,  
Martha, St,  
Martinez Estrada,  
Maruts, 
Mary, Queen of Scots,  
Mashu,  
Matthew, St,  
Maya, Queen,  
Mazdaism,  
Mecca, 
Medea, , ,  
Meizinische Psychologie,
 
Medusa,  
Menelaus,  
Men-scorpions,  
Mermaid,  
Mermecolion, - 
Messina, Strait of,  
Metamorphoses, , , ,
,  
Metaphysical beings, - 
Meyrink, Gustav,  
Mice,  
Michael, St,  
Micheli, Pietro,  
Middle Kingdom, 
Midsummer Night’s Dream, A, 

Miõgarõsormr, ,  
Milton, John, , ,  
Minnesota, ,  
Minotaur, , -,  
Miron, 
Mirrors, , , , -,  
Mirth of the Snakes,  
Moby Dick,  
Mohammed, , - 
Momigliano,  
Monkeys, , . See also 
Apes, Chimpanzee 
Mooncalf,  
Morlocks, - 
Morris, William, ,  
Moslemism, , , , , , 
, , -,  
Mule,  
Murcia,  
Murex,  
Murgen,  
Musset, Alfred de,  
Myrmex, 
Myths and Superstitions, 
Nagarjuna,  
Nagas, - 
Naiads,  
Napaeae,  
Naples, 
Narrative of Arthur Gordon 
Pym . . ., - 
Nasnas, -
Natural History (Pliny),  
Natural History of Norway, 

Natural History of Serpents 
and Dragons,  
Navigation of St Brendan, 
-


Nazis, 
Neoplatonists, ,  
Nepal, 
Neptune, , , ; (planet), 

Nereids,  
Nightingale,  
Nile, , 
Nimbarka,  
Nirvana,  
Niu Chiao,  
Norns, -
Norse mythology, , , , 
,  
Norse pirates,  
Norway, , ,  
Nuremberg, 
Nymphs, , , , , , 

Oceanids, 
Octopus, , 
Odin, , , 
Odradek, -
Odyssey, , , , , 
Oedipus, 
Olaus Magnus, 
Olympia, 
Omar, 
On Malay Witchcraft,  
On the Nature of the Gods,  
Oreads,  
Origen, -
Orlando Furioso, , -,  
Orpheus,  
Orphism, 
Ovid, , , , , , ,
,  
Owl, , , ,  
Ox,  , , , , , 
Paltock, Robert,  
Pans, 
Panther, , - 
Paracelsus, , ,  
Paradise, 
Paradise Lost, , ,  
Paradiso,  
Paraguay, ,  
Parcae,  
Pareas,  
Paris,  
Parrot,  
Parsis,  
Parthenon,  
Partridge,  
Pasiphae,  
Pausanius,  
Peacock, , , ,  
Peer Gynt,  
Pegasus,  
Pelican, - 
Pellicer,  
Pennsylvania,  
Perelandra, ,  
Periander, ,  
Persepolis,  
Perseus, 
Persia, , , , , , 
, ,  
Peryton, - 
Peter Wilkins,  
Pharsalia, , ,  
Pheasant,  
Phidias,  
Philostratus,  
Phoenicians,  
Phoenix, , -, , -, 
, , , ; Tower of, 

Phoenix and its Natural His- 
tory, The,  
Physiologus, , ,  
Pig, , . See also Hog, Sow 
Pisanello, Antonio,  
Plato, , , , , , 


Pliny, , , , , , , , 
, -, , , , , 
, , , , -,
, , , , , - 
Pluralistic Universe, A,  
Plutarch, , , , ,  
Poe, Edgar Allan, -,  
Political Emblems,  
Pollux, 
Polo, Marco, , -,  
Polyphemus, ,  
Pontoppidan, Erik,  
Poseidon, 
Prescott, William Hickling,  
Prestor, John, ,  
Princess-Comb-Ricefield,  
Propertius,  
Proserpina,  
Proteus,  
Proverbs,  
Psalms, 
Pseudodoxia Epidemica, , , 

Psychologie und Alchemie, ,
   
Purgatorio,  
Pygmies,  
Pyrallis,  
Pyrausta,  
Pyrenees,  
Pythagoras, , 
Qaswini, Zakariyya al-, , ,
, ,  
Quevedo, Francisco Gómez de, 
, ,  
Quicherat, Louis,  
Quintilian, 
Quiroga, General Facundo, 
Rabbits,  
Rabelais, François,  
Rachel, 
Ram, , , . See also 
Lambs, Sheep 
Ramayana,  
Rat, , ,  
Ravenna,  
Red Sea,  
Regensburg,  
Remora, - 
Remus, 
Reptiles, , , , , .
See also Serpents, Snakes 
Republic,  
Resurrection,  
Reuben, 
Revelation of St John, , -,

Rhinoceros,  
Rhiphaean Mountains,  
Rhone, ,  
Ricci, Father Matteo,  
Richard III,  
Rodríguez, Zorobabel,  
Romantic poets,  
Rome, , , , , , , 
, , , ,  
Romeo and Juliet,  
Romulus,  
Rooster. See Cock 
Rosetti, Dante Gabriel, ,
,  
Rubens, Peter Paul,  
Rukh, , - 
Russia, 
Saavedra Fajardo, Diego de, 

Sachs, Hans,  
Sacred Scriptures of the Japan- 
ese, The,  
Sagittarius, - 
Saintsbury, George Edward 
Bateman,  
Salamanders, , -, 


Sale, George,  
Samson Agonistes,  
Sandars, N. R.,  
Satan, -
Saturnian period, ,  
Satyrs, , - 
Saxon kings,  
Scholem, Gershom, ,  
Scholiasts, 
Schopenhauer, Arthur, ,  
Schrader, Eberhard,  
Scipio,  
Scorpions, , ,  
Scotland, , , , , ,

Scott, Sir Walter, ,  
Scriptures. See Bible 
Scylla, - 
Sea Horses, , - 
Second World War,  
Secret Commonwealth . . ., The 

Sefer Yeriçah,  
Seneca,  
Septuagint, ,  
Serpents, , , , , , , 
-, , , , , , , 
, , , , , , 
, , , , , . 
See also Reptiles, Snakes 
Servius Honoratius, , ,  
Shakespeare, William, , ,
, , ,  
Shang Dynasty,  
Shang Yang, - 
Sheba, Queen of,  
Sheep, , , , . See also 
Lambs, Ram 
Shikk, 
Short History of English Litera- 
ture,  
Shun, Emperor,  
Siberia, 
Sibyl of Erythraea,  
Sicily, ,  
Sigurd,  
Silveira, Luiz da,  
Simonides,  
Simorg Anka, ,  
Simurgh, , - 
Sinbad, , , ,  
Sioux Indians,  
Sirens, - 
Skeat, W. W., ,  
Skuld,  
Sleep,  
Sleipnir, , 
Snake, , , , , , , 
, , , , , , , 
, , . See also 
Reptiles, Serpents 
Sodom,  
Solomon,  
Solomon’s seal,  
Some Chinese Ghosts,  
Song of Solomon,  
Soothill,  
South Africa,  
South America,  
Southey, Robert,  
South Pole,  
Sow, , - 
Spanish Parnassus, ,  
Speculum Triplex,  
Spherical animals, - 
Sphinx, , , , - 
Spider,  
Squonk,  
Ssu-ma Ch’ien,  
Stag, , , , ,  
Steiner, Rudolf, ,  
Stevenson, Robert Louis, , 
,  
Stilbia,  
Stoics,  
Strabo, , 


Sturluson, Snorri, ,  
Sulla, Lucius Cornelius,  
Swedenborg, Emanuel, , 
, - 
Sylphs, ,  
Sylvans, 
Tabari, al-,  
Tacitus, - 
Tagus, 
T’ai P’ing Kuang Chi,  
Talmud, , , ,  
Talos, , - 
Tantalus,  
T’ao T’ieh,  
Tartarus,  
Tempest, The,  
Temple of Jerusalem,  
Temple of Zeus,  
Temptation of Saint Anthony, 
, , -, ,  
Tennyson, Alfred, Lord,  
Terra,  
Tertulius, - 
Tesoro,  
Thalaba,  
Thales, ,  
Thebes, 
Theogony, , , ,  
Thermal beings, - 
Theseus,  
Thessaly, ,  
Thor, ,  
Thrace,  
Tibetans, -
Tigers, , , , , , , 
, , , - 
Tigre capiango,  
Timaeus,  
Time Machine, The,  
Tirso de Molina,  
Titans, , ,  
Toad, , , 
Tortoises, , , , -, 
, , . See also Turtle 
Tower of the Phoenix,  
Tower of Victory,  
Trachtenberg,  
Traité des sensations,  
Travels (Mandeville),  
Travels (Polo), ,  
Tree of Knowledge,  
Tritons, ,  
Trolls, - 
Troy,  
Tunk-poj,  
Turkey, 
Turtle, , , . See also 
Tortoises 
Twilight of the Gods, ,  
Typhon,  
Tzetzes, John, 
Ulysses, 
Unicom, , , , , -, 
-
United States fauna, - 
Un-man, - 
Uroboros, - 
Urth,  
Uraquay,  
Utgard-Loki, 
Vaihinger, Hans,  
Valhalla,  
Valkyries, , - 
Van Duym, H. van Ameyden, 

Vanini, Lucilio,  
Vedic myth, ,  
Velue, La,  
Venus,  
Verthandi,  
Victory, Tower of,  
Vicuña Cifuentes, Julio,  
Viper, 


Virgil, , , , , ,  
Vishnu,  
Visio Tundali,  
Voragine, Jacobus de,  
Vore, Nicholas de,  
Vulcan, 
Vulgar Errors, See Pseudodoxia 
Epidemica 
Vulgate, , 
Vultures, , , , , , 
, 
Wales, ,  
Waley, Arthur, ,  
Wang Ch’ung,  
Wang Tai-hai, , - 
Weasel,  
Webster, Noah,  
Wells, Herbert George,  
Wentling, J. P.,  
Werewolf, ,  
Whale, -, ,  
Wheeler, Post,  
White, T. H.,  
Wilde, Oscar,  
Wilhelm,  
Wilkins, Peter,  
Will in Nature,  
Willoughby-Meade, G.,  
Wisconsin, 
Witches, , , , ,  
Wizards, , , , 
Wolves, , , , , , ,
, , 
Wonders of Creation, , ,

Wonders of God’s Creation . . ., 
The, - 
Woodpecker,  
Wyrd, 
Yad’ua,  
Yama,  
Yang, , ,  
Yao, 
Yeats, W. B., , ,  
Yellow Emperor, ,  
Yellow River,  
Yemen,  
Yggdrasil, ,  
Yin, ,  
Youwarkee, - 
Yunnan,  
Yü the Great, 
Zal, 
Zaratan, , - 
Zarathustra,  
Zauberbibliothek,  
Zend-Avesta,  
Zeus, , ; Temple of,  
Zodiacal signs, ,  
Zohar, 

