
Penguin Books 
The Book of Sand
Jorge Luis Borges was born in Buenos Aires in  and was 
educated in Europe. One of the major writers of our time, he 
has published many collections of poems, essays, and short 
stories. In , Borges shared the International Publishers’ 
Prize with Samuel Beckett. The Ingram Merrill Foundation 
granted him its Annual Literary Award in  for his ‘out- 
standing contribution to literature’. In  he was awarded 
the degree of Doctor of Letters, honoris causa, from both Colum- 
bia and Oxford, the following year won the fifth biennial Jeru- 
salem Prize, and in  was awarded the Alfonso Reyes Prize. 
Time has called him ‘the greatest living writer in the Spanish 
language today’, while the New York Herald Tribune has des- 
cribed him as ‘unquestionably the most brilliant South 
American writing today’. He was Director of the National 
Library of Buenos Aires from  until .
A Universal History of Infamy, Labyrinths, The Book of 
Imaginary Beings and Doctor Brodie’s Report have been pub- 
lished in Penguins.
Norman Thomas di Giovanni, who to date has produced 
English versions of eight books by Borges, lives in Devon. He 
worked with Borges in Buenos Aires from  to . 
Alastair Reid is a noted poet and translator. He made his 
selection for The Gold of the Tigers from two books of poetry 
by Borges: El oro de los tigres () and La rosa profunda 
().

Jorge Luis Borges
Penguin Books

The Book of Sand
The Book of Sand 
Translated by Norman Thomas di Giovanni
The Gold of the Tigers 
Selected Later Poems: translated by Alastair Reid

Penguin Books Ltd, Harmondsworth, Middlesex, England
Penguin Books,  Madison Avenue, New York, New York , U.S.A.
Penguin Books Australia Ltd, Ringwood, Victoria, Australia
Penguin Books Canada Ltd,  John Street, Markham, Ontario, Canada LR IB
Penguin Books (N.Z.) Ltd, - Wairau Road, Auckland , New Zealand
El librole arena first published by Emecé Editores, S.A.,  
This translation first published in the U.S.A. by E. P. Dutton  
Published simultaneously in Penguin Books and Allen Lane  
Reprinted , 
Copyright © Emecé Editores, S.A., and Norman Thomas di Giovanni,
, , , , 
El oro de los tigres and La rosa profunda
first published by Emecé Editores, S.A.,  
This translation, a selection with English translations from El oro de los tigres
and La rosa profunda, first published in the U.S.A. by E. P. Dutton 
Published simultaneously in Penguin Books and Allen Lane 
Copyright © Emecé Editores, S.A., , 
English translation copyright © Alastair Reid, , , 
All rights reserved
The following stories from The Book of Sand first appeared in these peri- 
odicals:
The Antioch Review: ‘The Bribe’
The Atlantic Monthly: ‘There Are More Things’
The New Yorker: ‘The Congress’, ‘Utopia of a Tired Man’, ‘The Disk’, ‘The 
Book of Sand’, ‘The Mirror and the Mask’, ‘Avelino Arredondo’,
‘Undr’, ‘The Night of the Gifts’
The New York Times Magazine: ‘The Sect of the Thirty’, ‘Ulrike’
Playboy: ‘The Other’
‘The Congress’ has also been published in a limited edition by Enitharmon 
Press, London, 
The following poems from The Gold of the Tigers have appeared in these 
publications:
The New Yorker: ‘The Watcher’, ‘The Palace’, ‘Hengist Wants Men, a.d. 
’, ‘Brunanburh, a.d. ’, ‘To the Nightingale’, ‘Talismans’
The New York Review of Books: ‘The Blind Man’, ‘A Blind Man’, ‘Browning 
Resolves to be a Poet’, ‘To the German Language’
Translation: ‘The Gold of the Tigers’, ‘The Unending Rose’
American Poetry Review: ‘You’, ‘Inventory’, ‘I Am’, ‘My Books’
New Republic: ‘Tankas’, ‘Fifteen Coins’, ‘Elegy’, ‘Milonga of Manuel Flores’ 
‘I’, ‘Poem of Quantity’, ‘Susana Bombal’
Made and printed in Great Britain
by Richard Clay (The Chaucer Press) Ltd, Bungay, Suffolk 
Set in Monotype Ehrhardt
Except in the United States of America, this book is sold subject to the condition 
that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out, or 
otherwise circulated without the publisher’s prior consent in any form of binding 
or cover other than that in which it is published and without a similar condition 
including this condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser

Contents
The Book of Sand
(Translated by Norman Thomas di Giovanni)
Author’s note 

The other 

Ulrike 

The Congress 

There are more things 

The Sect of the Thirty 

The night of the gifts 

The mirror and the mask 

Undr 

Utopia of a tired man 

The bribe 

Avelino Arredondo 

The disk 

The Book of Sand 

Afterword 

The Gold of the Tigers 
(Translated by Alastair Reid)
Preface to The Gold of the Tigers 

Preface to The Unending Rose 

Tankas 

Susana Bombal 

v

Things
The threatened one 
You
Poem of quantity 
The watcher 
To the German language 

Milonga of Manuel Flores
The dream of Pedro Henríquez Ureña
The Palace
Hengist wants men, A.D.  
To a cat
The gold of the tigers 
I
The dream
Browning resolves to be a poet
Inventory
The suicide
To the nightingale
I am
Fifteen coins 
Proteus
Brunanburh, A.D.  
The blind man 
A blind man 
 
Elegy
The exile ()
In memory of Angelica 
My books 
Talismans 
The white deer 
The unending rose
Notes


































vi

Translated by Norman Thomas di Giovanni
The Book of Sand

Author’s note
At my age (I was born in ), I cannot promise - I 
cannot even promise myself - more than these few varia- 
tions on favourite themes. As everyone knows, this is the 
classic recourse of irreparable monotony. Allow me, 
nevertheless, to point out one or two details.
The volume includes thirteen stories. The number is 
accidental, or fatal - here the two words are strictly 
synonymous - and not magical. If of all my stories I had 
to save one, I would probably save ‘The Congress’, which 
at the same time is the most autobiographical (the one 
richest in memories) and the most imaginative. Nor shall 
I hide a predilection for ‘The Book of Sand’. There is 
also a love story, a ‘psychological’ story, and the story 
of a dramatic episode in South American history.
In these blind man’s exercises, I have tried to be faithful 
to the example of H. G. Wells in combining a plain and 
at times almost colloquial style with a fantastic plot. To 
Wells’ name the reader may add those of Swift and of Poe, 
who, around , gave up a very rich style in order to 
bequeath us the admirable final chapters of his Narrative 
of Arthur Gordon Pym.
I do not write for a select minority, which means nothing 
to me, nor for that adulated platonic entity known as 
‘The Masses’. Both abstractions, so dear to the demago- 
gue, I disbelieve in. I write for myself and for my friends, 
and I write to ease the passing of time.


The other
It was in Cambridge, back in February, , that the 
event took place. I made no attempt to record it at the 
time, because, fearing for my mind, my initial aim was to 
forget it. Now, some years later, I feel that if I commit it 
to paper others will read it as a story and, I hope, one day 
it will become a story for me as well. I know it was 
horrifying while it lasted - and even more so during the 
sleepless nights that followed - but this does not mean 
that an account of it will necessarily move anyone else.
It was about ten o’clock in the morning. I sat on a bench 
facing the Charles River. Some five hundred yards dis- 
tant, on my right, rose a tall building whose name I never 
knew. Ice floes were borne along on the grey water. In- 
evitably, the river made me think about time - Heraclitus’ 
millennial image. I had slept well; my class on the pre- 
vious afternoon had, I thought, managed to hold the 
interest of my students. Not a soul was in sight.
AH at once, I had the impression (according to psycho- 
logists, it corresponds to a state of fatigue) of having 
lived that moment once before. Someone had sat down 
at the other end of the bench. I would have preferred to 
be alone, but not wishing to appear unsociable I avoided 
getting up abruptly. The other man had begun to whistle. 
It was then that the first of the many disquieting things 
of that morning occurred. What he whistled, what he 
tried to whistle (I have no ear for music), was the tune of


‘La tapera’, an old milonga by Elías Regules. The melody 
took me back to a certain Buenos Aires patio, which has 
long since disappeared, and to the memory of my cousin 
Álvaro Melián Lafinur, who has been dead for so many 
years. Then came the words. They were those of the 
opening line. It was not Álvaro’s voice but an imitation 
of it. Recognizing this, I was taken aback.
‘Sir,’ I said, turning to the other man, ‘are you an 
Uruguayan or an Argentine?’
‘Argentine, but I’ve lived in Geneva since ,’ he 
replied.
There was a long silence. ‘At number seventeen Malagnou 
- across from the Orthodox church?’ I asked.
He answered in the affirmative.
‘In that case,’ I said straight out, ‘your name is Jorge 
Luis Borges. I, too, am Jorge Luis Borges. This is  
and we’re in the city of Cambridge.’
‘No,’ he said in a voice that was mine but a bit removed. 
He paused, then became insistent. ‘I’m here in Geneva, 
on a bench, a few steps from the Rhone. The strange 
thing is that we resemble each other, but you’re much 
older and your hair is grey.’
‘I can prove I’m not lying,’ I said. ‘I’m going to tell 
you things a stranger couldn’t possibly know. At home 
we have a silver maté cup with a base in the form of en- 
twined serpents. Our great-grandfather brought it from 
Peru. There’s also a silver washbasin that hung from his 
saddle. In the wardrobe of your room are two rows of 
books: the three volumes of Lane’s Thousand and One 
Nights, with steel engravings and with notes in small type 
at the end of each chapter; Quicherat’s Latin dictionary; 
Tacitus’ Germania in Latin and also in Gordon’s English 
translation; a Don Quixote published by Garnier; Rivera 
Indarte’s Tablas de Sangre, inscribed by the author; 
Carlyle’s Sartor Resartus; a biography of Amiel; and, 
hidden behind the other volumes, a book in paper covers


about sexual customs in the Balkans. Nor have I forgotten 
one evening on a certain second floor of the Place Du- 
bourg.’
‘Dufour,’ he corrected.
‘Very well - Dufour. Is this enough now?’
‘No,’ he said. ‘These proofs prove nothing. If I am 
dreaming you, it’s natural that you know what I know. 
Your catalogue, for all its length, is completely worthless.’ 
His objection was to the point. I said, ‘If this morning 
and this meeting are dreams, each of us has to believe 
that he is the dreamer. Perhaps we have stopped dreaming, 
perhaps not. Our obvious duty, meanwhile, is to accept 
the dream just as we accept the world and being born and 
seeing and breathing.’
‘And if the dream should go on?’ he said anxiously.
To calm him and to calm myself, I feigned an air of 
assurance that I certainly did not feel. ‘My dream has 
lasted seventy years now,’ I said. ‘After all, there isn’t a 
person alive who, on waking, does not find himself with 
himself. It’s what is happening to us now - except that 
we are two. Don’t you want to know something of my 
past, which is the future awaiting you?’
He assented without a word. I went on, a bit lost. 
‘Mother is healthy and well in her house on Charcas and 
Maipú, in Buenos Aires, but Father died some thirty 
years ago. He died of heart trouble. Hemiplegia finished 
him; his left hand, placed on his right, was like the hand 
of a child on a giant’s. He died impatient for death but 
without complaint. Our grandmother had died in the 
same house. A few days before the end, she called us all 
together and said, “I’m an old woman who is dying very, 
very slowly. Don’t anyone become upset about such a 
common, everyday thing.” Your sister, Norah, married 
and has two sons. By the way, how is everyone at 
home?’
‘Quite well. Father makes his same antireligious jokes.


Last night he said that Jesus was like the gauchos, who 
don’t like to commit themselves, and that’s why he 
preached in parables.’ He hesitated and then said, ‘And 
you?’
‘I don’t know the number of books you’ll write, but I 
know they’ll be too many. You’ll write poems that will 
give you a pleasure that others won’t share and stories of 
a somewhat fantastic nature. Like your father and so 
many others of our family, you will teach.’
It pleased me that he did not ask about the success or 
failure of his books. I changed my tone and went on. 
‘As for history, there was another war, almost among the 
same antagonists. France was not long in caving in; 
England and America fought against a German dictator 
named Hitler - the cyclical battle of Waterloo. Around 
, Buenos Aires gave birth to another Rosas, who bore 
a fair resemblance to our kinsman. In , the province 
of Córdoba came to our rescue, as Entre Ríos had in the 
last century. Now things are going badly. Russia is 
taking over the world; America, hampered by the super- 
stition of democracy, can’t make up its mind to become 
an empire. With every day that passes, our country be- 
comes more provincial. More provincial and more pre- 
tentious - as if its eyes were closed. It wouldn’t surprise 
me if the teaching of Latin in our schools were replaced 
by that of Guaraní.’
I could tell that he was barely paying attention. The 
elemental fear of what is impossible and yet what is so 
dismayed him. I, who have never been a father, felt for 
that poor boy - more intimate to me even than a son of 
my flesh - a surge of love. Seeing that he clutched a book 
in his hands, I asked what it was.
‘The Possessed, or, as I believe, The Devils, by Fëdor 
Dostoevski,’ he answered, not without vanity.
‘It has faded in my memory. What’s it like?’ As soon 
as I said this, I felt that the question was a blasphemy.


‘The Russian master,’ he pronounced, ‘has seen better 
than anyone else into the labyrinth of the Slavic soul.’
This attempt at rhetoric seemed to me proof that he 
had regained his composure. I asked what other volumes 
of the master he had read. He mentioned two or three, 
among them The Double. I then asked him if on reading 
them he could clearly distinguish the characters, as you 
could in Joseph Conrad, and if he thought of going on in 
his study of Dostoevski’s work.
‘Not really,’ he said with a certain surprise.
I asked what he was writing and he told me he was 
putting together a book of poems that would be called 
Red Hymns. He said he had also considered calling it 
Red Rhythms.
‘And why not?’ I said. ‘You can cite good antecedents. 
Rubén Darío’s blue verse and Verlaine’s grey song.’
Ignoring this, he explained that his book would celebrate 
the brotherhood of man. The poet of our time could not 
turn his back on his own age, he went on to say. I thought 
for a while and asked if he truly felt himself a brother to 
everyone - to all funeral directors, for example, to all post- 
men, to all deep-sea divers, to all those who lived on the 
even-numbered side of the street, to all those who were 
aphonic, and so on. He answered that his book referred 
to the great mass of the oppressed and alienated.
‘Your mass of oppressed and alienated is no more than 
an abstraction,’ I said. ‘Only individuals exist - if it can 
be said that anyone exists. “The man of yesterday is not 
the man of today,” some Greek remarked. We two, 
seated on this bench in Geneva or Cambridge, are per- 
haps proof of this.’
Except in the strict pages of history, memorable events 
stand in no need of memorable phrases. At the point of 
death, a man tries to recall an engraving glimpsed in 
childhood; about to enter battle, soldiers speak of the 
mud or of their sergeant. Our situation was unique and,


frankly, we were unprepared for it. As fate would have it, 
we talked about literature; I fear I said no more than the 
things I usually say to journalists. My alter ego believed 
in the invention, or discovery, of new metaphors; I, in 
those metaphors that correspond to intimate and obvious 
affinities and that our imagination has already accepted. 
Old age and sunset, dreams and life, the flow of time and 
water. I put forward this opinion, which years later he 
would put forward in a book. He barely listened to me. 
Suddenly, he said, ‘If you have been me, how do you 
explain the fact that you have forgotten your meeting 
with an elderly gentleman who in  told you that he, 
too, was Borges?’
I had not considered this difficulty. ‘Maybe the event 
was so strange I chose to forget it,’ I answered without 
much conviction.
Venturing a question, he said shyly, ‘What’s your me- 
mory like?’
I realized that to a boy not yet twenty a man of over 
seventy was almost in the grave. ‘It often approaches 
forgetfulness,’ I said, ‘but it still finds what it’s asked to 
find. I study Old English, and I am not at the bottom of 
the class.’
Our conversation had already lasted too long to be that 
of a dream. A sudden idea came to me. ‘I can prove at 
once that you are not dreaming me,’ I said. ‘Listen care- 
fully to this line, which, as far as I know, you’ve never 
read.’
Slowly I entoned the famous verse, ‘L’hydre-univers 
tordant son corps écaillé d’astres.’ I felt his almost fearful 
awe. He repeated the line, low-voiced, savouring each 
resplendent word.
‘It’s true,’ he faltered. ‘I’ll never be able to write a line 
like that.’
Victor Hugo had brought us together.
Before this, I now recall, he had fervently recited that


short piece of Whitman’s in which the poet remembers a 
night shared beside the sea when he was really happy.
‘If Whitman celebrated that night,’ I remarked, ‘it’s 
because he desired it and it did not happen. The poem 
gains if we look on it as the expression of a longing, not 
the account of an actual happening.’
He stared at me open-mouthed. ‘You don’t know him!’ 
he exclaimed. ‘Whitman is incapable of telling a lie.’
Half a century does not pass in vain. Beneath our con- 
versation about people and random reading and our 
different tastes, I realized that we were unable to under- 
stand each other. We were too similar and too unalike. 
We were unable to take each other in, which makes 
conversation difficult. Each of us was a caricature copy 
of the other. The situation was too abnormal to last much 
longer. Either to offer advice or to argue was pointless, 
since, unavoidably, it was his fate to become the person I 
am.
All at once, I remembered one of Coleridge’s fantasies. 
Somebody dreams that on a journey through paradise he 
is given a flower. On awaking, he finds the flower. A 
similar trick occurred to me. ‘Listen,’ I said. ‘Have you 
any money?’
‘Yes,’ he replied. ‘I have about twenty francs. I’ve 
invited Simon Jichlinski to dinner at the Crocodile to- 
night.’
‘Tell Simon that he will practise medicine in Carouge 
and that he will do much good. Now, give me one of 
your coins.’
He drew out three large silver pieces and some small 
change. Without understanding, he offered me a five- 
franc coin. I handed him one of those not very sensible 
American bills that, regardless of their value, are all the 
same size. He examined it avidly.
‘It can’t be,’ he said, his voice raised. ‘It bears the date 
. All this is a miracle, and the miraculous is terrifying.


Witnesses to the resurrection of Lazarus must have been 
horrified.’
We have not changed in the least, I thought to myself. 
Ever the bookish reference. He tore up the bill and put 
his coins away. I decided to throw mine into the river. 
The arc of the big silver disk losing itself in the silver 
river would have conferred on my story a vivid image, 
but luck would not have it so. I told him that the super- 
natural, if it occurs twice, ceases to be terrifying. I 
suggested that we plan to see each other the next day, 
on this same bench, which existed in two times and in 
two places. He agreed at once and, without looking at his 
watch, said that he was late. Both of us were lying and 
we each knew it of the other. I told him that someone was 
coming for me.
‘Coming for you?’ he said.
‘Yes. When you get to my age, you will have lost your 
eyesight almost completely. You’ll still make out the 
colour yellow and lights and shadows. Don’t worry. 
Gradual blindness is not a tragedy. It’s like a slow summer 
dusk.’
We said goodbye without having once touched each 
other. The next day, I did not show up. Neither would he.
I have brooded a great deal over that meeting, which 
until now I have related to no one. I believe I have dis- 
covered the key. The meeting was real, but the other man 
was dreaming when he conversed with me, and this 
explains how he was able to- forget me; I conversed with 
him while awake, and the memory of it still disturbs me.
The other man dreamed me, but he did not dream me 
exactly. He dreamed, I now realize, the date on the dollar 
bill.


Ulrike
He took the sword Gram and laid it naked between 
them.
The Saga of the Volsungs, 
My story will be true to reality or, in any case, to my 
personal memory of reality, which amounts to the same 
thing. The events took place only a short time ago, but 
I know that literary habit is also the habit of adding 
circumstantial details and of underlining high points. I 
want to give an account of my meeting with Ulrike (I 
never knew her surname and perhaps never shall) in the 
city of York. The narrative will encompass one night and 
a morning.
It would be easy to say that I saw her for the first time 
by the Five Sisters of York Minster, those stained-glass 
windows which, pure of any image, Cromwell’s iconoclasts 
respected, but the fact is that we met in the small lounge 
of The Northern Inn, which lies outside the city walls. 
We were a handful, and Ulrike stood with her back to us. 
Someone offered her a drink and she refused it.
‘I am a feminist,’ she said. ‘I am not out to ape men. 
I dislike their tobacco and their alcohol.’
The remark was meant to be witty, and I guessed that 
this was not the first time she had delivered it. I later 
found out that it was not typical of her, but what we say 
is not always like us. She mentioned that she had arrived 
at the museum too late, but that they let her in when they 
learned she was a Norwegian.
One of those present remarked, ‘It’s not the first time 
the Norwegians have entered York.’


‘That’s right,’ she said. ‘England was once ours and we 
lost it - if one can have anything or if anything can be lost.’ 
It was at this point that I looked at her. A line in Blake 
speaks of girls of mild silver or of furious gold, but in 
Ulrike were both gold and mildness. She was tall and 
slender, with sharp features and grey eyes. Less than by 
her face, I was impressed by her air of calm mystery. She 
smiled easily, and the smile seemed to withdraw her from 
the company. She was dressed in black, which is strange 
for northern lands, which try to liven the drab surround- 
ings with vivid colours. She spoke a crisp, precise English, 
rolling her r’s slightly. I am not much of an observer; 
these things I discovered bit by bit.
We were introduced. I told her that I was a professor 
at the University of the Andes, in Bogotá. I explained 
that I was a Colombian.
She asked me in a thoughtful way, ‘What does it mean 
to be a Colombian?’
‘I don’t know,’ I replied. ‘It’s an act of faith.’
‘Like being Norwegian,’ she affirmed.
I can remember no more of what was said that night. 
The next day, I came down to the dining room early. 
Through the windows I saw that it had snowed; in the 
early morning light the moors faded away. We were the 
only ones there. Ulrike invited me to her table. She told 
me that she liked going out for solitary walks.
Recalling a joke of Schopenhauer’s, I said, ‘So do I. 
The two of us could go out together.’
We walked away from the inn on the new-fallen snow. 
There was not a soul about. I suggested that we go on 
to Thorgate, a few miles down the river. I know that I 
was already in love with Ulrike; I could never have 
wanted any other person by my side.
All at once, I heard the distant howling of a wolf. I had 
never before-heard a wolf howl, but I knew it was a wolf. 
Ulrike was impassive.


A while later she said, as if thinking aloud, ‘The few 
poor swords I saw yesterday in York Minster moved me 
more than the great ships in the Oslo museum.’
Our paths had crossed. That evening Ulrike would 
continue her journey on to London; I to Edinburgh.
‘In Oxford Street,’ she told me, ‘I shall follow De 
Quincey’s footsteps in search of his Ann, lost amid the 
crowds of London.’
‘De Quincey stopped looking for her,’ I replied. ‘All my 
life, I never have.’
‘Maybe you’ve found her,’ Ulrike said, her voice low.
I realized that an unexpected thing was not forbidden 
me, and I kissed her on the mouth and eyes. She drew 
away firmly but gently and then declared, ‘I’ll be yours 
in the inn at Thorgate. Until then, I ask you not to touch 
me. It is better that way.’
To a bachelor well along in years, the offer of love is a 
gift no longer expected. The miracle has a right to impose 
conditions. I thought back on my youth in Popayán and 
on a girl in Texas, as fair and slender as Ulrike, who once 
denied me her love.
I did not make the mistake of asking Ulrike whether 
she loved me. I realized that this was not her first time 
nor would it be her last. The adventure, perhaps my last, 
would be one of many for that splendid, determined 
follower of Ibsen. Hand in hand, we walked on.
‘All this is like a dream, and I never dream,’ I said.
‘Like that king who never dreamed until a wizard made 
him sleep in a pigsty,’ Ulrike replied. Then she added, 
‘Listen. A bird is about to sing.’
A moment or two later we heard the song.
‘In these lands,’ I said, ‘it’s thought that a person about 
to die sees into the future.’
‘And I am about to die,’ she said.
I looked at her in astonishment. ‘Let’s cut through the 
woods,’ I urged. ‘We’ll reach Thorgate sooner.’


‘The woods are dangerous,’ she said.
We continued along the moors.
‘I should like this moment to last forever,’ I murmured.
‘“Forever” is a word forbidden to men,’ Ulrike said 
and, to soften the force of this, she asked me to repeat 
my name, which she had not caught.
‘Javier Otálora,’ I said.
She tried to pronounce it and couldn’t. I failed, equally, 
with the name Ulrike.
‘I shall call you Sigurd,’ she said with a smile.
‘If I am Sigurd,’ I replied, ‘you will be Brynhild.’
She had slowed her step.
‘Do you know the saga?’ I asked.
‘Of course,’ she said. ‘The tragic story spoiled by the 
Germans with their late Nibelungs.’
Not wishing to argue the point, I answered, ‘Brynhild, 
you’re walking as if you wished a sword lay between us in 
bed.’
Suddenly we stood before the inn. It did not surprise 
me that, like the other one, it was called The Northern Inn.
From the top of the stairs, Ulrike called down to me, 
‘Did you hear the wolf? There are no longer any wolves 
in England. Hurry.’
Climbing to the upper floor, I noticed that the walls 
were papered in the style of William Morris, in a deep 
red, with a design of fruit and birds intertwined. Ulrike 
went on ahead. The dark room was low, with a slanted 
ceiling. The awaited bed was duplicated in a dim mirror, 
and the polished mahogany reminded me of the looking 
glass of Scriptures. Ulrike had already undressed. She 
called me by my real name - Javier. I felt that the snow 
was falling faster. Now there were no longer any mirrors 
or furniture. There was no sword between us. Time 
passed like the sands. In the darkness, centuries old, love 
flowed, and for the first and last time I possessed Ulrike’s 
image.


The Congress
. . . ils s’acheminèrent vers un château immense, au 
frontispice duquel on lisait: ‘Je n’appartiens à per- 
sonne et j’appartiens à tout le monde. Vous y étiez 
avant que d’y entrer, et vous y serez encore quand 
vous en sortirez.’
- Diderot, Jacques le Fataliste et son Maître
Buenos Aires, 
Alejandro Ferri is my name. Martial echoes may be 
heard in it, but neither the metals of glory nor the great 
shadow of the Macedonian - the words belong to the poet 
of The Marble Pillars, who honoured me with his friend- 
ship - has any kinship with the nearly anonymous man 
who strings together these lines on the upper floor of a 
hotel on Santiago del Estero Street, on the south side of 
town, which is no longer the old Southside. Any day now, 
I’ll turn seventy-one or seventy-two; I am still teaching 
English to a handful of students. Out of indecision or 
carelessness, or for some other reason, I never married, 
and now I live alone. Loneliness does not worry me ; life 
is difficult enough, putting up with yourself and with 
your own habits. I realize I am getting on in years. An 
unmistakable symptom of this is the fact that novelties - 
maybe because I feel they hold nothing essentially new 
and are really no more than timid variations - neither 
interest nor distract me. When I was a young man, I was 
fond of sunsets, the city’s sprawling slums, and of un- 
happiness; now I prefer mornings and downtown and 
peace. I no longer play at being Hamlet. I have become a 
member of the Conservative Party and of a chess club,


which I usually attend as an onlooker - sometimes an 
absentminded onlooker. Anyone who is curious may dig 
up from some out-of-the-way nook of the National 
Library, on Mexico Street, a copy of my Short Study of 
 John Wilkins’ Analytical Language, a work that sadly 
stands in need of a new edition, if only to correct or to 
lessen its many mistakes. The library’s new director, I 
am told, is a literary man who dedicates himself to the 
study of ancient languages (as if modern ones were not 
sufficiently rudimentary) and to the demagogic exaltation 
of an imaginary Buenos Aires of knife fighters. I have 
never cared to meet him. I came to this city in , and 
only once did chance bring me face to face with a knife 
fighter or with an individual who had a reputation as 
such. Further on, should the occasion present itself, I 
shall relate the episode.
I have already said that I live alone. Several days ago, 
a fellow-roomer, who had heard me speak of Fermín 
Eguren, told me that he had died in Punta del Este.
The death of this man, who was certainly never a friend 
of mine, has unaccountably saddened me. I know that I 
am alone; I know that in the whole world I am the only 
keeper of that secret event - the Congress - whose me- 
mory I can no longer share. I am now the last member 
of that Congress. It is undeniable that all men are mem- 
bers of that Congress - that there is not a single being on 
earth who is not - but I know I am a member in a very 
different way. I know that I am, and that’s what sets me 
apart from my numberless colleagues, present and future. 
It is undeniable that on the seventh of February, , 
we swore by what is most holy (is there anything holy on 
earth, or anything that is not?) never to reveal the history 
of the Congress, but it is no less undeniable that my now 
committing perjury is also part of the Congress. This last 
statement is sufficiently dim, but it may whet the curiosity 
of my eventual readers.


At any rate, the task I have taken upon myself is not an 
easy one. I have never before attempted the art of nar- 
ration - not even in its epistolary form - and, what is 
doubtless even more important, the story itself is un- 
believable. The pen of José Fernández Irala, the un- 
deservedly forgotten author of The Marble Pillars, was 
the one destined for this work, but now it is too late. I 
shall not deliberately falsify the real facts, although I fore- 
see that laziness and incompetence will more than once 
lead me into error.
Exact dates are of no account. Let it be recalled that I 
came from Santa Fe, my native province, in .  I  have 
never gone back. I have grown accustomed to Buenos 
Aires, a city I am not fond of, in the same way that a 
man grows accustomed to his own body or to an old ail- 
ment. Without much caring, I am aware that I am going 
to die soon; I must, consequently, control my digressive 
tendencies and get on with my story.
The years do not change our essential selves - if one has 
an essential self. The impulse that would one night lead 
me to the Congress of the World was the same that first 
brought me to the staff of Última Hora. To a poor boy 
from the provinces, becoming a newspaperman was a 
romantic fate, just as to a poor city boy the life of a gaucho 
or a farmhand is romantic. I feel no shame at having 
once wanted to be a journalist, an occupation that now 
seems trivial to me. I remember having heard my col- 
league Fernández Irala say that newspapermen wrote for 
oblivion but that his ambition was to write for time and 
for memory. He had already chiselled (the verb was then 
in common use) some of those perfect sonnets that were 
later to reappear, with one or two minor touches, in the 
pages of The Marble Pillars.
I cannot quite recall the first time I heard the Congress 
spoken of. Maybe it was on that same evening the cashier


paid me my first month’s salary and, to celebrate this 
proof that Buenos Aires had taken me to its bosom, I 
suggested to Irala that we dine together. He excused 
himself, saying he could not miss the Congress. I under- 
stood at once that he was not referring to the rather 
pompous, domed building at the foot of an avenue peo- 
pled by Spaniards but to something more secret and far 
more important. People spoke of the Congress, some with 
open scorn, others with lowered voices, still others with 
alarm or curiosity - all, I believe, without knowing any- 
thing about it. A few Saturdays later, Irala invited me to 
go along with him.
It must have been nine or ten o’clock at night. On our 
way, in a streetcar, he told me these preliminary meetings 
took place every Saturday arid that don Alejandro Glencoe, 
the president of the Congress, perhaps struck by my name, 
had already signed his approval of my attendance. We 
went to the Gas-Lamp Coffee House. Some fifteen or 
twenty members of the Congress sat around a long table; 
I don’t know if there was a dais or if memory adds it. 
I immediately recognized the president, whom I had 
never seen before. Don Alejandro was a gentleman, al- 
ready well along in years, with a high forehead and 
thinning hair, grey eyes, and a greying reddish beard. I 
always saw him dressed in a dark frock coat, and he 
usually held his hands locked together over the head of 
his cane. He was portly and tall. To his left sat a much 
younger man, also with red hair. Its violent colour sug- 
gested fire, while the colour of Mr Glencoe’s beard sug- 
gested autumn leaves. To his right was a long-faced 
young man with an unusually low forehead and dressed 
like a dandy. Everyone had ordered coffee, and several 
absinthe. What first caught my attention was the pre- 
sence of a woman - the only woman among so many men. 
At the other end of the table sat a boy of about ten, 
dressed in a sailor suit, who was not long in falling asleep.


There were also a Protestant minister, two unmistakable 
 Jews, and a Negro, who, with a white silk handkerchief 
around his neck and very tight-fitting clothes, was dressed 
like a street-corner hoodlum. In front of the Negro and 
the boy were cups of chocolate. I do not remember any 
of the other people except for a Mr Marcelo del Mazo, a 
man of great politeness and fine conversation, whom I 
never saw again. (I still have a faded, poorly done photo- 
graph of one of the gatherings, but I shall not publish it, 
since the dress, the long hair, and the moustaches of that 
period would make the whole thing look burlesque and 
even shabby.)
All groups tend to create their own dialects and rites; 
the Congress, which always had something dreamlike 
about it, seemed to want its members to discover - at 
leisure and for themselves - its real aim and even the 
names and surnames of its members. I was not long in 
realizing that I was duty-bound not to ask questions, and 
I refrained even from asking any of Fernández Irala, who 
never told me a thing. I did not miss a single Saturday, 
but a good month or two went by before I reached this 
understanding. From the second meeting on, my neigh- 
bour was Donald Wren, an engineer on the Southern 
Railways, who was to give me English lessons.
Don Alejandro spoke very little. The rest did not 
address themselves directly to him, but I felt that their 
words were meant for him and that everyone was after 
his approval. One gesture of his slow hand was enough to 
change the topic of discussion. I came to find out, little 
by little, that the red-haired man to his left bore the 
strange name of Twirl. I remember that fragile look of 
his, which, as though their stature made them dizzy and 
forced them to hunch forward, is characteristic of some 
very tall people. His hand, I recall, often played with a 
copper compass case, which from time to time he set on 
the table. At the end of , he was killed as an infantry-


man in an Irish regiment. The person who always sat to 
the right, the young man with the low forehead, was 
Fermín Eguren, the president’s nephew.
Putting no faith in the methods of realism (a most 
artificial school if there ever was one), I shall declare 
right off what I learned only little by little. Beforehand, 
I want to remind the reader of my situation at the time. 
I was a poor boy from Casilda, a farmer’s son, who had 
come to the capital and suddenly found himself - this 
was the way I felt - in the intimate heart of Buenos Aires 
and perhaps (who knows?) of the whole world. After 
half a century, I still feel those first dazzling moments, 
which certainly were not to be the last.
Here are the facts. I shall tell them as briefly as I can. 
Don Alejandro Glencoe, the president, was an Uruguayan 
rancher and owner of a large spread of land bordering on 
Brazil. His father, a native of Aberdeen, had established 
himself on this continent around the middle of the last 
century. He brought with him some hundred books - the 
only books, I venture to say, that don Alejandro read in 
the course of his life. (I speak of these assorted books, 
which I have had in my hands, because in one of them 
lies the root of my story.) The elder Mr Glencoe, on 
dying, left a daughter and a son. The son was later to 
become our president; the daughter married an Eguren 
and was Fermín’s mother. Don Alejandro at one time 
aspired to the Uruguayan National Congress, but the 
political bosses barred his way. Rankled, he decided to 
found another Congress and on a vaster scale. He re- 
membered having read in the volcanic pages of Carlyle 
the fate of Anacharsis Clootz, that worshipper of the god- 
dess Reason who, at the head of thirty-six foreigners, 
addressed a Paris assembly as ‘mankind’s spokesman’. 
Moved by this example, don Alejandro conceived the idea 
of calling together a Congress of the World that would 
represent all men of all nations. The centre for the pre-


liminary meetings was the Gas-Lamp Coffee House; the 
formal act of inauguration, which would take place within 
some four years, would be held at don Alejandro’s ranch. 
Like so many Uruguayans, don Alejandro - who was no 
lover of Uruguay’s now national hero, Artigas - was fond 
of Buenos Aires, but he nonetheless decided that the 
Congress must eventually meet in his own country. 
Oddly enough, the four-year planning period was carried 
out with a precision that was almost magical.
In the beginning, we were paid a considerable sum as a 
per diem, but the zeal that enflamed us prompted Fer- 
nández Irala - who was as poor as I was - to renounce 
his, and all the rest of us followed suit. This measure was 
healthy, since it served to separate the wheat from the 
chaff; the number of members was reduced, and only the 
faithful remained. The one paid position was that of the 
secretary, Nora Erfjord, who lacked other means of sup- 
port and whose work at the same time was staggering. 
To set up a worldwide organization is no trifling enter- 
prise. Letters came and went, and so did cables and 
telegrams. Potential delegates wrote from Peru, Denmark, 
and India. A Bolivian wrote that his country’s lack of 
access to the sea should be a matter of prime consideration 
in our first meetings. Twirl, who had a farseeing mind, 
remarked that the Congress involved a problem of a 
philosophical nature. Planning an assembly to represent 
all men was like fixing the exact number of platonic types - 
a puzzle that had taxed the imagination of thinkers for 
centuries. Twirl suggested that, without going farther a- 
field, don Alejandro Glencoe might represent not only 
cattlemen but also Uruguayans, and also humanity’s great 
forerunners, and also men with red beards, and also 
those who are seated in armchairs. Nora Erfjord was 
Norwegian. Would she represent secretaries, Norwegian 
womanhood, or - more obviously - all beautiful women?


Would a single engineer be enough to represent all en- 
gineers - including those of New Zealand?
It was then, I believe, that Fermín broke in. ‘Ferri 
represents the gringos,’ he said in a flood of laughter.
Don Alejandro looked at him severely and, in an even 
voice, said, ‘Mr Ferri is representative of the immigrants 
whose labour is building up this country.’
Fermín Eguren never could bear the sight of me. He 
took pride in an assortment of things: in being Uruguayan; 
in coming from old stock; in attracting women; in having 
chosen an expensive tailor; and, God knows why, in his 
Basque origin - a people who throughout history have 
done little else than milk cows.
An incident of the most trivial sort sealed our enmity. 
After one of the meetings, Eguren suggested that we pay 
a visit to one of the Junín Street brothels. The plan did 
not attract me, but, in order not to make myself the butt 
of his jokes, I accepted. We went with Fernández Irala. 
On leaving the establishment, we ran into a huge specimen 
of a man. Eguren, who may have been a bit drunk, gave 
him a shove. The stranger quickly barred our way and 
 told us, ‘Whoever wants to leave is going to have to pass 
by this knife.’
I remember the glint of the blade in the darkness of the 
long entranceway. Eguren drew back, visibly afraid. I 
wasn’t too sure of myself, but my hatred got the best of 
my fright. I reached into my armpit, as if to draw out a 
weapon, and said in a firm voice, ‘We’ll settle this out on 
the street.’
The stranger answered - with another voice now, ‘That’s 
the kind of man I like. I wanted to test you, friend.’ Then 
he began to laugh in a cordial way.
‘As to “friend”,’ I answered him, ‘that’s what you 
think.’ The three of us made our way past him.
The man with the knife entered the brothel. I heard 
later that his name was Tapia, or Paredes, or something


of the kind, and that he had a reputation for brawling. 
Out on the sidewalk, Irala, who had kept cool, slapped 
me on the back and said, impressively, ‘Among us three, 
we had a musketeer. Hail, d’Artagnan!’
Fermín Eguren never forgave me for having witnessed 
his backing down.
I feel that now, and only now, my story begins. The 
preceding pages have set down no more than the condi- 
tions that chance or fate required so that the unbelievable 
event - perhaps the single event of my whole life - might 
take place. Don Alejandro Glencoe was always at the 
centre of the Congress, but over a period of time we felt, 
not without misgiving, that the real president was Twirl. 
This singular character, with the flaming moustache, 
fawned on Glencoe and even on Fermín Eguren - but in 
such an exaggerated way that those present would think 
he was actually mocking the two. By so doing, he never 
once compromised his integrity. Glencoe laboured under 
the pride of his vast fortune; Twirl discovered that in 
order to get anything done it was enough to suggest that 
its cost might prove beyond the president’s means. It is 
my suspicion that at the outset the Congress had been 
nothing more than a haphazard sort of name. Twirl was 
continually proposing new areas of expansion, and don 
Alejandro always accepted. It was like being at the middle 
of a spreading circle, which grows ever larger and always 
farther away. Twirl said, for example, that the Congress 
could not get along without a reference library, and 
Nierenstein, who worked in a bookshop, went about or- 
dering us the atlases of Justus Perthes and several exten- 
sive encyclopedias - all the way from Pliny’s Natural 
History and Beauvais’ Speculum down to the pleasant 
mazes (I reread these words with Fernández Irak’s voice) 
of the illustrious French Encyclopedists, of the Britan- 
nica, of Pierre Larousse, of Brockhaus, of Larsen, and of


Montaner y Simón. I recall how I reverently fondled the 
silky volumes of a certain Chinese encyclopedia whose 
finely brushed characters seemed to me more mysterious 
than the spots on a leopard’s skin. As yet, I will say nothing 
of what lay in store for them and which certainly I do 
not regret.
Don Alejandro, maybe because we were the only ones 
who did not try to flatter him, had grown quite fond of 
Fernández Irala and me. He invited us to spend a few 
days at his ranch, La Caledonia, where he had a crew of 
stonemasons already at work.
At the end of a long trip upriver by steamer and a ferry 
crossing on a raft, we set foot one morning on the Uru- 
guay shore. We then had to spend successive nights in 
run-down country saloons, while opening and shutting 
dozens of gateways all day along back roads in the Cuchilla 
Negra. We made our way in a light carriage; the country- 
side seemed wider and lonelier to me than the small farm 
where I was born.
I still hold my two images of the ranch - the one I 
brought with me and the one my eyes finally saw. Ab- 
surdly, I had imagined, as in a dream, an impossible 
combination of the flat plains of Santa Fe and of the 
rather gaudy Victorian Buenos Aires Waterworks. La 
Caledonia was a long adobe building with a thatched 
saddle roof and a brick-paved gallery. It appeared to be 
built for hardship and endurance. The rough walls were 
nearly a yard thick and the doors were narrow. Nobody 
had ever thought of planting a tree. The sun’s first and 
last rays beat down on the place. The corrals were of 
stone; the cattle were many, scrawny and long-horned; 
the horses’ switching tails reached the ground. For the 
first time in my life, I knew the taste of freshly slaughtered 
meat. Some sacks of sea biscuit were brought out; a few 
days later, the foreman told me he had never eaten bread


in his life. Irala asked where the bathroom was, and, with 
a sweeping gesture, don Alejandro indicated the entire 
continent. It was a moonlit night; I went out to stretch 
my legs, and I surprised Irala being watched by an ostrich.
The heat, which the night had not dispelled, was un- 
bearable, and everyone praised the coolness. The rooms 
were low-ceilinged and many, and seemed to me barely 
furnished; we were given one, facing south, in which 
there were two cots and a dresser with a silver washbasin 
and pitcher. The floor was dirt.
The second day, I came across the library and the 
volumes of Carlyle, and I found the pages dedicated to 
mankind’s spokesman, Anacharsis Clootz, who had led 
me to that morning and to that loneliness. After breakfast, 
which was identical with dinner, don Ajelandro showed us 
the building under construction. We rode three or four 
miles on horseback out in the wide open. Irala, whose 
horsemanship was shaky, had an accident; unsmiling, the 
foreman remarked, ‘You Argentines really know how to 
dismount.’
From way off, we could see the construction site. Some 
twenty men were at work building a kind of tumbledown 
amphitheatre. I recall a series of stages and ladders and 
stone tiers with stretches of sky showing between.
More than once, I tried to speak with the gauchos, but 
my efforts failed. In some way, they knew they were 
different. Among themselves, they used a spare, guttural 
Brazilianized Spanish. It was obvious that both Indian 
and Negro blood ran in their veins. They were short and 
strong; at La Caledonia, I became a tall man - some- 
thing that had never happened to me until then.
Almost all of them dressed with their legs wrapped in 
the chiripá, and a few wore the wide, baggy bombachas. 
They had little or nothing in common with the complain- 
ing heroes found in the books of Hernández or of Rafael 
Obligado. Under the stimulus of Saturday-night alcohol,


they were easily moved to violence. There wasn’t a single 
woman around, and I never once heard a guitar.
I was more interested in the change that had come over 
don Alejandro than I was in these border-country men. 
In Buenos Aires, he was a pleasant, reserved gentleman; 
at La Caledonia, like his fathers before him, he became 
the stern chief of a clan. Sunday mornings, he read Holy 
Scripture to the hands, who did not understand a single 
word. One night, the foreman, a youngish man who had 
inherited the job from his father, reported to us that one 
of the day labourers and one of the regular help were 
having it out with knives. Don Alejandro got up, un- 
ruffled. When he came to the circle of onlookers, he drew 
out the weapon he always carried, handed it to the fore- 
man (who appeared to me to cringe), and stepped between 
the knives. At once, I heard the order, ‘Drop those 
knives, boys.’ With the same calm voice, he added, ‘Now 
shake hands and behave yourselves. I don’t want any 
brawling around here.’
The two men obeyed. The next day, I learned that don 
Alejandro had fired the foreman.
I felt the loneliness ringing me in, and I began fearing 
I’d never get back to Buenos Aires. I wonder whether 
Fernández Irala shared that fear. We talked a lot about 
Argentina and what we’d do when we returned. I missed 
the stone lions of a certain gateway on Jujuy Street, near 
the Plaza del Once, and the light of a particular old bar 
in some dim part of town, but not my familiar haunts. 
Always a good rider, I fell into the habit of going out on 
horseback and riding long distances. I still remember the 
particular piebald I used to saddle up myself. On some 
afternoon or on some night or other, I probably was in 
Brazil, since the border was nothing but a line traced out 
by widely spaced markers. Then, at the close of a day 
exactly like all the rest, don Alejandro told us, ‘We’ll turn 
in early. Tomorrow we’ll be off while it’s still cool.’


Once down the river, I felt so happy that I was even able 
to think back to La Caledonia with affection.
We took up our Saturday meetings again. At the first one, 
Twirl asked for the floor. He said, with his usual flowers 
of rhetoric, that the library of the Congress of the World 
could not be limited to reference books alone, and that 
the classical works of all nations and all languages were a 
veritable storehouse that we could not safely afford to 
ignore. The suggestion was approved on the spot; Fer- 
nández Irala and Dr Ignacio Cruz, who was a teacher of 
Latin, accepted the job of selecting the appropriate texts. 
Twirl had already talked things over with Nierenstein.
In those days, there wasn’t a single Argentine whose 
utopia was not Paris. Perhaps the most enthusiastic of us 
was Fermín Eguren; next, for quite different reasons, 
came Fernández Irala. To the poet of The Marble Pillars, 
Paris was Verlaine and Leconte de Lisle, while to Eguren 
it was an improved version of Junín Street. I suspect that 
he had come to some understanding with Twirl. At a 
subsequent meeting, Twirl brought up the question of 
what language the members of the Congress would use, 
arguing the feasibility of sending delegates to London 
and Paris to gather information. Feigning impartiality, 
he first put up my name, and then, as an apparent after- 
thought, that of his friend Eguren. As always, don 
Alejandro agreed.
I think I have written that, in exchange for some lessons 
in Italian, Wren had initiated me into the study of the 
inexhaustible English language. As far as possible, we did 
away with grammar and with those exercises concocted for 
the beginner, and we found our way directly into poetry, 
whose forms demand brevity. My first contact with the 
language that was to fill out my life was Stevenson’s brave 
‘Requiem’. Then came the ballads that Percy revealed to 
the dignified eighteenth century. A short while before


leaving for London, I was dazzled by Swinburne - an 
experience that made me begin to doubt (and to feel 
guilty about it) the eminence of Irala’s alexandrines.
I reached London early in January, ; I remember the 
soft touch of falling snow, which I had never before seen 
and for which I was grateful. Luckily, Eguren and I had 
travelled separately. I roomed at a modest boarding house 
behind the British Museum, where mornings and after- 
noons I studied in the library in search of a language 
worthy of the Congress of the World. I did not overlook 
universal languages, investigating both Esperanto - which 
Lugones qualifies as ‘impartial, simple, and economical’ - 
and Volapük, which, declining verbs and conjugating 
nouns, attempts to work out all linguistic possibilities. I 
also weighed the arguments in favour of and against the 
revival of Latin, a nostalgia for which has endured down 
through the centuries. I even dwelled on an examination 
of John Wilkins’ analytical language, in which the defini- 
tion of each word is to be found in the letters that spell 
it out. It was beneath the high dome of the reading room 
that I first met Beatrice.
This is meant to be a general history of the Congress 
of the World, not of Alejandro Ferri, but the former takes 
in the latter, just as it takes in all other histories. Beatrice 
was tall, trim, with fine features and a head of red hair 
that might have reminded me - but never did - of the 
shady Twirl. She was not yet twenty. She had come down 
from one of the northern counties to study literature at 
the university. Her background, like mine, was humble. 
At that time, to be of Italian stock in Buenos Aires was 
still to be looked down on, but in London I found out 
that being Italian was to many people a romantic attribute. 
Within a few evenings, we were lovers; I asked her to 
marry me, but Beatrice Frost, like Nora Erfjord, was a 
follower of the faith preached by Ibsen, and she did not


want to tie herself down to anyone. From her lips came 
the word I never dared speak. O nights, O darkness warm 
and shared, O love that flows in shadows like some secret 
river, O that instant of ecstasy when each is both, O that 
ecstasy’s purity and innocence, O the coupling in which we 
became lost so as then to lose ourselves in sleep, O the 
first light of dawn, and I watching her.
On the rough Brazil border, I had been plagued by 
homesickness; not so in London’s red labyrinth, which 
gave me so many things. Despite the pretexts I dreamed 
up to delay my departure, I had to return home at the 
end of the year. Beatrice and I celebrated Christmas to- 
gether. I assured her that don Alejandro would invite her 
to join the Congress; she answered, in an offhand way, 
that she had always wanted to visit the Southern Hemi- 
sphere, and that a cousin of hers, a dentist, had settled in 
Tasmania.
Beatrice did not want to come to the boat. Goodbyes, 
to her way of thinking, were too dramatic, were a senseless 
feast of unhappiness, and she detested dramatics. We 
parted in the library, where we had met the winter before. 
As a man, I’m a coward; to avoid the anguish of waiting 
for letters, I did not leave her my address.
Return trips are shorter, I have always noticed, but that 
crossing of the Atlantic, heavy with memories and anxieties, 
seemed unusually long. Nothing hurt me as much as 
thinking that, in a parallel with my life, Beatrice would 
go on living hers, minute by minute and night by night. 
I wrote a lengthy letter, destroying it as we left Monte- 
video. When I reached Argentina - it was on a Thursday - 
Irala was waiting for me at the dock. I went back to my 
old place on Chile Street; that day and the next he and I 
spent together talking and taking long walks. I wanted to 
recover Buenos Aires again. It was a relief to find out 
that Fermín Eguren was staying on in Paris; I knew the


fact of my having come back before him would in some 
way make up for my long absence.
Irala was downcast. Fermín was squandering huge sums 
in Europe, and had more than once disobeyed the order 
to return home. This was to have been foreseen. I was 
more disturbed by other news. Twirl, in spite of the 
opposition of Irala and Cruz, had invoked the Younger 
Pliny, according to whom there is no book so bad it does 
not contain some good, and had proposed the indiscrimi- 
nate purchase of bound volumes of the daily press, of 
thirty-four hundred copies of Don Quixote in various ed- 
tions, of the complete works of General Mitre, of Ph.D. 
theses, of old account books, of bulletins, and of theatre 
programmes. Everything gives witness, he had said. 
Nierenstein backed him; don Alejandro, ‘after three re- 
sounding Saturdays’ (as Irala put it), approved the motion. 
Nora Erfjord had resigned her position as secretary; it 
was taken over by a new member, Karlinski, who was a 
tool of Twirl’s. The bulky packages began piling up now, 
without files or catalogues, in the back rooms and in the 
wine cellar of don Alejandro’s rambling old town house. 
Early in July, Irala spent a week back at La Caledonia, 
where the masons had broken off their work. The fore- 
man, upon questioning, explained that that was what the 
boss had ordered, and that there would always be time 
enough tomorrow.
In London, I had drafted a report that there is now no 
point in going into. That Friday, I went to pay a visit 
to don Alejandro and to deliver a copy of what I had 
written. Fernández Irala came with me. It was early 
evening, and the cold south wind blew into the house. 
At the front gate, on Alsina Street, a delivery wagon, 
pulled by three horses, stood waiting. I remember that 
the deliverymen were weighed down under the loads they 
went about piling up in the last patio. Twirl was imperious, 
giving them orders. Also present, indoors, as if they had


had an inkling of something, were Nora Erfjord and 
Nierenstein and Cruz and Donald Wren and a few other 
members of the Congress. Nora threw her arms around 
me and kissed me, and that embrace and that kiss made 
me remember others. The Negro, brimming over with 
good nature and happiness, kissed my hand.
In one of the rooms, the square trapdoor to the cellar 
was wide open; some masonry steps plunged down into 
darkness. Suddenly we heard footsteps. Before laying eyes 
on him, I knew it was don Alejandro. He came almost on 
the run.
His voice was different. It was not the voice of the de- 
liberate gentleman who presided over our Saturdays, nor 
that of the feudal landowner who had put a stop to a knife 
duel and who preached the word of God to his gauchos - 
but it seemed more like this latter.
Without looking at anyone, he ordered, ‘Get everything 
out that’s packed away down there. I don’t want a single 
book left in that cellar.’
The work went on for nearly an hour. Outside, on the
earth floor of the last patio, we made a pile that was
taller than the tallest head. All of us marched back
and forth; the only person who failed to move was don 
Alejandro.
Then came the order, ‘Now set fire to that heap.’
Twirl went pale. Nierenstein blurted, ‘How can the 
Congress of the World do without this valuable material 
I’ve collected with so much love?’
‘The Congress of the World?’ said don Alejandro. He 
laughed scornfully. I had never before heard him laugh.
There is a mysterious pleasure in destruction. The 
flames crackled brightly, and we all had to press back 
against the walls or move indoors. Darkness, ashes, and 
an odour of burning were left behind in the patio. I 
remember some undamaged pages lying white against the 
ground. Nora Erfjord, who felt for don Alejandro that


love which young women often feel for older men, said, 
without really understanding, ‘Don Alejandro knows what 
he’s doing.’
Irala, always true to literature, attempted an epigram. 
‘Every few centuries,’ he said, ‘the Library of Alexandria 
must be burned down.’
Then the revelation was made to us.
‘It has taken me four years to understand what I am 
about to say,’ don Alejandro began. ‘My friends, the 
undertaking we have set for ourselves is so vast that it 
embraces - I now see - the whole world. Our Congress 
cannot be a group of charlatans deafening each other in 
the sheds of an out-of-the-way ranch. The Congress of 
the World began with the first moment of the world and 
it will go on when we are dust. There’s no place on earth 
where it does not exist. The Congress is the books we’ve 
burned. The Congress is Job on the ash heap and Christ 
on the Cross. The Congress is that worthless boy who 
squanders my substance on whores.’
I could not hold myself back. ‘Don Alejandro,’ I broke 
in, ‘I, too, am to blame. I had finished my report, which 
I now hand you, but I stayed on and on in England, 
throwing your money away on a woman.’
Don Alejandro went on. ‘I had already guessed as much, 
Ferri. The Congress is my cattle. The Congress is the 
cattle I have sold and the miles of land that are no longer 
mine.’
A horror-stricken voice was raised - Twirl’s. ‘You don’t 
mean to say you’ve sold La Caledonia?’
‘Yes,’ don Alejandro said calmly, ‘I’ve sold it. I haven’t 
a square foot of land to my name, but I do not regret it, 
because now I see things as they are. Perhaps we shall 
never meet again, for the Congress stands in no need of 
us. But this last night we will all go out together to see 
the true Congress.’
Drunk with victory, he overwhelmed us with his re-


solution and faith. No one - not for a single second - 
thought he was mad.
In the square, we climbed into an open carriage. I 
squeezed myself onto the driver’s seat beside the coach- 
man, and don Alejandro ordered, ‘Maestro, let’s have a 
turn around the city. Take us anywhere you like.’
The Negro, perched on the running board, never stopped 
smiling. I’ll never know whether or not he realized what 
was going on.
Words are symbols that assume a shared memory. The 
memory I now want to set down is mine alone; all those 
who share it have died. The mystics invoke a rose, a kiss, 
a bird that is all birds, a sun that is all the stars and the 
sun, a jug of wine, a garden, or the sexual act. Of these 
metaphors, none will serve me for that long, joyous night, 
which left us, tired out and happy, at the borders of 
dawn. We barely spoke while the wheels and the horses’ 
hooves clattered over the cobblestones. Before daybreak, 
beside a dark, humble body of water that may have been 
the Maldonado or the Riachuelo, Nora Erfjord’s high 
voice sang the ballad of Sir Patrick Spens, and don 
Alejandro, in a low voice and out of tune, chimed in with 
a few verses. The English words did not bring me Beatrice’s 
image. At my back, Twirl muttered, ‘I wanted to do evil 
and I have done good.’
Something of what we glimpsed lives on - the reddish 
wall of the Recoleta cemetery, the yellow wall of a jail, 
a couple of men dancing together at a right-angled street 
corner, a church courtyard with black and white tiles 
and a grilled iron fence, a railway gate crossing, my house, 
a marketplace, the damp unfathomable night - but none 
of these fleeting things, which may have been others, now 
matter. What really matters is having felt that our plan, 
which more than once we made a joke of, really and 
secretly existed and was the world and ourselves. Down


through the years, without much hope, I have sought the 
taste of that night; a few times I thought I had recap- 
tured it in music, in love, in untrustworthy memories, but 
it has never come back to me except once in a dream. 
When we swore not to say a word to anyone, it was al- 
ready Saturday morning.
I never saw any of them again, outside of Irala. He and 
I never spoke about the Congress; anything we might 
have said would have been a desecration. In , don 
Alejandro Glencoe died and was buried in Montevideo. 
Irala had already passed away the year before.
Once, I ran across Nierenstein on Lima Street, and we 
pretended not to see each other.


There are more things
To the memory of H. P. Lovecraft
On the point of taking my last examination at the Uni- 
versity of Texas, in Austin, I learned that my uncle 
Edwin Arnett had died of an aneurysm at the far end of 
the South American continent. I felt what we all feel 
when someone dies - the remorse, now pointless, for not 
having been kinder. We forget that we are all dead men 
conversing with dead men. My course of study was philo- 
sophy. I remembered that it was my uncle, at the Casa 
Colorada, his home near Lomas, on the edge of Buenos 
Aires, who, without invoking a single proper name, had 
first revealed to me philosophy’s beautiful perplexities. 
One of the after-dinner oranges was his aid in initiating 
me into Berkeley’s idealism; a chessboard was enough to 
illustrate the paradoxes of the Eleatics. Years later, he 
was to lend me Hinton’s treatises which attempt to 
demonstrate the reality of four-dimensional space and 
which the reader is meant to imagine by means of com- 
plicated exercises with multicoloured cubes. I shall never 
forget the prisms and pyramids that we erected on the 
floor of his study.
My uncle was an engineer. Before retiring from his job 
with the railroad, he decided to build himself a house in 
Turdera, which offered the advantages of almost country- 
like solitude and of proximity to the city. Nothing was 
more predictable than that the architect should be his 
close friend Alexander Muir. This uncompromising man


followed the uncompromising teachings of John Knox. 
My uncle, like almost all the gentlemen of his day, had 
been a freethinker or, rather, an agnostic, but he was 
interested in theology, just as he was interested in Hinton’s 
unreal cubes and in the well-constructed nightmares of 
the young H. G. Wells. He liked dogs, and he had a great 
sheepdog that he had named Samuel Johnson, in memory 
of Lichfield, his far-off birthplace.
The Casa Colorada stood on a height of land, bordered 
on the west by sun-blackened fields. Inside its fence, the 
araucarias did nothing to soften its air of gloom. Instead 
of a flat roof, there was a slate-tiled saddle roof and a 
square tower with a clock. These seemed to oppress the 
walls and the meagre windows. As a boy, I used to accept 
all this ugliness, just as one accepts those incompatible 
things which, only because they coexist, are called the 
world.
I returned home in . To avoid legal complications, 
the house had been auctioned off. It was bought by a 
foreigner, a Max Preetorius, who paid double what was 
offered by the highest bidder. No sooner was the deed 
signed than he arrived, late one afternoon, with two 
helpers and they carted off to a rubbish dump, not far 
from the old Drover’s Road, all the furniture, all the books, 
and all the utensils of the house. (I sadly recalled the 
diagrams in the Hinton volumes and the great globe.) The 
next day, Preetorius went to Muir and proposed certain 
alterations that the architect indignantly rejected. In the 
end, a firm from Buenos Aires took charge of the work. 
The local carpenters refused to furnish the house again. 
Finally, a certain Mariani, from Glew, accepted the con- 
ditions laid down by Preetorius. For an entire fortnight 
he had to labour by night behind closed doors. It was 
also by night that the new owner of the Casa Colorada 
moved in. The windows no longer opened, but chinks of 
light could be made out in the dark. One morning, the


milkman found the sheepdog dead on the walk, headless 
and mutilated. That winter they felled the araucarias. No- 
body saw Preetorius again.
News of these events, as may be imagined, left me un- 
easy. I know that my most obvious trait is curiosity - that 
same curiosity that brought me together with a woman 
completely different from me only in order to find out 
who she was and what she was like, to take up (without 
appreciable results) the use of laudanum, to explore trans- 
finite numbers, and to undertake the hideous adventure 
that I am about to tell. Ominously, I decided to look into 
the matter.
My first step was to see Alexander Muir. I remembered 
him as tall-standing and dark, with a. wiry build that 
suggested strength. Now the years had stooped him and 
his black beard had gone grey. He received me at his 
Temperley house, which, foreseeably, was like my uncle’s, 
since both houses followed the solid standards of the good 
poet and bad builder William Morris.
Conversation was spare - Scotland’s symbol, after all, is 
the thistle. I had the feeling, nonetheless, that the strong 
Ceylon tea and the equally generous plate of scones 
(which my host broke in two and buttered for me as if 
I were still a boy) were, in fact, a frugal Calvinistic feast 
offered to the nephew of his friend. His theological 
differences with my uncle had been a long game of chess, 
demanding of each player the collaboration of his oppo- 
nent.
Time passed and I was no nearer my business. There 
was an uncomfortable silence and Muir spoke. ‘Young 
man,’ he said, ‘you have not come all this way to talk 
about Edwin or the United States, a country that I have 
little interest in. What’s troubling you is the sale of the 
Casa Colorada and its odd buyer. They do me, too. 
Frankly, the story displeases me, but I’ll tell you what I 
can. It will not be much.’


After a while he went on, unhurriedly. ‘Before Edwin 
died, the mayor called me into his office. He was with the 
parish priest. They asked me to draw the plans for a 
Catholic chapel. My work would be well paid. On the 
spot, I answered no. I am a servant of God and I cannot 
commit the abomination of erecting altars to idols.’ Here 
he stopped.
‘Is that all?’ I finally dared ask.
‘No. This whelp of a Jew Preetorius wanted me to des- 
troy my work and in its place get up a monstrous thing. 
Abomination comes in many shapes.’ He pronounced 
these words gravely and got to his feet.
Outside, on turning the corner, I was approached by 
Daniel Iberra. We knew one another the way people in 
small towns do. He suggested that we accompany each 
other back to Turdera. I have never been keen on hood- 
lums, and I expected a sordid litany of violent and more 
or less apocryphal back-room stories, but I gave in and 
accepted his invitation. It was nearly nightfall. On seeing 
the Casa Colorada come into view from a few blocks off, 
Iberra made a detour. I asked him why. His reply was not 
what I anticipated.
‘I am don Felipe’s right arm,’ he said. ‘Nobody has ever 
called me soft. That young Urgoiti who took the trouble 
to come looking for me all the way from Merlo - you 
probably remember what happened to him. Look. A few 
nights ago, I was returning from a party. A hundred yards 
or so from that house I saw something. My horse reared 
up, and if I hadn’t had a good grip on him and made him 
turn down an alley, maybe I wouldn’t be telling this 
story now. What I saw justified the horse’s fright.’ 
Angrily, Iberra added a swear word.
That night I did not sleep. Around dawn, I dreamed 
about an engraving that I had never seen before or that 
I had seen and forgotten; it was in the style of Piranesi, 
and it had a labyrinth in it. It was a stone amphitheatre


ringed by cypresses, above whose tops it reached. There 
were neither doors nor windows; rather, it displayed an 
endless row of narrow vertical slits. With a magnifying 
glass, I tried to see the Minotaur inside. At last, I made 
it out. It was a monster of a monster, more bison than 
bull, and, its human body stretched out on the ground, 
it seemed to be asleep and dreaming. Dreaming of what 
or of whom?
That evening, I passed by the Casa Colorada. The iron 
gate was shut and some of its bars were bent. What once 
was garden was now overgrown with weeds. To the right, 
there was a shallow ditch and its outer edges were 
trampled.
There was only one move left, but for days I kept putting 
it off - not because I felt it to be altogether a waste, but 
because it would drag me to the inevitable, to the last.
Without much hope, I went to Glew. Mariani, the car- 
penter, was a stout, pink-faced Italian, common and cor- 
dial and now somewhat advanced in years. A glance at 
him was enough for me to dismiss the stratagems I had 
contrived the night before. I handed him my card, which 
he pompously spelled out aloud with a certain reverential 
stumbling when he reached the ‘Ph.D.’ I told him I was 
interested in the furniture made by him for the house in 
Turdera that had been my uncle’s. The man spoke on 
and on. I shall not try to transcribe his torrent of words 
and gestures, but he told me that his motto was to satisfy 
his customer’s every demand, no matter how outlandish 
it was, and that he had carried out his work to the letter. 
After rummaging in various drawers he showed me some 
papers that I could make neither head nor tail of; they 
were signed by the elusive Preetorius. (Doubtless, Mariani 
mistook me for a lawyer.) On saying goodbye, he confided 
to me that even for all the world’s gold he would never 
again set foot in Turdera, let alone that house. He added 
that the customer is sacred, but that in his humble opinion


Mr Preetorius was crazy. Then he grew quiet, obviously 
repentant. I was unable to worm anything more out of 
him.
I had allowed for this failure, but it is one thing to 
allow for something and quite another to see it happen. 
Time and again, I said to myself that the solution of this 
enigma did not concern me and that the one true enigma 
was time, that seamless chain of past, present, and future, 
of the ever and the never. Such reflections turned out to 
be useless, however; after whole afternoons devoted to 
the study of Schopenhauer or Royce, night after night I 
would walk the dirt roads ringing the Casa Colorada. 
Sometimes I caught a glimpse upstairs of a very white 
light; other times, I thought I heard a moaning. It went 
on this way until the nineteenth of January.
It was one of those Buenos Aires days when a man feels 
himself not only bullied and insulted by the summer but 
even debased by it. At around eleven o’clock at night 
the storm broke. First came the south wind, and then the 
water in torrents. I wandered about looking for a tree. 
In the sudden glare of a lightning flash I found myself a 
few steps from the fence. Whether out of fear or hope I 
don’t know, but I tried the gate. Unexpectedly, it opened. 
I made my way, pushed along by the storm. Sky and 
earth threatened me. The door of the house was also open. 
A squall of rain lashed my face and I went in.
Inside, the floor tiles had been torn up and I stepped 
on matted grass. A sweet, sickening smell filled the house. 
Right or left, I’m not sure which, I tripped on a stone 
ramp. Quickly, I went up. Almost unawares, I turned on 
the light switch.
The dining room and the library of my memories were 
now, with the wall between them torn down, a single great 
bare room containing one or two pieces of furniture. I 
shall not try to describe them, since I am not altogether 
sure - in spite of the cruel white light - of having seen


them. Let me explain myself. To see a thing one has to 
comprehend it. An armchair presupposes the human 
body, its joints and limbs; a pair of scissors, the act of 
cutting. What can be said of a lamp or a car? The savage 
cannot comprehend the missionary’s Bible; the passenger 
does not see the same rigging as the sailors. If we really 
saw the world, maybe we would understand it.
None of the meaningless shapes that that night granted 
me corresponded to the human figure or, for that matter, 
to any conceivable use. I felt revulsion and terror. In one 
of the corners, I found a ladder which led to the upper 
floor. The spaces between the iron rungs, which were no 
more than ten, were wide and irregular. That ladder, 
implying hands and feet, was comprehensible, and in 
some way this relieved me. I put out the light and waited 
for some time in the dark. I did not hear the least sound, 
but the presence there of incomprehensible things dis- 
quieted me. In the end, I made up my mind.
Once upstairs, my fearful hand switched on the light a 
second time. The nightmare that had foreshadowed the 
lower floor came alive and flowered on the next. Here 
there were either many objects or a few linked together. 
I now recall a sort of long operating table, very high and 
in the shape of a U, with round hollows at each end. I 
thought that maybe it was the bed of the house’s inhabi- 
tant, whose monstrous anatomy revealed itself in this 
way, implicitly, like an animal’s or a god’s by its shadow. 
From some page or other of Lucan there came to my 
lips the word ‘amphisbaena’, which hinted at, but which 
certainly did not exhaust, what my eyes were later to see. 
I also remember a V of mirrors that became lost in the 
upper darkness.
What would the inhabitant be like? What could it be 
looking for on this planet, no less hideous to it than it to 
us? From what secret regions of astronomy or time, from 
what ancient and now incalculable dusk can it have


reached this South American suburb and this particular 
night?
I felt an intruder in the chaos. Outside, the rain had 
stopped. I looked at my watch and saw with astonishment 
that it was almost two o’clock. I left the light on and 
carefully began climbing down. To get down the way I 
had come up was not impossible - to get down before the 
inhabitant returned. I guessed that it had not locked the 
doors because it did not know how.
My feet were touching the next to last rung of the ladder 
when I felt that something, slow and oppressive and two- 
fold, was coming up the ramp. Curiosity overcame my 
fear, and I did not shut my eyes.


The Sect of the Thirty
The original manuscript may be consulted at the Uni- 
versity of Leiden; the text is in Latin, but one or two 
Hellenisms justify the conjecture that it was translated 
from the Greek. According to Leisegang, it dates from 
the fourth century a.d. Gibbon mentions it in passing in 
one of the footnotes to the fifteenth chapter of his Decline 
and Fall. The anonymous author has recorded:
. . . The Sect was never large, and now its proselytes num- 
ber but a scant few. Decimated by sword and fire, they 
sleep by the wayside or, since it is forbidden them to 
build any form of dwelling place, among the ruins spared 
by war. They also journey about quite naked. These facts 
are common knowledge. My aim here is to leave a written 
record of what it has been vouchsafed me to discover of 
the Sect’s beliefs and customs. I have argued at length 
with its masters and have met with little success in con- 
verting them to the Faith of Our Lord.
The first thing about the Sect that drew my attention 
was the variousness of its notions regarding the dead. 
Among the most ignorant, for example, it is held that the 
burial of those who have departed this life is entrusted 
to their spirits; others, the unorthodox, maintain that 
 Jesus’ admonition to ‘let the dead bury their dead’ is 
meant to condemn the pompous vanity of our funeral 
rites.


The advice to sell what one has and give to the poor is 
closely followed by every sectarian; those so benefited 
give to others and these, in turn, to still others. This 
should suffice to explain their indigence and nakedness, 
which, in addition, brings them nearer the state of paradise. 
Fervently they repeat the words, ‘Behold the ravens of 
the air: for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor have 
they barns or sheds; yet your heavenly Father feedeth 
them. Are ye not much better than they?’ Their teaching 
forbids all saving: ‘Wherefore, if God so clothe the grass 
of the field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into 
the oven, shall he not much more clothe you, O ye of 
little faith? Therefore take no thought, saying, What shall 
we eat? or, What shall we drink?’
The judgement ‘whosoever looketh on a woman to lust 
after her hath committed adultery with her already in his 
heart’ is a piece of straightforward advice about main- 
taining purity. Yet, many are the members of the Sect 
who point out that if there is not one man on earth who 
has not looked upon a woman to lust after her all men have 
committed adultery. Since the desire is as sinful as the 
act, the righteous may without risk indulge in the most 
outrageous lust.
The Sect shuns temples; its elders preach in the open 
air, from the top of a hill or a wall, or sometimes from a 
boat on the shore.
The Sect’s name has given rise to persistent conjectures. 
One such suggests that it refers to the number to which 
the faithful have been reduced, which is ridiculous and 
yet prophetic, because, due to its perverse set of beliefs, 
the Sect is destined to die out. Another conjecture is that 
the name derives from the height of the Ark, which was 
thirty cubits; another, which distorts the calendar, from 
the number of nights that make up a lunar month; an- 
other, from the Saviour’s age at baptism; another, from 
Adam’s years when he rose out of the red dust of the


ground. All are equally untrue. No less deceiving is the 
list of thirty godheads or thrones, of which one is Abraxas, 
portrayed by a cock’s head, the arms and torso of a man, 
and the tail of an entwined serpent.
The priceless gift of communicating Truth has not been 
granted me. One knows the Truth but is unable to argue 
it. May others more gifted than I save the members of 
the Sect by preaching - by preaching or by fire, for it is 
better to be put to death than to commit suicide. I shall 
therefore limit myself to giving an account of the abomi- 
nable heresy.
The Word was made flesh to become a man among men, 
who would deliver Him up to the cross and be redeemed 
by Him. He was born of the womb of a woman of the 
chosen people not only to preach Love, but to suffer 
martyrdom.
It was necessary that events be unforgettable. The death 
of a human being by the sword or by drinking hemlock 
was not enough to move the imagination of mankind to 
the end of time. The Lord arranged things in a dramatic 
way. This accounts for the Last Supper, for Jesus’ words 
that foretold his betrayal, for the repeated warning to one 
of the disciples, for the blessing of the bread and wine, 
for Peter’s pledges, for the solitary vigil in the garden of 
Gethsemane, for the sleep of the twelve disciples, for the 
Son of God’s human prayer, for the sweat like blood, for 
the multitude with swords and staves, for the kiss of be- 
trayal, for Pilate’s washing his hands, for the scourging, 
for the mocking, for the crown of thorns, for the purple 
robe and reed sceptre, for the vinegar with gall, for the 
cross on the summit of a hill, for the promise to the repen- 
tant thief, for the earth that shook and the darkness over 
all the land.
Divine Providence, to which I owe so many blessings, 
has allowed me to discover the real and secret reason for 
the Sect’s name. In Kerioth, where in all likelihood it


originated, there survives a conventicle known as the 
Thirty Coins. This was the earliest name, and it gives us 
the clue. In the drama of the Cross (I mean this with due 
reverence) there were intentional and unintentional actors 
- all of them indispensable, all of them fatal. Uninten- 
tional were the priests who handed out the pieces of 
silver, unintentional was the multitude that asked for 
Barabbas, unintentional was the Governor of Judea, un- 
intentional were the Roman soldiers who erected the 
cross of His martyrdom and nailed the nails and cast lots 
for His garments. The intentional actors were only two - 
the Redeemer and Judas. The latter cast down the thirty 
pieces of silver that were the price of Salvation and went 
and hanged himself. At the time, like the Son of Man, 
he was thirty-three years old. The Sect|worships them 
equally and absolves all the others. There is no one culprit. 
Everyone, unwitting or not, is an agent in the scheme laid 
down by Divine Wisdom. All of them now share the 
Glory.
My hand trembles to set down yet another abomination. 
In order to follow the example of their masters, the 
believers, upon attaining the designated age, have them- 
selves mocked and crucified on the summit of a hill. 
This criminal violation of the Fifth Commandment must 
be brought to an end with all the severity that human 
and divine laws have always demanded. May the curses 
of the skies, may the hatred of the angels . . .
No more of the manuscript has been unearthed.


The night of the gifts
It was many years ago in the old Confitería del Águila, 
on Florida Street up around Piedad, that we heard this 
story. The problem of knowledge was being discussed. 
Someone invoked the platonic theory that we have already 
seen everything in a previous world, so that to know is 
to know again. My father, I believe, said that Bacon had 
written that if to learn is to remember, not to know is in 
fact to have forgotten. Another person, a man getting on 
in years, who was probably a bit lost in metaphysics, 
decided to enter in. Speaking slowly and deliberately this 
is what he told us:
Frankly, I don’t understand all this talk of platonic 
archetypes. Nobody remembers the first time he saw the 
colour yellow or black, or the first time he tasted a certain 
fruit - maybe because he was small then and had no way 
of knowing he was initiating a very long series. Of course, 
there are other first times that no one forgets. I can tell 
you what a certain night of my life gave me, one I often 
recall - the night of the thirtieth of April, .
Summer holidays were much longer then, but I don’t 
know why we stayed away from Buenos Aires until that 
late date. We were at the ranch of some cousins, the 
Dornas, not far from Lobos. During that time, one of 
the cowhands, Rufino, initiated me into country things. 
I was approaching thirteen; he was somewhat older and


had a reputation as a daredevil. He was quick, agile. 
When the younger hands played at knife-fighting with 
burnt sticks, the one who always got his face marked was 
Rufino’s opponent. One Friday, Rufino suggested we go 
into town the next night to have a little fun. Of course, I 
leaped at the chance, but without really knowing what 
it was all about. I warned him I didn’t know how to 
dance. Dancing was easy to learn, he said.
After dinner on Saturday, at around seven-thirty, we set 
off. Rufino had rigged himself out like someone going to 
a party, and he wore a silver knife in his belt. I had a 
little knife like it, but I didn’t bring mine for fear of 
being laughed at. It was not long before we glimpsed the 
first houses. I don’t suppose any of you has ever been to 
Lobos. Not that it matters. There’s no small town in the 
Argentine that isn’t exactly like all the others - even to 
the point of thinking itself different. Each has the same 
unpaved alleys, the same empty lots, the same one-story 
houses - all of which make a man on horseback seem more 
important.
We dismounted at a certain street corner in front of a 
house painted sky-blue or pink, with a sign saying ‘La 
Estrella’. Tied to the hitching post were some horses with 
good saddles. Through the half-open street door I saw 
a shaft of light. At the end of the entranceway was a large 
room with wooden benches on either side and, between 
the benches, a number of dark doors that opened who 
knew where. A little mongrel with yellow fur ran up 
barking to welcome me. Quite a few people were about, 
and a half dozen or so women in floral dressing gowns 
came and went. A respectable-looking lady, dressed in 
black from head to foot, seemed to be the owner of the 
house. Rufino greeted her, saying, ‘I’ve brought a new 
friend, but he’s not much of a rider.’
‘Don’t worry,’ the woman answered. ‘He’ll learn soon 
enough.’


I felt ashamed. To draw their attention away, or to 
make them see that I was a boy, I began playing with the 
dog at the end of one of the benches. On a table in the 
kitchen burned some cheap candles in bottles, and I also 
remember a small brazier in a corner to the rear. On the 
whitewashed wall opposite was a picture of Our Lady of 
Mercy.
Somebody, between one joke and another, was tuning a 
guitar that gave him a lot of trouble. Out of sheer timidity 
I did not refuse a gin, which burned my mouth like a 
red-hot coal. Among the women I noticed one who 
seemed different from the others. They called her La 
Cautiva - the Captive. There was something Indian about 
her, but her features were like a picture and her eyes very 
sad. Her braided hair reached her waist. Rufino saw that 
I was looking at her.
‘Let’s hear about the raid again - to refresh our memo- 
ries,’ he said to her.
The girl spoke as if she were alone, and in some way I 
felt that she was unable to think of anything else and that 
the story she told us was the only thing that had happened 
to her in her life.
‘I was very young when they brought me from Cata- 
marca,’ she said. ‘What did I know about Indian raids? 
At Santa Irene we didn’t even mention such things, we 
were so scared. As if unravelling a secret, I gradually 
found out that Indians could descend like a cloud and 
kill people and steal their stock. Women they carried off 
into the pampa, and they did everything to them. I tried 
as hard as I could not to believe any of this. My brother 
Lucas - the Indians later put a spear through him - swore 
it was all lies, but when a thing is true it has to be said 
only once for you to know it’s so. The government hands 
out strong drink and yerba to keep the Indians happy, 
but they have very clever wizards telling them what to do. 
At the word of one of their chiefs, it’s nothing for them


to attack a ranch somewhere out between the forts, 
which are far apart. Just from thinking about it so much, 
I almost wished they would come, and I knew how to 
look for them out towards the setting sun. I don’t know 
how much time went by, but there were frosts and sum- 
mers and roundups and the death of the foreman’s son 
before the raid.’
She paused for a moment or two, lost in thought, then 
went on. ‘It was as if the south wind brought them. I 
saw a thistle in a ditch, and that night I dreamed of 
Indians. It happened at daybreak. The animals knew it 
before we did - the same as when there’s an earthquake. 
The cattle were restless and birds wheeled in the sky. We 
ran to look in the direction I always looked.’
‘Who warned you?’ someone asked.
Distant as ever, the girl repeated her last sentence. ‘We 
ran to look in the direction I always looked. It was as if 
the whole desert had begun to move. Through the bars 
of the window grille we saw the cloud of dust before we 
saw them. It was a raiding party. They beat their hands 
over their mouths, whooping. We had some rifles at 
Santa Irene, but all they were good for was making noise 
and turning the Indians even more savage.’
La Cautiva spoke like someone saying a prayer she had 
learned by heart, but out in the street I heard the desert 
Indians and their war cries. There was an eruption and, 
as if riding in on horseback in the fragments of some 
dream, they were in the room. They were local toughs 
and they were drunk. Now, in my memory, I see them 
as very tall. The one who came in at the head of them el- 
bowed past Rufino, who stood by the door. Rufino 
changed colour and got out of the way. The lady in black, 
who had not stirred from her place, rose to her feet.
‘It’s Juan Moreira!’ she said.
After so much time, I no longer know whether I remem- 
ber the man of that night - the outlaw Moreira - or


somebody else I was later often to see around cattle fairs. 
The long, thick hair and black beard of stage characters 
based on Moreira come to mind, but I also recall a ruddy 
face pitted by smallpox. The little dog scurried forward 
to give him a welcome. With a single whiplash, Moreira 
left it in a sprawl on the floor. It lay on its back and died 
pawing the air. This is where my story really begins. 
Without a sound I made my way to one of the doors, 
which opened into a narrow passageway and a staircase. 
On the upper floor, I hid myself in a dark room. Apart 
from the bed, which was very low, I never knew what 
other furniture was there. I was trembling. Below, the 
shouting did not let up, and there was a shattering of 
glass. I heard a woman’s footsteps coming up the stairs 
and I saw a momentary slit of light. Then La Cautiva’s 
voice called out to me in a whisper. ‘I’m here to serve - 
but to serve peaceable people,’ she said. ‘Come closer, I’m 
not going to hurt you.’
She had taken off her dressing gown. I lay beside her 
and felt for her face with my hands. I have no idea how 
much time passed. We exchanged neither a word nor a 
kiss. I untied her braid, and my hands played with her 
hair, which was very straight, and then they played with 
her. We did not see each other again after that, and I 
never learned her real name.
A shot startled us. La Cautiva said, ‘You can leave by 
the other stairway.’
I did, and I found myself out in the dirt alley. It was a 
moonlit night. A police sergeant, Andrés Chirino, stood 
on watch by the wall with a rifle and fixed bayonet. He 
laughed, saying to me, ‘I see you’re an early riser.’
I must have answered something, but he paid me no 
attention. A man was lowering himself over the wall. 
With a bound, the sergeant buried the steel in his flesh. 
The man dropped to the ground, where he lay on his 
back, moaning and bleeding to death. I remembered the


dog. To finish the man off once and for all, Chirino sank 
the bayonet in again.
‘You didn’t make it this time, Moreira,’ he said almost 
joyously.
From every side came uniformed men, who had sur- 
rounded the house, and then the neighbours. The ser- 
geant had a struggle to pull out the bayonet. Everybody 
wanted to shake his hand.
‘The fancy footwork’s all over for this hoodlum,’ 
Rufino said with a laugh.
I went from group to group, telling people what I had 
seen. Then, all at once, I felt very tired; maybe I was 
even feverish. Slipping away, I found Rufino and we 
started home. From our horses, we saw the pale dawn 
light. More than tired, I felt dazed by that torrent of 
events.
‘By the great river of that night,’ my father said when 
the man had finished.
‘That’s right,’ he agreed. ‘In the bare space of a few 
hours I had known love and had looked on death. All 
things are revealed to all men - or, anyway, all those 
things it’s granted a man to know - but to me two fun- 
damental things were revealed in a single night. The 
years pass and I’ve told this story so many times I no 
longer know whether I remember it as it was or whether 
it’s only my words I’m remembering. Maybe the same 
thing happened to La Cautiva with her Indian raid. It 
doesn’t matter now whether it was I or someone else who 
saw Moreira killed.’


The mirror and the mask
The battle of Clontarf over, in which the Norwegians met 
defeat, the High King of Ireland spoke to his court poet. 
‘The greatest deeds lose their lustre if they are not coined 
in words,’ the king said. ‘I want you to sing my victory 
and my praise. I will be Aeneas; you will be my Virgil. 
Do you think yourself capable of this task, which will 
make us both immortal?’
‘Yes, my lord,’ said the bard. ‘I am Ollan. For twelve 
winters I have trained in the disciplines of prosody. I 
know by heart the three hundred and sixty legends that 
form the basis of true poetry. The cycles of Ulster and 
Munster are in the strings of my harp. The laws authorize 
me to be lavish in using the oldest words of our tongue 
and the most complex metaphors. I have mastered the 
secret of writing, which protects our art from the undis- 
cerning eyes of the common herd. I can celebrate loves, 
cattle thieves, voyages, and wars. I know the mythological 
lineages of all the royal houses of Ireland. I possess a 
knowledge of judicial astrology, mathematics, canon law, 
and the powers of plants. I have defeated my rivals in 
public contest. I have made myself skilled in satire, which 
causes infirmities of the skin, including leprosy. I know 
how to wield a sword, as I proved in your battle. I am 
ignorant of only one thing - how to thank you for the gift 
you make me.’
The king, who was easily tired by long speeches, espe-


cially those of others, said with relief, ‘I know these 
things quite well, I have been told that the nightingale 
recently sang in England. When the rains and snows pass, 
and the nightingale returns from its southern lands, you 
will sing your praises before the court and before the 
School of Bards. I grant you a whole year. You will 
polish each word and letter. Reward, as you know by 
now, will not be unworthy of my royal custom nor of the 
sleepless nights of your inspiration.’
‘O king, what greater reward than to see your face!’ 
said the poet, who was also a courtier. He bowed and 
withdrew, already glimpsing one or two verses.
When the year came round - it had been a time of epi- 
demics and uprisings - the poet presented his panegyric. 
He declaimed it slowly, confidently, without a glance at 
the manuscript. With his head the king showed his appro- 
val. Everyone imitated his gesture, even those thronging 
the doorways, who were unable to make out a single word. 
At the end the king spoke.
‘I accept your labour,’ he said. ‘It is another victory. 
You have given each word its true meaning, and each 
substantive the epithet given it by the poets of old. In 
your whole panegyric there is not a single image unknown 
to the classics. War is the beautiful web of men, and blood 
is the sword’s water. The sea has its gods and the clouds 
foretell the future. You have skilfully handled rhyme, 
alliteration, assonance, quantities, the artifices of learned 
rhetoric, the wise variation of metres. If all the literature 
of Ireland were to perish - absit omen - it could be re- 
constructed without loss from your classic ode. Thirty 
scribes shall copy it twelve times each.’
There was a silence, then he went on. ‘All is well and 
yet nothing has happened. In our veins the blood runs 
no faster. Our hands have not sought the bow. No one 
has turned pale. No one uttered a battle cry or set his 
breast against the Vikings. Before a year is out, poet, we


shall applaud another ode. As a sign of our approval, take 
this mirror, which is of silver.’
‘I give thanks and I understand,’ said the bard.
The stars in the sky went on in their bright course. 
Once more the nightingale sang in the Saxon forests, 
and the poet came back with his manuscript, which was 
shorter than the one before. He did not repeat it from 
memory but read it, obviously hesitant, omitting certain 
passages as if he himself did not completely understand 
them or did not wish to profane them. The ode was 
strange. It was not a description of the battle - it was 
the battle. In its warlike chaos there struggled with one 
another the God that is Three and is One, Ireland’s pagan 
deities, and those who would wage war hundreds of years 
later at the beginning of the Elder Edda. The form was 
no less odd. A singular noun governed a plural verb. The 
prepositions were alien to common usage. Harshness al- 
ternated with sweetness. The metaphors were arbitrary, 
or so they seemed.
The king exchanged a few words with the men of 
letters who stood around him, then spoke to the bard. 
‘Your first ode I could declare was an apt compendium 
of all that has been sung in Ireland,’ the king said. ‘This 
one outdoes, and even makes as nothing, whatever came 
before it. It astounds, it dazzles, it causes wonderment. 
The ignorant will be unworthy of it, but not so the learned, 
the few. An ivory casket will be the resting place of its 
single copy. Of the pen that has produced so eminent a 
work we may expect one still more lofty.’ He added with 
a smile, ‘We are the figures of a fable, and it is good to 
remember that in fables the number three prevails.’
‘The wizard’s three gifts, triads, and the unquestionable 
Trinity,’ the bard made bold to murmur.
The king continued, ‘As a token of our approval, take 
this golden mask.’
‘I give thanks and I have understood,’ said the bard.


The anniversary came round again. The palace sentries 
noticed that the poet carried no manuscript. In amaze- 
ment, the king looked at him; the bard was like another 
man. Something other than time had furrowed and trans- 
formed his features. His eyes seemed to stare into the 
distance or to be blind. The bard begged to be allowed a 
few words with the king. The slaves left the chamber.
‘Have you not written the ode?’ asked the king.
‘Yes,’ the bard sadly replied. ‘But would that Christ 
Our Lord had prevented me!’
‘Can you repeat it?’
‘I dare not.’
‘I will give you the courage you lack,’ said the king.
The bard recited the poem. It consisted of a single line.
Not venturing to repeat it aloud, the poet and his king 
savoured it as if it were a secret prayer or a blasphemy. 
The king was as awestricken and overcome as the bard. 
The two looked at each other, very pale.
‘In my youth,’ said the king, ‘I sailed towards the sun- 
set. On one island I saw silver hounds that dealt death to 
golden boars. On another we fed ourselves on the fra- 
grance of magic apples. On a third I saw walls of fire. 
On the farthest island of all an arched and hanging river 
cut across the sky and in its waters went fishes and boats. 
These are wonders, but they do not compare with your 
poem, which in some way encompasses them all. What 
bewitchery gave it to you?’
‘In the dawn I woke up speaking words I did not at 
first understand,’ said the bard. ‘Those words were a 
poem. I felt I had committed a sin, perhaps one the Holy 
Ghost does not forgive.’
‘The one we two now share,’ the king said in a whisper. 
‘The sin of having known Beauty, which is a gift for- 
bidden to men. Now it behoves us to expiate it. I gave 
you a mirror and a golden mask; here is my third present, 
which will be the last.’


In the bard’s right hand he placed a dagger.
Of the poet, we know that he killed himself upon 
leaving the palace; of the king, that he is a beggar wan- 
dering the length and breadth of Ireland - which was 
once his kingdom - and that he has never repeated the 
poem.


Undr
The reader should be forewarned that the following pages 
will not be found in the Libellus () of Adam of 
Bremen, who, as everyone knows, was born and died in 
the eleventh century. They were unearthed by Lappen- 
berg in a manuscript in the Bodleian, at Oxford, and, 
given the wealth of circumstantial details, he judged them 
a late interpolation, but he published them as a curiosity 
in his Analecta Germanica (Leipzig, ). The opinion 
of a mere Argentine amateur is of little account; let the 
reader judge these pages for himself. My translation is 
faithful, but it is not literal. Adam of Bremen wrote:
. . . Of the peoples who live on the edge of the wilderness 
that stretches away on the other shore of the Barbarian 
Gulf, beyond the lands where the wild horse breeds, the 
worthiest of mention are the Urns. The uncertain or in- 
vented information of traders, the dangers of the route, 
and the plundering of nomads prevented me from reaching 
their territory. It is clear, however, that their rudimentary, 
unfrequented villages are located in the lowlands of the 
Vistula. Unlike the Swedes, the Urns profess the true 
faith of Christ, untainted by Arianism or by the blood- 
thirsty worship of devils, from which the royal houses of 
England and other northern nations trace their lineages. 
The Urns are herdsmen, ferrymen, shamans, forgers of 
swords, and harness makers. Owing to the rigours of war,


they barely till the soil. One invariably comes to resemble 
one’s enemies, and the steppe and the tribes that roam it 
have made the Urns very skilled in the handling of horse 
and bow. Their spears, since they are used by horsemen 
and not foot soldiers, are longer than ours.
As may be imagined, the Urns are unfamiliar with pen, 
inkhorn, and parchment. They carve their characters as 
our ancestors carved the runes which Odin revealed to 
them after having hung from the ash tree - Odin given to 
Odin - through nine days and nights.
To this general information I add an account of what I 
was told by a traveller from Iceland, Ulf Sigurdsson, a 
man of grave and measured words. We met in Uppsala, 
 near the temple. The wood fire had died, and the cold and 
the dawn entered through the uneven chinks in the wall. 
Outside, the grey wolves, which eat the flesh of the hea- 
thens sacrificed to the three gods, left their wary tracks in 
the snow. Our conversation began in Latin, as is usual 
with churchmen, but we were not long in slipping 
into the tongue of the north, which extends from Thule 
all the way to the marketplaces of Asia. The man 
said:
As I am of the race of the skalds, to learn that the 
poetry of the Urns consists of a single word was enough 
for me to set out in search of them and the way that 
would lead to their land. Not without exhaustion and 
hardship did I arrive there after a year-long journey. It 
was night, and all those I came upon shot me odd looks, 
and one or two stones were hurled at me.
Seeing the light of a blacksmith’s forge, I approached 
it. The smith, whose name was Orm, offered me lodging 
for the night. His language was more or less ours. We 
exchanged a few words. From his lips I heard for the 
first time the name of the reigning king - Gunnlaug. I 
learned that after his last war he looked with suspicion 
upon strangers and that it was his custom to crucify them.


To avoid that fate, which is less fitting to a man than a 
god, I undertook the composition of a drápa, or ode, that 
celebrated the victories, the fame, and the mercy of the 
king. I had barely committed it to memory when two men 
came searching for me. I did not want to surrender my 
sword to them, but I let myself be led away.
There were still stars in the sky. We crossed the first of 
several stretches of open ground with huts on every side. 
I had been led to expect pyramids, but what I saw in the 
middle of this square was a yellow wooden post. At the 
top of it I made out the black figure of a fish. Orm, who 
had accompanied us, said that the fish was the Word. 
In the next opening, I saw a red post marked with a disk. 
Orm said that this was the Word. I asked him to tell me 
it. He was a simple artisan, he said, and he did not know. 
In the third opening, which was the last, I saw a post 
painted black, with a design on it that I have forgotten. 
On the far side of the square was a long, straight wall 
whose ends I could not catch sight of. Later I found out 
that it was circular, that it supported a mud roof, that it 
enclosed a single chamber, and that it stretched around 
the whole city.
The horses tied to the hitching post outside were of 
small stature and had long manes. The blacksmith was 
not allowed entrance. Inside there were armed men, all 
standing. Gunnlaug, the king, who was ailing, lay with 
his eyes half shut on some camel hides on a kind of dais. 
He was a wasted, yellowish man, a sacred and almost for- 
gotten thing; old scars spanned the width of his chest. 
One of the soldiers opened a way for me. Someone had 
brought a harp. Kneeling, I intoned the drápa in a low 
voice. There was no lack of the rhetorical figures, the 
alliterations, and the stresses that the form demands. I do 
not know whether the king understood it, but he gave 
me a silver ring, which I still preserve. Under his pillow, 
I glimpsed the edge of a dagger. To his right was a chess-


board with a hundred squares and a handful of scattered 
pieces.
The guard shoved me to the rear. A man took my 
place before the king but did not kneel. He plucked 
the harp as if tuning it, and in a low voice he uttered 
the word that I had come in search of and had not yet 
fathomed.
‘It no longer means anything now,’ someone said 
reverently.
I saw tears. The man raised or modulated his voice, and 
his scarcely varying chords were monotonous or, still 
better, infinite. I would have liked his song to go on 
forever and to be my life. Abruptly, it stopped. I heard 
the noise the harp made when the singer, no doubt in 
utter exhaustion, threw it down. We all went out in dis- 
order. I was one of the last. In astonishment I saw that 
the light was waning on another day. I walked a few steps, 
when a hand on my shoulder made me pause.
‘The king’s ring was your talisman,’ I was told, ‘but 
you will not be long in meeting your death, because you 
have heard the Word. I, Bjarni Thorkelsson, will save 
you. I am of the race of the skalds. In your ode you called 
blood the sword’s water and a battle the web of men. I 
remember having heard those figures from my father’s 
father. You and I are poets, and I will save you. Now- 
adays, we do not define each thing that our song quickens; 
we express it in a single word, which is the Word.’
‘I was unable to hear it,’ I said. ‘I beg you to tell me 
what it is.’
He paused for a moment or two and replied, ‘I have 
sworn not to divulge it. Besides, nobody can teach any- 
thing. You must find it out for yourself. But let’s hurry; 
your life is in danger. I’ll hide you in my house, where 
no one will dare look for you. If the wind is favourable, 
tomorrow you will sail southward on the river.’
So began the adventure that was to last so many winters.


I shall not go into all that befell me, nor shall I try to give 
an orderly account of my shifting fortunes. I was an oars- 
man, slave dealer, slave, woodcutter, highwayman, singer, 
and taster of deep waters and metals. I suffered captivity, 
and spent a year in the quicksilver mines, which loosen 
one’s teeth. I fought side by side with men of Sweden 
in the Varangian guard at Mikligarðr [Constantinople]. 
On the shores of the Sea of Azov I was loved by a woman 
whom I shall never forget; I left her or she left me - it 
amounts to the same thing. I betrayed and I was betrayed. 
More than once fate made me kill. A Greek soldier chal- 
lenged me and gave me the choice between two swords. 
One was a hand’s breadth longer than the other. Knowing 
he was out to intimidate me, I chose the shorter. He 
asked me why. I replied that with either the distance from 
my hand to his heart was the same. At the edge of the 
Black Sea stands the runic epitaph I carved for my com- 
rade in arms, Leif Arnarson. I have fought the Blue Men 
of Serkland, the Saracens. In the course of time I have 
been many men; it was a whirlwind, a long dream, but 
all the while the main thing was the Word. From time 
to time I disbelieved in it. I kept telling myself that to 
renounce the beautiful game of combining beautiful 
words was senseless, and that there was no reason to 
search for a single, and perhaps imaginary, word. Such 
reasoning was vain. A missionary suggested the word 
‘God’, which I rejected. One early dawn, along the banks 
of a river that widened into a sea, I believed I had come 
upon the revelation.
Returning to the land of the Urns, I had some trouble 
finding the singer’s house. When I did, I entered and 
spoke my name. By that time, night had fallen. From the 
floor, Thorkelsson told me to light a candle in the bronze 
candlestick. His face had aged so much that I could not 
help thinking that I, too, was old. As is the custom, I 
asked about his king.


‘The king is no longer called Gunnlaug,’ he said. ‘His 
name is now another. Tell me all about your travels.’
I did so in exact order and with a great many details 
that I shall omit here. Before I had finished, he asked me, 
‘Did you often sing in those lands?’
The question took me by surprise. ‘At first, I sang to 
earn my living,’ I said. ‘Later, overcome by a fear I do 
not understand, I was estranged from my harp and my 
song.’
‘All right,’ he said. ‘You may go on with your story now.’
I obeyed. After I had finished, a long silence followed.
‘The first woman you had - what did she give you?’ he 
asked.
‘Everything,’ I said.
‘Life gave me everything as well. Life gives everything 
to everyone, but most men are unaware of it. My voice 
is tired and my fingers weak, but listen to me.’
He took up his harp and uttered the word ‘undr’, 
which means ‘wonder’. The dying man’s song held me 
rapt, but in it and in his chords I recognized my own 
verses, the slave woman who gave me my first love, the 
men I had killed, the chill of dawn, daybreak over the 
water, the oars. I took up the harp and sang to a different 
word.
‘All right,’ the other man said, and I had to draw close 
to hear him. ‘You have understood.’


Utopia of a tired man
He called it Utopia, a Greek word meaning there is 
no such place.
- Quevedo
No two hills are alike, but everywhere on earth plains are 
one and the same. I was making my way in such country, 
asking myself, not that it really mattered, if this were 
Oklahoma or Texas or the part of the Argentine that 
literary men called the pampa. Neither to right nor left 
did I see a fence. As on other occasions, I slowly repeated 
these lines by the poet Emilio Oribe:
At the heart of the endless awesome plain 
and close by the border of Brazil.
which keep growing and ever expanding.
The road was uneven. Rain began to fall. Some two or 
three hundred yards off I saw light from a house, which 
was low and rectangular and surrounded by trees. The 
door was opened by a man so tall he almost gave me a 
fright. He was dressed in grey. I felt he was waiting for 
someone. There was no lock on the door.
We went into a long room with wooden walls, a table, 
and chairs. A lamp giving off a yellowish light hung from 
the ceiling. The table, for some reason, seemed strange to 
me. On it stood an hourglass, the first, outside of some 
steel engraving or other, I had ever laid eyes on. The 
man motioned me to one of the chairs.
I tried out various languages, and we did not understand 
each other. When at last he spoke, he did so in Latin. I


dusted off what I remembered from my now distant 
school days, readying myself for conversation.
‘By your clothes, I see you come from another century,’ 
he said. ‘A diversity of tongues favoured a diversity of 
peoples and even of wars. The world has fallen back on 
Latin. There are those who fear it may degenerate again 
into French, Lemosi, or Papiamento, but that is not an 
immediate risk. Be that as it may, neither the past nor 
the future interests me.’
I said nothing, and he added, ‘If you don’t mind watch- 
ing somebody else eat, will you join me?’
Seeing that he noticed my uneasiness, I said yes. We 
went down a corridor, with doors on either hand, that 
led to a small kitchen in which everything was made of 
metal. We came back with our dinner on a tray - bowls 
of cornflakes, a bunch of grapes, an unfamiliar fruit whose 
taste reminded me of figs, and a big pitcher of water. If 
I remember correctly, there was no bread. My host’s 
features were sharp, and there was something unusual 
about his eyes. I won’t forget his pale, austere face, 
which I shall never see again. He made no gestures when 
he spoke. Having to converse in Latin inhibited me, but 
at last I said, ‘Doesn’t my sudden appearance amaze 
you?’
‘No,’ he said. ‘We receive such visits from century to 
century. They don’t last long. Tomorrow, at the latest, 
you’ll be home again.’
The certainty in his voice was reassuring. I thought it 
proper to introduce myself. ‘I am Eudoro Acevedo. I was 
born in , in the city of Buenos Aires. I am seventy 
years old. I am a professor of English and American 
literatures and a writer of imaginative tales.’
‘I remember having read, not without pleasure, two 
tales of an imaginative nature,’ he said. ‘Travels of a 
Captain Lemuel Gulliver, which many people take to be 
true, and the Summa Theologiae. But let’s not speak of


facts. Facts matter to no one any more. They are mere 
points of departure for invention and reasoning. In our 
schools we are taught doubt and the art of forgetting - 
above all, the forgetting of what is personal and local. We 
live in time, which is successive, but we try to live sub 
specie aeternitatis. Of the past we retain a few names, 
which language tends to lose. We shun pointless details. 
We have neither dates nor history. Nor have we statistics. 
You said your name is Eudoro. I can’t tell you my name, 
because I’m simply called Someone.’
‘And what was your father’s name?’
‘He had none.’
On one of the walls I saw a shelf. I opened a book at 
random; the letters were clean and undecipherable, and 
they were written by hand. Their angular lines reminded 
me of the runic alphabet, which, however, was only used 
for writing inscriptions. I reflected that these men of the 
future were not only taller but were more skilled. In- 
stinctively, I looked at the man’s long, fine fingers.
‘Now you are going to see something you’ve never seen,’ 
he said. He handed me a copy of Thomas More’s Utopia, 
printed in Basel in the year ; leaves and pages were 
missing.
Somewhat foolishly, I answered, ‘It’s a printed book. 
At home, I had over two thousand of them, though they 
were neither as old nor as valuable as this one.’ I read the 
title aloud.
The man laughed. ‘No one can read two thousand books. 
In the four centuries I have lived, I haven’t read more 
than half a dozen. Besides, rereading, not reading, is 
what counts. Printing - which is now abolished, since it 
tended to multiply unnecessary texts to the point of 
dizziness - was one of man’s worst evils.’
‘In my strange past,’ I said, ‘the superstition prevailed 
that every day, between evening and morning, certain 
acts occur which it is a shame to be ignorant of. The


planet was populated by collective ghosts - Canada, 
Brazil, the Swiss Congo, and the Common Market. Al- 
most no one knew anything of the history that preceded 
those platonic entities, but, of course, they knew every 
last detail of the most recent congress of pedagogues, or 
of imminent breakdowns in diplomatic relations, or of 
statements issued by presidents, drawn up by the secre- 
tary of a secretary and containing all the carefully worded 
haziness appropriate to the genre. These things were 
read to be forgotten, for, only hours later, other trivialities 
would blot them out. Of all offices, that of politician was 
without doubt the most public. An ambassador or a 
Cabinet minister was a kind of cripple whom it was 
necessary to cart around in long, noisy vehicles, ringed 
by motorcyclists and military escorts and awaited by 
eager photographers. It seems that their feet have been 
cut off, my mother used to say. Pictures and the printed 
word were more real than the things they stood for. 
Only what was published had any reality. Esse est percipi 
(to be is to be photographed) was the beginning, middle, 
and end of our singular idea of the world. In that past 
of mine, people were naïve; they believed that certain 
merchandise was good because its own makers claimed so 
over and over again. Robberies were also frequent, though 
everyone knew that the possession of money brings no 
greater happiness or peace of mind.’
‘Money?’ the man echoed. ‘No one any longer suffers 
poverty, which must have been unbearable, or wealth, 
which must have been the most uncomfortable form of 
vulgarity. Everyone has a calling.’
‘Like the rabbis,’ I said.
He appeared not to understand and went on. ‘Nor are 
there cities anymore. To judge by the ruins of Bahia 
Blanca, which I once explored, not much has been lost. 
There are no personal possessions now, there are no in- 
heritances. At the age of a hundred, when a man matures,


he is ready to come face to face with himself and his lone- 
liness. By then he will have fathered a child.’
‘One child?’ I asked.
‘Yes. Only one. There is no reason to carry on the human 
race. Some people think man is an organ of the godhead 
for universal consciousness, but nobody knows for sure 
whether such a godhead exists. The advantages and dis- 
advantages of gradual or simultaneous suicide by every 
man and woman on earth are, I believe, now being argued. 
But let’s get back to what we were saying.’
I agreed.
‘Having reached a hundred, the individual no longer 
stands in need of love or friendship. Evils and involuntary 
death are no threat to him. He practises one of the arts 
or philosophy or mathematics or he plays a game of soli- 
tary chess. When he wants to, he kills himself. Man is 
master of his life. He is also master of his death.’
‘Is that a quotation?’ I asked.
‘Of course. Quotations are all we have now. Language 
is a system of quotations.’
‘And the great adventure of my time - space travel?’ I 
asked.
‘It’s centuries ago now that those travels were given up. 
They were certainly to be admired, but we could never 
rid ourselves of a here and now.’ With a smile, he added, 
‘Besides, all travel is spatial. To go from one planet to 
another is like going to the farm across the way. When 
you entered this room, you were carrying out a voyage 
through space.’
‘That’s right,’ I said. ‘And one also used to speak of 
chemical substances and animals.’
The man now turned his back to me and looked outside. 
Beyond the windows, the plain was white with silent 
snow and moonlight.
I got up my courage to ask, ‘Are there still museums and 
libraries?’


‘No. We try to forget the past, except for the writing of 
elegies. There are no commemorations or anniversaries or 
effigies of dead men now. Each of us must himself produce 
the arts and sciences he needs.’
‘Then everyone must be his own Bernard Shaw, his 
own Jesus Christ, his own Archimedes.’
He agreed without a word.
‘What happened to governments?’
‘According to tradition, they fell into gradual disuse,’ 
he said. ‘They called elections, declared wars, collected 
taxes, confiscated fortunes, ordered arrests, and tried to 
impose censorship, but nobody on earth obeyed them. 
The press stopped publishing the news and photographs 
of government leaders. Politicians had to find honest work; 
some of them made good comedians or good faith healers. 
What actually happened was probably far more complex 
than this summary.’ He went on in a changed tone. ‘I 
built this house, which is the same as all others. I carved 
this furniture and these utensils. I worked these fields, 
which will be improved by people unknown to me. May 
I show you a few things?’
I followed him into an adjoining room. He lit a lamp 
like the first one; it too, hung from the ceiling. In a 
corner I saw a harp with few strings. On the walls 
were rectangular canvases in which yellow tones pre- 
dominated. The work did not seem that of the same 
hand.
‘This is what I do,’ he said.
I examined the canvases, stopping before the smallest 
one, which represented, or suggested, a sunset and which 
encompassed something infinite.
‘If you like it, you can have it as a keepsake of a future 
friend,’ he said matter-of-factly.
I thanked him, but there were a few canvases that left 
me uneasy. I won’t say that they were blank, but they 
were nearly so.


‘They’re painted in colours that your eyes of the past 
can’t see,’ he said.
A moment later, when his delicate hands plucked the 
strings of the harp, I barely caught an occasional sound. 
 Just then a knock was heard.
A tall woman and three or four men entered the house. 
One would have said that they were brothers and sisters 
or that time had made them alike. My host spoke to the 
woman first.
‘I knew you wouldn’t fail to come tonight. Have you 
seen Nils?’
‘Off and on. He’s as devoted to his painting as ever.’
‘Let’s hope with more success than his father.’
The dismantling began. Manuscripts, pictures, furnish- 
ings, utensils - we left nothing in the house. The woman 
worked alongside the men. I was ashamed of my weakness, 
which scarcely allowed me to be of any help. No one shut 
the door and we went out, loaded with things. I noticed 
that the house had a saddle roof.
After a fifteen-minute walk, we turned left. In the dis- 
tance I made out a kind of tower, crowned with a cupola.
‘It’s the crematory,’ someone said. ‘Inside it is the lethal 
chamber. It’s said to have been invented by a philan- 
thropist whose name, I think, was Adolf Hitler.’
The caretaker, whose stature by now did not astonish 
me, opened the gate to us. My host exchanged a few words 
with him. Before stepping into the enclosure, he waved 
goodbye.
‘It looks like more snow,’ the woman said.
In my study on Mexico Street, in Buenos Aires, I have 
the canvas that someone will paint, thousands of years 
from now, with substances today scattered over the whole 
planet.


The bribe
My story is about two men or, rather, about an episode 
involving two men. The actual affair, in itself neither 
singular nor even out of the ordinary, matters less than 
the character of its protagonists. Each of them sinned out 
of vanity, but in different ways and with different results. 
The events giving rise to the anecdote (for really it is 
not much more) took place a short time ago. To my mind, 
it could only have happened where it did - in America.
I had occasion at the University of Texas, in Austin, 
to speak at length to one of the two, Dr Ezra Winthrop. 
This was towards the end of . Winthrop was a pro- 
fessor of Old English (he did not approve of the term 
‘Anglo-Saxon’, which to him suggested an artifact made 
of two parts). I can remember that without once contra- 
dicting me he corrected my many mistakes and rash 
assumptions about the language. I was told that in his 
examinations he never asked a single question but invited 
his students to expatiate upon this or that topic, leaving 
the choice up to them. Of old Puritan stock, a native of 
Boston, Winthrop had found it hard getting used to the 
habits and prejudices of the South. He missed the snow, 
but it is my observation that Northerners are conditioned 
to the cold, much as we Argentines are to the heat. I still 
preserve the image, now dim, of a rather tall man with 
grey hair, less agile than strong. Clearer is my memory 
of his colleague, Herbert Locke, who gave me a copy of


his book Towards a History of the Kenning, in which one 
reads that the Saxons were not long in dispensing with 
those somewhat too mechanical metaphors (‘whale’s road’ 
for ‘the sea’, ‘falcon of battle’ for ‘the eagle’), whereas 
the skalds went on combining and interweaving them to 
the point of inextricability. I mention Herbert Locke 
because he is an integral part of my story.
I now come to the Icelander, Eric Einarsson, who is 
perhaps the true protagonist. I never set eyes on him. 
He arrived in Texas in , when I was in Cambridge, 
but the letters of a mutual friend, Ramón Martínez López, 
have left me feeling I know Einarsson intimately. I know 
that he was impetuous, energetic, and cold, and that in a 
land of tall men he was tall. Given his red hair, it was 
inevitable that his students dub him Eric the Red. In 
his opinion, the use of slang by a foreigner was forced and 
mistaken, making him an intruder, so he never condes- 
cended even to an occasional ‘okay’. A serious scholar of 
the Nordic languages, of English, of Latin, and - although 
he would not admit it - of German, he found no difficulty 
in making his way in American universities.
Einarsson’s first work of any consequence was a study 
of the four articles that De Quincey wrote on the Danish 
origins of Cumbrian dialect. This was followed by a 
study of one of the rural dialects of Yorkshire. Both 
publications were well received, but Einarsson felt his 
career needed a boost. In , the Yale University Press 
published his lengthy critical edition of the Battle of 
Maldon. The scholarship of Einarsson’s notes was un- 
deniable; in the introduction, however, certain of his 
hypotheses stirred up controversy in the almost secret 
circles of academics. There he stated, for example, that 
in style the poem has an affinity - even if a remote one - 
with the heroic Finnsburh fragment and not with the 
deliberate rhetoric of Beowulf, and that its handling of 
moving circumstantial details strangely foreshadows the


methods which, not unjustly, we admire in the Icelandic 
sagas. He also emended a number of readings in Elphin- 
ston’s text. Einarsson was made full professor at Texas 
the same year he arrived.
As everyone knows, scholarly conferences are popular in 
American universities. Dr Winthrop, in his turn, had 
given a paper at one of the important Germanic symposia 
the year before, at Michigan State. His department head, 
who was getting ready to go off on sabbatical, asked 
Winthrop to choose a delegate to deliver a paper at the 
next conference, to be held at Wisconsin. There were 
only two real candidates - Herbert Locke and Eric 
Einarsson.
Winthrop, like Carlyle, had renounced the Puritan faith 
of his ancestors but not its ethics. His duty was clear, and 
he did not decline to give his advice. Herbert Locke, 
going back to , had been unstinting in his assistance 
to him, particularly with regard to a certain annotated 
edition of Beowulf which, in a number of universities, had 
replaced Klaeber’s edition. Locke was now compiling a 
very useful work for the Germanic specialist - an English- 
Anglo-Saxon dictionary that would save readers from the 
often useless examination of etymological dictionaries. 
The Icelander was considerably younger; his insolence 
had earned him everyone’s dislike, including Winthrop’s. 
Einarsson’s critical edition of Maldon had contributed a 
good deal to spreading his name. He was a master of 
polemic, and at the symposium he would cut a better 
figure than the shy, taciturn Locke.
Winthrop was in the midst of these considerations when 
there appeared in the review columns of the Yale Philo- 
logical Quarterly a long article on the teaching of Anglo- 
Saxon. The piece was signed with the giveaway initials 
‘E. E.’ and, as if to allay any doubt, under them it read 
‘University of Texas’. Written in a foreigner’s correct 
English, the article, while not admitting of the least in-


civility, embodied a certain violence. It argued that to 
begin Anglo-Saxon by studying Beowulf, the work of an 
early period but in a pseudo-Virgilian, rhetorical style, 
was as arbitrary as to begin the study of English with the 
elaborate poetry of Milton. Its author advised an inver- 
sion of chronological order, starting, say, with the eleventh- 
century poem ‘The Grave’, in which the everyday lan- 
guage comes through, and then going back to the origins. 
As for Beowulf, some excerpt from its tedious aggregate 
of over three thousand lines was enough - for example, 
the funeral rites of Scyld, who came from the sea and 
returns to the sea. There was no mention of Winthrop’s 
name in the article, but nonetheless he felt himself stiffly 
attacked. This mattered less to him, however, than the 
fact that his teaching method had been impugned.
Only a few days were left. Wanting to be fair, Winthrop 
could not allow Einarsson’s article, which was being 
widely commented upon, to influence his decision. The 
choice between Locke and the Icelander gave him no 
small trouble. Winthrop spoke to Lee Rosenthal, the 
department chairman, one morning, and that same after- 
noon Einarsson was officially named to make the trip to 
Wisconsin.
On the eve of his departure, Einarsson presented himself 
in Ezra Winthrop’s office. He had come to say goodbye 
and to thank Winthrop. One of the windows opened onto 
a tree-lined side street, and the two men were surrounded 
by shelves of books. Einarsson was quick to recognize a 
first edition of the Edda Islandorum, bound in parchment. 
Winthrop told him that he was sure Einarsson would do 
a good job and that he had nothing to thank him for. 
Their conversation, if I am not mistaken, was long.
‘Let’s speak frankly,’ said Einarsson. ‘Everyone knows 
that in honouring me with representing the university, 
Rosenthal is acting upon your advice. I am a good Ger- 
manic scholar; I’ll do my best not to disappoint him.


The tongue of my childhood is the tongue of the sagas, 
and I pronounce Anglo-Saxon better than my British col- 
leagues. My students say “cyning”, not “cunning”. They 
also know that smoking is absolutely forbidden in my 
classes and that they cannot come to them rigged out as 
hippies. As regards my unsuccessful rival, it would be in 
very bad taste were I to criticize him. In his book on the 
kenning he demonstrates not only his research into origi- 
nal sources but also into the pertinent works of Meissner 
and Marquardt. But let’s put all this nonsense aside. I 
owe you a personal explanation.’
Einarsson paused, gave a glance out the window, and 
resumed. ‘I left my country at the end of ,’ he said. 
‘When someone decides to emigrate to a distant land, he 
fatally imposes upon himself the duty of getting on in 
that land. My first two small works, whose nature was 
strictly philological, had no other object than to demon- 
strate my ability. That, obviously, was not enough. I had 
always been interested in the Battle of Maldon, which I 
can repeat from memory - with an occasional slip or two. 
I managed to get Yale to publish my critical edition of it. 
The poem records a Norse victory, as you know, but as 
regards the notion that it may have influenced the later 
Icelandic sagas, I judge that inadmissible and absurd. 
I hinted at this merely to flatter English-speaking 
readers.’
The Icelander held Winthrop in his gaze. ‘I come now 
to the heart of the matter - my polemical piece in the 
Quarterly. As you are aware, it justifies, or tries to justify, 
my system, but it deliberately exaggerates the drawbacks 
of yours, which, in exchange for imposing on the student 
the boredom of three thousand consecutive lines of in- 
tricate verse that narrate a confused story, endows him 
with a large vocabulary, allowing him to enjoy - if by then 
he has not given it up - the entire corpus of Anglo-Saxon 
literature. To go to Wisconsin was my real aim. You and


I, my dear friend, know that these conferences are foolish 
and that they entail pointless expense but that they can 
prove useful in one’s career.’
Winthrop looked at him in surprise. The New Englander 
was an intelligent man, but he tended to take things 
seriously - including conferences and the world, which 
may very well be a cosmic joke.
‘You perhaps remember our first conversation,’ Einars- 
son went on. ‘I had arrived from New York. It was a 
Sunday. The university dining halls were closed, and we 
had lunch at the Nighthawk. I learned a great deal from 
that meeting. As a good European, I had always supposed 
that the American Civil War was a crusade against slave 
owners; you argued that the South was within its rights 
to wish to secede from the Union and to maintain its 
own institutions. To lend greater strength to what you 
were saying, you told me that you were a Northerner and 
that one of your forebears had fought in that war in the 
ranks of Henry Halleck. You also praised the courage of 
the Confederates. I have an unusual flair for making in- 
stant assessments. That morning was enough for me. I 
realized, my dear Winthrop, that you are governed by 
the curious American passion for impartiality. You want, 
above all, to be fair-minded. Precisely because you are a 
Northerner, you attempt to understand and justify the 
South’s cause. As soon as I knew that my trip to Wisconsin 
depended on what you might say to Rosenthal, I pressed 
the Quarterly to get my article into print, knowing that to 
criticize your teaching methods was the best means of 
getting your vote.’
There was a long silence. Winthrop was the first to 
break it. ‘I’m an old friend of Herbert’s, whose work I 
esteem,’ he said. ‘Directly or indirectly, you attacked me. 
To have denied you my vote would have been a sort of 
reprisal. I assessed his merits and yours, and the result 
you already know.’ He added, as if thinking aloud,


‘Maybe I gave in to the vanity of not seeking revenge. As 
you see, your stratagem worked.’
‘Stratagem is the right word,’ Einarsson replied, ‘but I 
do not regret what I did. I shall always act in the best 
interests of our department. Be that as it may, I was 
determined to go to Wisconsin.’
‘My first Viking,’ said Winthrop, looking Einarsson 
straight in the eye.
‘Another romantic superstition. It is not enough to 
be a Scandinavian to have descended from Vikings. My 
forefathers were good pastors of the Evangelical church; 
at the beginning of the tenth century, my ancestors may 
have been good priests of Thor. In my family, as far as 
I know, there were never any seafarers.’
‘There were many in mine,’ Winthrop said. ‘Still, we 
aren’t so different. One sin is common to us both - 
vanity. You pay me this visit to boast of your clever stra- 
tagem; I backed you to boast that I am an upright man.’ 
‘Another thing is common to us,’ said Einarsson. ‘Na- 
tionality. I am an American citizen. My destiny is here, 
not in Ultima Thule. You would say that a passport does 
not change a man’s nature.’
Then, shaking hands, they took leave of each other.


Avelino Arredondo
The event took place in Montevideo in .
Every Saturday, in the way of the honest poor who 
know they cannot invite people home or else are trying 
to escape home, a group of young men occupied the 
same side table at the Café del Globo. They were all 
from Montevideo, and they had found it hard at first to 
make friends with Arredondo, a man from the interior, 
who neither confided in others nor encouraged others to 
confide in him. A little over twenty years old, he was lean 
and dark, rather short, and maybe a bit clumsy. His would 
have been an almost anonymous face had his eyes - at 
one and the same time sleepy and lively - not rescued it. He 
worked as a clerk in a drygoods store on Buenos Aires 
Street, studying law in his spare time. When the others con- 
demned the war that ravaged the country and that, accord- 
ing to general opinion, the president was prolonging for 
unworthy reasons, Arredondo remained silent. He also re- 
mained silent when they made fun of him for being stingy.
A short while after the battle of Cerros Blancos, Arre- 
dondo told his companions that they would not be seeing 
him for a time, since he had to travel to Mercedes. The 
news stirred no one. Somebody told him to watch out 
for the gaucho rabble of Aparicio Saravia, the rebel 
leader of the Whites. With a smile, Arredondo answered 
that he was not afraid of the Whites. The other man, 
who was a White himself, said nothing.


His goodbye to Clara, his fiancée, Arredondo found 
harder. He made it in almost the same words he had used 
with his friends, warning her not to expect letters, as he 
would be very busy. Clara, who was not in the habit of 
writing, accepted the explanation without a protest. The 
two were very much in love.
Arredondo lived on the outskirts of town. He was 
looked after by a mulatto woman who bore the same 
surname as he, since her forebears had been slaves of his 
family many years earlier, at the time of the Great War. 
Clementina was completely trustworthy, and he ordered 
her to tell anyone who came looking for him that he was 
away in the country. He had already collected his last 
pay from the drygoods store.
He moved into a back room of his house - one that 
opened onto the earth-paved third patio. It was a point- 
less measure, but it helped him to initiate his self-imposed 
reclusion. From the narrow iron bed, in which he was 
beginning to take naps again, he looked with a touch of 
melancholy at a bare shelf. He had sold his books - even 
his textbooks. All he had left was a Bible that he had 
never read before and that he would never finish reading.
He leafed through it page by page - sometimes out of 
interest, sometimes out of boredom - and he took upon 
himself the task of learning by heart some chapter or 
other of Exodus and the end of Ecclesiastes. He made no 
effort to understand what he read. He was a freethinker, 
but he never let a single night pass without saying the 
Lord’s Prayer, which, on coming to Montevideo, he had 
promised his mother he would do. To fail in this filial 
promise, he thought, might bring him bad luck.
Arredondo knew that his goal was the morning of the 
twenty-fifth of August. He knew the exact number of 
days he had to get through. Once his goal was attained, 
time would cease, or, rather, nothing that happened after 
that would matter. He awaited the date like someone


awaiting a boon or a liberation. He had let his clock run 
down so as not to be forever looking at it, but every night, 
on hearing the twelve dark strokes of midnight on a town 
clock, he tore a leaf out of the calendar and thought, One
day less.
In the beginning he worked to build up a routine - 
brewing maté, smoking Turkish cigarettes that he rolled 
himself, reading and rereading a set number of pages, 
trying to converse with Clementina when she brought 
him his meals on a tray, and, before putting out the can- 
dle, repeating and embellishing the speech he planned to 
give. Talking to Clementina, a woman well along in years, 
was not at all easy, for her memory had remained rooted 
in the countryside and in its daily life. Arredondo also 
laid out a chessboard, on which he played haphazard games 
that never came to a conclusion. He was missing a rook, 
which he replaced with a bullet or with a two-cent coin.
To fill time, he cleaned his room every morning, chasing 
away spiders with a dustcloth and broom. The mulatto 
woman did not like his doing these menial tasks, which 
were her domain and which, in addition, he was not 
especially good at. He would have preferred waking with 
the sun already high, but his habit of getting up at dawn 
was stronger than his will. He missed his friends a good 
deal but, without feeling bitter about it, he knew that, 
given his invincible reserve, they were not missing him. 
One evening, one of them came to ask for him and was 
turned away from the door. Clementina did not know the 
caller, and Arredondo never learned who it was. He had 
been an avid reader of newspapers, and now he found it 
hard giving up these museums of ephemeral tidbits. He 
was not a man cut out for deep thinking or for deliberating.
His days and his nights were all the same, but Sundays 
weighed most on him. Towards the middle of July, he 
suspected that it had been a mistake to parcel out time, 
which in some way bears us along. Presently, he let his


imagination wander over the length and breadth of Uru- 
guay, then running with blood - over the rolling fields of 
Santa Irene, where he had flown kites; over a certain pinto, 
which by now would be dead; over the dust raised by 
cattle when they are herded by drovers; over the weary 
stagecoach that came from Fray Bentos once a month 
with its hoard of trinkets; over the bay of La Agraciada, 
where the Thirty-Three, the country’s national heroes, 
had disembarked; over the Hervidero; over the hill ranges, 
the woods, and the rivers; over the Cerro, where he had 
climbed up to the lighthouse, thinking that on either bank 
of the Plate there was no other hill like it. From this hill 
overlooking the bay of Montevideo his thoughts passed on 
to the hill of the Uruguayan national emblem, and he fell 
asleep.
Every night the breeze off the sea brought a coolness 
propitious to sleep. He was never wakeful. He loved his 
fiancée completely, but it had been said that a man should 
not think about women - above all when they are not 
there. Life in the country had accustomed him to chastity. 
As for this other business, he tried to think as little as 
possible about the man he hated. The din of the rain on 
the flat roof kept him company.
To a man in jail or to a blind man, time flows down- 
stream, as if along an easy slope. Halfway through his 
reclusion, Arredondo experienced more than once that 
almost timeless time. In the first of the house’s three 
patios there was a cistern with a frog in it. It never occurred 
to Arredondo to think that the frog’s time, which borders 
on eternity, was what he himself sought.
When the date was not far off, his impatience began 
again. One night, unable to bear it any longer, he went 
out into the street. Everything seemed different, larger. 
Turning a corner, he saw a light and entered a saloon. To 
 justify his presence, he ordered a bitter rum. Some sol- 
diers, leaning on the wooden bar, were holding forth.


‘You know it’s absolutely forbidden to give out news of 
battles,’ one of them said. ‘Listen to what happened yes- 
terday evening. This will amuse you. A few of us were 
passing by La Razón, when we heard a voice inside defying 
the order. Losing no time, we marched in. The office was 
pitch-dark, but we riddled with bullets whoever was doing 
the talking. We wanted to drag him out by the heels. 
When it was quiet, we searched the place for him, but 
what we found was one of those machines they call a 
phonograph, which speaks by itself.’
All of them laughed. ‘What do you think of a dodge like 
that, farmer?’ the soldier said to Arredondo, who had 
been eavesdropping. Arredondo kept silent.
The uniformed man brought his face close to Arredon- 
do’s and said, ‘Quick! Let me hear you shout, “Long live 
the president of our country - Juan Idiarte Borda!”’ 
Arredondo did not disobey, and amid mocking applause 
he managed to reach the door. He was in the street when 
a final insult was hurled at him. ‘Fear’s no fool,’ he heard. 
‘It kills anger.’ Arredondo had behaved like a coward, but 
he knew he was not one. Slowly he made his way back 
home.
On the twenty-fifth of August, Avelino Arredondo woke 
up at a little after nine. He thought first of Clara and only 
later of the date. ‘Goodbye to waiting,’ he told himself 
then, relieved. ‘Today’s the day.’
He shaved without hurrying, and in the mirror he found 
his everyday face. He chose a red necktie and put on his 
best clothes. He ate a late lunch. The overcast sky threat- 
ened drizzle. He had always imagined the sky would be 
bright and blue. A touch of sadness came over him as he 
left his damp room for the last time. In the arched entrance- 
way he met Clementina and gave her his few remaining 
pesos. On the sign over the hardware store he saw the 
coloured diamond shapes, meaning paint was sold there, 
and he reflected that for over two months he had not


given them a thought. He walked towards Sarandi Street. 
It was a holiday and very few people were about.
The clock had not struck three when he reached the 
Plaza Matriz. The ‘Te Deum’ was already over. A group 
of dignitaries - government officials, Army officers, and 
prelates - was coming down the slow steps of the church. 
At first sight, the tall hats - some still in hand - the uni- 
forms, the gold braid, the arms, and the tunics created 
the illusion that the group was large; in reality, there were 
no more than about thirty people. Arredondo, who felt 
no fear, was filled with a kind of respect. He asked some- 
one which was the president.
‘You see the archbishop, with his mitre and crosier - the 
one beside him,’ he was told.
Arredondo drew a revolver and opened fire. Idiarte 
Borda took one or two steps, fell headlong, and said dis- 
tinctly, ‘I’ve been shot!’
Arredondo gave himself up to the authorities. Later he 
was to declare, ‘I am a Colorado, a Red, and I say it with 
pride. I’ve killed the president, who betrayed and tainted 
our party. I broke with my friends and my fiancée, so as 
not to implicate them. I did not look at the newspapers, 
so that nobody could say they had incited me. I claim this 
act of justice as my own. Now - let me be judged.’
This is the way it probably happened, although in a more 
involved fashion; this is the way I imagine it happened.


The disk
I am a woodcutter. My name does not matter. The hut 
where I was born and where I shall probably soon die 
stands at the edge of the forest.
It is said of the forest that it stretches as far as the sea, 
which rings the whole earth and on which wooden huts 
like mine wend their way. Never having seen this sea, I 
don’t know. Nor have I ever seen the other side of the 
forest. When we were boys my elder brother made me 
vow that between us we would chop down the entire 
woods until not a single tree was left. My brother died, 
and what I seek now - and what I shall go on seeking - is 
something else. To the west runs a stream that I know 
how to fish with my hands. In the forest there are wolves, 
but wolves do not scare me, and my axe has never been 
untrue to me.
Of my years I have never kept count. I know they are 
many. My eyes no longer see. In the village, where I 
venture no more, since I would lose my way, I am known 
as a miser. But how much treasure can a mere woodcutter 
have laid up?
To keep snow out, I shut tight the door of my house 
with a stone. One evening long ago, I heard laboured foot- 
steps approach, and then a knock. I opened, and a stranger 
came in. He was old and tall, and he was wrapped in a 
threadbare blanket. A scar marked his face. His years 
seemed to have given him more authority than frailty,


but I noticed that he was unable to get about without the 
aid of a staff. We exchanged a few words that I no longer 
remember. At the end, he said, ‘I am homeless and sleep 
wherever I can. I have travelled the length and breadth 
of this land of the Saxons.’
These words testified to his years. My father had always 
spoken of the Saxon land, which nowadays people call 
England.
I had bread and fish. We did not speak a word during 
the meal. Rain began to fall. With a few skins I made him 
a pallet on the earth floor, where my brother had died. 
When night fell, we went to sleep.
Day was dawning when we left the hut. The rain had 
stopped and the ground was covered with new-fallen 
snow. My companion’s staff slipped from his hand and he 
ordered me to pick it up.
‘Why must I obey you?’ I asked him.
‘Because I am a king,’ he answered.
I thought him mad. Picking up the staff, I handed it to 
him. He spoke with a different voice.
‘I am king of the Secgens,’ he said. ‘Often in hard- 
pitched battle I carried my people to victory, but at the 
fateful hour I lost my kingdom. My name is Isern and I 
am of the race of Odin.’
‘I do not worship Odin,’ I said. ‘I worship Christ.’
He went on as if he had not heard me. ‘I travel the paths 
of exile, but I am still king, for I have the disk. Do you 
want to see it?’
He opened the palm of his bony hand. There was no- 
thing in it. Only then did I recall that he had always kept 
the hand closed.
Staring hard at me, he said, ‘You may touch it.’
With a certain misgiving, I touched my fingertips to his 
palm. I felt something cold, and saw a glitter. The hand 
closed abruptly. I said nothing. The man went on patiently, 
as if speaking to a child.


‘It is Odin’s disk,’ he said, ‘It has only one side. In all 
the world there is nothing else with only one side. As long 
as the disk remains mine, I shall be king.’
‘Is it golden?’ I said.
‘I don’t know. It is Odin’s disk and it has only one side.’ 
Then and there I was overcome with greed to own the 
disk. If it were mine, I could trade it for an ingot of gold 
and I would be a king. I said to the vagabond, whom to 
this day I go on hating, ‘In my hut I have buried a box 
of coins. They are of gold and they shine like an axe. If 
you give me Odin’s disk, I’ll trade you the box.’
He said stubbornly, ‘I don’t want to.’
‘Then,’ I said, ‘you may continue on your path.’
He turned his back to me. One blow with the axe at 
the back of his neck was more than enough to bring him 
down, but as he fell his hand opened, and in the air I saw 
the glitter. I took care to mark the spot with my axe, and 
dragged the dead man to the stream, which was running 
high. There I threw him in.
Coming back to my hut, I searched for the disk. I did 
not find it. That was years ago, and I am searching still.


The Book of Sand
Thy rope of sands . . . - George Herbert
The line is made up of an infinite number of points; the 
plane of an infinite number of lines; the volume of an 
infinite number of planes; the hypervolume of an infinite 
number of volumes . . . No, unquestionably this is not - 
more geometrico - the best way of beginning my story. To 
claim that it is true is nowadays the convention of every 
made-up story. Mine, however, is true.
I live alone in a fourth-floor apartment on Belgrano 
Street, in Buenos Aires. Late one evening, a few months 
back, I heard a knock at my door. I opened it and a stran- 
ger stood there. He was a tall man, with nondescript 
features - or perhaps it was my myopia that made them 
seem that way. Dressed in grey and carrying a grey suit- 
case in his hand, he had an unassuming look about him. 
I saw at once that he was a foreigner. At first, he struck 
me as old; only later did I realize that I had been misled 
by his thin blond hair, which was, in a Scandinavian sort 
of way, almost white. During the course of our conver- 
sation, which was not to last an hour, I found out that he 
came from the Orkneys.
I invited him in, pointing to a chair. He paused awhile 
before speaking. A kind of gloom emanated from him - 
as it does now from me.
‘I sell Bibles,’ he said.
Somewhat pedantically, I replied, ‘In this house are 
several English Bibles, including the first - John Wiclif’s.


I also have Cipriano de Valera’s, Luther’s - which, from 
a literary viewpoint, is the worst - and a Latin copy of the 
Vulgate. As you see, it’s not exactly Bibles I stand in need 
of.’
After a few moments of silence, he said, ‘I don’t only 
sell Bibles. I can show you a holy book I came across on 
the outskirts of Bikaner. It may interest you.’
He opened the suitcase and laid the book on a table. It 
was an octavo volume, bound in cloth. There was no 
doubt that it had passed through many hands. Examining 
it, I was surprised by its unusual weight. On the spine 
were the words ‘Holy Writ’ and, below them, ‘Bombay’.
‘Nineteenth-century, probably,’ I remarked.
‘I don’t know,’ he said. ‘I’ve never found out.’
I opened the book at random. The script was strange to 
me. The pages, which were worn and typographically 
poor, were laid out in double columns, as in a Bible. The 
text was closely printed, and it was ordered in versicles. 
In the upper corners of the pages were Arabic numbers. 
I noticed that one left-hand page bore the number (let 
us say) , and the facing right-hand page . I turned 
the leaf; it was numbered with eight digits. It also bore a 
small illustration, like the kind used in dictionaries - an 
anchor drawn with pen and ink, as if by a schoolboy’s 
clumsy hand.
It was at this point that the stranger said, ‘Look at the 
illustration closely. You’ll never see it again.’
I noted my place and closed the book. At once, I re- 
opened it. Page by page, in vain, I looked for the illus- 
tration of the anchor. ‘It seems to be a version of Scrip- 
tures in some Indian language, is it not?’ I said to hide my 
dismay.
‘No,’ he replied. Then, as if confiding a secret, he lowered 
his voice. ‘I acquired the book in a town out on the plain 
in exchange for a handful of rupees and a Bible. Its owner 
did not know how to read. I suspect that he saw the Book


of Books as a talisman. He was of the lowest caste; nobody 
but other untouchables could tread his shadow without 
contamination. He told me his book was called the Book 
of Sand, because neither the book nor the sand has any 
beginning or end.’
The stranger asked me to find the first page.
I laid my left hand on the cover and, trying to put my 
thumb on the flyleaf, I opened the book. It was useless. 
Every time I tried, a number of pages came between the 
cover and my thumb. It was as if they kept growing from 
the book.
‘Now find the last page.’
Again I failed. In a voice that was not mine, I barely 
managed to stammer, ‘This can’t be.’
Still speaking in a low voice, the stranger said, ‘It can’t 
be, but it is. The number of pages in this book is no more 
or less than infinite. None is the first page, none the last. 
I don’t know why they’re numbered in this arbitrary way. 
Perhaps to suggest that the terms of an infinite series ad- 
mit any number.’
Then, as if he were thinking aloud, he said, ‘If space is 
infinite, we may be at any point in space. If time is in- 
finite, we may be at any point in time.’
His speculations irritated me. ‘You are religious, no 
doubt?’ I asked him.
‘Yes, I’m a Presbyterian. My conscience is clear. I am 
reasonably sure of not having cheated the native when I 
gave him the Word of God in exchange for his devilish 
book.’
I assured him that he had nothing to reproach himself 
for, and I asked if he were just passing through this part 
of the world. He replied that he planned to return to his 
country in a few days. It was then that I learned that he 
was a Scot from the Orkney Islands. I told him I had a 
great personal affection for Scotland, through my love of 
Stevenson and Hume.


‘You mean Stevenson and Robbie Burns,’ he corrected.
While we spoke, I kept exploring the infinite book. 
With feigned indifference, I asked, ‘Do you intend to 
offer this curiosity to the British Museum?’
‘No. I’m offering it to you,’ he said, and he stipulated a 
rather high sum for the book.
I answered, in all truthfulness, that such a sum was out 
of my reach, and I began thinking. After a minute or two, 
I came up with a scheme.
‘I propose a swap,’ I said. ‘You got this book for a 
handful of rupees and a copy of the Bible. I’ll offer you 
the amount of my pension cheque, which I’ve just collec- 
ted, and my black-letter Wiclif Bible. I inherited it from 
my ancestors.’
‘A black-letter Wiclif!’ he murmured.
I went to my bedroom and brought him the money and 
the book. He turned the leaves and studied the title page 
with all the fervour of a true bibliophile.
‘It’s a deal,’ he said.
It amazed me that he did not haggle. Only later was I 
to realize that he had entered my house with his mind 
made up to sell the book. Without counting the money, 
he put it away.
We talked about India, about Orkney, and about the 
Norwegian jarls who once ruled it. It was night when the 
man left. I have not seen him again, nor do I know his 
name.
I thought of keeping the Book of Sand in the space left 
on the shelf by the Wiclif, but in the end I decided to 
hide it behind the volumes of a broken set of The Thou- 
sand and One Nights. I went to bed and did not sleep. 
At three or four in the morning, I turned on the light. 
I got down the impossible book and leafed through its 
pages. On one of them I saw engraved a mask. The upper 
corner of the page carried a number, which I no longer 
recall, elevated to the ninth power.


I showed no one my treasure. To the luck of owning it 
was added the fear of having it stolen, and then the mis- 
giving that it might not truly be infinite. These twin pre- 
occupations intensified my old misanthropy. I had only 
a few friends left; I now stopped seeing even them. A 
prisoner of the book, I almost never went out anymore. 
After studying its frayed spine and covers with a magni- 
fying glass, I rejected the possibility of a contrivance of 
any sort. The small illustrations, I verified, came two 
thousand pages apart. I set about listing them alphabetic- 
ally in a notebook, which I was not long in filling up. 
Never once was an illustration repeated. At night, in the 
meagre intervals my insomnia granted, I dreamed of the 
book.
Summer came and went, and I realized that the book 
was monstrous. What good did it do me to think that I, 
who looked upon the volume with my eyes, who held it 
in my hands, was any less monstrous? I felt that the book 
was a nightmarish object, an obscene thing that affronted 
and tainted reality itself.
I thought of fire, but I feared that the burning of an 
infinite book might likewise prove infinite and suffocate 
the planet with smoke. Somewhere I recalled reading that 
the best place to hide a leaf is in a forest. Before retire- 
ment, I worked on Mexico Street, at the Argentine Na- 
tional Library, which contains nine hundred thousand 
volumes. I knew that to the right of the entrance a curved 
staircase leads down into the basement, where books and 
maps and periodicals are kept. One day I went there and, 
slipping past a member of the staff and trying not to notice 
at what height or distance from the door, I lost the Book 
of Sand on one of the basement’s musty shelves.


Afterword
Prefacing stories a reader has not yet read, since it de- 
mands the analysis of plots that it may be inconvenient 
to deal with in advance, is a somewhat impossible task. I 
therefore prefer an afterword.
The book’s first story takes up the old theme of the 
double, which several times moved Robert Louis Steven- 
son’s ever-fortunate pen. In England, its name is ‘fetch’ 
or, more bookishly, ‘wraith of the living’; in Germany, 
‘Doppelgänger’. One of its earliest names, I suspect, was 
‘alter ego’. This ghostly apparition probably came from 
mirrors of metal or from reflections in water or simply 
from memory, which makes of anyone both a spectator 
and an actor. In ‘The Other’, I had to ensure that the 
speakers were sufficiently different to be two persons and 
alike enough to be one. Is it worth stating that the idea 
for the story came to me in Cambridge on the banks of 
the Charles River, whose cold course reminded me of the 
far-off course of the Rhone?
The theme of love is quite common in my poems but 
not in my prose, which offers no other example than 
‘Ulrike’. The reader will notice its formal affinity with 
‘The Other’.
‘The Congress’ is perhaps the most ambitious of the 
tales in this book; its subject is that of an enterprise so 
vast that in the end it becomes confused with the world 
itself and with the sum of daily life. Its opaque beginning


tries to imitate that of a Kafka story; its end tries, doubt- 
less in vain, to match the ecstasies of Chesterton and John 
Bunyan. I have never been worthy of such a revelation, 
but I managed to dream one up. I have woven into the 
story - as is my habit - a number of autobiographical 
elements.
Life, which everyone knows is inscrutable, left me no 
peace until I perpetrated a posthumous story by H. P. 
Lovecraft, a writer whom I have always considered an 
unconscious parodist of Poe. In the end, I gave in; the 
lamentable fruit is entitled ‘There Are More Things’.
‘The Sect of the Thirty’ salvages, without a shred of 
documentation, the tale of a possible heresy.
‘The Night of the Gifts’ is perhaps the most innocent, 
most violent, and most exalted story offered by this 
collection.
An earlier story of mine, ‘The Library of Babel’ (), 
imagines an infinite number of books; ‘Undr’ and ‘The 
Mirror and the Mask’, centuries-old literatures that are 
made up of a single line or word.
‘Utopia of a Tired Man’ is in my judgement the most 
honest and melancholy piece in the collection.
I have always been amazed by the ethical obsession of 
Americans. ‘The Bribe’ attempts to reflect this trait.
In spite of John Felton, Charlotte Corday, the well- 
known opinion of Rivera Indarte (‘It is a holy act to kill 
Rosas’), and the Uruguayan National Anthem (‘If they 
are tyrants, Brutus’ dagger’), I do not approve of political 
assassination. Be that as it may, readers of Avelino Arre- 
dondo’s solitary crime might wish to know the story’s out- 
come. The historian Luis Melián Lafinur asked for 
Arredondo’s pardon, but his judges Carlos Fein and 
Cristóbal Salvanach sentenced him to a month in solitary 
confinement and five years’ imprisonment. One of the 
streets of Montevideo now bears Arredondo’s name.
Two opposite and inconceivable concepts are the subjects


of the last two stories. ‘The Disk’ is about the Euclidean 
circle, which has only one side; ‘The Book of Sand’, a 
volume of incalculable pages.
I hope that these hasty notes I have just dictated do not 
exhaust this book and that its dreams go on branching 
out in the hospitable imagination of those who now close 
it.
Buenos Aires,  February  
J. L. B.


Selected later poems translated by Alastair Reid
The Gold of the Tigers


Preface to The Gold of the Tigers
For anyone who has lived out seventy years, according to 
the Book of David, there is little to hope for except to go 
on plying familiar skills, with an occasional mild varia- 
tion and with tedious repetitions. To escape, or possibly 
to extenuate, that monotony, I chose to admit, perhaps 
with rash hospitality, the miscellaneous interests that 
crossed my everyday writer’s attention. Parable follows 
on the heels of confession, free or blank verse on the son- 
net. In the earliest times, which were so susceptible to 
vague speculation and the inevitable ordering of the 
universe, there can have existed no division between the 
poetic and the prosaic. Everything must have been tinged 
with magic. Thor was not the god of thunder; he was 
the thunder and the god.
For a true poet, every moment of existence, every act, 
ought to be poetic since, in essence, it is so. As far as I 
know, no one to this day has attained that high state of 
awareness. Browning and Blake got closer to it than any- 
one else. Whitman aimed in that direction, but his careful 
enumerations do not always rise above a kind of crude 
cataloguing.
I distrust literary schools, which I judge to be didactic 
constructs designed to simplify what they preach; but if 
I were obliged to name the influence behind my poems, 
I would say they stemmed from modernismo - that enor- 
mous liberation that gave new life to the many litera-


tures that use the Castilian language, and that certainly 
carried as far as Spain. I have spoken more than once 
with Leopoldo Lugones - that solitary, proud man - and 
he would interrupt the flow of the conversation to men- 
tion ‘my friend and master, Rubén Darío’. (I think, 
furthermore, that we ought to emphasize the affinities 
within our language, and not its regional differences.)
My reader will notice, in some pages, a philosophical 
preoccupation. It has been with me since my childhood, 
when my father showed me, with the help of a chessboard 
(it was, I remember, a cedarwood board), the paradox of 
the race between Achilles and the tortoise.
As for the influences that show up in this volume . . . 
First, the writers I prefer - I have already mentioned 
Robert Browning; next, those I have read and whom I 
echo; then, those I have never read but who are in me. 
A language is a tradition, a way of grasping reality, not 
an arbitrary assemblage of symbols.
Buenos Aires,  
J. L. B.


Preface to The Unending Rose
The romantic notion of a Muse who inspires poets was 
advanced by classical writers; the classical idea of the 
poem as a function of the intelligence was put forward by 
a romantic, Poe, around . The fact is paradoxical. 
Apart from isolated cases of oneiric inspiration - the shep- 
herd’s dream referred to by Bede, the famous dream of 
Coleridge - it is obvious that both doctrines are partially 
true, unless they correspond to distinct stages in the 
process. (For Muse, we must read what the Hebrews and 
Milton called Spirit, and what our own woeful mythology 
refers to as the Subconscious.) In my own case, the 
process is more or less unvarying. I begin with the 
glimpse of a form, a kind of remote island, which will 
eventually be a story or a poem. I see the end and I see 
the beginning, but not what is in between. That is gra- 
dually revealed to me, when the stars or chance are 
propitious. More than once, I have to retrace my steps 
by way of the shadows. I try to interfere as little as pos- 
sible in the evolution of the work. I do not want it to be 
distorted by my opinions, which are the most trivial 
things about us. The notion of art as compromise is a 
simplification, for no one knows entirely what he is doing. 
A writer can conceive a fable, Kipling acknowledged, 
without grasping its moral. He must be true to his imagi- 
nation, and not to the mere ephemeral circumstances of 
a supposed ‘reality’.


Literature starts out from poetry and can take centuries 
to arrive at the possibility of prose. After four hundred 
years, the Anglo-Saxons left behind a poetry which was 
not just occasionally admirable and a prose which was 
scarcely explicit. The word must have been in the be- 
ginning a magic symbol, which the usury of time wore 
out. The mission of the poet should be to restore to the 
word, at least in a partial way, its primitive and now 
secret force. All verse should have two obligations: to 
communicate a precise instance and to touch us physic- 
ally, as the presence of the sea does. I have here an ex- 
ample from Virgil:
sunt lacrymae rerum et mentem mortalia tangunt
One from Meredith:
Not till the fire is dying in the grate 
Look we for any kinship with the stars
Or this alexandrine from Lugones, in which the Spanish 
is trying to return to the Latin:
El hombre numeroso de penas y de días.
Such verses move along their shifting path in the memory. 
After so many - too many - years of practising literature, 
I do not profess any aesthetic. Why add to the natural 
limits which habit imposes on us those of some theory 
or other? Theories, like convictions of a political or 
religious nature, are nothing more than stimuli. They vary 
for every writer. Whitman was right to do away with 
rhyme; that negation would have been stupid in Victor 
Hugo’s case.
Going over the proofs of this book, I notice with some 
distaste that blindness plays a mournful role, which it


does not play in my life. Blindness is a confinement, but 
it is also a liberation, a solitude propitious to invention, 
a key and an algebra.
June,  
J.L.B.


Tankas

Alto en la cumbre 
todo el jardín es luna, 
luna de oro.
Más precioso es el roce 
de tu boca en la sombra.

La voz del ave
que la penumbra esconde
ha enmudecido.
Andas por tu jardín.
Algo, lo sé, te falta.

La ajena copa, 
la espada que fue espada 
en otra mano, 
la luna de la calle,
¿dime, acaso no bastan?

Bajo la luna
el tigre de oro y sombra 
mira sus garras.
No sabe que en el alba 
han destrozado un hombre.


Tankas

High on the summit, 
the garden is all moonlight, 
the moon is golden.
More precious is the contact 
of your lips in the shadow.

The sound of a bird 
which the twilight is hiding 
has fallen silent.
You pace the garden.
I know that you miss something.

The curious goblet,
the sword which was a sword once
in another grasp,
the moonlight on the street -
tell me, are they not enough?

Underneath the moon, 
tiger of gold and shadow 
looks down at his claws, 
unaware that in the dawn 
they lacerated a man.



Triste la lluvia
que sobre el mármol cae,
triste ser tierra.
Triste no ser los días
del hombre, el sueño, el alba.

No haber caído, 
como otros de mi sangre, 
en la batalla.
Ser en la vana noche 
él que cuenta las sílabas.



Wistful is the rain 
falling upon the marble, 
sad to become earth, 
sad no longer to be part 
of man, of dream, of morning.

Not to have fallen, 
like others of my lineage, 
cut down in battle.
To be in the fruitless night 
he who counts the syllables.


Susana Bombal
Alta en la tarde, altiva y alabada, 
cruza el casto jardín y está en la exacta 
luz del instante irreversible y puro 
que nos da este jardín y la alta imagen 
silenciosa. La veo aquí y ahora, 
pero también la veo en un antiguo 
crepúsculo de Ur de los Caldeos 
o descendiendo por las lentas gradas 
de un templo, que es innumerable polvo 
del planeta y que fue piedra y soberbia, 
o descifrando el mágico alfabeto 
de las estrellas de otras latitudes 
o aspirando una rosa en Inglaterra.
Está donde haya música, en el leve 
azul, en el hexámetro del griego, 
en nuestras soledades que la buscan, 
en el espejo de agua de la fuente, 
en el mármol de tiempo, en una espada, 
en la serenidad de una terraza 
que divisa ponientes y jardines.
Y detrás de los mitos y las máscaras, 
el alma, que está sola.


Susana Bombal
Tall in the evening, arrogant, aloof, 
she crosses the chaste garden and is caught 
in the shutter of that pure and fleeting instant 
which gives to us this garden and this vision, 
unspeaking, deep. I see her here and now, 
but simultaneously I also see her 
haunting an ancient, twilit Ur of the Chaldees 
or coming slowly down the shallow steps, 
a temple, which was once proud stone but now 
has turned to an infinity of dust, 
or winkling out the magic alphabet 
locked in the stars of other latitudes, 
or breathing in a rose’s scent, in England.
She is where music is, and in the gentle 
blue of the sky, in Greek hexameters, 
and in our solitudes, which seek her out.
She is mirrored in the water of the fountain, 
in time’s memorial marble, in a sword, 
in the serene air of a patio, 
looking out on sunsets and on gardens.
And underneath the myths and the masks, 
her soul, always alone.


Cosas
El volumen caído que los otros 
ocultan en la hondura del estante 
y que los días y las noches cubren 
de lento polvo silencioso. El ancla 
de sidón que los mares de Inglaterra 
oprimen en su abismo ciego y blando.
El espejo que no repite a nadie 
cuando la casa se ha quedado sola.
Las limaduras de uña que dejamos 
a lo largo del tiempo y del espacio.
El polvo indescifrable que fue Shakespeare. 
Las modificaciones de la nube.
La simétrica rosa momentánea 
que el azar dio una vez a los ocultos 
cristales del pueril calidoscopio.
Los remos de Argos, la primera nave.
Las pisadas de arena que la ola 
soñolienta y fatal borra en la playa.
Los colores de Turner cuando apagan 
las luces en la recta galería 
y no resuena un paso en la alta noche.
El revés del prolijo mapamundi.
La tenue telaraña en la pirámide.
La piedra ciega y la curiosa mano.
El sueño que he tenido antes del alba 
y que olvidé cuando clareaba el día.
El principio y el fin de la epopeya 
de Finsburh, hoy unos contados versos 
de hierro, no gastado por los siglos.
La letra inversa en el papel secante.
La tortuga en el fondo del aljibe.


Things
The fallen volume; hidden by the others 
from sight in the recesses of the bookshelves, 
and which the days and nights muffle over 
with slow and noiseless dust. Also, the anchor 
of Sidon, which the seas surrounding England 
press down into its blind and soft abyss.
The mirror which shows nobody’s reflection 
after the house has long been left alone.
Fingernail filings which we leave behind 
across the long expanse of time and space.
The indecipherable dust, once Shakespeare.
The changing figurations of a cloud.
The momentary but symmetric rose
which once, by chance, took substance in the shrouded
mirrors of a boy’s kaleidoscope.
The oars of Argus, the original ship.
The sandy footprints which the fatal wave 
as though asleep erases from the beach.
The colours of a Turner when the lights 
are turned out in the narrow gallery 
and not a footstep sounds in the deep night.
The other side of the dreary map of the world.
The tenuous spiderweb in the pyramid.
The sightless stone and the inquiring hand.
The dream I had in the approaching dawn 
and later lost in the clearing of the day.
The ending and beginning oí the epic 
of Finsburh, today a few sparse verses 
of iron, unwasted by the centuries.
The mirrored letter on the blotting paper.
The turtle in the bottom of the cistern.


Lo que no puede ser. El otro cuerno 
del unicornio. El Ser que es Tres y es Uno. 
El disco triangular. El inasible 
instante en que la flecha del eleata, 
inmóvil en el aire, da en el blanco.
La flor entre las páginas de Becquer.
El péndulo que el tiempo ha detenido.
El acero que Odín clavó en el árbol.
El texto de las no cortadas hojas.
El eco de los cascos de la carga 
de Junín, que de algún eterno modo 
no ha cesado y es parte de la trama.
La sombra de Sarmiento en las aceras.
La voz que oyó el pastor en lá montaña.
La osamenta blanqueando en el desierto.
La bala que mató a Francisco Borges.
El otro lado del tapiz. Las cosas
que nadie mira, salvo el Dios de Berkeley.


And that which cannot be. The other horn 
of the unicorn. The Being, Three in One.
The triangular disk. The imperceptible moment 
in which the Eleatic arrow, 
motionless in the air, reaches the mark.
The violet pressed between the leaves of Becquer. 
The pendulum which time has stayed in place. 
The weapon Odin buried in the tree.
The volume with its pages still unslit.
The echo of the hoofbeats at the charge 
of Junin, which in some enduring mode 
never has ceased, is part of the webbed scheme. 
The shadow of Sarmiento on the sidewalks.
The voice heard by the shepherd on the mountain. 
The skeleton bleaching white in the desert.
The bullet which shot dead Francisco Borges.
The other side of the tapestry. The things 
which no one sees, except for Berkeley’s God.


El amenazado
Es el amor. Tendré que ocultarme o que huir.
Crecen los muros de su cárcel, como en un sueño atroz. 
La hermosa máscara ha cambiado, pero como siempre 
es la única. ¿De qué me servirán mis talismanes: el 
ejercicio de las letras, la vaga erudición, el aprendizaje 
de las palabras que usó el áspero Norte para cantar sus 
mares y sus espadas, la serena amistad, las galerías de la 
Biblioteca, las cosas comunes, los hábitos, el joven amor 
de mi madre, la sombra militar de mis muertos, la 
noche intemporal, el sabor del sueño?
Estar contigo o no estar contigo es la medida de mi 
tiempo.
Ya el cántaro se quiebra sobre la fuente, ya el hombre se 
levanta a la voz del ave, ya se han oscurecido los que 
miran por las ventanas, pero la sombra no ha traído la 
paz.
Es, ya lo sé, el amor: la ansieded y el alivio de oír tu voz. 
la espera y la memoria, el horror de vivir en lo sucesivo,
Es el amor con sus mitologías, con sus pequeñas magias 
inútiles.
Hay una esquina por la que no me atrevo a pasar.
Ya los ejércitos me cercan, las hordas.
(Esta habitación es irreal; ella no la ha visto.)
El nombre de una mujer me delata.
Me duele una mujer en todo el cuerpo.


The threatened one
It is love. I will have to hide or flee.
Its prison walls grow larger, as in a fearful dream. The 
alluring mask has changed, but as usual it is the only 
one. What use now are my talismans, my touchstones: 
the practice of literature, vague learning, an apprentice- 
ship to the language used by the flinty Northland to sing 
of its seas and its swords, the serenity of friendship, the 
galleries of the Library, ordinary things, habits, the 
young love of my mother, the soldierly shadow cast by 
my dead ancestors, the timeless night, the flavour of 
sleep and dream?
Being with you or without you is how I measure my time.
Now the water jug shatters above the spring, now the man 
rises to the sound of birds, now those who look through 
the windows are indistinguishable, but the darkness has 
not brought peace.
It is love, I know it; the anxiety and relief at hearing your 
voice, the hope and the memory, the horror at living in 
succession.
It is love with its own mythology, its minor and pointless 
magic.
There is a street corner I do not dare to pass.
Now the armies surround me, the rabble.
(This room is unreal. She has not seen it.)
A woman’s name has me in thrall.
A woman’s being afflicts my whole body.


Tú
Un solo hombre ha nacido, un solo hombre ha muerto en 
la tierra.
Afirmar lo contrario es mera estadística, es una adición 
imposible.
No menos imposible que sumar el olor de la lluvia y el 
sueño que antenoche soñaste.
Ese hombre es Ulises, Abel, Caín, el primer hombre que 
ordenó las constalaciones, el hombre que erigió la primera 
pirámide, el hombre que escribió los hexagramas del 
Libro de los Cambios, el forjador que grabó runas en 
la espada de Hengist, el arquero Einar Tamberskelver, 
Luis de León, el librero que engendró a Samuel Johnson, 
el jardinero de Voltaire, Darwin en la proa del Beagle, 
un judío en la cámara letal, con el tiempo, tú y yo.
Un solo hombre ha muerto en Ilión, en el Metauro, en 
Hastings, en Austerlitz, en Trafalgar, en Gettysburg.
Un solo hombre ha muerto en los hospitales, en barcos, 
en la ardua soledad, en la alcoba del hábito y del amor.
Un solo hombre ha mirado la vasta aurora.
Un solo hombre ha sentido en el paladar la frescura del 
agua, el sabor de las frutas y de la carne.
Hablo del único, del uno, del que siempre está solo.


You
In all the world, one man has been born, one man has 
died.
To insist otherwise is nothing more than statistics, an 
impossible extension.
No less impossible than bracketing the smell of rain with 
your dream of two nights ago.
That man is Ulysses, Abel, Cain, the first to make con- 
stellations of the stars, to build the first pyramid, the 
man who contrived the hexagrams of the Book of 
Changes, the smith who engraved runes on the sword of 
Hengist, Einar Tamberskelver the archer, Luis de León, 
the bookseller who fathered Samuel Johnson, Voltaire’s 
gardener, Darwin aboard the Beagle, a Jew in the death 
chamber, and, in time, you and I.
One man alone has died at Troy, at Metaurus, at Hastings, 
at Austerlitz, at Trafalgar, at Gettysburg.
One man alone has died in hospitals, in boats, in painful 
solitude, in the rooms of habit and of love.
One man alone has looked on the enormity of dawn.
One man alone has felt on his tongue the fresh quenching 
of water, the flavour of fruit and of flesh.
I speak of the unique, the single man, he who is always 
alone.


Poema de la cantidad
Pienso en el parco cielo puritano 
de solitarias y perdidas luces 
que Emerson miraría tantas noches 
desde la nieve y el rigor de Concord. 
Aquí son demasiadas las estrellas.
El hombre es demasiado. Las innúmeras 
generaciones de aves y de insectos, 
del jaguar constelado y de la sierpe, 
de ramas que se tejen y entretejen, 
del café, de la arena y de las hojas 
oprimen las mañanas y prodigan 
su minucioso laberinto inútil.
Acaso cada hormiga que pisamos 
es única ante Dios, que la precisa 
para la ejecución de las puntuales 
leyes que rigen Su curioso mundo.
Si así no fuera, el universo entero 
sería un error y un oneroso caos.
Los espejos del ébano y del agua, 
el espejo inventivo de los sueños, 
los líquenes, los peces, las madréporas, 
las filas de tortugas en el tiempo, 
las luciérnagas de una sola tarde, 
las dinastías de las araucarias, 
las perfiladas letras de un volumen 
que la noche no borra, son sin duda 
no menos personales y enigmáticas 
que yo, que las confundo. No me atrevo 
a juzgar a la lepra o a Calígula.


Poem of quantity
I think of the stark and puritanical sky 
with its remote and solitary stars 
which Emerson so many nights would look at 
from the snow-bound severity of Concord. 
Here, the night sky overflows with stars.
Man is too numerous. Endless generations 
of birds and insects, multiplying themselves, 
of serpents and the spotted jaguar, 
of growing branches, weaving, interweaving, 
of grains of sand, of coffee and of leaves 
descend on every day and recreate 
their minuscule and useless labyrinth.
It may be every ant we trample on 
is single before God, Who counts on it 
for the unfolding of the measured laws 
which regulate His curious universe.
The entire system, if it was not so,
would be an error and a weighty chaos.
Mirrors of water, mirrors of ebony,
the all-inventive mirror of our dreams,
lichens, fishes, and the riddled coral,
the clawmarks left by tortoises in time,
the fireflies of a single afternoon,
the dynasties of the Auraucarians,
the delicate shapes of letters in a volume
which night does not blot out, unquestionably
are no less personal and enigmatic
than I, who mix them up. I would not venture
to judge the lepers or Caligula.


El centinela
Entra la luz y me recuerdo; ahí está.
Empieza por decirme su nombre, que es (ya se entiende) 
el mío.
Vuelvo a la esclavitud que ha durado más de siete veces 
diez años.
Me impone su memoria.
Me impone las miserias de cada día, la condición humana.
Soy su viejo enfermero; me obliga a que le lave los pies.
Me acecha en los espejos, en la caoba, en los cristales de 
las tiendas.
Una u otra mujer lo han rechazado y debo compartir su 
congoja.
Me dicta ahora este poema, que no me gusta.
Me exige el nebuloso aprendizaje del terco anglosajón.
Me ha convertido al culto idolátrico de militares muertos, 
con los que acaso no podría cambiar una sola palabra.
En el último tramo de la escalera siento que está a mi lado.
Está en mis pasos, en mi voz.
Minuciosamente lo odio.
Advierto con fruición que casi no ve.
Estoy en una celda circular y el infinito muro se estrecha.
Ninguno de los dos engaña al otro, pero los dos mentimos.
Nos conocemos demasiado, inseparable hermano.
Bebes el agua de mi copa y devoras mi pan.
La puerta del suicida está abierta, pero los teólogos afirman 
que en la sombra ulterior del otro reino estaré yo, 
esperándome.


The watcher
The light enters and I remember who I am; he is there.
He begins by telling me his name which (it should now be 
clear) is mine.
I revert to the servitude which has lasted more than seven 
times ten years.
He saddles me with his rememberings.
He saddles me with the miseries of every day, the human 
condition.
I am his old nurse; he requires me to wash his feet.
He spies on me in mirrors, in mahogany, in shop windows.
One or another woman has rejected him, and I must share 
his anguish.
He dictates to me now this poem, which I do not like.
He insists I apprentice myself tentatively to the stubborn 
Anglo-Saxon.
He has won me over to the hero worship of dead soldiers, 
people with whom I could scarcely exchange a single 
word.
On the last flight of stairs, I feel him at my side.
He is in my footsteps, in my voice.
Down to the last detail, I abhor him.
I am gratified to remark that he can hardly see.
I am in a circular cell and the infinite wall is closing in.
Neither of the two deceives the other, but we both lie.
We know each other too well, inseparable brother.
You drink the water from my cup and you wolf down my 
bread.
The door to suicide is open, but theologians assert that, in 
the subsequent shadows of the other kingdom, there will 
I be, waiting for myself.


Al idioma alemán
Mi destino es la lengua castellana, 
el bronce de Francisco de Quevedo, 
pero en la lenta noche caminada 
me exaltan otras músicas más intimas. 
Alguna me fue dada por la sangre - 
oh voz de Shakespeare y de la Escritura 
otras por el azar, que es dadivoso, 
pero a ti, dulce lengua de Alemania, 
te he elegido y buscado, solitario.
A través de vigilias y gramáticas, 
de la jungla de las declinaciones, 
del diccionario, que no acierta nunca 
con el matiz preciso, fui acercándome. 
Mis noches están llenas de Virgilio, 
dije una vez; también pude haber dicho 
de Hölderlin y de Angelus Silesius. 
Heine me dio sus altos ruiseñores; 
Goethe, la suerte de un amor tardío, 
a la vez indulgente y mercenario;
Keller, la rosa que una mano deja 
en la mano de un muerto que la amaba 
y que nunca sabrá si es blanca o roja. 
Tú, lengua de Alemania, eres tu obra 
capital: el amor entrelazado 
de las voces compuestas, las vocales 
abiertas, los sonidos que permiten 
el estudioso hexámetro del griego 
y tu rumor de selvas y de noches.
Te tuve alguna vez. Hoy, en la linde 
de los años cansados, te diviso 
lejana como el álgebra y la luna.


To the German language
My destiny is in the Spanish language, 
the bronze words of Francisco de Quevedo, 
but in the long, slow progress of the night, 
different, more intimate musics move me.
Some have been handed down to me by blood - 
voices of Shakespeare, language of the Scriptures - 
others by chance, which has been generous; 
but you, gentle language of Germany,
I chose you, and I sought you out alone.
By way of grammar books and patient study, 
through the thick undergrowth of the declensions, 
the dictionary, which never puts its thumb on 
the precise nuance, I kept moving closer.
My nights were full of overtones of Virgil,
I once said; but I could as well have named 
Hölderlin, Angelus Silesius.
Heine lent me his lofty nightingales;
Goethe, the good fortune of late love, 
at the same time both greedy and indulgent; 
Keller, the rose which one hand leaves behind 
in the closed fist of a dead man who adored it, 
who will never know if it is white or red.
German language, you are your masterpiece: 
love interwound in all your compound voices 
and open vowels, sounds which accommodate 
the studious hexameters of Greek 
and undercurrents of jungles and of nights.
Once, I had you. Now, at the far extreme 
of weary years, I feel you have become 
as out of reach as algebra and the moon.



Apenas lo entreveo y ya lo pierdo. 
Ajustado el decente traje negro 
y con una chalina como todas, 
la frente angosta y el bigote ralo, 
camina entre la gente de la tarde 
ensimismado y sin mirar a nadie.
En una esquina de la calle Piedras 
pide una caña brasilera. El hábito. 
Alguien le grita adiós. No le contesta. 
Hay en los ojos un rencor antiguo.
Otra cuadra. Una racha de milonga 
le llega desde un patio. Esos changangos 
están siempre amolando la paciencia, 
pero al andar se hamaca y no lo sabe. 
Sube la mano y palpa la firmeza 
del puñal en la sisa del chaleco.
Va a cobrarse una deuda. Falta poco. 
Unos pasos y el hombre se detiene.
En el zaguán hay una flor de cardo.
Oye el golpe del balde en el aljibe 
y una voz que conoce demasiado. 
Empuja la cancel que aún está abierta 
como si lo esperaran. Esta noche 
tal vez ya lo habrán muerto.



I catch a glimpse of him and then I lose him - 
best black suit well-brushed and narrow-fitting, 
nondescript neckerchief around the throat, 
narrow forehead, straggling moustache, 
he walks among the people of the evening, 
lost in himself, not seeing anyone.
At a corner counter on the Calle Piedras 
he takes a shot of spirits, out of habit.
Someone calls out to him. He doesn’t answer. 
Behind his eyes, an old resentment smoulders. 
Another block. A fragment of milonga 
falls from a patio. Those cheap guitars 
keep gnawing at the edges of his temper, 
but still, his walk keeps time, unconsciously.
He lifts his hand and pats the solid handle 
of the dagger in the collar of his waistcoat.
He goes to reclaim a debt. It is not far.
A few steps, and the man stops in his walking.
In the passageway, there is a flowering thistle.
He hears the clunk of a bucket in the cistern 
and a voice already too well-known to him.
He pushes the far door, which is already open 
as though he were expected. This very evening 
perhaps they will have shown him his own death.


Milonga de Manuel Flores
Manuel Flores va a morir.
Eso es moneda corriente; 
morir es una costumbre 
que sabe tener la gente.
Y sin embargo me duele 
decircle adiós a la vida, 
esa cosa tan de siempre, 
tan dulce y tan conocida.
Miro en el alba mi mano, 
miro en la mano las venas; 
con extrañeza las miro 
como si fueran ajenas.
Mañana vendrá la bala 
y con la bala el olvido.
Lo dijo el sabio Merlín: 
morir es haber nacido.
¡Cuánta cosa en su camino 
Estos ojos habrán visto!
Quién sabe lo que verán 
después que me juzgue Cristo.
Manuel Flores va a morir.
Eso es moneda corriente; 
morir es una costumbre 
que sabe tener la gente.


Milonga of Manuel Flores
Manuel Flores is doomed to die. 
That’s as sure as your money. 
Dying is a custom 
well-known to many.
But even so, it pains me 
to say goodbye to living, 
that state so well-known now, 
so sweet, so solid-seeming.
I look at my hand in the dawning. 
I look at the veins contained there. 
I look at them in amazement 
as I would look at a stranger.
Tomorrow comes the bullet, 
oblivion descending.
Merlin the magus said it: 
being born has an ending.
So much these eyes have seen, 
such things, such places!
Who knows what they will see 
when I’ve been judged by Jesus.
Manuel Flores is doomed to die. 
That’s as sure as your money. 
Dying is a custom 
well-known to many.


El sueño de Pedro Henríquez Ureña
El sueño que Pedro Henríquez Ureña tuvo en el alba de 
uno de los días de  curiosamente no constaba de 
imágenes sino de pausadas palabras. La voz que las decía 
no era la suya pero se parecía a la suya. El tono, pese a las 
posibilidades patéticas que el tema permitía, era imper- 
sonal y común. Durante el sueño, que fue breve, Pedro 
sabía que estaba durmiendo en su cuarto y que su mujer 
estaba a su lado. En la obscuridad el sueño le dijo:
Hará unas cuantas noches, en una esquina de la calle 
Córdoba, discutiste con Borges la invocación del Anónimo 
Sevillano Oh Muerte, ven callada como sueles venir en la 
saeta. Sospecharon que era el eco deliberado de algún 
texto latino, ya que esas translaciones correspondían a los 
hábitos de una época, del todo ajena a nuestro concepto 
del plagio, sin duda menos literario que comercial. Lo 
que no sospecharon, lo que no podían sospechar, es que 
el diálogo era profético. Dentro de unas horas, te apre- 
surarás por el último andén de Constitución, para dictar 
tu clase en la Universidad de La Plata. Alcanzarás el tren, 
pondrás la cartera en la red y te acomodarás en tu asiento, 
junto a la ventanilla. Alguien, cuyo nombre no sé pero 
cuya cara estoy viendo, te dirigirá unas palabras. No le 
contestarás, porque estarás muerto. Ya te habrás des- 
pedido como siempre de tu mujer y de tus hijas. No 
recordarás este sueño porque tu olvido es necesario para 
que se cumplan los hechos.


The dream of Pedro Henríquez Ureña
The dream which Pedro Henríquez Ureña dreamed close 
to dawn one day in  consisted, oddly enough, not of 
images but of slow, specific words. The voice which spoke 
them was not his own, but resembled it. Its tone, in spite 
of the mournful possibilities implicit in what it said, was 
impersonal and matter-of-fact. During the dream, which 
was short, Pedro knew that he was asleep in his own 
room, with his wife at his side. In the dark, the dream 
addressed him:
Some nights ago, on a corner of the Calle Córboda, you 
discussed with Borges the invocation of the Anonymous 
One of Seville: ‘O Death come in silence as you are wont 
to do in the hands of the clock.’ You both suspected it to 
be the deliberate echo of some Latin text, inasmuch as 
these transliterations corresponded with the habits of a 
particular time, totally outside our own notions of plagiar- 
ism, unquestionably less literary than practical. What you 
did not suspect, what you could not suspect, is that the 
dialogue was a prophetic one. In a few hours, you will be 
hurrying along the last platform of Constitution Station, 
to give your class at the University of La Plata. You will 
catch the train, put your briefcase on the rack and settle 
in your seat, beside the window. Someone, whose name 
I do not know but whose face I am seeing, will address 
some words to you. You will not reply, because you will 
be dead. You will already have said goodbye, as usual, 
to your wife and children. You will not remember this 
dream, because your forgetting is necessary to the fulfil- 
ment of these events.


El Palacio
El Palacio no es infinito.
Los muros, los terraplenes, los jardines, los laberintos, las 
gradas, las terrazas, los antepechos, las puertas, las galerías, 
los patios circulares o rectangulares, los claustros, las 
encrucijadas, los aljibes, las antecámaras, las cámaras, 
las alcobas, las bibliotecas, los desvanes, las cárceles, las 
celdas sin salida y los hipogeos, no son menos cuantiosos 
que los granos de arena del Ganges, pero su cifra tiene 
un fin. Desde las azoteas, hacia el poniente, no falta 
quien divise las herrerías, las carpinterías, las caballerizas, 
los astilleros y las chozas de los esclavos.
A nadie le está dado recorrer más que una parte infinitesi- 
mal del palacio. Alguno no conoce sino los sótanos. Pode- 
mos percibir unas caras, unas voces, unas palabras, pero 
lo que percibimos es ínfimo. Ínfimo y precioso a la vez. 
La fecha que el acero graba en la lápida y que los libros 
parroquiales registran es posterior a nuestra muerte; ya 
estamos muertos cuando nada nos toca, ni una palabra, 
ni un anhelo, ni una memoria. Yo sé que no estoy muerto.


The Palace
The Palace is not infinite.
The walls, the ramparts, the gardens, the labyrinths, the 
staircases, the terraces, the parapets, the doors, the gal- 
leries, the circular or rectangular patios, the cloisters, the 
intersections, the cisterns, the anterooms, the chambers, 
the alcoves, the libraries, the attics, the dungeons, the 
sealed cells and the vaults, are not less in quantity than 
the grains of sand in the Ganges, but their number has 
a limit. From the roofs, towards sunset, many people 
can make out the forges, the workshops, the stables, the 
boatyards and the huts of the slaves.
It is granted to no one to traverse more than an infini- 
tesimal part of the palace. Some know only the cellars. 
We can take in some faces, some voices, some words, but 
what we perceive is of the feeblest. Feeble and precious 
at the same time. The date which the chisel engraves in 
the tablet, and which is recorded in the parochial registers, 
is later than our own death; we are already dead when 
nothing touches us, neither a word nor a yearning nor a 
memory. I know that I am not dead.


Hengist quiere hombres, a.d. 
Hengist quiere hombres.
Acudirán de los confines de arena que se pierden en 
largos mares, de chozas llenas de humo, de tierras 
pobres de hondos bosques de lobos, en cuyo centro in- 
definido está el Mal.
Los labradores dejarán el arado y los pescadores las 
redes.
Dejarán sus mujeres y sus hijos, porque el hombre sabe 
que en cualquier lugar de la noche puede hallarlas y 
hacerlos.
Hengist el mercenario quiere hombres.
Los quiere para debelar una isla que todavía no se llama 
Inglaterra.
Le seguirán sumisos y crueles.
Saben que siempre fue el primero en la batalla de hom- 
bres.
Saben que una vez olvidó su deber de venganza y que le 
dieron una espada desnuda y que la espada hizo su 
obra.
Atravesarán a remo los mares, sin brújula y sin 
mástil.
Traerán espadas y broqueles, yelmos con la forma del 
jabalí, conjuros para que se multipliquen las mieses, 
vagas cosmogonías, fábulas de los hunos y de los 
godos.
Conquistarán la tierra, pero nunca entrarán en las ciu- 
dades que Roma abandonó, porque son cosas dema- 
siado complejas para su mente bárbara.
Hengist los quiere para la victoria, para el saqueo, para 
la corrupción de la carne y para el olvido.
Hengist los quiere (pero no lo sabe) para la fundación


Hengist wants men, a.d. 
Hengist wants men.
They will rally from the edges of sand which dissolve into 
broad seas, from huts filled with smoke, from threadbare 
landscapes, from deep forests haunted by wolves, in 
whose vague centre Evil lurks.
The ploughmen will abandon the plough and the fisher- 
men their nets.
They will leave their wives and their children, for a man 
knows that anywhere in the night he can encounter the 
one and engender the other.
Hengist the mercenary wants men.
He wants them to subdue an island which is not yet 
called England.
Cowed and vicious, they will follow him.
They know him always to have been the first among men 
in battle.
They know that once he forgot his vow of vengeance and 
that they gave him a naked sword and that the sword 
did its work.
They will try their oars against the seas, with neither 
compass nor mast.
They will bear swords and bucklers, helmets in the like- 
ness of the boar’s head, spells to make the cornfields 
multiply, vague cosmogonies, legends of the Huns and 
the Goths.
They will conquer the ground, but never will they enter 
the cities which Rome abandoned, for these are things 
too complicated for their primitive minds.
Hengist wants them for the victory, for the pillaging, for 
the corruption of the flesh and for oblivion.
Hengist wants them (but he does not know it) for the


del mayor imperio, para que canten Shakespeare y 
Whitman, para que dominen el mar las naves de Nelson, 
para que Adán y Eva se alejen, tomados de la mano y 
silenciosos, del Paraíso que han perdido.
Hengist los quiere (pero no lo sabrá) para que yo trace 
estas letras.


founding of the greatest of empires, for the singing of 
Shakespeare and Whitman, for Nelson’s ships to rule 
the sea, for Adam and Eve to be banished, hand in hand 
and silent, from the Paradise they have lost.
Hengist wants them (but he cannot know it) so that I 
may form these letters.


A un gato
No son más silenciosos los espejos 
ni más furtiva el alba aventurera; 
eres, bajo la luna, esa pantera 
que nos es dado divisar de lejos.
Por obra indescifrable de un decreto 
divino, te buscamos vanamente; 
más remoto que el Ganges y el poniente, 
tuya es la soledad, tuyo el secreto.
Tu lomo condesciende a la morosa 
caricia de mi mano. Has admitido, 
desde esa eternidad que ya es olvido, 
el amor de la mano recelosa.
En otro tiempo estás. Eres el dueño 
de un ámbito cerrado como un sueño.


To a cat
Mirrors are not more wrapt in silences 
nor the arriving dawn more secretive; 
you, in the moonlight, are that panther figure 
which we can only spy at from a distance.
By the mysterious functioning of some 
divine decree, we seek you out in vain; 
remoter than the Ganges or the sunset, 
yours is the solitude, yours is the secret.
Your back allows the tentative caress 
my hand extends. And you have condescended, 
since that forever, now oblivion, 
to take love from a flattering human hand.
You live in other time, lord of your realm - 
a world as closed and separate as dream.


El oro de los tigres
Hasta la hora del ocaso amarillo 
cuántas veces habré mirado 
al poderoso tigre de Bengala 
ir y venir por el predestinado camino 
detrás de los barrotes de hierro, 
sin sospechar que eran su cárcel. 
Después vendrían otros tigres, 
el tigre de fuego de Blake; 
después vendrían otros oros, 
el metal amoroso que era Zeus, 
el anillo que cada nueve noches 
engendra nueve anillos y éstos, nueve, 
y no hay un fin.
Con los años fueron dejándome 
los otros hermosos colores 
y ahora sólo me quedan 
la vaga luz, la inextricable sombra 
y el oro del principio.
Oh ponientes, oh tigres, oh fulgores 
del mito y de la épica, 
oh un oro más precioso, tu cabello 
que ansian estas manos.


The gold of the tigers
Up to the moment of the yellow sunset, 
how many times will I have cast my eyes on 
the sinewy-bodied tiger of Bengal 
toing and froing on its paced-out path 
behind the labyrinthine iron bars, 
never suspecting them to be a prison.
Afterward, other tigers will appear:
the blazing tiger of Blake, burning bright;
and after that will come the other golds -
the amorous gold shower disguising Zeus,
the gold ring which, on every ninth night,
gives light to nine rings more, and these, nine more,
and there is never an end.
All the other overwhelming colours,
in company with the years, kept leaving me,
and now alone remains
the amorphous light, the inextricable shadow
and the gold of the beginning.
On sunsets, O tigers, O wonders 
of myth and epic,
O gold more dear to me, gold of your hair 
which these hands crave to touch.


Yo
La calavera, el corazón secreto, 
los caminos de sangre que no veo, 
los túneles del sueño, ese Proteo, 
las visceras, la nuca, el esqueleto.
Soy esas cosas. Increíblemente
soy también la memoria de una espada
y la de un solitario sol poniente
que se dispersa en oro, en sombra, en nada.
Soy él que ve las proas desde el puerto;
soy los contados libros, los contados
grabados por el tiempo fatigados;
soy él que envidia a los que ya se han muerto.
Más raro es ser el hombre que entrelaza
palabras en un cuarto de una casa.


I
The skull within, the secret, shuttered heart, 
the byways of the blood I never see, 
the underworld of dreaming, that Proteus, 
the nape, the viscera, the skeleton.
I am all those things. Amazingly,
I am too the memory of a sword
and of a solitary, falling sun,
turning itself to gold, then grey, then nothing.
I am the one who sees the approaching ships 
from harbour. And I am the dwindled books, 
the rare engravings worn away by time; 
the one who envies those already dead. 
Stranger to be the man who interlaces 
such words as these, in some room, in a house.


El sueño
Cuando los relojes de la media noche prodiguen 
un tiempo generoso,
iré más lejos que los bogavantes de Ulises 
a la región del sueño, inaccesible 
a la memoria humana.
De esa región immersa rescato restos 
que no acabo de comprender: 
hierbas de sencilla botánica, 
animales algo diversos, 
diálogos con los muertos,
Rostros que realmente son máscaras, 
palabras de lenguajes muy antiguos 
y a veces un horror incomparable 
al que nos puede dar el día.
Seré todos o nadie. Seré el otro 
que sin saberlo soy, él que ha mirado 
ese otro sueño, mi vigilia. La juzga, 
resignado y sonriente.


The dream
While the clocks of the midnight hours are squandering 
an abundance of time,
I shall go, farther than the shipmates of Ulysses, 
to the territory of dream, beyond the reach 
of human memory.
From that underwater world I save some fragments,
inexhaustible to my understanding:
grasses from some primitive botany,
animals of all kinds,
conversations with the dead,
faces which all the time are masks,
words out of very ancient languages,
and at times, horror, unlike anything
the day can offer us.
I shall be all or no one. I shall be the other 
I am without knowing it, he who has looked on 
that other dream, my waking state. He weighs it up, 
resigned and smiling.


Browning resuelve ser poeta
Por estos rojos laberintos de Londres 
descubro que he elegido 
la más curiosa de las profesiones humanas, 
salvo que todas, a su modo, lo son.
Como los alquimistas
que buscaron la piedra filosofal
en el azogue fugitivo,
haré que las comunes palabras -
naipes marcados del tahur, moneda de la plebe -
rindan la magia que fue suya
cuando Thor era el numen y el estrépito,
el trueno y la plegaria.
En el dialecto de hoy 
diré a mi vez las cosas eternas; 
trataré de no ser indigno 
del gran eco de Byron.
Este polvo que soy será invulnerable.
Si una mujer comparte mi amor 
mi verso rozará la décima esfera de los cielos 
concéntricos; 
si una mujer desdeña mi amor 
haré de mi tristeza una música, 
un alto río que siga resonando en el tiempo. 
Viviré de olvidarme.
Seré la cara que entreveo y que olvido,
seré Judas que acepta
la divina misión de ser traidor,
seré Calibán en la ciénaga,
seré un soldado mercenario que muere
sin temor y sin fe,
seré Polícrates que ve con espanto


Browning resolves to be a poet
In these red London labyrinths
I find that I have chosen
the most curious of human professions,
though given that all are curious, in their way.
Like alchemists
who looked for the philosopher’s stone 
in elusive quicksilver,
I shall make ordinary words -
the marked cards of the sharper, the people’s coinage - 
yield up the magic which was theirs 
when Thor was inspiration and eruption, 
thunder and worship.
In the wording of the day,
I in my turn will say eternal things;
I will try to be not unworthy 
of the great echo of Byron.
This dust that is me will be invulnerable.
If a woman partakes of my love, 
my poem will graze the tenth sphere of the concentric 
heavens;
if a woman shrugs off my love,
I will make music out of my misery, 
a vast river reverberating on through time.
I will live by forgetting myself.
I will be the face I half-see and forget,
I will be Judas who accepts
the blessed destiny of being a traitor,
I will be Caliban in the swamp,
I will be a mercenary dying 
without fear or faith,
I will be Polycrates, horrified to see


el anillo devuelto por el destino, 
seré el amigo que me odia.
El persa me dará el ruiseñor y Roma la espada. 
Máscaras, agonías, resurrecciones, 
destejerán y tejerán mi suerte 
y alguna vez seré Robert Browning.


the ring returned by destiny,
I will be the friend who hates me.
Persia will grant me the nightingale, Rome the sword.
Agonies, masks and resurrections
will weave and unweave my fate
and at some point I will be Robert Browning.


Inventario
Hay que arrimar una escalera para subir. Un tramo le falta. 
¿Qué podemos buscar en el altillo 
sino lo que amontona el desorden?
Hay olor a humedad.
El atardecer entra por la pieza de plancha.
Las vigas del cielo raso están cerca y el piso está vencido. 
Nadie se atreve a poner el pie.
Hay un catre de tijera desvencijado.
Hay unas herramientas inútiles.
Está el sillón de ruedas del muerto.
Hay un pie de lámpara.
Hay una hamaca paraguaya con borlas, deshilachada.
Hay aparejos y papeles.
Hay una lámina del estado mayor de Aparicio Saravia. 
Hay una vieja plancha a carbón.
Hay un reloj de tiempo detenido, con el péndulo roto. 
Hay un marco desdorado, sin tela.
Hay un tablero de cartón y unas piezas descabaladas.
Hay un brasero de dos patas.
Hay una petaca de cuero.
Hay un ejemplar enmohecido del Libro de los Mártires de 
Foxe, en intrincada letra gótica.
Hay una fotografía que ya pueda ser de cualquiera.
Hay una piel gastada que fue de tigre.
Hay una llave que ha perdido su puerta.
¿Qué podemos buscar en el altillo 
sino lo que amontona el desorden?
Al olvido, a las cosas del olvido, acabo de erigir este monu- 
mento
sin duda menos perdurable que el bronce y que se con- 
funde con ellas.


Inventory
To reach it, a ladder has to be set up. There is no stair. 
What can we be looking for in the attic 
but the accumulation of disorder?
There is a smell of damp.
The late afternoon enters by way of the laundry.
The ceiling beams loom close, and the floor has rotted. 
Nobody dares to put a foot on it.
A folding cot, broken.
A few useless tools, 
the dead one’s wheelchair.
The base for a lamp.
A Paraguayan hammock with tassels, all frayed away. 
Equipment and papers.
An engraving of Aparicio Saravia’s general staff.
An old charcoal iron.
A clock stopped in time, with a broken pendulum.
A peeling gilt frame, with no canvas.
A cardboard chessboard, and some broken chessmen.
A stove with only two legs.
A chest made of leather.
A mildewed copy of Foxe’s Book of Martyrs, in intricate 
Gothic lettering.
A photograph which might be of anybody.
A worn skin, once a tiger’s.
A key which has lost its lock.
What can we be looking for in the attic 
except the flotsam of disorder?
To forgetting, to all forgotten objects, I have just erected 
this monument
(unquestionably less durable than bronze) which will be 
lost among them.


El suicida
No quedará en la noche una estrella. 
No quedará la noche.
Moriré y conmigo la suma 
del intolerable universo.
Borraré las pirámides, las medallas, 
los continentes y las caras.
Borraré la acumulación del pasado. 
Haré polvo la historia, polvo el polvo. 
Estoy mirando el último poniente. 
Oigo el último pájaro.
Lego la nada a nadie.


The suicide
Not a single star will be left in the night. 
The night will not be left.
I will die and, with me,
the weight of the intolerable universe.
I shall erase the pyramids, the medallions, 
the continents and faces.
I shall erase the accumulated past.
I shall make dust of history, dust of dust. 
Now I am looking on the final sunset.
I am hearing the last bird.
I bequeath nothingness to no one.


Al ruiseñor
¿En qué noche secreta de Inglaterra 
o del constante Rhin incalculable, 
perdida entre las noches de mis noches, 
a mi ignorante oído habrá llegado 
tu voz cargada de mitologías, 
ruiseñor de Virgilio y de los persas?
Quizá nunca te oí, pero a mi vida 
se une tu vida, inseparablemente.
Un espíritu errante fue tu símbolo 
en un libro de enigmas. El Marino 
te apodaba sirena de los bosques 
y cantas en la noche de Julieta 
y en la intrincada página latina 
y desde los pinares de aquel otro 
ruiseñor de Judea y de Alemania,
Heine el burlón, el encendido, el triste. 
Keats te oyó para todos, para siempre.
No habrá uno solo entre los claros nombres 
que los pueblos te dan sobre la tierra 
que no quiera ser digno de tu música, 
ruiseñor de la sombra. El agareno 
te soñó arrebatado por el éxtasis 
el pecho traspasado por la espina 
de la cantada rosa que enrojeces 
con tu sangre final. Asiduamente 
urdo en la hueca tarde este ejercicio, 
ruiseñor de la arena y de los mares, 
que en la memoria, exaltación y fábula, 
ardes de amor y mueres melodioso.


To the nightingale
Out of what secret English summer evening 
or night on the incalculable Rhine, 
lost among all the nights of my long night, 
could it have come to my unknowing ear, 
your song, encrusted with mythology, 
nightingale of Virgil and the Persians?
Perhaps I never heard you, but my life 
is bound up with your life, inseparably.
The symbol for you was a wandering spirit 
in a book of enigmas. And among all sailors, 
you were nicknamed ‘siren of the woods’; 
you sing throughout the night of Juliet 
and through the intricate pages of the Latin 
and from the pinewoods of that other one, 
the nightingale of Germany and Judea,
Heine, the clown, the man on fire, the sad one.
Keats heard your song for everyone, for ever.
There is not one among the shimmering names
people have given you across the earth
which does not seek to match your own music,
nightingale of the dark. The Muslim dreamed you
in the delirium of ecstasy,
his breast pierced by the thorn of the sung rose
you redden with your blood. Assiduously
in the black evening I contrive this poem,
nightingale of the sands and all the seas,
that in exultation, memory and fable,
you burn with love and die in liquid song.


Soy
Soy él que sabe que no es menos vano 
que el vano observador que en el espejo 
de silencio y cristal sigue el reflejo 
o el cuerpo (da lo mismo) del hermano.
Soy, tácitos amigos, él que sabe 
que no hay otra venganza que el olvido 
ni otro perdón. Un dios ha concedido 
al odio humano esta curiosa llave.
Soy él que pese a tan ilustres modos 
de errar, no ha descifrado el laberinto 
singular y plural, arduo y distinto, 
del tiempo, que es de uno y es de todos.
Soy él que es nadie, él que no fue una espada 
en la guerra. Soy eco, olvido, nada.


I am
I am he who knows himself no less vain 
than the vain looker-on who in the mirror 
of glass and silence follows the reflection 
or body (it’s the same thing) of his brother.
I am, my silent friends, the one who knows 
there is no other pardon or revenge 
than sheer oblivion. A god has granted 
this odd solution to all human hates.
Despite my many wondrous wanderings,
I am the one who never has unravelled 
the labyrinth of time, singular, plural, 
gruelling, strange, one’s own and everyone’s. 
I am no one. I did not wield a sword 
in battle. I am echo, emptiness, nothing.


Quince monedas 
A Alicia Jurado
Un poeta oriental
Durante cien otoños he mirado 
tu tenue disco.
Durante cien otoños he mirado 
tu arco sobre las islas.
Durante cien otoños mis labios 
no han sido menos silenciosos.
El desierto
El espacio sin tiempo.
La luna es del color de la arena.
Ahora, precisamente ahora,
mueren los hombres del Metauro y de Trafalgar.
Llueve
¿En qué ayer, en qué patios de Cartago, 
cae también esta lluvia?
Asterión
El año me tributa mi pasto de hombres 
y en la cisterna hay agua.
En mí se anudan los caminos de piedra.
¿De qué puedo quejarme?
En los atardeceres
me pesa un poco la cabeza de toro.


Fifteen coins 
To Alicia Jurado
An Oriental poet
A hundred autumns I have looked upon 
your uncertain disk.
A hundred autumns I have looked upon 
your rainbow over the islands.
A hundred autumns and my lips 
have never been less silent.
The desert 
Space without time.
The moon is the same colour as the sand.
Now, at this precise hour,
the men of Metaurus and Trafalgar die.
It is raining
In what yesterday, in what patios of Carthage, 
does this rain also fall?
Asterion
The year awards to me my human fodder 
and in the cisterns there is water.
In me, the stony paths crisscross.
What can I complain of?
In the late afternoons,
the bull’s head weighs on me a little.


Un poeta menor
La meta es el olvido.
Yo he llegado antes.
Génesis iv, 8
Fue en el primer desierto.
Dos brazos arrojaron una gran piedra. 
No hubo un grito. Hubo sangre.
Hubo por vez primera la muerte.
Ya no recuerdo si fui Abel o Caín.
Nortumbria, a.d. 900
Que antes del alba lo despojen los lobos; 
la espada es el camino más corto.
Miguel de Cervantes
Crueles estrellas y propicias estrellas 
presidieron la noche de mi génesis; 
debo a las últimas la cárcel 
en que soñé Quijote.
El oeste
El callejón final con su poniente. 
Inauguración de la pampa.
Inauguración de la muerte.
Estancia El Retiro
El tiempo juega un ajedrez sin piezas 
en el patio. El crujido de una rama 
rasga la noche. Fuera la llanura


A minor poet
The goal is oblivion.
I have arrived early.
Genesis iv, 8
It was in the original desert.
Two arms let loose a great stone.
There was no cry. There was blood.
For the first time there was death.
I do not recall now if I was Abel or Cain.
Northumbria, a.d. 900
Let the wolves savage him before dawn; 
the sword is the quickest way.
Miguel de Cervantes
Both cruel stars and propitious stars 
watched over the evening of my genesis; 
to the last of those I owe the prison 
in which I dreamed of Don Quixote.
The West
The final alley with its setting sun.
Beginning of the pampa.
Beginning of death.
The Retiro Ranch
Time plays a game of chess without the pieces 
in the patio. The creaking of a branch 
gnaws away at the night. Outside, the plain


leguas de polvo y sueño desparrama.
Sombras los dos, copiamos lo que dictan 
otras sombras: Heráclito y Guatama.
El prisionero 
Una lima.
La primera de las pesadas puertas de hierro.
Algún día seré libre.
Macbeth
Nuestros actos prosiguen su camino, 
que no conoce término.
Maté a mi rey para que Shakespeare 
urdiera su tragedia.
Eternidades
La serpiente que ciñe el mar y es el mar, 
el repetido remo de Jasón, la joven espada de Sigurd. 
Sólo perduran en el tiempo las cosas 
que no fueron del tiempo.
Edgar Allen Poe
Los sueños que he soñado. El pozo y el péndulo.
El hombre de las multitudes. Ligeia . . .
Pero también este otro.
El espía
En la pública luz de las batallas 
otros dan su vida la patria 
Y los recuerda el mármol.
Yo he errado oscuro por ciudades que odio.


squanders its endless leagues of dust and dream.
Both of us shadows, we copy out the dictates 
of other shadows: Guatama, Heraclitus.
The prisoner
A file.
The first of the solid iron doors.
One day I will be free.
Macbeth
Our acts continue on their destined way 
which does not know an end.
I slew my sovereign so that Shakespeare 
might plot his tragedy.
Eternities
The serpent which circles the sea and is the sea, 
the recurring oar of Jason, the young sword of Sigurd.
In time, only those things last 
which have not been in time.
Edgar Allen Poe
The dreams that I have dreamed. The pit and the pendu- 
lum.
The man of the multitudes. Ligeia . . .
But also this other one.
The spy
In the public glare of battles 
others give their lives for their country 
and are remembered in marble.
I gave it other things.


Le di otras cosas.
Abjuré de mi honor,
traicioné a quienes me creyeron su amigo, 
compré conciencias, 
abominé del nombre de la patria, 
me resigné a la infamia.


I foreswore my honour,
I betrayed those who believed me their friend, 
I purchased consciences,
I abominated the name of my country,
I gave myself up to infamy.


Proteo
Antes que los remeros de Odiseo 
fatigaran el mar color de vino 
las inasibles formas adivino 
de aquel dios cuyo nombre fue Proteo. 
Pastor de los rebaños de los mares 
y poseedor del don de profecía, 
prefería ocultar lo que sabía 
y entretejer oráculos dispares.
Urgido por las gentes asumía 
la forma de un león o de Una hoguera 
o de árbol que da sombra a la ribera 
o de agua que en el agua se perdía.
De Proteo el egipcio no te asombres, 
tú, que eres uno y eres muchos hombres.


Proteus
Before the oarsmen of Odysseus 
were able to exhaust the wine-dark sea,
I can divine the indefinable forms 
of that old god whose name was Proteus. 
Shepherd of the wave-flocks of the waters 
and wielder of the gift of prophecy, 
he liked to make a secret of his knowledge 
and weave a pattern of ambiguous answers. 
At the demand of people, he took on 
the substance of a lion or a bonfire 
or a tree, spreading shade on the river bank 
or water which would disappear in water. 
Do not take fright at Proteus the Egyptian, 
you, who are one, and also many men.


Brunanburh, a.d. 
Nadie a tu lado.
Anoche maté a un hombre en la batalla.
Era animoso y alto, de la clara estirpe de Anlaf.
La espada entró en el pecho, un poco a la izquierda. 
Rodó por tierra y fue una cosa, 
una cosa del cuervo.
En vano lo esperarás, mujer que no he visto.
No lo traerán las naves que huyéron 
sobre el agua amarilla.
En la hora del alba,
tu mano desde el sueño lo buscará.
Tu lecho está frío.
Anoche maté a un hombre en Brunanburh.


Brunanburh, a.d. 
No one at your side.
Last night I did a man to death in battle.
He was spirited and tall, of the clear line of Anlaf. 
The sword went into his breast, a shade to the left. 
He turned on the ground and was a thing, 
an object for crows.
In vain will you await him, wife I have not seen. 
They will not bear him back, the ships that fled 
over the yellow waters.
In the hour of the dawn,
out of a dream, your hand will reach for him.
Your couch is cold.
Last night I killed a man in Brunanburh.


El ciego
i
Lo han despojado del diverso mundo, 
de los rostros, que son lo que eran antes, 
de las cercanas calles, hoy distantes, 
y del cóncavo azul, ayer profundo.
De los libros le queda lo que deja 
la memoria, esa forma del olvido 
que retiene el formato, no el sentido, 
y que los meros títulos refleja.
El desnivel acecha. Cada paso 
puede ser la caída. Soy el lento 
prisionero de un tiempo soñoliento 
que no marca su aurora ni su ocaso.
Es de noche. No hay otros. Con el verso 
debo labrar mi insípido universo.
ii
Desde mi nacimiento, que fue el noventa y nueve 
de la cóncava parra y el aljibe profundo, 
el tiempo minucioso, que en la memoria es breve, 
me fue hurtando las formas visibles de este mundo. 
Los días y las noches limaron los perfiles 
de las letras humanas y los rostros amados; 
en vano interrogaron mis ojos agotados 
las vanas bibliotecas y los vanos atriles.
El azul y el bermejo son ahora una niebla 
y dos voces inútiles. El espejo que miro 
es una cosa gris. En el jardín aspiro, 
amigos, una lóbrega rosa de la tiniebla.
Ahora sólo perduran las formas amarillas 
y sólo puedo ver para ver pesadillas.


The blind man
i
He is divested of the diverse world, 
of faces, which still stay as once they were, 
of the adjoining streets, now far away, 
and of the concave sky, once infinite.
Of books, he keeps no more than what is left him 
by memory, that brother of forgetting, 
which keeps the formula but not the feeling 
and which reflects no more than tag and name. 
Traps lie in wait for me. My every step 
might be a fall. I am a prisoner 
shuffling through a time which feels like dream, 
taking no note of mornings or of sunsets.
It is night. I am alone. In verse like this,
I must create my insipid universe.
ii
Since I was born, in ,
beside the concave vine and the deep cistern,
frittering time, so brief in memory,
kept taking from me all my eye-shaped world.
Both days and nights would wear away the profiles 
of human letters and of well-loved faces.
My wasted eyes would ask their useless questions 
of pointless libraries and lecterns.
Blue and vermilion both are now a fog, 
both useless sounds. The mirror I look into 
is grey. I breathe a rose across the garden, 
a wistful rose, my friends, out of the twilight.
Only the shades of yellow stay with me 
and I can see only to look on nightmares.


Un ciego
No sé cuál es la cara que me mira 
cuando miro la cara del espejo; 
no sé qué anciano acecha en su reflejo 
con silenciosa y ya cansada ira.
Lento en mi sombra, con la mano exploro 
mis invisibles rasgos. Un destello 
me alcanza. He vislumbrado tu cabello 
que es de ceniza o es aún de oro.
Repito que he perdido solamente 
la vana superficie de las cosas.
El consuelo es de Milton y es valiente, 
pero pienso en las letras y en las rosas. 
Pienso que si pudiera ver mi cara 
sabría quién soy en esta tarde rara.


A blind man
I do not know what face is looking back 
whenever I look at the face in the mirror;
I do not know what old face seeks its image 
in silent and already weary anger.
Slow in my blindness, with my hand I feel 
the contours of my face. A flash of light 
gets through to me. I have made out your hair, 
colour of ash and at the same time, gold.
I say again that I have lost no more 
than the inconsequential skin of things.
These wise words come from Milton, and are noble, 
but then I think of letters and of roses.
I think, too, that if I could see my features,
I would know who I am, this precious afternoon.



Temí que el porvenir (que ya declina) 
sería un profundo corredor de espejos 
indistintos, ociosos y menguantes, 
una repetición de vanidades, 
y en la penumbra que precede al sueño 
rogué a mis dioses, cuyo nombre ignoro, 
que enviaran algo o alguien a mis días.
Lo hicieron. Es la Patria. Mis mayores 
la sirvieron con largas proscripciones, 
con penurias, con hambre, con batallas, 
aquí de nuevo está el hermoso riesgo.
No soy aquellas sombras tutelares 
que honré con versos que no olvida el tiempo. 
Estoy ciego. He cumplido los setenta; 
no soy el oriental Francisco Borges 
que murió con dos balas en el pecho, 
entre las agonías de los hombres, 
en el hedor de un hospital de sangre, 
pero la Patria, hoy profanada quiere 
que con mi oscura pluma de gramático, 
docta en las nimiedades académicas 
y ajena a los trabajos de la espada, 
congregue el gran rumor de la epopeya 
y exija mi lugar. Lo estoy haciendo.



I feared that the future, now already dwindling, 
would be an extending corridor of mirrors, 
useless and vague, their images on the wane, 
a repetition of all vanities, 
and in the half-light which precedes the dream,
I begged my gods, whose names I do not know, 
to send something or someone into my days.
They did. It is my country. My own forebears 
gave themselves up to it through long proscriptions, 
in penury, in hunger, and in battle.
Here, once again, comes the alluring challenge.
I am not with those tutelary figures 
I praised in verses still alive in time.
I am blind, and I have lived out seventy years.
I am not Francisco Borges from the east 
who died with a brace of bullets in his breast 
among the final agonies of men 
in the death-stench of a hospital of blood; 
but my country, violated now, insists 
that with my tentative grammarian’s pen, 
well-schooled in academic tinkerings, 
far from the warlike business of the sword,
I assemble the great rumble of the epic 
and carve out my own place. I am doing it.


Elegía
Tres muy antiguas caras me desvelan: 
una el Océano, que habló con Claudio, 
otra el Norte de aceros ignorantes 
y atroces en la aurora y el ocaso, 
la tercera la muerte, ese otro nombre 
del incesante tiempo que nos roe.
La carga secular de los ayeres
de la historia que fue o que fue soñada
me abruma, personal como una culpa.
Pienso en la nave ufana que devuelve 
a los mares el cuerpo de Scyld Sceaving 
que reinó en Dinamarca bajo el cielo; 
pienso en el alto lobo, cuyas riendas 
eran sierpes, que dio al barco incendiado 
la blancura del dios hermoso y muerto; 
pienso en piratas cuya carne humana 
es dispersión y limo bajo el peso 
de los mares que fueron su aventura; 
pienso en las tumbas que los navegantes 
vieron desde boreales Odiseas.
Pienso en mi propria, en mi perfecta muerte, 
sin la urna cineraria y sin la lágrima.


Elegy
Three very ancient faces stay with me:
one is the Ocean, which would talk with Claudius,
another the North, with its unfeeling temper,
savage both at sunrise and at sunset;
the third is Death, that other name we give
to passing time, which wears us all away.
The secular burden of those yesterdays 
from history which happened or was dreamed, 
oppresses me as personally as guilt.
I think of the proud ship, carrying back
to sea the body of Scyld Sceaving,
who ruled in Denmark underneath the sky;
I think of the great wolf, whose reins were serpents, 
who lent the burning boat the purity 
and whiteness of the beautiful dead god;
I think of pirates too, whose human flesh 
is scattered through the slime beneath the weight 
of waters which were ground for their adventures;
I think of mausoleums which the sailors 
saw in the course of Northern odyssies.
I think of my own death, my perfect death, 
without a funeral urn, without a tear.


El desterrado ()
Alguien recorre los senderos de Itaca
y no se acuerda de su rey, que fue a Troya
hace ya tantos años;
alguien piensa en las tierras heredadas
y en el arado nuevo y el hijo
y es acaso feliz.
En el confín del orbe yo, Ulises,
descendí a la Casa de Hades
y vi la sombra del tebano Tiresias
que desligó el amor de las serpientes
y la sombra de Heracles
que mata sombras de leones en la pradera
y asimismo está en el Olimpo.
Alguien hoy anda por Bolívar y Chile 
y puede ser feliz o no serlo.
Quién me diera ser él.


The exile ()
Someone makes tracks along the paths of Ithaca 
and has forgotten his king, who was at Troy 
so many years ago;
someone is thinking of his new-won lands, 
his new plough and his son, 
and is happy, in the main.
Within the confines of the globe, myself, Ulysses,
descended deep into the Hall of Hades
and saw the shade of Tiresius of Thebes
who unlocked the love of the serpents
and the shade of Hercules
who kills the shades of lions on the plain
and at the same time occupies Olympus.
Someone today walks streets - Chile, Bolívar - 
perhaps happy, perhaps not.
I wish I could be he.


En memoria de Angelica
¡Cuántas posibles vidas se habrán ido 
en esta pobre y diminuta muerte, 
cuántas posibles vidas que la suerte 
daría a la memoria o al olvido! 
Cuanda yo muera morirá un pasado; 
con esta flor un porvenir ha muerto 
en las aguas que ignoran, un abierto 
porvenir por los astros arrasado.
Yo, como ella, muero de infinitos 
destinos que el azar no me depara; 
busca mi sombra los gastados mitos 
de una patria que siempre dio la cara. 
Un breve mármol cuida su memoria; 
sobre nosotros crece, atroz, la historia.


In memory of Angelica
How many possible lives must have gone out 
in this so modest and diminutive death, 
how many possible lives, which fate would turn 
to memory, or else oblivion?
When I die too, a certain past will die; 
with this small bloom, a yet-to-be has died 
in the unfeeling water, a white future 
blindly obliterated by the stars.
Like her, I am dead to infinite destinies 
which chance makes inaccessible to me.
My shadow seeks out all the lifeless myths 
within my country, which was always brave.
A slab of marble tends her memory.
Over us looms atrocious history.


Mis libros
Mis libros (que no saben que yo existo) 
son tan parte de mí como este rostro 
de sienes grises y de grises ojos 
que vanamente busco en los cristales 
y que recorro con la mano cóncava.
No sin alguna lógica amargura
pienso que las palabras esenciales
que me expresan están en esas hojas
que no saben quién soy, no en las que he escrito.
Mejor así. Las voces de los muertos
me dirán para siempre.


My books
My books (which do not know that I exist) 
are as much part of me as is this face, 
the temples gone to grey and the eyes grey, 
the face I vainly look for in the mirror, 
tracing its outline with a concave hand.
Not without understandable bitterness,
I feel now that the quintessential words
expressing me are in those very pages
which do not know me, not in those I have written.
It is better so. The voices of the dead
will speak to me for ever.


Talismanes
Un ejemplar de la primera edición de la Edda Islandorum 
de Snorri, impresa en Dinamarca.
Los cinco tomos de la obra de Schopenhauer.
Los dos tomos de las Odiseas de Chapman.
Una espada que guerreó - el desierto.
Un mate con un pie de serpientes que mi bisabuelo trajo 
de Lima.
Un prisma de cristal.
Unos daguerrotipos borrosos.
Un globo terráqueo de madera que me dio Cecilia Inge- 
nieros y que fue de su padre.
Un bastón de puño encorvado que anduvo por las llanuras 
de América, por Colombia y por Texas.
Varios cilindros de metal con diplomas.
La toga y el birrete de un doctorado.
Las Empresas de Saavedra Fajardo, en olorosa pasta es- 
pañola.
La memoria de una mañana.
Líneas de Virgilio y de Frost.
La voz de Macedonio Fernández.
El amor o el diálogo de unos pocos.
Ciertamente son talismanes, pero de nada sirven contra la 
sombra que no puedo nombrar, contra la sombra que no 
debo nombrar.


Talismans
A copy of the first edition of the Edda Islandorum, by 
Snorri, printed in Denmark.
The five volumes of the work of Schopenhauer.
The two volumes of Chapman’s Odyssey.
A sword which fought in the desert.
A maté gourd with serpent feet which my great-grand- 
father brought from Lima.
A crystal prism.
A few eroded daguerrotypes.
A terraqueous wooden globe which Cecilia Ingenieros gave 
me and which belonged to her father.
A stick with a curved handle with which I walked on the 
plains of America, in Colombia and in Texas.
Various metal cylinders with diplomas.
The gown and mortarboard of a doctorate.
Las Empresas, by Saavedra Fajardo, bound in good-smell- 
ing Spanish board.
The memory of a morning.
Lines of Virgil and Frost.
The voice of Macedonio Fernandez.
The love or the conversation of a few people.
Certainly they are talismans, but useless against the dark 
I cannot name, the dark I must not name.


La cierva blanca
¿De qué agreste balada de la verde Inglaterra, 
de qué lámina persa, de qué región arcana 
de las noches y, días que nuestro ayer encierra, 
vino la cierva blanca que soñé esta mañana? 
Duraría un segundo. La vi cruzar el prado 
y perderse en el oro de una tarde ilusoria, 
leve criatura hecha de un poco de memoria 
y de un poco de olvido, cierva de un solo lado.
Los númenes que rigen este curioso mundo 
me dejaron soñarte pero no ser tu dueño; 
tal vez en un recodo del porvenir profundo 
te encontraré de nuevo, cierva blanca de un sueño. 
Yo también soy un sueño fugitivo que dura 
unos días más que el sueño del prado y la blancura.


The white deer
Out of what country ballad of green England, 
or Persian etching, out of what secret region 
of nights and days enclosed in our lost past 
came the white deer I dreamed of in the dawn?
A moment’s flash. I saw it cross the meadow 
and vanish in the golden afternoon, 
a lithe, illusory creature, half-remembered 
and half-imagined, deer with a single side.
The presences which rule this curious world 
have let me dream of you but not command you. 
Perhaps in a recess of the unplumbed future, 
again I will find you, white deer from my dream.
I too am dream, lasting a few days longer
than that bright dream of whiteness and green fields.


La rosa profunda 
A Susana Bombal
A los quinientos años de la Héjira
Persia miró desde sus alminares
la invasión de las lanzas del desierto
y Attar de Nishapur miró una rosa
y le dijo con tácita palabra
como él que piensa, no como él que reza:
- Tu vaga esfera está en mi mano. El tiempo
Nos encorva a los dos y nos ignora
en está tarde de un jardín perdido.
Tu leve peso es húmedo en el aire.
La incesante pleamar de tu fragancia 
sube a mi vieja cara que declina 
pero te sé más lejos que aquel niño 
que te entrevió en las láminas de un sueño 
o aquí en este jardín, una mañana.
La blancura del sol puede ser tuya 
o el oro de la luna o la bermeja 
firmeza de la espada en la victoria.
Soy ciego y nada sé, pero preveo
que son más los caminos. Cada cosa
es infinitas cosas. Eres música,
firmamentos, palacios, ríos, ángeles,
rosa profunda, ilimitada, íntima,
que el Señor mostrará a mis ojos muertos.


The unending rose 
To Susana Bombal
Five hundred years in the wake of the Hegira, 
Persia looked down from its minarets 
on the invasion of the desert lances, 
and Attar of Nishapur gazed on a rose, 
addressing it in words which had no sound, 
as one who thinks rather than one who prays: 
‘Your fragile globe is in my hand; and time 
is bending both of us, both unaware, 
this afternoon, in a forgotten garden.
Your brittle shape is humid in the air.
The steady, tidal fullness of your fragrance 
rises up to my old, declining face.
But I know you far longer than that child 
who glimpsed you in the layers of a dream 
or here, in this garden, once upon a morning.
The whiteness of the sun may well be yours 
or the moon’s gold, or else the crimson stain 
on the hard sword-edge in the victory.
I am blind and I know nothing, but I see 
there are more ways to go; and everything 
is an infinity of things. You, you are music, 
rivers, firmaments, palaces and angels,
O endless rose, intimate, without limit,
which the Lord will finally show to my dead eyes.’


Notes
‘Tankas’. I have attempted to adapt to our prosody the 
 Japanese form that consists of a first line of five syllables, 
then one of seven, one of five, and the last two of seven. 
Who knows how these exercises sound to an Oriental ear. 
The original form also ignores rhyme.
‘The gold of the tigers’. For the ring of nine nights, the 
curious reader can look up chapter  of the Lesser Edda. 
The name of the ring was Draupnir.
‘In memory of Angelica’. Borges’ niece was drowned in a 
swimming pool at the age of six.


