
Back cover
Jorge  Luis  Borges's  fictions  blur  the  distinctions  between  fact  and 
fantasy, scholarship and imagination. Behind his playful cerebrations lies 
an impressive erudition amassed over a lifetime of study, in spite of 
failing eyesight and eventual blindness. Allusive motifs run through his 
writings in amazing diversity, and in Seven Nights they are distilled into 
the form of public lectures, originally given in Buenos Aires in 1977, and 
now made available for the first time in English translation.
“The Divine Comedy”; “Nightmares”; “The Thousand and One 
Nights”;  “Buddhism”;  “Poetry”;  “The  Kabbalah”;  “Blindness”
―th
e
 
relevance of these lectures to Borges's oeuvre is thoughtfully explored in 
an introduction by Alastair Reid, who as a translator has in the past 
himself worked closely with the author. The texts themselves have been 
rendered into English by Eliot Weinberger, translator of the poetry of 
Octavio Paz and Homero Aridjis.
Borges was born in 1899 in Buenos Aires, where he still lives, and 
has long  been  acknowledged  internationally  as  one  of  the  foremost 
writers of the century. His ingenious and innovative work was introduced 
to North American readers in 1962 through Labyrinths (New Directions) 
and Ficciones (Grove)
―paving the way for the immense popularity o
f
 
Latin American literature of recent years.
“Jorge Luis Borges is. . . a central fact of Western culture. . . He is also 
one of the finest, subtlest, and least appreciated of comedians.”
J. D. O'Hara, 
―
The Washington Post Book World
2

D. R. © 1980, Fondo de Cultura Económica
Translation, Copyright © 1984 by Eliot Weinberger
Introduction, Copyright © 1984 by Alastair Reid
All rights reserved. Except for brief passages quoted in a newspaper,
magazine, radio, or television review, no part of this book may be
reproduced in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including
photocopying and recording, or by any information storage and retrieval
system, without permission in writing from the Publisher.
This edition is published by arrangment with Fondo de Cultura
Económica, Av. de la Universidad, 975, 03100 Mexico, D. F.
Of the translations in this volume, “The Thousand and One Nights”
first appeared in The Georgia Review and “The Divine Comedy”
and “Poetry” in the PN Review (U.K.).
Manufactured in the United States of America
First published clothbound and as New Directions Paperbook 576 in 1984
Published simultaneously in Canada by Penguin Books Canada Limited.
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Borges, Jose Luis, 1899–
Seven nights.
(A New Directions Book)
Translation of: Siete noches.
Contents: The Divine comedy
―Nightmare
s―The 1001 nigh
ts―[et
c
.
]
I. Title.
PQ7797.B635S4213      1984      809      84-1018
ISBN 0-8112-0904-0 
ISBN 0-8112-0905-9 (pbk.)
New Directions Books are published for James Laughlin
by New Directions Publishing Corporation, 80 Eighth
Avenue, New York 10011
THIRD PRINTING
3

Contents
Introduction by Alastair Reid
5
The Divine Comedy
9
Nightmares
24
The Thousand and One Nights 36
Buddhism
48
Poetry
61
The Kabbalah
76
Blindness
85
4

Introduction
he seven lectures which make up this volume were delivered by 
Borges in Buenos Aires at the Teatro Coliseo, at intervals between 
June and August 1977. In an Epilogue to the first Spanish edition of the 
book, published in Mexico in 1980, Roy Bartholomew tells how the 
lectures were widely taped, appeared later as pirated records, and were 
printed, in a cut and mangled form, in the literary supplement of a 
Buenos Aires newspaper. Later, at a remove of two years, he worked on 
a version of the lectures with Borges, who corrected them extensively for 
publication.
T
Among his many other literary selves, Borges has had a separate 
existence as a lecturer for almost the past forty years, and, like every 
separate dimension of Borges, the lectures shed a different kind of light 
on the whole, and make clear more of Borges' webbed connections. 
Borges' dismissal from his post in the suburban library in 1946 had made 
lecturing his essential means of earning a livelihood, but he undertook it 
with some trepidation for, unable to read a written text, he had first to 
prepare the lectures, with his mother's help, and then commit them to 
memory. Yet the obligation to memorize his material did Borges a great 
service,  for,  as his blindness  encroached,  he  was  at  the  same  time 
memorizing a considerable private library of reference and quotation. 
Asked  a  question  now,  he  will  pause,  as  though  riffling  through 
bookshelves in his head, and come up with a verse from one of his 
essential texts, an idiosyncratic collection familiar to his readers. Certain 
lectures, like Borges' endlessly shifting lecture on Dante, which he has 
given many times, but probably never twice in the same form, exist by 
now in that remembered library, and it is appropriate that this group of 
them become part of the Borges canon.
5

From the seventies on, however, Borges has traveled, lectured, and 
granted  interviews  with  relative  abandon,  throughout  Europe,  South 
America, and the United States, and there his past lecturing experience 
has served him well, for it has meant that he has had ready an eclectic 
range of succinct literary opinions and an abundance of quotation, and 
has  given  memorable  interviews.  Borges'  presence  is  an  intensely 
moving one, and since, in the last ten years especially, he has been seen 
on  television  by  vast  numbers  of  people,  his  presence  has  become 
fastened to his written image, so that at certain times he appears to be a 
pure embodiment of his own writing. He prefers of late to give charlas 
rather than formal lectures, but then, whatever Borges is talking about, it 
is his manner to make sudden shifts and connections as they occur to 
him, so that the lecture becomes a series of separate insights linked by 
the eccentric thread of Borges' attention. Of his indefatigable traveling, 
he remaked to me last year: “In Buenos Aires, one day is much like 
another. . . But when I travel, I move from one comfortable armchair to 
another, a kindly ghost materializes and talks to me, very informedly, 
about my writings, then vanishes, to be replaced at once with another. It 
makes for great variety.”
I have listened and talked to Borges over the last twenty years in a 
variety  of  speaking  contexts
―i n  London ,  Oxford ,  Scotland ,  Spain
,
 
Buenos Aires, and New York
―and have come to admire the range an
d
 
fascinations of the spoken Borges, as distinct from the written one. The 
terse and scrupulous texts of the written Borges we all know well
―thei
r
 
spare inevitability, their disquieting, sometimes dizzying effect, their 
singular vocabulary, of images as well as words. Some words have 
become his
―one  could not  use  the wor d
 
vertiginoso  without being 
intensely aware of him, for his work defines it. We know from his essays 
the  play  of  his  mind,  his  speculative  ironies,  his  obliqueness,  the 
surprising connections he makes; and, through his poems, we come to 
know his obsessions, and his essential metaphors.
The spoken Borges, however, is much more elusive, and Protean. 
Where his writings show language as a game, his conversation quite 
often becomes play, a demonstration of ironies. He will quite often be 
deliberately perverse, making an apparently outrageous statement, and 
arguing it toward sense. “All literature is really for children,” he will say 
suddenly, and then he will go on to make a brilliant case.  Borges' 
6

conversational speculations follow a thread of his own, and his wiser 
interviewers have let his mind move of its own accord, content to keep 
track. Something may give him a reason to quote Oscar Wilde, and he 
will go on to talk about Wilde, about the French language, his schooldays 
in  Geneva,  Calvin,  the  Scots,  always  turning  to  the  library  in  his 
memory. Everything connects, but it is Borges alone who can make these 
connections, across cultures, across literatures, across languages, across 
time.
The lectures in  this book all  reveal  these  connected  shifts in 
Borges' attention, the flow of his mind and memory. In understanding 
Borges, it is important to remember that, for him, literary experience has 
been more vivid and affecting than real experience, or, better said, that 
there is no sensible difference between the two; so that when Borges is 
talking about books and writers, it is like talking of landscapes and 
journeys, so vivid has his reading been to him. Through literature, he 
maintains, we can travel through time, and become all men; it is his 
Aleph. So, his lectures wander along the thread of a preoccupation, as in 
the  lecture  on  “Nightmares,”  and  shift  from  personal  memories  to 
writers, to an examination of other people's metaphors, to language itself. 
There is nothing formal about Borges' literary speculations. Criticism, he 
has reminded us, is simply a branch of imaginative literature; and, while 
the play of his mind makes material for critics, Borges is not much 
concerned with literary judgment. For him, literature at its highest point 
generates awe, the disquieting astonishment that arises from a poem, a 
deep  image,  a  crucial  paragraph,  what  he  calls  either  asombro  or 
sagrada horror, “holy dread.” The writers he reaches for are those who 
have  given  him  this  essential  experience;  and  it  is  what  most 
distinguishes his own work, when, in a few phrases, the sharp edges of 
reality quiver in doubt, the awe is tangible. The lectures are separate 
literary journeys that we could not take by ourselves. Borges is our 
Virgil; only he knows the way.
The  presence  of  Borges  sometimes  takes  on  an  uncanny 
dimension: at certain times, he seems to be living his own metaphors. If 
he is asked about some remark he made years ago, he is likely to 
disclaim it, saying that it was obviously made by Borges, the Other. The 
figure of the other Borges, the writer, to whom the living Borges is 
chained,  is  familiar  to  us  from  poems  and  prose  pieces,  but  in 
7

conversation, he dramatizes the division, and makes us feel it directly. 
His work generates its own awe, but his presence intensifies it: those 
who have heard him are afterward better able to catch the wavelength of 
his writing, hearing that frail, precise voice threading its way through the 
words.
It is important, then, in reading these lectures, to imagine them 
spoken by Borges, and to follow the shifts in his text as if they were the 
shifts  in  a  living  attention,  for  the  lectures  also  demonstrate  the 
difference between the spoken and the written: the language has not been 
tempered down to written inevitability. There is a speaker present, the 
thread of a voice to follow. One has only to imagine the lecture on 
“Blindness” being delivered by a blind Borges to realize that his presence 
added a moving dimension to the language of the lecture.
It is just and appropriate that Borges' lectures should appear in an 
English version, since he has delivered many similar lectures in English. 
Borges speaks English with great respect and a careful formality. Since 
his early days in his father's English library, he has always thought of 
English as the language of literature, Spanish the language of real life, 
and his English does have certain mannerisms that come more from 
literature than from the spoken reality. Eliot Weinberger's translation has 
been careful to keep Borges' precise phrasing and tone. His version 
sounds like Borges in English. Wisely, since the original Spanish text 
was a corrected transcript, he has made essential alterations in the text, 
removing certain repetitions, to give the spoken sentences a written 
fluency. Paradoxically, while Borges' written texts are as spare as any 
great writer's, he has been generous with himself in the form of lectures 
and interviews. These lectures, in this able version, save something from 
that prodigal flow.
―Alastair Rei
d
8

The Divine Comedy
aul Claudel has written
―in a page unworthy of Paul Claude
l―th
a
t
 
the spectacles awaiting us after death will no doubt little resemble 
those that Dante showed us in the  Inferno,  the  Purgatorio,  and the 
Paradiso.
P
This curious remark is a proof of the intensity of Dante's text: the 
fact that while reading the poem, or remembering it later, we tend to 
believe that Dante imagined the other world exactly as he presented it. 
We inevitably assume that Dante believed that after death he would 
encounter the inverted mountain of Hell or the terraces of Purgatory or 
the concentric heavens of Paradise. Moreover, he would speak with 
shades
―shades of classical Antiquit
y―and some of them would reply 
i
n
 
Italian tercets.
This is, of course, absurd. Claudel's observation corresponds not to 
reason
―for to rationalize it is to realize it's absur
d―but rather to
 
a
 
sentiment, and one which could isolate us from the pleasure, the intense 
pleasure, of reading the work.
There  is  a  great  deal  of  evidence  that  refutes  this.  One  is  a 
statement attributed to Dante's son. He said that his father had proposed 
to show the life of sinners through the image of Hell, the life of penitents 
through the image of Purgatory, and the life of the just through the image 
of Paradise. He did not read it in a literal way. We have, moreover, 
Dante's own testimony, in the epistle to the Can Grande della Scala.
The epistle has been considered apocryphal, but it could not have 
been written much later than Dante. Whoever wrote it, it is believable as 
a product of its time. In it, the author affirms that the Commedia may be 
read four ways: literal, moral, anagogical, and allegorical. Dante, then, 
would be the symbol of man, Beatrice of faith, and Virgil of reason.
9

The idea of a text capable of multiple readings is characteristic of 
the Middle Ages, those maligned and complex Middle Ages that gave us 
Gothic architecture, the Icelandic sagas, and the Scholastic philosophy in 
which everything was discussed. That gave us, above all, the Commedia, 
which we continue to read, and which continues to astonish us; which 
will last beyond our lives, far beyond our waking lives, and will be 
enriched by each generation of readers.
Dante never presumed that what he was showing us corresponded 
to a real image of the world of death. Nothing of the kind. Dante could 
not possibly have thought that.
I believe, nevertheless, in the usefulness of that ingenious concept: 
the idea that what we are reading is a true story. It serves to carry us 
away. Personally, I am a hedonistic reader; I have never read a book 
merely because it was ancient. I read books for the aesthetic emotions 
they offer me, and I ignore the commentaries and criticism. When I first 
read the Commedia, I was carried away. I read it as I had read other, less 
famous works. I would like to tell you
―since we are among friends, an
d
 
since I am talking not to all of you, but rather with each one of you
―th
e
 
story of my personal involvement with the Commedia.
It all began shortly before the dictatorship. I was employed in a 
library in the Almagro section of Buenos Aires. I lived at Las Heras and 
Pueyrredón, and I had to travel by slow and solitary streetcars all the way 
from the north side of town to Almagro South, to the library at Avenida 
La Plata and Carlos Calvo. Chance
―except that there is no chance; wha
t
 
we  call  chance  is  our  ignorance  of  the  complex  machinery  of 
causality
―le d  m e  t o  discove r  thre e  smal l  volume s  i n  th e  Mitchel
l
 
Bookstore (now gone
―it brings back many memories). Those thre
e
 
volumes
―I should have brought one with me, as a talisma
n―were t
h
e
 
Inferno,  the  Purgatorio,  and the  Paradiso,  in the English version by 
Carlyle (not Thomas Carlyle). They were very handy books, published 
by Dent. They fit into my pocket. On the left was the Italian text, and on 
the right a literal translation. I devised this modus operandi: I first read a 
verse, a tercet, in the English prose; then I read the verse in Italian; and 
so on through to the end of the canto. Then I read the whole canto in 
English, and finally in Italian. With that first reading I realized that the 
translations were no substitute for the original text. The translation could 
be, at best, a means and a stimulus for the reader to approach the 
10

original. This was especially true for a Spanish reader. I think that 
Cervantes, somewhere in Don Quixote, says that with two cents of the 
Tuscan language one can understand Ariosto.
Well,  those  two  cents  were  given  to  me  by  the  semantic 
brotherhood of Spanish and Italian. I observed at the time that poetry, 
above all the great poetry of Dante, is much more than what it says. 
Poetry is, among so many other things, an intonation, an accentuation 
that is often untranslatable.  I saw this from the beginning. When  I 
reached the peak of Paradise, when I reached the deserted Paradise, 
there, at that moment in which Dante is abandoned by Virgil and he finds 
himself alone and calls out to him, at that moment I felt I could read the 
Italian text directly, only occasionally looking at the English. So I read 
the three volumes on those  slow  streetcar  rides.  Later  I  read  other 
editions.
I have read the  Commedia  many times. The truth is that I don't 
know Italian. I only know the Italian Dante taught me, and later Ariosto, 
when I read  Orlando Furioso.  And then the simpler parts of Croce. I 
have read almost all of Croce, and though I am not always in agreement 
with him, I am enchanted by him. Enchantment, as Stevenson said, is one 
of the special qualities a writer must have. Without enchantment, the rest 
is useless.
I have read the  Commedia  many times, in all of the editions I 
could find, and I have been distracted by the different commentaries, the 
varied interpretations of that multifaceted work. (Of all the editions, 
three in particular are noteworthy: those by Attilio Momigliano, Carlo 
Grabher, and Hugo Steiner.) I have found that in the oldest editions 
theological  commentary  predominates;  in  the  nineteenth  century, 
historical;  and  currently,  aesthetic,  which  directs  us  toward  the 
accentuation of each line, one of the great virtues of Dante.
I have compared Dante to Milton, but Milton has only one music: 
what they call in English a “sublime style.” That music is always the 
same, regardless of the emotions of the characters. In Dante, however, as 
in Shakespeare, the music corresponds to the emotions. Intonation and 
accentuation are foremost; each phrase must be read aloud.
Truly fine poetry must be read aloud. A good poem does not allow 
itself to be read in a low voice or silently. If we can read it silently, it is 
not  a  valid  poem:  a  poem  demands  pronunciation.  Poetry  always 
11

remembers  that  it  was  an  oral  art  before  it  was  a  written  art.  It 
remembers that it was first song.
There are two lines which confirm this. One is in Homer
―or th
e
 
Greeks whom we call Homer
―where he says, in the
 
Odyssey, “The gods 
weave misfortunes for men, so that the generations to come will have 
something to sing about.” The other, much later, is from Mallarmé, who 
repeats, less beautifully, what Homer said:  “tout aboutit en un livre,” 
everything ends up in a book. The Greeks speak of generations that will 
sing; Mallarmé speaks of an object, of a thing among things, a book. But 
the idea is the same: the idea that we are made for art, we are made for 
memory, we are made for poetry, or perhaps we are made for oblivion. 
But something remains, and that something is history or poetry, which 
are not essentially different.
Carlyle and other critics have observed  that the most notable 
characteristic of Dante is intensity. If we think of the hundred cantos of 
the poem, it seems a miracle that that intensity never lets up, except in a 
few places in the Paradiso which for the poet were light and for us are 
shadow. I can't think of another example, except perhaps Macbeth, which 
begins with the three witches and continues to the death of the hero 
without a weak moment.
I would like to mention another aspect: the gentleness of Dante. 
We always think of the somber and sententious Florentine poem, and we 
forget that the work is full of delights, of pleasures, of tenderness. That 
tenderness is part of the structure of the work. For example, Dante must 
have read somewhere that the cube is the most solid of volumes. It was a 
current, unpoetical observation, and yet Dante used it as a metaphor for 
man,  who  must  support  misfortune:  “buon  tetragono  a  i  colpe  di 
fortuna,” man is a good tetragon, a cube. That is truly rare.
I'd also like to recall the curious metaphor of the arrow. Dante 
wants to make us feel the speed of the arrow as it leaves the bow and hits 
the target. He tells us that it is fixed in the target, that it shoots from the 
bow, and leaves the string. He inverts the beginning and end to show 
how quickly this has occurred.
There is a verse that is always in my memory. It is the one in the 
first  canto  of  the  Purgatorio  where  he  refers  to  that  morning,  that 
incredible morning on the mountain of Purgatory, at the South Pole. 
Dante, who has left the filth, the sadness, and the horror of Hell, says, 
12

“dolce color d'oriental zaffiro.” The lines impose that slowness on the 
voice:
dolce color d 'oriental zaffiro
che s'accoglieva nel sereno aspetto
del mezzo puro infino al primo giro.
I  would  like  to  linger  over  the  curious  mechanism  of  this 
verse
―but the wor d
 
mechanism  is too harsh for what I want to say. 
Dante describes the Eastern sky, describes the dawn, and compares the 
color of the dawn to a sapphire. He compares it to a sapphire called 
Oriental sapphire, a sapphire of the East. The line is a game of mirrors, 
since the Orient is the color of the sapphire and the sapphire is an 
Oriental sapphire. That is to say, the sapphire is weighted with the riches 
of the word Oriental. It is full of The Thousand and One Nights, which 
Dante did not know, but which nevertheless is there.
I will also recall the famous last line of the fifth canto of the 
Inferno: “e caddi come corpo morto cade.” The fall resounds through 
the repetition of the word fall.
The Commedia is full of felicities of this kind. But what sustains 
the poem is that it is a narrative. When I was young, narrative was 
scorned. It was considered to be nothing more than anecdote. It was 
forgotten that poetry began by being narrative, that the roots of poetry 
are the epic, that the epic is the first poetic genre. In the epic there is 
time: a before, during, and after. All of that is in poetry.
I would advise the reader to ignore the feud between the Guelphs 
and Ghibellines, Scholastic philosophy, the mythological allusions, and 
the lines of Virgil which Dante repeats, sometimes improving them, as 
excellent as they are in the original Latin. It is better, at least in the 
beginning, merely to follow the story. I don't think anyone can keep from 
doing so.
We enter, then, into a story, and we enter in a way that is almost 
magical.  Normally,  when  dealing  with  the  supernatural,  one  has an 
unbelieving writer guiding unbelieving readers, and he must prepare 
them for what is to come. Dante does not need this: “Nel mezzo del 
cammin di nostra vita / mi rotrovai per una selva oscura.” That is, at 
thirty-five I found myself in a dark forest. It may be allegorical, but we 
13

physically believe it. Thirty-five is halfway through life because the 
Bible prescribes a life of seventy years for the prudent man. It is assumed 
that everything after seventy is bleak, as the English say; everything is 
sadness and anxiety. So when Dante writes, “nel mezzo del cammin di 
nostra vita,”  he is not exercising a vague rhetoric. He is telling us 
exactly the date of his vision.
I don't think that Dante was a visionary. A vision is brief. A vision 
as large as the Commedia is impossible. His vision was voluntary: we 
may abandon ourselves to it and read it with poetic faith. Coleridge said 
that poetic faith is the willing suspension of disbelief. If we attend the 
theater, we know that, amid the scenery, there are costumed people 
speaking the words of Shakespeare or Ibsen or Pirandello which have 
been  put  in  their  mouths.  But  we  accept  that  these  people  are  not 
costumed, that the man in the antechamber slowly talking to himself of 
vengeance really is Hamlet, Prince of Denmark. We lose ourselves. 
Films are even stranger, for what we are seeing are not disguised people 
but photographs of disguised people, and yet we believe them while the 
film is being shown.
In the case of Dante, everything is so vivid that we begin to 
imagine that he believed in his other world, in the same way that he 
believed in a geocentric astronomy and not in other astronomies.
We believe Dante so profoundly for a reason that was pointed out 
by Paul Groussac: because the Commedia is written in the first person. It 
is not a mere grammatical artifice; it does not mean saying I saw for they 
saw or it was. It means something more. It means that Dante is one of the 
characters of the  Commedia.  According to Groussac, this was a new 
development. Before Dante, St. Augustine had written his Confessions. 
But those confessions, because of their splendid rhetoric, are not as close 
to us as Dante is; the rhetoric interposes itself between what he wants to 
say and what we hear.
Rhetoric must be a bridge, a road; too often it is a wall, an 
obstacle. We see it in writers as diverse as Seneca, Quevedo, Milton, and 
Lugones. In all of them the words come between them and us.
We know Dante more intimately than his contemporaries. One 
might say that we know him as he knew Virgil, who was a dream of his. 
We certainly know him better than we know Beatrice Portinari, better 
than  anyone.  He  has  placed  himself  in  the  center  of  the  action. 
14

Everything is not only seen by him, but he is also an active participant. 
But his role is not always in accord with what he is describing.
We see Dante terrified by Hell. He must be terrified, not because 
he is a coward but rather so that we will believe in Hell. Dante is 
terrified, he is afraid, he comments on this and that. We know his 
opinions not by what he says but by the poetics, the intonation, the 
accentuation of his language. 
There is another character. (In fact, there are three, but I will now 
speak of the second.) And that is Virgil. Dante has succeeded in giving 
us a second image of Virgil. The first is the image left us by the Aeneid 
or the Georgics. The second, the more intimate image, has been given to 
us by poetry, by Dante's pious poetry.
One of the subjects of literature
―as it is of lif
e―is friendship.
 
I
 
would say that friendship is the Argentine passion. There are many 
friendships in literature, which is a web of friendship: Quixote and 
Sancho; Fierro and Cruz, our two gauchos lost in the frontier; the old 
soldier and Fabio Cáceres; Kim and the lama. Friendship is a common 
theme, but in general writers tend to emphasize the contrast between the 
two friends.
In the case of Dante, the matter is more delicate. It is not exactly a 
contrast, although there is a filial relationship. Dante comes to be the son 
of Virgil, yet at the same time he is superior to Virgil for he believes he 
will be saved, since he has been given the vision. But he knows, from the 
beginning, that Virgil is a lost soul, a reprobate. When Virgil tells him 
that he cannot accompany him beyond Purgatory, he knows that the 
Latin poet will always inhabit the terrible nobile castello with the great 
shades of Antiquity, those who never heard the word of Christ. At that 
moment,  Dante  hails  him  with  magnificent  words:  “Tu,  duca;  tu, 
signore; tu, maestro. . .” He speaks of the great labor and of the great 
love with which his work has been studied, and this relation is always 
maintained between the two. But Virgil is essentially a sad figure who 
knows he is forever condemned to that castle filled with the absence of 
God. Dante, however, will be permitted to see God; he will be permitted 
to understand the universe.
We have, first, two characters. And then there are the thousands, 
hundreds, a multitude of characters of whom it has been said that they 
are episodic. I would call them eternal.
15

A contemporary novel requires five or six hundred pages to make 
us know somebody, if it ever does. For Dante a single moment is enough. 
In that moment a person is defined forever. Dante unconsciously sought 
that central moment. I have wanted to do the same in many stories, and I 
have been admired for a discovery which actually belongs to Dante in 
the Middle Ages: that of presenting a moment as a cipher of a life. In 
Dante we have characters whose lives may consist of only a few tercets, 
and yet their lives are eternal. They live in a word, in a gesture; they 
need do nothing more. They are merely part of a canto, but that part is 
eternal. They keep living and renewing themselves in the memory and in 
the imagination of men.
Carlyle said that there are two characteristics of Dante. Of course 
there are others, but two are essential: tenderness and rigor, which do not 
contradict one another. On the one hand, there is his human tenderness, 
what Shakespeare called “the milk of human kindness.” On the other, 
there is the knowledge that we are inhabitants of a rigorous world, that 
there is an order to it. That order corresponds to the Other, the third 
speaker.
Let us recall two examples. First, the best-known episode of the 
Inferno, the story of Paolo and Francesca in the fifth canto. I would not 
presume to summarize what Dante has said
―it would be irreverent fo
r
 
me  to  say  in  other  words  what  Dante  has  said  for  always  in  his 
Italian
―but I'd like simply to recall the circumstances
.
Dante and Virgil arrive at the second circle. There they see the 
whirlwind of souls and smell the stench of sin, the stench of punishment. 
There is Minos, twining his tail around himself to indicate to which 
circle  the  condemned  must  descend.  It  is  physically  disagreeable, 
deliberately ugly, because it is understood that in Hell nothing can be 
beautiful. In that circle where the lustful are punished there are great, 
illustrious names. I say “great names” because Dante, when he began the 
canto, had not yet reached the perfection of his art, the point where the 
characters  became  something  more  than  their  names.  But  halfway 
through the canto, Dante makes his great discovery: the possibility of a 
dialogue between the souls of the dead and Dante himself, who will 
respond and judge in his fashion. No, he will not judge them. He knows 
that he is not the Judge, that the Judge is the Other, the third speaker, the 
Divinity.
16

Well then: there are Helen, Achilles, Paris, Tristan, and other 
luminaries. But Dante sees two whom he does not know, less illustrious, 
and who belong to the contemporary world: Paolo and Francesca. He 
knows that they have both died as adulterers. He calls to them and they 
come, “quali colombe dal disio chiamate.” Here we have two sinners, 
and  Dante  compares  them  to  two  doves  called  by  desire,  because 
sensuality must also be the essence of the scene. They draw near, and 
Francesca, who is the only one to speak
―Paolo canno
t―thanks him f
o
r
 
calling them and speaks these pathetic words: “Se fosse amico il Re 
dell'universo / noi pregheremmo lui per la tua pace,” if we were friends 
of the King of the universe
―she cannot say God, because that name i
s
 
forbidden in Hell and Purgatory
―we would pray for your peace, sinc
e
 
you have taken pity on our misfortune.
Francesca tells her story, and she tells it twice. The first time she 
tells it in a reserved fashion, but she insists that she is still in love with 
Paolo. Repentence is forbidden in Hell. She knows she has sinned and 
must continue to be faithful to her sin, which gives her a heroic grandeur. 
It  would  be  terrible  if  she  repented,  if  she  denied  what  happened. 
Francesca knows the punishment is just; she accepts it, and continues to 
love Paolo.
Dante is curious about one thing. “Amor condusse noi ad una 
morte”:  Paolo  and  Francesca  were  executed  together.  Dante  is  not 
interested in adultery, nor in the way they were discovered and brought 
to justice. What interests him is something more intimate, and that is how 
they knew they were in love, how they fell in love, how they reached the 
time of the sweet sighs. He asks them.
To digress for a moment, I would like to recall a stanza, perhaps 
the finest, of Leopoldo Lugones, who was no doubt inspired by the fifth 
canto of the  Inferno.  It is the first quatrain of his “Alma venturosa” 
(“Fortunate soul”), one of the sonnets of  Las horas dorados (“The 
golden hours”) of 1922:
Al promediar la tarde de aquel dia, 
Cuando iba mi habitual adiós a darte, 
Fue una vaga congoja de dejarte 
Lo que me hizo saber que te quería.
17

[Halfway through the afternoon that day,
As I bid you my habitual goodbye, 
A vague dismay at leaving
Made me know that I loved you.]
An inferior poet would have said that a man feels great sadness on 
leaving his woman, and he would have said that they see each other 
rarely. In contrast, “As I bid you my habitual goodbye” may be a slow 
and heavy line, but it expresses that they see each other frequently. And 
then: “A vague dismay at leaving / Made me know that I loved you.”
The theme is essentially the same in the fifth canto: two people 
who discover that they are in love and didn't know it. This is what Dante 
wants to know; he wants them to tell him how it happened. She tells 
how, to entertain themselves one day, they were reading about Lancelot 
and how he complained of love. They were alone and suspected nothing. 
They did not suspect they were in love. And they were reading a story 
from the  Matière de Bretagne,  one of those books conceived by the 
British in France after the Saxon invasion
―one of those books that fe
d
 
the madness of Alonso Quijano and revealed their guilty love to Paolo 
and Francesca. Well: Francesca states that at times they blushed. Then, 
“quando leggemmo il disiato riso,”  when we read how the longed-for 
smile was kissed by such a lover, this one, who will never be separated 
from me, kissed my mouth, tutto tremante.
There is something that Dante does not say, but which one feels at 
a distance from the episode and perhaps gives it its virtue. Dante relates 
the fate of the two lovers with an infinite pity, and we sense that he 
envies their fate. Paolo and Francesca are in Hell and he will be saved, 
but they have loved and he never won the love of the woman he loved, 
Beatrice. There is a certain injustice to this, and Dante must feel it as 
something terrible, now that he is separated from her. In contrast, these 
two sinners are together. They cannot speak to each other, they turn in 
the black whirlwind without hope, yet they are together. When she 
speaks, she says “we,” speaking for the two of them, another form of 
being together. They are together for eternity; they share Hell
―and that
,
 
for Dante, must have been a kind of Paradise.
We know that he is quite moved. He then collapses as though he 
were dead.
18

Everyone is defined forever in a single instant of their lives, a 
moment in which a man encounters his self for always. It has been said 
that Dante is cruel toward Francesca, by condemning her. But that is to 
ignore the Third  Character.  The  judgment  of  God  does  not  always 
coincide with the feelings of Dante. Those who do not understand the 
Commedia say that Dante wrote it to take revenge on his enemies and to 
reward  his  friends.  There  is  nothing  more  false.  Nietzsche  said, 
slanderously, that Dante is a hyena making verses among the tombs. A 
versifying hyena is a contradiction; moreover, Dante does not enjoy 
suffering. He knows that there are unpardonable, capital sins. For each 
he selects a person who has committed that sin. But in each there may be 
something admirable or worthy. Francesca and Paolo are not merely 
voluptuaries. They have committed no other sin, but one is enough to 
condemn them.
The idea of God as indecipherable is a concept we find in another 
of the essential books of mankind, the Book of Job. You will recall how 
Job condemns God, how his friends defend Him, and how at the end God 
speaks from the whirlwind and rebukes equally those who accuse or 
defend Him. God is beyond all human justice, as He Himself declares in 
the Book of Job. And the men humble themselves before God, because 
they have dared to judge Him, to defend Him. It is unnecessary. God, as 
Nietzsche would say, is beyond good and evil. He is another category.
If Dante had always agreed with the God he imagines, it would 
have meant that his was a false god, merely a replica of Dante himself. 
However, Dante must accept his God, as he must accept that Beatrice 
never loved him, that Florence is vile, as he will have to accept his exile 
and his death in Ravenna. He must accept the evil of the world, and at 
the same time, he must worship a God he does not understand.
There is a character missing in the Commedia, one who could not 
be there because he had become too human. That character is Jesus. He 
does not appear in the  Commedia  as he appears in the Gospels; the 
human Jesus of the Gospels could not be the Second Person of the 
Trinity that the Commedia requires.
I would like to turn to the second example, which for me is the 
high point of the Commedia. It occurs in the twenty-sixth canto, and it is 
the episode of Ulysses. (I once wrote an article titled “The Enigma of 
Ulysses.” I published it, but later lost it, and I'd like to try to reconstruct 
19

it now.) I think that it is the most enigmatic of the episodes of the 
Commedia, and perhaps the most intense. But it is very difficult, when 
dealing with peaks, to know which is the highest
―and the
 
Commedia is 
made of peaks.
I have chosen the Commedia for this first talk because I am a man 
of letters and I believe that the apex of literature, of all literature, is the 
Commedia. This does not imply that I agree with its theology, or with its 
mythology, which is a combination of Christian and pagan myth. What it 
means is that no book has given me such intense aesthetic emotions. 
And, I repeat, I am a hedonistic reader; I look for emotion in books.
The Commedia is a book that everyone ought to read. Not to do so 
is to deprive oneself of the greatest gift that literature can give us; it is to 
submit to a strange asceticism. Why should we deny ourselves the joy of 
reading the  Commedia?  Besides, it is not difficult to read. What is 
difficult is outside of the reading: the opinions, the discussions. But the 
book itself is crystalline. And there is the central character, Dante, who is 
perhaps the most vivid character in literature, not to mention the other 
characters. But I will return to the episode of Ulysses.
They reach a ditch, I think it is the eighth, the one of swindlers. 
There is, in the beginning, an apostrophe against Florence, where he says 
that it beats its wings over heaven and earth and its name is spread 
through Hell. Then he sees above him countless flames, and inside the 
flames are the dark souls of the swindlers, dark because they continue to 
hide themselves. The flames move, and Dante almost falls. Virgil holds 
him back
―the words of Virgil. He speaks of those who are inside th
e
 
flames, and Virgil mentions two great names, Ulysses and Diomedes. 
They are there because together they plotted the strategy of the Trojan 
horse, which allowed the Greeks to enter the besieged city.
There are Ulysses and Diomedes, and Dante wants to meet them. 
He tells Virgil his desire to speak with these illustrious ancient shades, 
these celebrated and great ancient heroes. Virgil approves, but asks him 
to  leave  the  talking  to  him,  since  we  are  dealing  with  two  proud 
Greeks
―it is better if Dante does not speak. This has been explained i
n
 
various ways. Torquato Tasso believed that Virgil wanted to surpass 
Homer. That suspicion is totally absurd, for Virgil sang of Ulysses and 
Diomedes, and if Dante knows them it was because Virgil made them 
known. We may ignore the hypothesis that Dante was scorned because 
20

he was a descendant of Aeneas, a barbarian, worthless to the Greeks. 
Virgil, like Diomedes and Ulysses, is a dream of Dante's. Dante is 
dreaming them, but he dreams them with such intensity, in a way that is 
so vivid, that he can believe that those dreams
―which have no othe
r
 
voice than that which he gives them, no other form than that which he 
lends them
―may scorn him, he who is nobody, who hasn't even writte
n
 
his Commedia.
Dante has entered the game, as we enter it: Dante too is swindled 
by the  Commedia.  He thinks: they are celebrated heroes of Antiquity, 
and I am nobody, a poor man. Why should they take notice of what I say 
to them? Then Virgil asks them to tell how they died, and the voice of 
the invisible Ulysses speaks. Ulysses has no face; he is within the flame.
Here we come to what is wonderful, a legend created by Dante, a 
legend superior to many in the Odyssey or the Aeneid, or those that will 
be included in that other book in which Ulysses appears, as Sinbad of the 
Sea (Sinbad the Sailor), The Thousand and One Nights.
The legend was suggested to Dante by various things; above all, 
the belief that the city of Lisbon was founded by Ulysses and the stories 
of the Fortunate Isles in the Atlantic. The Celts were thought to have 
populated the Atlantic coast from those fantastic lands: an island with a 
river that rises up and crosses the sky and is full of boats and fish that do 
not fall back to earth; a revolving island of fire; an island where bronze 
greyhounds chase silver deer. Some of this must have been known to 
Dante; what is important is what he made of these legends. He originated 
something that is essentially noble.
Ulysses leaves Penelope. He calls together his companions and 
reminds them that, although they are now old and married men, they 
have  crossed  thousands  of  dangers  with  him.  He  proposes  a  noble 
enterprise: to pass through the Pillars of Hercules and cross the sea, to 
explore the Southern Hemisphere, which, it was then believed, was a 
hemisphere of water
―it was not known if anyone was there. He tell
s
 
them that they are men, not beasts; they have been born for courage, for 
knowledge; they have been born to know and to understand.
They follow him and “make wings of their oars.” (It is curious that 
this metaphor is also found in the Odyssey, which Dante could not have 
known.) They sail and leave behind Ceuta and Seville, enter the open 
sea, and turn toward the left. (Toward the left, or on the left, means evil 
21

in the Commedia. To climb to Purgatory one goes to the right; to descend 
to Hell, to the left. That is to say, the “sinister” side has a double 
meaning.) Then he tells us, “in the night I saw all the stars of the other 
hemisphere”
―our hemisphere, the Southern, full of stars. (The grea
t
 
Irish poet Yeats speaks of the “starladen sky.” That is untrue in the 
Northern Hemisphere, where there are few stars compared to ours.)
They sail for five months and then, at last, see land. What they see 
is a brown mountain in the distance, a mountain taller than any they have 
ever seen. Ulysses says that their joy was soon turned to grief, for a 
whirlwind blew from the land and the ship was lost. That mountain is 
Purgatory,  as  we  will  learn  in  another  canto.  Dante  believes  that 
Purgatory
―he pretends to believe in poetic justic
e―is antipodal to t
h
e
 
city of Jerusalem.
Well, we reach that terrible moment, and we wonder why Ulysses 
has been punished. Evidently it was not for the ruse of the Trojan horse, 
since the culminating moment of his life, the one told to Dante and to us, 
is another: it is that generous, bold enterprise of wanting to know the 
forbidden, the impossible. We ask ourselves why this canto has such 
force. Before answering I would like to mention something which has 
never been said before, as far as I know.
It is that other great book, a great poem of our times, Moby-Dick 
by  Herman  Melville,  who  certainly  knew  Dante  in  the  Longfellow 
translation. We have the mad enterprise of the crippled Captain Ahab, 
who wants to revenge himself on the white whale. At the end they find 
the whale, who sinks the ship, and the great novel ends exactly as Dante's 
canto ends: the sea closes over them. Melville must have remembered 
the Commedia at that point, though I prefer to think that he had read it 
and absorbed it in such a way he could literally forget it; that the 
Commedia had become part of him, and that he could rediscover what he 
had read years before. But the story is the same, except that Ahab is not 
moved by a noble aim but rather by a desire for vengeance. Ulysses, in 
contrast, acts as the greatest of men. Moreover, he invokes a just reason, 
one related to intelligence, and he is punished.
To what do we owe the tragic weight of this episode? I think there 
is an explanation, the only valid one, and that is that Dante felt, in some 
way, that he was Ulysses. I don't know if he felt it in a conscious way
―i
t  
doesn't matter. In some tercet of the Commedia he says that no one is 
22

permitted to know the judgments of Providence. We cannot anticipate 
them; no one can know who will be saved and who condemned. But 
Dante has dared, through poetry, to do precisely that. He shows us the 
condemned and the chosen. He must have known that doing so courted 
danger. He could not ignore that he was anticipating the indecipherable 
providence of God.
For this reason the character of Ulysses has such force, because 
Ulysses is a mirror of Dante, because Dante felt that perhaps he too 
deserved this punishment. Writing the poem, whether for good or ill, he 
was infringing on the mysterious laws of the night, of God, of Divinity.
I have reached the end, and again I would like to insist that no one 
has the right to deprive himself of this pleasure
―th e
 
Commedia―of 
reading it in an open way. Later come the commentaries, the desire to 
know what each mythological allusion means, to see how Dante took a 
great line of Virgil and perhaps improved it by translating it. In the 
beginning we must read the book with the faith of a child, abandoning 
ourselves to it; then it will accompany us to the end. It has accompanied 
me for so many years, and I know that as soon as I open it tomorrow I 
will discover things I did not see before. I know that this book will go on, 
beyond my waking life, and beyond ours.
23

Nightmares
reams are the genus; nightmares the species. I will speak first of 
dreams, and then of nightmares.
D
Lately  I've  been  rereading  psychology  books,  and  I  have  felt 
singularly defrauded. All of them discuss the mechanisms of dreams or 
the subjects of dreams, but they do not mention, as I had hoped, that 
which is so astonishing, so strange
―the fact of dreaming
.
Thus, in a psychology book I admire greatly, The Mind of Man, 
Gustav Spiller states that dreams correspond to the lowest plane of 
mental  activity
― I  woul d  maintai n  that ,  a t  leas t  fo r  me ,  thi s  i s  a
n
 
error
―and he speaks of the incoherence, the disconnectedness, of th
e
 
fables of dreams. I would like to recall Paul Groussac and his fine essay, 
“Among Dreams,” in The Intellectual Voyage. Groussac writes that it is 
astonishing  that  each  morning  we  wake  up sane
―tha t  is ,  relativel
y
 
sane
―after having passed through that zone of shades, those labyrinth
s
 
of dreams.
The  study  of  dreams  is  particularly  difficult,  for  we  cannot 
examine dreams directly, we can only speak of the memory of dreams. 
And it is possible  that the memory of dreams does not correspond 
exactly  to  the  dreams  themselves.  A  great  writer  of  the  eighteenth 
century, Sir Thomas Browne, believed that our memory of dreams is 
more impoverished than the splendor of reality. Others, in turn, believe 
that we improve our dreams. If we think of the dream as a work of 
fiction
―and I think it i
s―it may be that we continue to spin tales wh
e
n
 
we wake and later when we recount them.
I want to recall that great book by Boethius,  De consolatione 
philosophiae, which Dante read and reread, as he read and reread all of 
the literature of the Middle Ages. Boethius, who has been called “the last 
Roman,” Boethius the senator imagined a spectator at a horse race.
24

The spectator is in the hippodrome, and he sees, from his box, the 
horses at the starting gate, all the vicissitudes of the race itself, and the 
arrival of one of the horses at the finishing  line. He sees it all in 
succession.  Boethius  then  imagines  another  spectator.  This  other 
spectator is the spectator of the spectator of the race; he is, let us say, 
God. God sees the whole race; he sees in a single eternal instant the start, 
the race, the finish. He sees everything in a single glance; and in the 
same way he sees all of history. Thus Boethius bridges the concepts of 
free will and of Providence. Just as the spectator sees the race (albeit 
sequentially) but does not influence it, so God sees the whole race from 
cradle to tomb. He does not influence what we do. We act by our own 
free will, but God knows
―God knows at this very momen
t―our fin
a
l
 
destiny. God sees all of history, what unfolds as history, in a single 
splendid dizzying instant that is eternity.
I think now of that book, An Experiment with Time―I know no 
title more interesting
―by J. W. Dunne, an English writer of this century
.
 
I do not agree with his theory, but it is so beautiful it's worth recalling. In 
the book he imagines that each one of us possesses a kind of modest 
personal eternity: one we possess each night. Tonight we will sleep, and 
tonight,  Wednesday  night,  we  will  dream.  And  we  will  dream  of 
Wednesday and of the next day, Thursday, and perhaps of Friday, and 
perhaps of Tuesday. . . Each man is given, in dreams, a little personal 
eternity which allows him to see the recent past and the near future.
All of this the dreamer sees in a single glance, in the same way 
that God, from His vast eternity, sees the whole cosmic process. And 
what  happens  when  we  wake?  What  happens  is  that,  as  we  are 
accustomed to a sequential life, we give a narrative structure to our 
dream, though our dream has been multiple and simultaneous.
Let us look at a very simple example. Suppose I dream of a man, 
simply the image of a man
―I'm using a very poor drea
m―and the
n
,
 
immediately after, I dream the image of a tree. Waking, I can give this 
dream a complexity it does not have: I can think I have dreamed that a 
man has been changed into a tree, that he was a tree. Modifying the facts, 
I spin a tale.
We  don't  know  exactly  what  happens  in  dreams.  It  is  not 
impossible that, during dreams, we are in heaven, we are in hell. Perhaps 
we are someone, the someone whom Shakespeare called “the thing I 
25

am”; perhaps we are ourselves, perhaps we are God. All of this we forget 
at waking. We can only examine the memory of a dream, the poor 
memory.
I  have  read  Frazer
― a  supremel y  talente d  writer ,  bu t  als o  a
n
 
extremely credulous one, as it seems he believed everything reported by 
the various travelers. According to Frazer, savages do not distinguish 
between waking and dreaming. For them, dreams are episodes of the 
waking life. Thus, according to Frazer, or according to the travelers he 
read, a savage dreams he goes into the forest and kills a lion. When he 
wakes, he thinks his soul has abandoned his body and has killed a lion in 
his dreams. Or, if we want to complicate things a little, we may suppose 
that he has killed the dream of a lion. All of this is possible, and this idea 
of  the  savages  coincides  with  that  of  children,  who  also  cannot 
distinguish between waking and dream.
I will recall a personal memory. A nephew of mine
―he was abou
t
 
five or six at the time
―used to tell me his dreams each morning. On
e
 
day, as he was sitting on the floor, I asked him what he had dreamed. 
Patiently, knowing that I had this  hobby,  he told me: “Last night I 
dreamed that I was lost in the forest. I was scared, but I came to a 
clearing, and there was a white house, made of wood, with a staircase 
that turned around, with steps with runners, and then a door, and out of 
this door you came out.” I interrupted him sharply: “Stop making up 
things about my house!”
Everything, waking and dream, occurred for him on a single plane. 
This brings us to another, similar but contrary, hypothesis: that of the 
mystics and the metaphysicians.
For the savage and for the child, dreams are episodes of the 
waking life; for poets and mystics, it is not impossible for all of the 
waking life to be a dream. This was said, in a dry and laconic fashion, by 
Calderón: “Life is a dream.” It was said, with an image, by Shakespeare: 
“We are such stuff as dreams are made on.” And splendidly by the 
Austrian poet Walter von der Vogelweide, who asked, “Ist mein Leben 
geträumt oder ist es wahr?”―have I dreamed my life or is it real? I am 
not sure. It takes us certainly to solipsism, to the suspicion that there is 
only one dreamer and that dreamer is every one of us. That dreamer
―le
t
 
us imagine that I am he
―is, at this very moment, dreaming you. He i
s
 
dreaming this room and this lecture. There is only one dreamer, and that 
26

dreamer dreams all of the cosmic process, dreams all of the world's 
history,  dreams  everything,  including  your  childhood  and  your 
adolescence. All this could not have happened; at this moment it begins 
to exist. He begins to dream and is each one of us
―not
 
us, but each one. 
At this moment I am dreaming that I am giving a lecture on the Calle 
Charcas, that I am looking for things to say (and perhaps not finding 
them); I am dreaming you. But it is not true. Each one of you is dreaming 
me and the others.
We have these two ideas: the belief that dreams are part of waking, 
and the other, the splendid one, the belief of the poets: that all of waking 
is a dream. There is no difference between the two. It takes us back to 
Groussac's article: we may be awake, we may be asleep and dreaming, 
but our mental activity is the same.
There is a passage in the Odyssey where it speaks of two gates, 
one of horn and one of ivory. Through the ivory gate false dreams pass 
to men, and through the gate of horn go the true and prophetic dreams. 
And there is a passage in the  Aeneid,  in the sixth book, which has 
provoked innumerable commentaries. Aeneas descends to the Elysian 
Fields, beyond the Pillars of Hercules. He speaks with the shades of 
Achilles and Tiresias; he sees the shade of his mother, he wants to 
embrace her but cannot because she is made of shadow; and he sees, 
moreover,  the  future  greatness  of  the  city  he  will  found.  He  sees 
Romulus and Remus, a field, and then in that field the future Roman 
Forum, the future grandeur of Rome, the greatness of Augustus; he sees 
the whole imperial grandeur. And after having seen all of this, after 
having talked to its contemporaries (who, for Aeneas, are future people), 
he returns to the world of the living. What then occurs is quite curious 
and  has  never  been  well  explained,  except  by  one  anonymous 
commentator who I believe offered the truth. Aeneas returns through the 
gate of ivory and not through the gate of horn. Why? The anonymous 
commentator tells us: because we are not in reality. For Virgil, the real 
world was possibly the Platonic world, the world of the archetypes. 
Aeneas passes through the gates of ivory because he enters the world of 
dreams
―that is to say, what we call waking
.
Well, all of this may well be.
Now we come to the species, to nightmare. It may be useful to 
recall the names of nightmare.
27

The Spanish name, pesadilla, is too cheerful: the diminutive -illa 
makes it lack force. In other languages the names are more powerful. In 
Greek  the  word  is  ephialtes:  Ephialtes  is  the  demon  who  inspires 
nightmares. In Latin we have  incubus.  The incubus is the demon who 
crushes the sleeper, causing the nightmare. In German we have a very 
curious word, Alp, which has come to mean both the elf and the torment 
brought by elf
―the same idea of a demon who inspires nightmares
.
 
There is a painting that De Quincey, one of literature's great dreamers of 
nightmares, saw. It is a painting by Fuseli or Füssli (which was his actual 
name; he was a Swiss painter of the eighteenth century) called  The 
Nightmare. A girl is sleeping. She wakes and is terrified because she sees 
lying on her belly a monster that is small, black, and malign. This 
monster  is  the  nightmare.  When  Fuseli  painted  this picture  he  was 
thinking of the word Alp, of the elf's torments.
We  come  now  to  the  wisest  and  most  ambiguous  word,  the 
English  nightmare,  which means the mare of the night. This was how 
Shakespeare understood it. There is a line of his that says, “I met the 
night mare.” Clearly he saw it as a mare. And there is another line where 
he says, deliberately, “the nightmare and her nine foals.”
But according to the etymologists the root is different. The root is 
niht mare  or  niht maere,  the demon of the night. Dr. Johnson, in his 
famous  dictionary,  says  that  this  corresponds  to  Nordic 
mythology
―Saxon mythology we would sa
y―which saw nightmares 
a
s
 
the products of demons. This would make it a play on, or translation of, 
the Greek ephialtes or the Latin incubus.
There is another interpretation that may help us, one that relates 
nightmare  to the German word  Märchen. Märchen  means fable, fairy 
tale, fiction. Nightmare, then, would be the fiction of the night. Whatever 
the  case,  the  fact  of  conceiving  of  nightmare  as  a  mare  of  the 
night
―there is something terrifying in a mare of the nigh
t―was a bo
o
n
 
for Victor Hugo. Hugo mastered English and wrote an unjustly forgotten 
book on Shakespeare. In one of his poems, I think in Les contemplations, 
he speaks of “le cheval noir de la nuit,”  the black horse of night. No 
doubt he was thinking of the English word nightmare.
We also have the French word,  cauchemar,  which is probably 
linked to nightmare. In all of these words there is an idea of demonic 
origin, the idea of a demon who causes the nightmare. I believe it does 
28

not derive simply from a superstition. I believe that there is
―and I spea
k
 
with complete honesty and sincerity
―something true in this idea
.
Let us enter into the nightmare, into nightmares. Mine are always 
the same. I have two nightmares which often become confused with one 
another. I have the nightmare of the labyrinth, which comes, in part, 
from a steel engraving I saw in a French book when I was a child. In this 
engraving were the Seven Wonders of the  World, among them the 
labyrinth of Crete. The labyrinth was a great amphitheater, a very high 
amphitheater (and this was apparent because  it was higher than the 
cypresses and the men outside it). In this closed structure
―ominousl
y
 
closed
―there were cracks. I believed when I was a child (or I no
w
 
believe I believed) that if one had a magnifying glass powerful enough, 
one could look through the cracks and see the Minotaur in the terrible 
center of the labyrinth.
My other nightmare is that of the mirror. The two are not distinct, 
as it only takes two facing mirrors to construct a labyrinth. I remember 
seeing, in the house of Dora de Alvear in the Belgrano district, a circular 
room whose walls and doors were mirrored, so that whoever entered the 
room found himself at the center of a truly infinite labyrinth.
I always dream of labyrinths or of mirrors. In the dream of the 
mirror another vision appears, another terror of my nights, and that is the 
idea of the mask. Masks have always scared me. No doubt I felt in my 
childhood that someone who was wearing a mask was hiding something 
horrible. These are my most terrible nightmares: I see myself reflected in 
a mirror, but the reflection is wearing a mask. I am afraid to pull the 
mask off, afraid to see my real face, which I imagine to be hideous. 
There may be leprosy or evil or something more terrible than anything I 
am capable of imagining.
A curious feature of my nightmares
―I don't know if you shar
e
 
this with me
―is that they have a precise topography. I, for example
,
 
always dream of certain corners in Buenos Aires. I'm on the corner of 
Laprida and Arenales, or the one at Balcarce and Chile. I know exactly 
where I am, and I know that I must head toward some far-off place. 
These places in my dreams have a precise topography, but they are 
completely different. They may be mountain paths or swamps or jungles, 
it doesn't matter: I know that I am on a certain corner in Buenos Aires. I 
try to find my way.
29

Although one might wish otherwise, in dreams what is important 
is not the images. What matters, as Coleridge said, is the impression 
produced by the dream. The images are minor; they are effects.
Let us look at a line by Petronius, quoted by Addison. (I am 
deliberately citing poets, who are particularly illuminating.) He says that, 
“The soul, without the body, plays.” Gongóra, in a sonnet, expresses with 
precision the idea that dreams and nightmares are, above all, fictions; 
they are literary creations:
El sueño, autor de representacions, 
en su teatro sobre el viento armado 
sombras suele vestir de bulto bello.
[The dream, author of representations,
in its theater above the armored wind
dresses shadows in beautiful bulk.]
The dream  is a  representation.  Addison  reinterpreted  the idea 
according  to  eighteenth-century  principles  in  an  excellent  article 
published in The Spectator.
I have cited Sir Thomas Browne. He says that dreams give us an 
idea of the excellence of the soul, seeing the soul free of the body and 
engaged in play and dreaming. He thinks that the soul enjoys its freedom. 
And Addison says effectively that the soul, when it is free of the shackles 
of the body, imagines, and is able to imagine with a freedom it does not 
have in waking. He adds that of all the operations of the soul
―of th
e
 
mind we would say, now that we don't use the word  soul―the most 
difficult is invention. Yet in dreams we invent so rapidly that we confuse 
our thoughts with our inventions. We dream we are reading a book, and 
the truth is we have invented every word in the book. But we don't 
realize it, and we take it as strange. I have noted in many dreams this 
anticipatory process, which prepares us for the things to come.
I remember a certain nightmare I had. It took place, I know, on the 
Calle Serrano, I think at the corner of Serrano and Soler. It did not look 
like Serrano and Soler
―the landscape was quite differen
t―but 
I
 
knew 
that I was on the old Calle Serrano in the Palermo district. I met a friend, 
a friend I do not know; I saw him, and he was much changed. I had never 
30

seen his face before, but I knew his face could not be like that. He was 
much changed, and very sad. His face was marked by troubles, by 
illness, perhaps by guilt. He had his right hand inside his jacket. I 
couldn't see the hand, which he kept hidden over his heart. I embraced 
him and felt that I had to help him. “But, my poor Fulano, what has 
happened? How changed you are!” “Yes,” he answered, “I am much 
changed.” Slowly, he withdrew his hand. I could see that it was the claw 
of a bird.
The strange thing is that from the beginning the man had his hand 
hidden. Without knowing it, I had paved the way for that invention: that 
the man had the claw of a bird and that I would see the terrible change, 
the terrible misfortune, that he was turning into a bird. It also happens in 
dreams that are not nightmares: they ask us something, and we don't 
know how to answer; they give us the answer, and we are astonished. 
The  answer  may  be  absurd,  but  in  the  dream  it  is  exactly  right. 
Everything has been prepared. I have come to the conclusion, though it 
may not be scientific, that dreams are the most ancient aesthetic activity.
We know that animals dream. There are Latin verses that speak of 
the greyhound barking at the hare it chases in dreams. What is curious is 
the dramatic order of dreams. Addison observed that in the dream we are 
the theater, the audience, the actors, the plot, the dialogue we hear. We 
make up everything unconsciously, and everything has a vivacity it does 
not have in reality. There are people who have weak dreams, vague 
ones
―or, at least, so they tell me. Mine are quite vivid
.
Let us return to Coleridge. He says it doesn't matter what we 
dream, that the dream searches for explanations. He gives an example: a 
lion suddenly appears in this room, and we all are afraid; the fear has 
been caused by the image of the lion. But in dreams the reverse can 
occur. We feel oppressed, and then search for an explanation. I, absurdly 
but vividly, dream that a sphinx has lain down next to me. The sphinx is 
not the cause of my fear, it is an explanation of my feeling of oppression. 
Coleridge adds that people who have  been frightened by imaginary 
ghosts have gone mad. On the other hand, a person who dreams a ghost 
can wake up and, within a few seconds, regain his composure.
I have had
―and I still hav
e―many nightmares. The most terribl
e
,
 
the one that struck me as the most terrible, I used in a sonnet. It went like 
this: I was in my room; it was dawn (possibly that was the time of the 
31

dream). At the foot of my bed was a king, a very ancient king, and I 
knew in the dream that he was the King of the North, of Norway. He did 
not look at me; his blind stare was fixed on the ceiling. I felt the terror of 
his presence. I saw the king, I saw his sword, I saw his dog. Then I woke. 
But I continued to see the king for a while, because he had made such a 
strong impression on me. Retold, my dream is nothing; dreamt, it was 
terrible.
I want to mention a nightmare my friend Susana Bombal recently 
told me. She dreamed she was in a vaulted room, the top of which was in 
darkness. From the darkness dropped a black, unraveling piece of cloth. 
In her hand she awkwardly held a giant pair of scissors. She had to cut 
the loose threads that hung from the cloth, and they were endless. She 
kept snipping but she knew she would never finish. And she had the 
sensation of horror that is the nightmare; for the nightmare is, above all, 
the sensation of horror.
I have recounted two actual nightmares, and now I will describe 
two nightmares from literature, which possibly were also real. The first 
is the nobile castello which Dante imagined in the Inferno. Dante tells 
how, guided by Virgil, he reaches the first circle and sees that Virgil has 
turned pale. He thinks: if Virgil turns pale entering Hell, which is his 
eternal domain, why do I not feel afraid? He tells this to Virgil, who is 
terrified. But Virgil says: “I will go first.” They go in despair, for they 
hear around them infinite sighs
―not the sighs of physical pain, but th
e
 
sighs of something more grave.
They come to a noble castle, to the nobile castello. It is encircled 
by seven walls that may be the seven liberal arts of the trivium and the 
quadrivium or the seven virtues; it doesn't matter. He speaks of a river 
that disappears and of a fresh meadow that also disappears. When they 
reach the meadow, they see that it is enameled, that it is not a living 
thing. Four shades approach them: the shades of the four great poets of 
Antiquity. There is Homer, sword in hand; Ovid, Lucan, and Horace. 
Virgil tells him to greet Homer, whom Dante revered and never read. He 
tells him, “Onorate l'altissimo poeta.” Homer comes forward, sword in 
hand, and admits Dante as the sixth of the company. Dante, who had still 
not written the  Commedia  because he was writing it at that moment, 
knows himself to be capable of writing it.
They then discuss things which Dante does not bother to repeat. 
32

We may wonder at the Florentine's modesty, but I think there is a deeper 
reason. He speaks of those who inhabit the noble castle: there are the 
great shades of the pagans, and of the Moslems too. They all speak 
slowly  and  softly,  they  have  faces  of  great  authority,  but  they  are 
deprived of God. There is the absence of God. They know they are 
condemned  to  that  eternal  castle,  to  that  castle  that  is  eternal  and 
honorable, but terrible.
There is Aristotle, master of those who know. There are the pre-
Socratic philosophers; there is Plato and, alone and apart, the great sultan 
Saladin. There are all the great pagans who could not be saved because 
they were never baptized. They could not be saved by Christ, of whom 
Virgil speaks but cannot name in Hell
―he calls him the Mighty One
.
 
We may think that Dante had not yet discovered his dramatic talent, he 
did not yet know that he could make those figures speak. We may lament 
that Dante does not repeat the great words, no doubt dignified, that 
Homer, that grand shade, told him, sword in hand. But we may also feel 
that Dante understood it was better for all to be silent in that terrible 
castle.  Dante  merely  names  them:  Seneca,  Plato,  Aristotle,  Saladin, 
Averroës. He names them, and we don't hear a single word. It's better 
that way.
I would say, thinking of the Inferno, that Hell is not a nightmare; it 
is simply a torture chamber. Atrocious things take place there, but it does 
not have the atmosphere of a nightmare that there is in the “noble castle.” 
This is what Dante gives us, perhaps for the first time in literature.
There is another example, one that was praised by De Quincey. It 
is in the fifth book of Wordsworth's Prelude. Wordsworth says that he 
was preoccupied by the fact that art and science were at the mercy of 
some cataclysm. (Such a preoccupation was rare at the beginning of the 
nineteenth century. Today, of course, we think that all of the works of 
humanity, and humanity itself, could be destroyed in a moment by the 
atomic bomb.) Well. . . Wordsworth is talking with a friend, and he 
expresses his horror at the thought that the great works of mankind, the 
sciences and the arts, could be destroyed. The friend confesses that he 
too has felt such fears. And Wordsworth says: I have dreamed it. . .
And  then  comes  a  dream  which  seems  to  me  the  perfect 
nightmare, for it contains all the elements of nightmare: episodes of 
physical ill-being, of persecution,  and the element of horror, of the 
33

supernatural. Wordsworth tells us that he was in a rocky cave by the sea. 
It was noon, and he was reading Don Quixote, one of his favorite books, 
“the famous history of the errant knight recorded by Cervantes.” He put 
down the book and began to think about the end of science and art, and 
then the hour came. The powerful hour of noon, a hot summer noon. 
“Sleep seized me,” he recalls, “and I passed into a dream.”
He falls asleep in the cave, facing the sea, amid the golden sands 
of the beach. In his dream he is also surrounded by sand, a Sahara of 
black sand. There is no water, there is no sea. He is in the middle of a 
desert
―in the desert one is always in the middl
e―and he is horrified 
a
t
 
the thought of trying to escape. Suddenly he sees there is someone next 
to him. It is, oddly enough, an Arab of the Bedouin tribes, mounted on a 
camel and with a lance in his right hand. Under his left arm he has a 
stone, and in his hand he holds a shell. The Arab tells him that his 
mission is to save the arts and sciences. He brings the shell to the poet's 
ear; the shell is of an extraordinary beauty. Wordsworth tells us he hears 
a prophecy “in an unknown tongue which yet I understood”: a sort of 
tender  ode,  prophesying  that  the  earth  was  on  the  verge  of  being 
destroyed by a flood sent by the wrath of God. The Arab tells him that it 
is true, the flood is coming, but that he has a mission: to save the arts and 
sciences. He shows him the stone. And the stone is, curiously, Euclid's 
Elements, while remaining a stone. Then he brings the shell closer, and 
the shell too is a book; it is what had spoken those terrible things. The 
shell is, moreover, all the poetry of the world, including
―why not
?―t
h
e
 
poem by Wordsworth. The Bedouin tells him that he must save these two 
things, the stone and the shell, both of them books. He turns around, and 
there is a moment in which Wordsworth sees that the face of the Bedouin 
has changed, that it is full of horror. He too turns around, and he sees a 
great light, a light that has now flooded the middle of the desert. It is the 
waters of the flood that will destroy the earth. The Bedouin goes off, and 
Wordsworth sees that the Bedouin is also Don Quixote and that the 
camel is also Rosinante and that, in the same way that the stone was a 
book and the shell a book, so the Bedouin is Don Quixote and is neither 
of the two and is both at once. This duality corresponds to the horror of 
the dream. Wordsworth, at that moment, wakes with a cry of terror, for 
the waters have engulfed him.
I think that this nightmare is one of the most beautiful in literature.
34

We may draw two conclusions,  at least tonight; later we can 
change our minds. The first is that dreams are an aesthetic work, perhaps 
the most ancient aesthetic expression. They take a strangely dramatic 
form. We are, as Addison said, the theater, the spectators, the actors, the 
story. The second refers to the horror of nightmares. Our waking life 
abounds in terrible moments; we all know that there are moments in 
which reality overwhelms us. A loved one has died, a loved one has left 
us; such are the causes of sadness, of despair. . . Nevertheless, these do 
not pertain to nightmares. The nightmare has a particular horror, and that 
horror  may  be  expressed  by  any  story.  It  may  be  expressed  by 
Wordsworth's Bedouin who is also Don Quixote, by scissors and threads, 
by my dream of the king, by the famous nightmares of Poe. But there is 
something: it is the  flavor  of the nightmare. In the treatises I have 
consulted they do not speak of this horror.
We also have the possibility of a theological interpretation, one 
that would be in accord with etymology. Take any of the words: the 
Latin  incubus,  the  Saxon  nightmare,  the  German  Alp.  All  of  them 
suggest something supernatural. Well, what if nightmares were strictly 
supernatural?  What  if  nightmares  were  cries  from  hell?  What  if 
nightmares  literally  took  place  in  hell?  Why  not?  Everything  is  so 
strange that even this is possible.
35

The Thousand and One Nights
 major event in the history of the West was the discovery of the 
East.  It  would  be  more  precise  to  speak  of  a  continuing 
consciousness of the East, comparable to the presence of Persia in Greek 
history.  Within  this general  consciousness  of the Orient
something
―
 
vast, immobile, magnificent, incomprehensible
there were certain high
―
 
points, and I would like to mention a few. This seems to me the best 
approach to a subject I love so much, one I have loved since childhood, 
The Book of the Thousand and One Nights  or, as it is called in the 
English version
―the one I first rea
d
―The Arabian Nights, a title that is 
not without mystery, but is less beautiful.
A
I will mention a few of these high points. First, the nine books of 
Herodotus, and in them the revelation of Egypt, far-off Egypt. I say “far-
off”  because  space  was  measured  by  time,  and  the  journey  was 
hazardous. For the Greeks, the Egyptian world was older and greater, 
and they felt it to be mysterious.
We will examine later the words Orient and  Occident, East  and 
West, which we cannot define, but which are true. They remind me of 
what St. Augustine said about time: “What is time? If you don't ask me, I 
know; but if you ask me, I don't know.” What are the East and the West? 
If you ask me, I don't know. We must settle for approximations.
Let us look at the encounters, the campaigns, and the wars of 
Alexander, who conquered Persia and India and who died finally in 
Babylonia, as everyone knows. This was the first great meeting with the 
East, an encounter that so affected Alexander that he ceased to be Greek 
and became partly Persian. The Persians have now incorporated him into 
their history
―Alexander, who slept with a sword and the
 
Iliad under his 
pillow.  We  will  return  to  him  later,  but  since  we  are  mentioning 
Alexander, I would like to recall a legend that may be of interest to you.
36

Alexander does not die in Babylonia at age thirty-three. He is 
separated from his men and wanders through the deserts and forests, and 
at last he sees a great light. It is a bonfire, and it is surrounded by 
warriors with yellow skin and slanted eyes. They do not know him; they 
welcome him.  As he  is at  heart  a  soldier,  he joins in battles in  a 
geography that is unknown to him. He is a soldier: the causes do not 
matter to him, but he is willing to die for them. The years pass, and he 
has forgotten many things. Finally the day arrives when the troops are 
paid off, and among the coins there is one that disturbs him. He has it in 
the palm of his hand, and he says: “You are an old man; this is the medal 
that was struck for the victory of Arbela when I was Alexander of 
Macedon.” At that moment he remembers his past, and he returns to 
being a mercenary for the Tartars or Chinese or whoever they were.
That memorable invention belongs to the poet Robert Graves. To 
Alexander had been prophesied the dominion of the East and the West. 
The Islamic countries still honor him under the name Alexander the 
Two-Horned, because he ruled the two horns of East and West.
Let us look at another example of this great
―and not infrequently
,
 
tragic
―dialogue between East and West. Let us think of the youn
g
 
Virgil, touching a piece of printed silk from a distant country. The 
country of the Chinese, of which he only knows that it is far-off and 
peaceful, at the furthest reaches of the Orient. Virgil will remember that 
silk  in  his  Georgics,  that  seamless  silk,  with  images  of  temples, 
emperors, rivers, bridges, and lakes far removed from those he knew.
Another  revelation  of  the  Orient  is  that  admirable  book,  the 
Natural  History  of  Pliny.  There  he  speaks  of  the  Chinese,  and  he 
mentions Bactria, Persia, and the India of King Porus. There is a poem of 
Juvenal I read more than forty years ago, which suddenly comes to mind. 
In order to speak of a far-off place, Juvenal says “ultra Auroram et 
Gangem,” beyond the dawn and the Ganges. In those four words is, for 
us, the East. Who knows if Juvenal felt it as we do? I think so. The East 
has always held a fascination for the people of the West.
Proceeding through history, we reach a curious gift. Possibly it 
never happened; it has sometimes been considered a legend. Harun al-
Rashid,  Aaron  the  Orthodox,  sent  his  counterpart  Charlemagne  an 
elephant. Perhaps it was impossible to send an elephant from Baghdad to 
France, but that is not important. It doesn't hurt to believe it. That 
37

elephant is a monster. Let us remember that the word monster does not 
mean  something  horrible.  Lope  de  Vega  was  called  a  “Monster  of 
Nature” by Cervantes. That elephant must have been something quite 
strange for the French and for the Germanic king Charlemagne. (It is sad 
to think that Charlemagne could not have read the Chanson de Roland, 
for he spoke some Germanic dialect.)
They sent the elephant, and that word  elephant  reminds us that 
Roland sounded the olifant, the ivory trumpet that got its name precisely 
because it came from the tusk of an elephant. And since we are speaking 
of etymologies, let us recall that the Spanish word alfil, the bishop in the 
game of chess, means elephant in Arabic and has the same origin as 
marfil, ivory. Among Oriental chess pieces I have seen an elephant with 
a castle and a little man. That piece was not the rook, as one might think 
from the castle, but rather the bishop, the alfil or elephant.
In the Crusades, the soldiers returned and brought back memories. 
They brought memories of lions, for example. We have the famous 
crusader Richard the Lion-Hearted. The lion that entered into heraldry is 
an animal from the East. This list should not go on forever, but let us 
remember Marco Polo, whose book is a revelation of the Orient
―for 
a
 
long time it was the major source. The book was dictated to a friend in 
jail, after the battle in which the Venetians were conquered by the 
Genoese. In it, there is the history of the Orient, and he speaks of Kublai 
Khan, who will reappear in a certain poem by Coleridge.
In the fifteenth century in the city of Alexandria, the city of 
Alexander the Two-Horned, a series of tales was gathered. Those tales 
have a strange history, as it is generally believed. They were first told in 
India, then in Persia, then in Asia Minor, and finally were written down 
in  Arabic  and  compiled  in  Cairo.  They  became  The  Book  of  the 
Thousand and One Nights.
I want to pause over the title. It is one of the most beautiful in the 
world, as beautiful, I think, as that other title I have mentioned,  An 
Experiment with Time.
In this, there is another kind of beauty. I think it lies in the fact that 
for us the word thousand is almost synonymous with infinite. To say a 
thousand nights is to say infinite nights, countless nights, endless nights. 
To say a thousand and one nights is to add one to infinity. Let us recall a 
curious  English  expression:  instead  of  forever,  they  sometimes  say 
38

forever and a day. A day has been added to forever. It is reminiscent of a 
line of Heine, written to a woman: “I will love you eternally and even 
after.”
The idea of infinity is consubstantial with The Thousand and One 
Nights.
In 1704, the first European version was published, the first of the 
six  volumes  by  the  French  Orientalist  Antoine  Galland.  With  the 
Romantic movement,  the Orient richly entered  the consciousness  of 
Europe. It is enough to mention two great names: Byron, more important 
for his image than for his work, and Hugo, the greatest of them all. By 
1890 or so, Kipling could say: “Once you have heard the call of the East, 
you will never hear anything else.”
Let us return for a moment to the first translation of The Thousand 
and One Nights. It is a major event for all of European literature. We are 
in 1704, in France. It is the France of the Grand Siècle; it is the France 
where literature is legislated by Boileau, who dies in 1711 and never 
suspects that all of his rhetoric is threatened by that splendid Oriental 
invasion.
Let us think about the rhetoric of Boileau, made of precautions and 
prohibitions, of the cult of reason and of that beautiful line of Fénelon: 
“Of the operations of the spirit, the least frequent is reason.” Boileau, of 
course, wanted to base poetry on reason.
We are speaking in the illustrious dialect of Latin we call Spanish, 
and it too is an episode of that nostalgia, of that amorous and at times 
bellicose commerce between Orient and Occident, for the discovery of 
America is due to the desire to reach the Indies. We call the people of 
Moctezuma  and  Atahualpa  Indians  precisely  because  of  this  error, 
because the Spaniards believed they had reached the Indies. This little 
lecture is part of that dialogue between East and West.
As for the word Occident, we know its origin, but that does not 
matter. Suffice to say that Western culture is not pure in the sense that it 
exists  entirely  because  of  Western  efforts.  Two  nations  have  been 
essential for our culture: Greece (since Rome is a Hellenistic extension) 
and Israel, an Eastern country. Both are combined into what we call 
Western civilization. Speaking of the revelations of the East, we must 
also remember the continuing revelation that is the Holy Scripture. The 
fact is reciprocal, now that the West influences the East. There is a book 
39

by a French author called The Discovery of Europe by the Chinese―that 
too must have occurred.
The Orient is the place where the sun comes from. There is a 
beautiful German word for the East, Morgenland, the land of morning. 
For  the  West  it  is  Abendland,  land  of  afternoon.  You  will  recall 
Spengler's  Der  Untergang  des  Abendlandes,  that  is,  the  downward 
motion of the land of afternoon, or, as it is translated more prosaically, 
The Decline of the West.  I think that we must not renounce the word 
Orient, a word so beautiful, for within it, by happy chance, is the word 
oro, gold. In the word Orient we feel the word oro,  for when the sun 
rises we see a sky of gold. I come back to that famous line of Dante: 
“Dolce  color  d'oriental  zaffiro.”  The  word  oriental  here  has  two 
meanings: the Oriental sapphire, which comes from the East, and also the 
gold of morning, the gold of that first morning in Purgatory.
What is the Orient? If we attempt to define it in a geographical 
way, we encounter something quite strange: part of the Orient, North 
Africa, is in the West, or what for the Greeks and Romans was the West. 
Egypt is also the Orient, and the lands of Israel, Asia Minor, and Bactria, 
Persia, India
―all of those countries that stretch further and further an
d
 
have little in common with one another. Thus, for example, Tartary, 
China, Japan
―all of that is our Orient. Hearing the word
 
Orient, I think 
we all think, first of all, of the Islamic Orient, and by extension the 
Orient of northern India.
Such is the primary meaning it has for us, and this is the product 
of  The Thousand and One Nights.  There is something we feel as the 
Orient, something I have not felt in Israel but have felt in Granada and in 
Córdoba. I have felt the presence of the East, and I don't know if I can 
define  it;  perhaps  it's  not  worth  it  to  define  something  we  feel 
instinctively. The connotations of that word we owe to  The Thousand 
and One Nights. It is our first thought; only later do we think of Marco 
Polo or the legends of Prester John, of those rivers of sand with fishes of 
gold. First we think of Islam.
Let us look at the history of the book, and then at the translations. 
The origin of the book is obscure. We may think of the cathedrals, 
miscalled Gothic, that are the works of generations of men. But there is 
an essential difference: the artisans and craftsmen of the cathedrals knew 
what they were making. In contrast,  The Thousand and One Nights 
40

appears in a mysterious way. It is the work of thousands of authors, and 
none of them knew that he was helping to construct this illustrious book, 
one  of  the  most  illustrious  books  in  all  literature  (and  one  more 
appreciated in the West than in the East, so they tell me).
Now,  a  curious  note  that  was  transcribed  by  the  Baron  von 
Hammer–Purgstall, an Orientalist cited with admiration by both Lane 
and Burton, the two most famous English translators of The Thousand 
and One  Nights.  He  speaks  of  certain  men he  calls  confabulatores 
nocturni, men of the night who tell stories, men whose profession it is to 
tell stories during the night. He cites an ancient Persian text which states 
that the first person to hear such stories told, who gathered the men of 
the night to tell stories in order to ease his insomnia, was Alexander of 
Macedon.
Those  stories  must  have  been  fables.  I  suspect  that  the 
enchantment of fables is not in their moral. What enchanted Aesop or the 
Hindu fabulists was to imagine animals that were like little men, with 
their comedies and tragedies. The idea of the moral proposition was 
added later. What was important was the fact that the wolf spoke with the 
sheep and the ox with the ass, or the lion with the nightingale.
We have Alexander of Macedon hearing the stories told by these 
anonymous men of the night, and this profession lasted for a long time. 
Lane, in his book Account of the Manners and Customs of the Modern 
Egyptians, says that as late as 1850 storytellers were common in Cairo. 
There were some fifty of them, and they often told stories from  The 
Thousand and One Nights.
We have a series of tales. Those from India, which form the 
central core (according to Burton and to Cansinos-Asséns, author of an 
excellent Spanish version) pass on to Persia; in Persia they are modified, 
enriched, and Arabized. They finally reach Egypt, at the end of the 
fifteenth century, and the first compilation is made. This one leads to 
another, apparently Persian version: Hazar Afsana, the thousand tales.
Why were there first a thousand and later a thousand and one? I 
think  there  are  two  reasons.  First,  there  was  the  superstition
―an
d
 
superstition is very important in this case
―that even numbers are evi
l
 
omens. They then sought an odd number and luckily added and one. If 
they had made it nine hundred and ninety-nine we would have felt that 
there was a night missing. This way we feel that we have been given 
41

something infinite, that we have received a bonus, another night.
We know that chronology and history exist, but they are primarily 
Western discoveries. There are no Persian histories of literature or Indian 
histories  of  philosophy,  nor  are  there  Chinese  histories  of  Chinese 
literature, because they are not interested in the succession of facts. They 
believe that literature and poetry are eternal processes. I think they are 
basically right. For example, the title The Book of the Thousand and One 
Nights would be beautiful even if it were invented this morning. If it had 
been made today we would think what a lovely title, and it is lovely not 
only because it is beautiful (as beautiful as Lugones' Los crepúsculos del 
jardin, the twilights of the garden) but because it makes you want to read 
the book.
One feels like getting lost in The Thousand and One Nights, one 
knows that entering that book one can forget one's own poor human fate; 
one can enter a world, a world made up of archetypal figures but also of 
individuals.
In the title The Thousand and One Nights there is something very 
important: the suggestion of an infinite book. It practically is. The Arabs 
say that no one can read The Thousand and One Nights to the end. Not 
for reasons of boredom: one feels the book is infinite.
At home I have the seventeen volumes of Burton's version. I know 
I'll never read all of them, but I know that there the nights are waiting for 
me; that my life may be wretched but the seventeen volumes will be 
there; there will be that species of eternity,  The Thousand and One 
Nights of the Orient.
How does one define the Orient (not the real Orient, which does 
not  exist)?  I  would  say  that  the  notions  of  East  and  West  are 
generalizations, but that no individual can feel himself to be Oriental. I 
suppose that a man feels himself to be Persian or Hindu or Malaysian, 
but not Oriental. In the same way, no one feels himself to be Latin 
American: we feel ourselves to be Argentines or Chileans. It doesn't 
matter; the concept does not exist.
What is the Orient, then? It is above all a world of extremes in 
which people are very unhappy or very happy, very rich or very poor. A 
world of kings, of kings who do not have to explain what they do. Of 
kings who are, we might say, as irresponsible as gods.
There is, moreover, the notion of hidden treasures. Anybody may 
42

discover one. And the notion of magic, which is very important. What is 
magic? Magic is a unique causality. It is the belief that besides the causal 
relations we know, there is another causal relation. That relationship may 
be due to accidents, to a ring, to a lamp. We rub a ring, a lamp, and a 
genie appears. That genie is a slave who is also omnipotent and who will 
fulfill our wishes. It can happen at any moment.
Let  us  recall  the  story  of  the  fisherman  and  the  genie.  The 
fisherman has four children and is poor. Every morning he casts his net 
from the banks of a sea. Already the expression a sea is magical, placing 
us in a world of undefined geography. The fisherman doesn't go down to 
the sea, he goes down to a sea and casts his net. One morning he casts 
and hauls it in three times: he hauls in a dead donkey, he hauls in broken 
pots
―in short, useless things. He casts his net a fourth tim
e―each ti
m
e
 
he recites a poem
―and the net is very heavy. He hopes it will be full o
f
 
fish, but what he hauls in is a jar of yellow copper, sealed with the seal of 
Suleiman (Solomon). He opens the jar, and a thick smoke emerges. He 
thinks of selling the jar to the hardware merchants, but the smoke rises to 
the sky, condenses, and forms the figure of a genie.
What  are  these  genies?  They  are  related  to  a  pre-Adamite 
creation
―befor e  Adam ,  inferio r  t o  men ,  bu t  the y  ca n  b e  gigantic
.
 
According to the Moslems, they inhabit all of space and are invisible and 
impalpable.
The genie says, “All praises to God and Solomon His Prophet.” 
The fisherman asks why he speaks of Solomon, who died so long ago; 
today His Prophet is Mohammed. He also asks him why he is closed up 
in the jar. The genie tells him that he was one of those who rebelled 
against Solomon, and that Solomon enclosed him in the jar, sealed it, and 
threw it to the bottom of the sea. Four hundred years passed, and the 
genie pledged that whoever liberated him would be given all the gold in 
the world. Nothing happened. He swore that whoever liberated him, he 
would teach the song of the birds. The centuries passed, and the promises 
multiplied. Finally he swore that he would kill whoever freed him. “Now 
I must fulfill my promise. Prepare to die, my savior!” That flash of rage 
makes the genie strangely human, and perhaps likable.
The fisherman is terrified. He pretends to disbelieve the story, and 
he says: “What you have told me cannot be true. How could you, whose 
head touches the sky and whose feet touch the earth, fit into that tiny 
43

jar?” The genie answers: “Man of little faith, you will see.” He shrinks, 
goes back into the jar, and the fisherman seals it up.
The story continues, and the protagonist becomes not a fisherman 
but a king, then the king of the Black Islands, and at the end everything 
comes together. It is typical of The Thousand and One Nights. We may 
think of those Chinese spheres in which there are other spheres, or of 
Russian dolls. We encounter something similar in Don Quixote but not 
taken to the extremes of The Thousand and One Nights. Moreover, all of 
this is inside of a vast central tale which you all know: that of the sultan 
who has been deceived by his wife and who, in order never to be 
deceived again, resolves to marry every night and kill the woman the 
following morning. Until Scheherazade pledges to save the others and 
stays  alive  by  telling  stories  that  remain  unfinished.  They  spend  a 
thousand and one nights together, and in the end she produces a son.
Stories within stories create a strange effect, almost infinite, a sort 
of vertigo. This has been imitated by writers ever since. Thus the “Alice” 
books of Lewis Carroll or his novel Sylvia and Bruno, where there are 
dreams that branch out and multiply.
The subject of dreams is a favorite of  The Thousand and One 
Nights.  For example, the story of the two dreamers. A man in Cairo 
dreams that a voice orders him to go to Isfahan in Persia, where a 
treasure awaits him. He undertakes the long and difficult voyage and 
finally reaches Isfahan. Exhausted, he stretches out in the patio of a 
mosque to rest. Without knowing it, he is among thieves. They are all 
arrested, and the cadi asks him why he has come to the city. The 
Egyptian tells him. The cadi laughs until he shows the back of his teeth 
and says to him: “Foolish and gullible man, three times I have dreamed 
of a house in Cairo, behind which is a garden, and in the garden a 
sundial, and then a fountain and a fig tree, and beneath the fountain there 
is a treasure. I have never given the least credit to this lie. Never return to 
Isfahan. Take this money and go.” The man returns to Cairo. He has 
recognized his own house in the cadi's dream. He digs beneath the 
fountain and finds the treasure.
In The Thousand and One Nights there are echoes of the West. We 
encounter the adventures of Ulysses, except that Ulysses is called Sinbad 
the Sailor. The adventures are at times identical: for example, the story 
of Polyphemus.
44

To erect the palace of  The Thousand and One Nights  it took 
generations of men, and those men are our benefactors, as we have 
inherited  this  inexhaustible  book,  this  book  capable  of  so  much 
metamorphosis.  I  say  so  much  metamorphosis  because  the  first 
translation, that of Galland, is quite simple and is perhaps the most 
enchanting of them all, the least demanding on the reader. Without this 
first text, as Captain Burton said, the later versions could not have been 
written.
Galland publishes his first volume in 1704. It produces a sort of 
scandal, but at the same time it enchants the rational France of Louis 
XIV. When we think of the Romantic movement, we usually think of 
dates  that  are  much  later.  But  it  might  be  said  that  the  Romantic 
movement begins at that moment when someone, in Normandy or in 
Paris,  reads  The  Thousand  and  One  Nights.  He  leaves  the  world 
legislated by Boileau and enters the world of Romantic freedom.
The other events come later: the discovery of the picaresque novel 
by the Frenchman Le Sage; the Scots and English ballads published by 
Percy  around  1750;  and,  around  1798,  the  Romantic  movement 
beginning in England with Coleridge, who dreams of Kublai Khan, the 
protector of Marco Polo. We see how marvelous the world is and how 
interconnected things are.
Then come the other translations. The one by Lane is accompanied 
by an encyclopedia of the customs of the Moslems. The anthropological 
and obscene translation by Burton is written in a curious English partly 
derived from the fourteenth century, an English full of archaisms and 
neologisms, an English not devoid of beauty but which at times is 
difficult to read. Then the licensed (in both senses of the word) version 
of Doctor Mardrus, and a German version, literal but without literary 
charm, by Littmann. Now, happily, we have a Spanish version by my 
teacher  Rafael  Cansinos–Asséns.  The  book  has  been  published  in 
Mexico; it is perhaps the best of all the versions, and it is accompanied 
by notes.
The most famous tale of  The Thousand and One Nights  is not 
found in the original version. It is the story of Aladdin and the magic 
lamp. It appears in Galland's version, and Burton searched in vain for an 
Arabic or Persian text. Some have suspected that Galland forged the tale. 
I think the word forged is unjust and malign. Galland had as much right 
45

to invent a story as did those confabulatores nocturni. Why shouldn't we 
suppose that after having translated so many tales, he wanted to invent 
one himself, and did?
The story does not end with Galland. In his autobiography De 
Quincey says that, for him, there was one story in The Thousand and 
One Nights that was incomparably superior to the others, and that was 
the story of Aladdin. He speaks of the magician of Magreb who comes to 
China  because  he  knows  that  there  is  the  one  person  capable  of 
exhuming the marvelous lamp. Galland tells us that the magician was an 
astrologer, and that the stars told him he had to go to China to find the 
boy. De Quincey, who had a wonderfully inventive memory, records a 
completely different fact. According to him, the magician had put his ear 
to the ground and had heard the innumerable footsteps of men. And he 
had distinguished, from among the footsteps, those of the boy destined to 
discover the lamp. This, said De Quincey, brought him to the idea that 
the world is made of correspondences, is full of magic mirrors
―that i
n
 
small things is the cipher of the large. The fact of the magician putting 
his ear to the ground and deciphering the footsteps of Aladdin appears in 
none of these texts. It is an invention of the memory or the dreams of De 
Quincey.
The Thousand and One Nights has not died. The infinite time of 
the thousand and one nights continues its course. At the beginning of the 
eighteenth century the book was translated; at the beginning of the 
nineteenth (or end of the eighteenth) De Quincey remembered it another 
way. The  Nights  will have other translators, and each translator will 
create a different version of the book. We may almost speak of the many 
books titled The Thousand and One Nights: two in French, by Galland 
and Mardrus; three in English, by Burton, Lane, and Paine; three in 
German, by Henning, Littmann, and Weil; one in Spanish, by Cansinos-
Asséns. Each of these books is different, because The Thousand and One 
Nights  keeps growing or recreating itself. Stevenson's admirable  New 
Arabian Nights takes up the subject of the disguised prince who walks 
through  the  city  accompanied  by  his  vizier  and  who  has  curious 
adventures. But Stevenson invented his prince, Floricel of Bohemia, and 
his aide-de-camp, Colonel Geraldine, and he had them walk through 
London. Not a real London, but a London similar to Baghdad; not the 
Baghdad of reality, but the Baghdad of The Thousand and One Nights.
46

There is another author we must add: Chesterton, Stevenson's heir. 
The fantastic London in which occur the adventures of Father Brown and 
of The Man Who Was Thursday would not exist if he hadn't read 
Stevenson. And Stevenson would not have written his  New Arabian 
Nights  if he hadn't read  The Arabian Nights. The Thousand and One 
Nights is not something which has died. It is a book so vast that it is not 
necessary to have read it, for it is a part of our memory
―and also, now
,
 
a part of tonight.
47

Buddhism
he subject tonight is Buddhism. I will not go into the long history 
that begins some twenty-five hundred years ago in Benares, when a 
prince of Nepal named Siddhartha or Gautama became the Buddha, set in 
motion the wheel of the Law, and proclaimed the four noble truths and 
the  eightfold  path.  I  will  speak  of  the  essence  of  the  religion,  the 
elements of Buddhism which have been preserved since the fifth century 
before Christ. From the age of Heraclitus, Pythagoras, and Zeno, up to 
our own time, the elements have remained the same, but the religion has 
become encrusted with mythology, astronomy, extraneous beliefs, and 
magic. Since the subject is complex, I will limit myself to what the 
diverse  sects  have  in  common.  This  corresponds,  more  or  less,  to 
Hinayana, or the Lesser Vehicle.
T
Let us consider first the longevity of Buddhism. This may be 
explained by historical reasons, but they are, at best, fortuitous and 
debatable. I think there are two fundamental causes. The first is the 
extraordinary tolerance of Buddhism, which does not pertain, as is the 
case of other religions, to certain periods: Buddhism has always been 
tolerant.
It has never resorted to iron or to fire; it has never believed that 
these  means  could  be  persuasive.  When  Ashoka,  emperor  of  India, 
became a Buddhist, he did not try to impose his new religion on anyone. 
A good Buddhist can be a Lutheran or Methodist or Presbyterian or 
Calvinist or Shintoist or Taoist or Catholic; he may be a proselyte of 
Islam or of the Jewish religion, all with complete freedom. In contrast, it 
is not permissible for a Christian, a Jew, or a Moslem to be Buddhist.
The tolerance of Buddhism is not a weakness but rather part of its 
particular disposition. Buddhism is, above all, what could be called a 
yoga. What is yoga? It is the same word as yoke, which has its origin in 
48

the Latin  iugum―a yoke, a discipline man imposes on himself. If we 
understand what the Buddha preached in that first sermon in the Deer 
Park in Benares twenty-five hundred years ago, we may understand 
Buddhism.  Except  that  one  does  not  attempt  to  understand  it,  one 
attempts to feel it in a deep way, to feel it in body and soul
―except, o
f
 
course, that Buddhism does not admit the reality of the body or of the 
soul.
There is a second reason for its longevity. Buddhism requires a 
greal deal of faith. This is natural, as all religion is an act of faith. So too 
is patriotism an act of faith. I have often asked myself, what does it mean 
to be Argentine? To be Argentine is to feel that we are Argentines. What 
does it mean to be Buddhist? To be Buddhist is
―not to understand
,
 
because that can be accomplished in a few minutes
―but to
 
feel the four 
noble truths and the eightfold path.
Then there is the story of the Buddha. We may, if we like, not 
believe that story. I have a Japanese friend, a Zen Buddhist, with whom 
I've had long and friendly discussions. I told him I believed in the 
historical reality of the Buddha. I believed, and still believe, that some 
twenty-five  hundred  years  ago  there  was  a  prince  of  Nepal  named 
Siddhartha or Gautama who became the Buddha, the Enlightened or 
Awakened One
―as opposed to the rest of us who are sleeping or ar
e
 
dreaming this great dream that is life. I remember that line of Joyce: 
“History  is  a  nightmare  from  which  I  am  trying  to  awake.”  Well, 
Siddhartha, at age thirty, woke up and became the Buddha.
I talked with my friend who was a Buddhist
―I'm not sure I'm 
a
 
Christian, but I am sure that I'm not a Buddhist
―and I said: “Why no
t
 
believe in  the story  of  Prince  Siddhartha?”  He  replied: “Because  it 
doesn't matter; what matters is to believe in the Teachings.” He added, I 
think with more wit than truth, that to believe in the historical existence 
of the Buddha, or to be interested in it, is something like confusing the 
laws of mathematics with the biographies of Pythagoras or Newton. One 
of the subjects of meditation for the monks in the monasteries of China 
and Japan is to doubt the existence of the Buddha. It is one of the doubts 
that must be imposed on one's self in order to arrive at the truth.
The other religions require a great deal of credulity. If we are 
Christians, we must believe that one of the three figures of the Divinity 
condescended to become a man and was crucified in Judaea. If we are 
49

Moslems, we must believe that there is no other god but God and that 
Mohammed is His prophet. But we can be good Buddhists and deny the 
Buddha's existence. Or, more exactly, we must know that our belief in 
the historical is not important; what is important is to believe in the 
Teachings. Nevertheless, the legend of the Buddha is so beautiful I can't 
help but mention it.
The French have given particular attention to the study of the 
legend of the Buddha. Their argument is this: the biography of the 
Buddha relates what happened to one man in a brief period of time. It 
may or may not have happened that way. In contrast, the legend of the 
Buddha has illuminated and continues to illuminate millions of people. 
The legend is what has inspired so many beautiful paintings, sculptures, 
and  poems.  Buddhism,  besides  being  a  religion,  is  a  mythology,  a 
cosmology,  a  metaphysical  system
―o r  mor e  exactly ,  a  serie s  o
f
 
metaphysical systems which do not recognize each other and which 
dispute among themselves.
Although one need not believe it, the legend of the Buddha is 
illuminating. It begins in the heavens. In the heavens there is someone 
who for centuries and centuries
―we may literally say for an infinit
e
 
number of centuries
―has been perfecting himself toward understanding
,
 
and who, in his next incarnation, will be the Buddha.
He chooses the continent in which he will be born. According to 
Buddhist cosmogony, the world is divided into four triangular continents 
and in the center is a mountain of gold, Mt. Meru. He will be born in 
what corresponds to India. He chooses the century in which he will be 
born; he chooses his caste, his mother.
Now the terrestrial part of the legend. There is a queen, Maya, 
married to the king Suddhodana. Maya means illusion. She dreams that a 
white elephant with six tusks, who wandered in the mountains of gold, 
enters her left side without causing pain. She wakes. The king gathers his 
astrologers, and they explain that the queen will give birth to a son who 
will  become  either  the  emperor  of  the  earth  or  the  Buddha,  the 
Enlightened or Awakened One, the being destined to save all mankind. 
As might be expected, the king prefers the first destiny: he wants his son 
to be emperor of the earth.
Let us go back to the detail of the white elephant with the six 
tusks. Oldenberg has noted that the elephant in India is a common 
50

domestic animal. The color white is always the symbol of innocence. 
Why six tusks? We must remember (it recurs at times in history) that the 
number six, which for us is arbitrary or inconvenient
―we prefer three o
r
 
seven
―i s  no t  rando m  i n  India .  The y  believ e  tha t  ther e  ar e  si
x
 
dimensions in space: above, below, in front, behind, left, right. A white 
elephant with six tusks is not extravagant for Hindus.
The king gathers his magicians, and the queen painlessly gives 
birth. A fig tree bends its branches to help her. The  child is born 
standing,  and  at  birth  he  takes  four  steps
―north ,  south ,  east ,  an
d
 
west
―and speaks with the voice of a lion: “I am the incomparable; thi
s
 
will be my last birth.” (The Hindus believe in an infinite number of 
births.) The prince grows up to be the best archer, the best horseman, the 
best swimmer, the best athelete, the best calligrapher; he confounds all 
the doctors (here we may think of Christ and the doctors). At sixteen he 
marries.
The father knows
―the astrologers have told hi
m―that his s
o
n
 
runs the risk of becoming the Buddha, the man who will save the others, 
if he learns four facts of life: old age, sickness, death, and asceticism. He 
secludes his son in the palace and provides him with a harem. I will not 
mention the number of women, obviously a Hindu exaggeration. Well, 
why not say it? There were eighty-four thousand.
The prince lives a happy life. He doesn't know there is suffering in 
the world; he has been protected from old age, sickness, death. On the 
predestined day he goes out in his coach through one of the four gates of 
the rectangular palace; let us say through the north gate. He travels for a 
while and then he sees a creature different from anything he has ever 
seen. It is stooped over, wrinkled; it has no hair. It can barely walk and 
leans on a staff. He asks who the man is, if he is indeed a man. The 
coachman answers that he is an old man and that we will all be that man 
if we keep on living.
The prince returns to the palace, troubled. Six days later he again 
goes out, this time through the south gate. He sees in a ditch a man who 
is even stranger: one with the disfigured face of a leper. He asks who that 
man is, if he is a man. He is a sick man, the coachman replies. We will 
all be that man if we keep on living.
The prince, now quite disturbed, returns to the palace. Six days 
later he leaves again, and he sees a man who seems to be sleeping but 
51

whose color is not that of life. The man is being carried by others. He 
asks who he is. The coachman tells him that this is a dead man and we 
will all be that dead man when we have lived long enough.
The prince is desolate. Three horrible truths have been revealed to 
him: the truth of old age, the truth of sickness, the truth of death. He goes 
out a fourth time. He sees a man who is almost naked and whose face is 
full of serenity. He asks who he is. They tell him that the man is an 
ascetic,  a  man  who  has  renounced  everything  and  who  has  gained 
beatitude.
The prince resolves to give up everything
―he, who has had a lif
e
 
so rich. (Buddhism believes that asceticism may be necessary but only 
after having tried life. It does not believe that one must begin by denying 
everything. One must  purify one's life down to the  dregs and then 
renounce the illusion of life, but not without first knowing it.) The prince 
resolves to be a Buddha. At this moment they bring him a message: his 
wife, Yashodhara, has given birth to a child. He says: “A fetter has been 
forged.” It is the son who chains him to life. For this reason he names 
him Rahula, which means fetter. Siddhartha is in his harem, looking at 
these women who are young and beautiful, and he sees horrible, leprous 
old women. He goes to his wife's room. She is sleeping. He takes the 
child in his arms. He is about to kiss his wife, but he knows that if he 
kisses her he will not be able to give her up, and he leaves.
He  seeks  out  various  teachers.  The  teachers  instruct  him  in 
asceticism, which he practices for a long time. At the end, he is lying in 
the middle of a field; his body is immobile, and the gods who see him 
from the thirty-three heavens think he is dead. One of them, the wisest, 
says, “No, he has not died. He will be the Buddha.” The prince wakes, 
crosses a nearby stream, takes a little food, and sits beneath the sacred 
pipal tree
―what might be called the tree of the Law
.
What follows next is a magical interlude, one which corresponds 
to the Gospels: the fight with the demon. The demon here is called Mara. 
(We have already seen that word nightmare, demon of the night.) Mara 
feels that her dominion over the world has been threatened, and she 
leaves her palace. The strings of her musical instruments have broken; 
the water has dried up in her tanks. She gathers her troops, mounts an 
elephant I don't know how many thousands of feet high, multiplies her 
arms and her weapons, and attacks the prince. The prince is seated in the 
52

late afternoon beneath the tree of knowledge, the tree that was born at the 
same time as he.
The demon and her army of tigers, lions, camels, elephants, and 
monstrous warriors shoot arrows at the prince. They turn into flowers. 
They hurl mountains of fire, and the flames form a canopy over his head. 
The prince meditates, immobile, with his legs crossed. Perhaps he doesn't 
know that he is being attacked. He thinks on life; he is reaching Nirvana, 
salvation. Before the sun sets, the demon has been defeated. A long night 
of  meditation  follows;  at  the  end  of  it,  Siddhartha  is  no  longer 
Siddhartha. He is the Buddha; he has reached Nirvana.
He resolves to teach the Law. He rises
―now that he has bee
n
 
saved he wants to save the others. He delivers his first sermon in the 
Deer Park in Benares. Then he gives another sermon, the Fire Sermon, in 
which he says that everything is burning: souls, bodies, all is on fire. (At 
more or less the same time, Heraclitus of Ephesus was also saying that 
everything is fire.)
His Law is not that of asceticism, since for the Buddha asceticism 
is an error. Man need not abandon the carnal life because it is lowly, 
ignoble, shameful, sorrowful; asceticism too is ignoble and sorrowful. 
He preaches a middle way
―to use the theological terminology. He ha
s
 
reached Nirvana, and he continues to live for another forty-odd years, 
dedicated to teaching. He could have remained immortal, but he chooses 
the moment of his death, after he has gathered many disciples.
He is dying in the house of a blacksmith. His disciples surround 
him. They are in despair. What will they do without him? He tells them 
that he does not exist, that he too is a man, as unreal and as mortal as 
they, but that he is leaving them the Law. Here is a great difference from 
Christ. Jesus told his disciples that if two are gathered, he will be the 
third. In contrast, the Buddha says: I leave you my Law. That is to say, 
he has, with the first sermon, put into motion the wheel of the Law. Later 
will  come  the  history  of  Buddhism:  lamaism,  magical  Buddhism, 
Hinayana or the Lesser Vehicle, Mahayana or the Greater Vehicle, the 
Zen Buddhism of Japan.
To  my  mind,  the  form of  Buddhism  most similar,  practically 
identical, to what the Buddha taught is Zen. The others are mythological 
encrustations,  fables.  It  is  known  that  the  Buddha  could  perform 
miracles. But, like Jesus, miracles displeased him; he disliked performing 
53

them. They seemed to him a vulgar ostentation. There is a story I will 
tell: that of the sandalwood bowl.
A merchant in a city of India carves a piece of sandal-wood into a 
bowl. He places it at the top of some bamboo stalks which are high and 
very slippery and declares that he will give the bowl to whomever can 
fetch it. Some heretical teachers try in vain. They then attempt to bribe 
the merchant to say they had succeeded. The merchant refuses, and a 
minor disciple of the Buddha arrives. (His name is not mentioned outside 
of this incident.) The disciple rises through the air, flies six times around 
the bowl, picks it up, and delivers it to the merchant. When the Buddha 
hears the story he expels the disciple from the order for indulging in 
something so frivolous.
But the Buddha also performed miracles. For example this one, a 
miracle of courtesy: The Buddha has to cross a desert at noon. The gods, 
from their thirty-three heavens, each send him down a parasol. The 
Buddha does not want to slight any of the gods, so he turns himself into 
thirty-three Buddhas. Each god sees a Buddha protected by the parasol he 
sent.
Among the stories of the Buddha, there is one that is particularly 
illuminating: the parable of the arrow. A man has been wounded in 
battle, but he does not want them to remove the arrow. First he wants to 
know the name of the archer, to what caste he belongs, what the arrow is 
made of, where the archer was standing at the time, how long the arrow 
is. While he is discussing these things, he dies. “I, however,” said the 
Buddha, “teach that one must pull the arrow out.” What is the arrow? It 
is the universe. The arrow is the notion of I, of everything to which we 
are chained. The Buddha says that we shouldn't waste time on useless 
questions. Is the universe finite or infinite? Does the Buddha live after 
Nirvana or not? All this is useless. What matters is that we pull the arrow 
out. It is an exorcism, a law of salvation.
The Buddha says: “As the vast ocean has only one flavor, the 
flavor of salt, so the flavor of the Law is the flavor of salvation.” His 
followers have lost themselves (or found too much) in metaphysical 
disquisitions. But that is not the goal of Buddhism. A Buddhist may 
profess any religion as long as he follows the Law. What is important is 
salvation and the four noble truths: suffering, the origin of suffering, the 
curing of suffering, and the way to arrive at the cure. At the end is 
54

Nirvana. The order of the truths doesn't matter. It has been said that they 
correspond to the traditional medical formulation of sickness, diagnosis, 
treatment, and cure. The cure, in this case, is Nirvana.
Now we come to the difficult part, which our Western minds tend 
to  reject:  transmigration,  which  for  us  is  a  poetic  notion.  What 
transmigrates is not the soul, because Buddhism denies the existence of a 
soul, but rather the karma, which is a sort of mental organism and which 
is transmigrated an infinite number of times. In the West the idea has 
been propounded by various thinkers, above all by Pythagoras
―wh
o
 
recognized the shield with which he had fought in the Trojan War, when 
he had another name. In the tenth book of Plato's Republic is the dream 
of Er, a soldier who watches the souls choose their fates before drinking 
in the river of Oblivion. Agamemnon chooses to be an eagle, Orpheus a 
swan, and Odysseus
―who once called himself Nobod
y―chooses to 
b
e
 
the most modest, the most unknown of men.
There is a passage in Empedocles of Agrigentum where he recalls 
his previous lives: “I was a maiden, I was a branch, I was a deer, and I 
was a mute fish who leapt from the sea.” Caesar attributes this doctrine 
to the Druids. The Welsh poet Taliesin says that there is not a single 
form in the universe he has not had: “I have been a leader in battle, I 
have been a sword in the hand, I have been a bridge that crossed sixty 
rivers, I was bewitched into sea foam, I have been a star, I have been a 
light, I have been a tree, I have been a word in a book, I have been a 
book in the beginning.” There is a poem of Dario, perhaps his most 
beautiful, which begins like this: “I was a soldier who slept in the bed / 
of Cleopatra the queen. . .”
Transmigration  has been a  great  theme of literature. We also 
encounter it among the mystics. Plotinus says that to pass from one life 
to another is like sleeping in different beds in different rooms. I imagine 
all of us have had the sensation of having lived previous lives. In the 
beautiful poem by Dante Gabriel Rossetti, “Sudden Light,” he says, “I 
have  been  here  before.”  It  is addressed  to a  woman  whom  he  has 
possessed or will possess, and he tells her that she has already been his, 
and has been his an infinite number of times, and will be his forever. 
This takes us to the doctrine of cycles, which is close to Buddhism, and 
which St. Augustine refuted in The City of God.
News of the Hindu doctrine reached the Stoics and Pythagoreans: 
55

the idea that  the  universe  consists  of an  infinite  number  of  cycles, 
divided into kalpas. The kalpa transcends the imagination of man. Think 
of a wall of iron. It is sixteen miles high, and every six hundred years an 
angel brushes against it with a fine cloth from Benares. When the cloth 
has worn down that sixteen-mile-high iron wall, the first day of a kalpa 
will have passed. The gods last for as long as a kalpa, and then they too 
die and are reborn.
The history of the universe is divided into cycles, and within these 
cycles there are great eclipses in which nothing or only the words of the 
Vedas remain. Those words are the archetypes that create things. The 
god Brahma also  dies and is reborn. There  is a somewhat pathetic 
moment in which Brahma is found in his palace. He has been reborn 
after one of the kalpas, after one of the eclipses. He walks through the 
rooms, which are empty. He thinks of the other gods. The other gods 
appear at his command; and they think that Brahma has created them 
because they were there before.
Let us pause for a moment in this vision of the history of the 
universe. In Buddhism there is no god; or there may be a god, but that is 
not what is essential. The essential is that we believe our destiny has 
been preordained by our karma. If I happen to have been born in Buenos 
Aires in 1899, if I happen to be blind, if I happen to be speaking these 
words before you tonight, all this is the result of my previous life. There 
is not a single fact of my life that has not been preordained by my 
previous life. This is what is called karma. Karma, as I have said, 
becomes a mental structure, a very delicate mental structure.
In every moment of our lives we are weaving and interweaving. 
What we weave is not only our will, our acts, our half-dreams, our sleep, 
our half-waking; we are forever weaving our karma. And when we die, 
another being will be born who is the heir of that karma.
Deussen
―a disciple of Schopenhauer, who loved Buddhism s
o
 
much
―tells how in India he met a blind beggar and became friends wit
h
 
him. The beggar told him: “If I have been born blind, it is because of the 
sins committed in my previous life; it is just if I am blind.” The people 
accept suffering. Gandhi opposed the building of hospitals. He said that 
hospitals and charitable works simply delay the paying of a debt. One 
being cannot help another: if the others suffer, then they must suffer, to 
pay for a sin. If I help them, then I am putting off their payment of this 
56

debt.
Karma  is  a  cruel  law,  but  it  has  a  curious  mathematical 
consequence: if my present life is determined by my previous life, that 
previous life was determined by another, and that by another, and so on 
forever. That is to say: the letter z is determined by y, y by x, x by w, w 
by  u,  except  that  this  alphabet  has  an  end  but  no  beginning.  The 
Buddhists and the Hindus, in general, believe in a living infinity. They 
believe that to arrive at this moment an infinite time has already passed. 
In saying infinite I do not mean indefinite, innumerable
―I mean strictl
y
 
infinite.
Among the six fates that are permitted for men
―one can be 
a
 
demon, a plant, an animal
―the most difficult is to be a man, and w
e
 
must make use of it in order to save ourselves.
The Buddha imagined that at the bottom of the sea is a tortoise and 
a floating bangle. Every six hundred years the tortoise sticks its head out. 
It would be extraordinary if it put its head through the bangle. But, said 
the Buddha, to be human is as rare as the tortoise putting its head through 
the bangle. Yet we must be men before we may reach Nirvana.
What is the cause of suffering, the cause of life, if we deny the 
concept of a god, if there is no personal deity who has created the 
universe? It is what the Buddha called zen. The word zen may seem 
strange, but we will compare it to other words we know.
Let  us  think,  for  example,  of  the  will  of  Schopenhauer. 
Schopenhauer conceived of  Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung,  the 
world as will and representation. There is a will embodied in each one of 
us, and it produces the representation that is the world. We find this in 
other philosophies under different names. Bergson speaks of the  élan 
vital, Bernard Shaw of the life force, which is the same. But there is a 
difference:  for  Bergson  and  Shaw  the élan  vital  is  a  force  we 
impose
―w e  kee p  dreamin g  th e  world ,  creatin g  th e  world .  Fo
r
 
Schopenhauer, the somber Schopenhauer, and for the Buddha, the world 
is a dream. We must stop dreaming it, and we can only stop through 
great effort. We have the principle of suffering, which becomes zen. Zen 
produces life, and life is powerfully wretched. What does it mean to live? 
To live is to be born, grow old, grow sick, die
―not to mention the othe
r
 
sorrows, including the one that was, for the Buddha, the most pathetic: 
not to be with those we love.
57

We must renounce passion. Suicide does not help, because it is a 
passionate act. The man who commits suicide remains in the world of 
dreams. We must reach the understanding that the world is an apparition, 
a dream; that life is a dream. But we must feel this deeply, having 
reached  it  through  the  exercises  of  meditation.  In  the  Buddhist 
monasteries one of the exercises is this: the neophyte must live every 
moment of his life experiencing it fully. He must think: “Now it is noon; 
now I am crossing the patio; now I will meet the superior.” And at the 
same time he must think that the noon, the patio, and the superior are 
unreal, that they are as unreal as he and his thoughts, for Buddhism 
denies the I.
One of the great delusions is the I. Buddhism thus agrees with 
Hume, with Schopenhauer, and with our own Macedonio Fernández. 
There is no subject; what exists is a series of mental states. If I say “I 
think,” I am committing an error, because I am assuming a fixed subject 
and then an act of that subject, which is thought. It is not so. One should 
say, as Hume points out, not “I think,” but rather “it is thought,” as one 
says “it is raining.” When we say “it is raining,” we do not think that the 
rain is performing an act but rather that something is happening. In the 
same way that we say “it's hot,” “it's cold,” we should also say “it's 
thinking,” “it's suffering,” and avoid the subject.
In  the  monasteries  the  neophytes  are  subjected  to  a  rigorous 
discipline. Anyone may leave the monastery at any time. They do not 
even  note,  I've  been  told,  anyone's  name.  The  neophyte  enters  the 
monastery, and they subject him to harsh labors. He sleeps, and after a 
quarter of an hour they wake him; he must clean and sweep; if he falls 
asleep they physically punish him. Thus he must continually think, not 
on his sins, but on the unreality of everything. He must perform a 
continuous exercise of unreality.
We now come to Zen Buddhism and to Bodhidharma, the great 
missionary. In the fifth century A.D. Bodhidharma traveled from India to 
China. There he met an emperor who fostered Buddhism. The emperor 
enumerated the  monasteries  and shrines he had built and the many 
neophytes studying within them. Bodhidharma said to him: “All of this 
belongs to the world of illusion. The monasteries and monks are as 
unreal as you and I.” Then he went to meditate and sat against a wall.
The teaching reached Japan and split into various sects, the most 
58

famous of which is Zen. In Zen they have discovered a procedure to 
reach illumination. It only works after years of meditation. It arrives 
suddenly: it is not the product of a series of syllogisms. One must 
suddenly intuit the truth. The process is called satori, and it consists of a 
sudden event that is beyond logic.
We always think in terms of subject-object, cause-effect, logic-
illogic, a thing and its opposite. We must go beyond these categories. 
According to the Zen masters, to reach truth through sudden intuition 
requires an illogical answer. The neophyte asks the teacher, “What is the 
Buddha?” The teacher answers: “The cypress is the orchard.” An answer 
which is completely illogical but which may awaken the truth. The 
neophyte asks  why  Bodhidharma  came  from  the  West.  The teacher 
replies:  “Three  pounds  of  linen.”  These  words  do  not  contain  an 
allegorical meaning; they are a nonsensical answer to awaken, suddenly, 
the intuition. It may also  be  a sudden blow. The disciple  may  ask 
something,  and  the  teacher  may  answer  with  a  slap.  There  is  a 
story
―though it must be legendar
y―about Bodhidharm
a
.
Bodhidharma was accompanied by a disciple who kept asking 
questions, and Bodhidharma never answered. The disciple attempted to 
meditate, and after a while he cut off his left arm and presented it to the 
master as proof that he wanted to be his disciple. The master, without 
paying any attention to the gift
―because in the end everything is 
a
 
physical matter, an illusory matter
―asked him, “What do you want?
”
 
The disciple replied: “I have been looking for my mind for a long time, 
and I haven't found it.” The master said: “You have not found it because 
it  doesn't  exist.”  At  that  moment  the  disciple  understood  the  truth, 
understood that the I does not exist, understood that everything is unreal. 
Here we have, more or less, the essence of Zen Buddhism.
It is very difficult to explicate a religion, particularly a religion one 
does not profess. I think that what is important in Buddhism is not its 
diverting legends but its discipline: a discipline that is within our reach 
and does not require us to become ascetics. Nor does it ask us to abandon 
the carnal life. What it requires is meditation, and meditation that has 
nothing to do with our sins, with our past lives.
One of the subjects of Zen Buddhist meditation is to think that 
your past life is illusory. If I were a Buddhist monk, I would be thinking 
at this very moment that I had just begun to live, that all the earlier life of 
59

Borges was a dream, that all of universal history is a dream. Through 
exercises of an intellectual kind we will become free of zen. Once we 
understand that the I does not exist, we will not think that the I can be 
happy or that our task is to make it happy. We will reach a state of calm. 
This is not to say that Nirvana is equivalent to a cessation of thinking. A 
proof of it is in the legend of the Buddha. The Buddha, beneath his 
sacred pipal tree, reached Nirvana, and yet he continued to live and teach 
the law for many years.
What does it mean to reach Nirvana? Simply that our acts no 
longer cast shadows. While we are in this world we are subject to karma. 
Every one of our acts is interwoven into this mental structure called 
karma. When we have reached Nirvana our acts no longer have shadows; 
we are free. St. Augustine said that when we are saved we will have no 
reason to think about good or evil. We will continue to do good, without 
thinking of it.
What is Nirvana? A large part of the attention that Buddhism has 
gained in the West is due to that beautiful word. It seems impossible it 
does not contain something precious. Nirvana is, literally, extinction, 
extinguishing. It is conjectured that when one reaches Nirvana he is 
extinguished. But when one dies there is a great Nirvana, and then 
extinction. However, an Austrian Orientalist has noted that the Buddha 
employed the physics of his time, and the idea of extinction was not the 
same as it is today. It was thought that a flame, when extinguished, did 
not  disappear.  It  kept  living,  it  endured  in  another  state.  Therefore 
Nirvana does not mean extinction, it means that we continue in another 
way, in a way that is inconceivable for us. In general, the metaphors of 
the mystics are nuptial; those of the Buddhists are different. When one 
speaks of Nirvana, one does not speak of the wine of Nirvana or the rose 
of Nirvana or the embrace of Nirvana. One compares it to an island, an 
unmoving island surrounded by torments. It is compared to a tower or to 
a garden. It is something which exists on its own, beyond us.
What I have said  tonight is fragmentary. It would have been 
absurd if I had expounded a doctrine to which I have dedicated some 
years
―and of which I have actually understood littl
e―with the intenti
o
n
 
of displaying a museum piece. Buddhism is not a museum piece; it is a 
path to salvation. Not for me, but for millions of men. I hope that I have 
treated it with respect, discussing it here tonight.
60

Poetry
he Irish  pantheist  Scotus  Erigena  said  that  the  Holy  Scripture 
contains an infinite number of meanings, and he compared it to the 
iridescent  feathers  of  a  peacock's  tail.  Centuries  later,  a  Spanish 
Kabbalist said that God wrote the Scriptures for each one of the men of 
Israel, that there are as many Bibles as there are readers of the Bible. 
This is believable if we consider that the author of the Bible and the 
author of the destiny of each one of its readers is the same. One may 
think of these two sentences merely as demonstrations of the Celtic 
imagination and of the Oriental imagination. But I would venture to say 
that they are both absolutely correct, not only in regard to the Scriptures 
but to any book worth rereading.
T
Emerson said that a library is a magic chamber in which there are 
many enchanted spirits. They wake when we call them. When the book 
lies unopened, it is literally, geometrically, a volume, a thing among 
things. When we open it, when the book surrenders itself to its reader, 
the aesthetic event occurs. And even for the same reader the same book 
changes, for we change; we are the river of Heraclitus, who said that the 
man of yesterday is not the man of today, who will not be the man of 
tomorrow. We change incessantly, and each reading of a book, each 
rereading, each memory of that rereading, reinvents the text. The text too 
is the changing river of Heraclitus.
This brings us to the doctrine of Croce, who may not be the most 
profound thinker but is the least prejudiced: the idea that literature is 
expression.  From  that  comes  Croce's  other  doctrine,  one  which  is 
frequently forgotten: if literature is expression, literature is made of 
words, and language is also an aesthetic phenomenon. That is something 
difficult for us to admit: the concept that language is an aesthetic event. 
Almost  no  one  professes  Croce's  doctrine  yet  everyone  applies  it 
61

continually.
We say that Spanish is a sonorous language, that English is a 
language of varied sounds, that Latin has a certain dignity to which all 
the later languages aspired: we apply aesthetic categories to languages. 
Erroneously we suppose that language corresponds to that mysterious 
thing we call reality. The truth is that language is something else.
Let us imagine something yellow, shining, changing. That thing is 
something in the sky, circular; at other times it has the form of an arc, 
other times it grows and shrinks. Someone
―we will never know th
e
 
name of that someone
―our ancestor, our common ancestor, gives to tha
t
 
thing the name  moon,  different in different languages and variously 
lovely. I would say that the Greek word selene is too complex for the 
moon,  that  the  English  moon  has  something  slow,  something  that 
imposes on the voice a slowness that suits the moon, that seems like the 
moon because it is almost circular: it begins almost with the same letter 
with which it ends. As for the Spanish  luna,  that beautiful word we 
inherited from the Latin and share with the Italian: it consists of two 
syllables, two pieces, which are perhaps too much. We have  lua  in 
Portuguese, which seems less lovely; and  lune  in French, which has 
something mysterious. In German, the word for moon is masculine. Thus 
Nietzsche could say that the moon is a monk who gazes enviously at the 
earth, or a cat, Kater, who walks on rugs of stars.
We imagine that someone, somewhere, invented the word moon. 
No doubt that first invention was something quite different. But why 
didn't it end with that first person who named the moon with that sound 
or another?
There is a Persian metaphor which says that the moon is the mirror 
of time. In that phrase, mirror of time, is the fragility of the moon and 
also its eternity. It is the contradiction of the moon, so nearly translucid, 
so nearly nothing, but whose measure is eternity. To say moon or to say 
mirror of time are two aesthetic events, except that the latter is the work 
of a second stage, because  mirror of time  is composed of two unities, 
while moon gives us, perhaps more effectively, the word, the concept of 
the moon. Each word is a poetic work.
It is said that prose is closer to reality than poetry. I think this is 
wrong. There is an idea that has been attributed to the short story writer 
Horacio Quiroga: if a cold wind blows from the bank of the river, one 
62

must write simply, “a cold wind blows from the bank of the river.” 
Quiroga
―if it was he who said thi
s―seems to have forgotten that th
a
t
 
construction is as far from reality as it is from the cold wind that blows 
from the bank of the river. What is our perception of it? We feel the air 
move, we call it  wind;  we feel that that wind comes from a certain 
direction, from the bank of the river. And with this we form something 
as complex as a poem by Gongóra or a sentence by Joyce. Let us return 
to that phrase, “a cold wind blows from the bank of the river.” We create 
a subject, wind, a verb, blows, and a context, from the bank of the river. 
All  of  this  is  far  from  reality.  Reality  is  something  simpler.  That 
apparently prosaic and ordinary line, deliberately chosen as such by 
Quiroga, is a complicated phrase; it is a structure.
Let us take Carducci's famous line: “The green silence of the 
fields.”  We  might  think  that  this  is  a  mistake,  that  Carducci  has 
misplaced the adjective; that he meant to write “The silence of the green 
fields.” Astutely or rhetorically, he altered it and spoke of the green 
silence of the fields. How do we perceive it? We feel various things at 
the same time. (The word thing is perhaps too substantive.) We feel the 
field, the vast presence of the field, we feel the verdure and the silence. 
The fact that there is a word for silence is an aesthetic creation. Silence 
applied to people. To apply it to the circumstance that there was no 
sound in the field is an aesthetic operation, one that no doubt was bold in 
its time. When Carducci says, “The green silence of the fields,” he is 
saying something that is as near and as far from immediate reality as if 
he had said, “The silence of the green fields.”
We have another famous example of hypallage, that unsurpassed 
line of Virgil, “Ibant obscuri sola sub nocte per umbram,” “They went 
darkly beneath the solitary night through the shadows.” We may leave 
aside  the  per  umbram,  which  rounds  out  the  line,  and  take  “They 
[Aeneas and the Sybil] went darkly beneath the solitary night.” (Solitary 
has more force in Latin because it comes before sub.) We might think 
that Virgil had switched words, because the natural thing to say would 
have been, “They went alone beneath the dark night.” Nevertheless, in 
trying to recreate the image, we think of Aeneas and the Sybil, and we 
see that it is as close to our image to say, “They went darkly beneath the 
solitary night,” as it is to say, “They went alone beneath the dark night.”
Language is an aesthetic creation. I think there is no question of 
63

that. A proof is that when we study a language, when we are obliged to 
see the words up close, we experience them as beautiful or not. Studying 
a language, one sees the words with a magnifying glass; one thinks, this 
word is ugly, this lovely, this too heavy. This does not happen in one's 
mother tongue, where the words do not appear to us isolated from 
speech.
Poetry, said Croce, is expression, if a line is expression, if each 
one of the parts from which the verse is made, each one of the words, is 
in  itself  expressive.  You  will  say  that  this  is  trite,  something  that 
everybody knows. But I don't know if we know it; I think we feel it 
because it is true.
The fact is that poetry is not the books in the library, not the books 
in Emerson's magic chamber. Poetry is the encounter of the reader with 
the book, the discovery of the book.
There is another aesthetic experience, also quite strange
―the on
e
 
in which the poet conceives the work, in which he is discovering or 
inventing the work. As is well known, in Latin the word for to invent and 
to discover is the same. All of this is in accord with the Platonic doctrine 
that to invent, to discover, is to remember. Francis Bacon agreed that 
learning is remembering, not knowing is knowing to forget; everything is 
this way, only we don't see it.
When I write something, I have the sensation that it existed before. 
I start from a general conception. I know more or less the beginning and 
the end, and then I discover the intervening parts. But I do not have the 
sensation of having invented them, that they depend on my free will. The 
things are as they are, but they are hidden, and my task as a poet is to 
find them.
Bradley said that one of the effects of poetry is that it gives us the 
impression  not  of  discovering  something  new  but  of  remembering 
something we have forgotten. When we read a good poem we imagine 
that we too could have written it; that the poem already existed within us. 
This brings us to the Platonic definition of poetry: that winged, fickle, 
sacred thing. As a definition it is fallible, since that winged, fickle, sacred 
thing could also be music (except that poetry is a form of music). Plato, 
defining poetry, gives us an example of poetry. And this brings us to the 
idea that poetry is an aesthetic experience: something that would be a 
revolution in the teaching of poetry.
64

I have been a professor of English literature in the College of 
Philosophy and Letters at the University of Buenos Aires, and I have 
tried to disregard as much as possible the history of literature. When my 
students asked me for a bibliography, I told them, “A bibliography is 
unimportant
―afte r  all ,  Shakespear e  kne w  nothin g  o f  Shakespearea
n
 
criticism. Why not study the texts directly? If you like the book, fine; if 
you don't, don't read it. The idea of compulsory reading is absurd; it's 
only worthwhile to speak of compulsory happiness. I believe that poetry 
is something one feels. If you don't feel poetry, if you have no sense of 
beauty, if a story doesn't make you want to know what happened next, 
then the author has not written for you. Put it aside. Literature is rich 
enough to offer you some other author worthy of your attention
―or on
e
 
today unworthy of your attention whom you will read tomorrow.”
This is how I have taught, relying on the aesthetic event, which 
does not need to be defined. The aesthetic event is something as evident, 
as immediate, as indefinable as love, the taste of fruit, of water. We feel 
poetry as we feel the closeness of a woman, or as we feel a mountain or a 
bay. If we feel it immediately, why dilute it with other words, which no 
doubt will be weaker than our feelings?
There are people who barely feel poetry, and they are generally 
dedicated to teaching it. I believe in feeling poetry and not in having it 
taught. I have not taught the love of particular texts; I have taught my 
students  how to  love  literature,  how  to  see  literature  as  a  form  of 
happiness. I am almost incapable of abstract thought
―you will hav
e
 
noticed that I'm continually propping myself up with quotations and 
memories. Rather than speaking abstractly of poetry, which is a form of 
ennui or of loafing, let us take two Spanish poems and examine them.
I choose two well-known poems because my memory is fallible, 
and I prefer a text that already exists in your memories. We will consider 
the famous sonnet of Quevedo, written to the memory of Don Pedro 
Téllez Girón, Duke of Osuna. I will recite it slowly, and then we will go 
back to it, line by line.
Faltar pudo su patria al grande Osuna, 
pero no a su defensa sus hazañas; 
diéronle muerte y cárcel las Españas, 
65

de quien él hizo esclava la Fortuna.
Lloraron sus invidias una a una 
con las proprias naciones las extrañas; 
su tumba son de Flandres las campañas, 
y su epitafio la sangrienta Luna.
En sus exequias encendio al Vesubio 
Part énope y Trinacria al Mongibelo; 
el llanto militar crecio en diluvio.
Dióle el mejor lugar Marte en su cielo; 
la Mosa, el Rhin, el Tajo, y el Danubio 
murmuran con dolor su desconsuelo.
[The great Osuna might lack his homeland,
but not the deeds in its defense;
Spain brought death and jail
to him whom Fortune made a slave.
They wept in envy, one by one,
foreign nations and his own;
his tomb is the campaigns of Flanders, 
and his epitaph the bloody moon.
For his obsequies Parthenope
lit Vesuvius, and Trinacria the Mongibelo;
the military weeping grew into a flood.
Mars gave him the best place in heaven;
the Moselle, the Rhine, the Tagus, and the Danube 
in sorrow murmur their grief.]
The first thing I want to observe is that it deals with a juridical 
allegation. The poet wants to defend the memory of the Duke of Osuna 
who, as he wrote in another poem, “died in prison and dead was a 
66

prisoner.” The poet says that Spain owes the duke great military honors, 
but they have repaid him with jail. This lacks total validity, as there is no 
reason  why  a  hero  couldn't  be  guilty  or  why  a  hero  shouldn't  by 
punished. Nevertheless,
Faltar pudo su patria al grande Osuna, 
pero no a su defensa sus hazañas; 
diéronle muerte y cárcel las Españas, 
de quien él hizo esclava la Fortuna.
is a demogogical moment. I am not speaking for or against the sonnet; I 
am trying to analyze it.
Lloraron sus invidias una a una 
con las proprias naciones las extrañas; 
These two lines do not have major poetic resonance; they are 
placed there by the necessity of elaborating a sonnet. Quevedo followed 
the difficult form of the Italian sonnet, which required four rhymes. 
Shakespeare followed the easy form of the Elizabethan sonnet, which 
required two. Quevedo continues:
su tumba son de Flandres las campañas, 
y su epitafio la sangrienta Luna.
Here  is  the  essential.  Those  two  lines  owe  their  richness  to 
ambiguity. I remember many discussions on the interpretation of those 
lines. What does it mean that “his tomb was the campaigns of Flanders”? 
We may think of the fields of Flanders, of the military campaigns the 
duke waged. “And his epitaph the bloody moon” is one of the most 
memorable lines in the Spanish language. What does it mean? We think 
of the bloody moon that figures in the Apocalypse, or of the moon 
properly red over the field of battle. But there is another sonnet of 
Quevedo, also dedicated to the Duke of Osuna, where he says, “to the 
moons of Thrace with bloody / eclipse your journey now is sealed.” 
Quevedo would have thought first of the Ottoman flag: the bloody moon 
would be the red half-moon. I think we are all agreed that none of the 
67

meanings should be discarded. We will not say that Quevedo is referring 
only to military travels, or to the duke's services, or to the campaign of 
Flanders, or to the bloody moon over the battlefield, or to the Turkish 
flag.  Quevedo  perceived  the  various  meanings.  The  lines  are  good 
because they are ambiguous.
En sus exequias encendio al Vesubio 
Part énope y Trinacria al Mongibelo; 
That is to say that Naples has lit Vesuvius, and Sicily Etna. How 
strange that these ancient names have been placed here
―they seem s
o
 
remote from the illustrious names that came later.
el llanto militar crecio en diluvio.
Here we have another proof that poetry is one thing and rational 
feeling another: the image of soldiers who weep until they produce a 
deluge is notoriously absurd. But it is not absurd in poetry, which has its 
own laws. The “military weeping”
―the word “military
”―is surprisin
g
.
 
“Military” is an astonishing adjective when applied to weeping.
Dióle el mejor lugar Marte en su cielo; 
Nor can we logically justify this: it makes no sense to think that 
Mars will quarter the Duke of Osuna next to Caesar. The phrase exists by 
virtue of the hyperbaton. It is the touchstone of poetry: the line exists 
beyond meaning.
la Mosa, el Rhin, el Tajo, y el Danubio 
murmuran con dolor su desconsuelo.
I would say that these lines which have moved me for years are, 
nonetheless, basically false. Quevedo allowed himself to be dragged 
along by the idea of a hero wept over by the geography of his campaigns 
and by famous rivers. We feel that it is false: it would have been better to 
tell the truth, to say what Wordsworth said, for example, at the end of 
that sonnet in which he attacks Douglas for having felled a forest. He 
68

says, yes, it was terrible what Douglas did to the forest, destroying a 
noble horde, “a brotherhood of venerable Trees.” And yet, he adds, we 
suffer the pains of evils which do not matter to nature
―the river Twee
d
 
and  the  green  pastures  and  the  hills  and  the  mountains  continue 
regardless. He felt he could have a greater effect by speaking the truth. It 
pains us that they have destroyed those beautiful trees, but to nature it 
doesn't matter. Nature
―if there exists an entity called Natur
e―kno
w
s
 
that it can restore them. The river keeps flowing.
It is true that for Quevedo it is a matter of the gods of those rivers. 
Perhaps it would have been more poetic had he written that the death of 
the Duke of Osuna doesn't concern the rivers at all. But Quevedo wanted 
to create an elegy, a poem on the death of a man. What is the death of a 
man? With him dies a face that will not occur again, as Pliny observed. 
Each man has his own unique face, and with him die thousands of 
events, thousands of memories, all of them too human. Quevedo seems 
to feel none of this. His friend, the Duke of Osuna, has died in jail, and 
Quevedo  writes  this  sonnet  with  coldness;  we  feel  its  essential 
indifference.  He  writes  it  as  an  allegation  against  the  state  which 
condemned the duke to prison. It might even seem that he didn't like the 
duke. And yet, it is one of the great sonnets of our language.
We will go on to another sonnet, one by Enrique Banchs. It would 
be absurd to say that Banchs is a better poet than Quevedo. Besides, what 
do such comparisons mean? Let us consider this sonnet by Banchs and 
see what makes it so pleasurable.
Hospitalario y fiel en su reflejo 
donde a ser apariencia se acostumbra 
el material vivir, está el espejo 
como un claro de luna en la penumbra.
Pompa le da en las noches la flotante 
claridad de la lámpara, y tristeza 
la rosa que en el vaso agonizante 
también en él inclina la cabeza.
Si hace doble al dolor, también repite 
69

las cosas que me son jardin del alma. 
Y acaso espera que algún dia habite
en la ilusión de su azulada calma 
el Huésped que le deje reflejadas 
frentes juntas y manos enlazadas.
[Hospitable and faithful in its reflection
where living matter is accustomed
to being appearance, the mirror is
like moonlight in the darkness.
Pomp it brings to the nights the floating
clarity of a lamp, and sadness
the rose that in the vase dying
leans its head within it too.
If it doubles pain, it also repeats
the things which for me are a garden of the soul.
And perhaps it hopes that some day will live
in the illusion of its blue calm
the Guest who will leave reflected
foreheads joined and hands interlaced.]
This  sonnet  is  quite  curious,  because  the  mirror  is  not  the 
protagonist: there is a secret protagonist who is revealed to us at the end. 
First of all we have the theme, which is so poetic: the mirror that 
duplicates the appearance of all things.
We may remember Plotinus. They wanted to paint his portrait, and 
he refused, saying “I myself am a shadow, a shadow of the archetype that 
is in the sky. What is the point of making a shadow of that shadow?” 
What is art, thought Plotinus, but an apparition of the second degree? If 
man is frail, how can an image of a man be loved? This is what Banchs 
felt. He felt the phantasmic quality of the mirror.
70

It is truly awful that there are mirrors; I have always been terrified 
by mirrors. I think that Poe felt it too. There is an essay of his, one of the 
least known, on the decoration of rooms. One of the conditions he insists 
on is that the mirrors be placed in such a way that a seated person is not 
reflected. This tells us his fear of seeing himself in the mirror. We see it 
in  his  story  “William  Wilson”  about  the  double,  and  also  in  The 
Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym, where there is an Antarctic tribe, and a 
man from  that  tribe  sees a  mirror  for  the  first  time  and collapses, 
horrified.  We  are  accustomed  to  mirrors,  but  there  is  something 
terrifying in that visual duplication of reality.
Let us return to the sonnet by Banchs. “Hospitable” gives it a 
human  touch.  Nevertheless,  we  have  never  thought  of  mirrors  as 
hospitable. Mirrors are received in silence, with amiable resignation.
Hospitalario y fiel en su reflejo 
donde a ser apariencia se acostumbra 
el material vivir, está el espejo 
como un claro de luna en la penumbra.
We see the mirror, itself luminous, and he also compares it to 
something as intangible as the moon. He continues to feel the magic and 
strangeness of the mirror: “like moonlight on shadow.”
Pompa le da en las noches la flotante 
claridad de la lámpara,. . .
The  “floating  clarity”  means  that  things  cannot  be  defined; 
everything must be imprecise like the mirror, the mirror of shadow. It is 
probably late afternoon or night.
. . . la flotante 
claridad de la lámpara, y tristeza 
la rosa que en el vaso agonizante 
también en él inclina la cabeza.
So that everything will not be vague, we now have a rose, a 
precise rose.
71

Si hace doble al dolor, también repite 
las cosas que me son jardin del alma. 
Y acaso espera que algún dia habite
en la ilusión de su azulada calma 
el Huésped que le deje reflejadas 
frentes juntas y manos enlazadas.
Here we reach the subject of the sonnet, which is not the mirror 
but  love,  modest  love.  The  mirror  does  not  hope  to  see  reflected 
foreheads joined and hands enlaced, it is the poet who hopes to see them. 
But a sort of modesty brings him to say all this in an indirect manner. 
This is admirably prepared: from the beginning we have “hospitable and 
faithful”; from the beginning the mirror is not a mirror of glass or of 
metal. The mirror is a human being; it is hospitable and faithful and then 
it accustoms us to see the world of appearances, a world that is finally 
identified with the poet. The poet is he who hopes to see the Guest, love.
I have spoken of languages and of how unfair it is to compare one 
with another. If we think of a poem, a stanza in Spanish, for example:
quién hubiera tal ventura 
sobre las aguas del mar 
como hubo el conde Arnaldos 
la mañana de San Juan
[who had such luck
on the waters of the sea
as had the Count Arnaldos
the morning of San Juan]
The Count Arnaldos or the morning of San Juan do not matter: those 
lines could only be said in Spanish.
The sound of French I don't find particularly agreeable. I think it 
lacks the sonority of other Latin tongues. But how can one think badly of 
a language which allows lines as marvelous as this one by Hugo:
72

L'hydre-Univers tordant son corps écaillé d'astres
How can we condemn a language without which those lines would 
be impossible?
As for English, I think it has the defect of having lost the open 
vowels  of  Old  English.  Nevertheless,  it  offered  the  possibility  to 
Shakespeare of lines like:
And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars 
From this world-wearied flesh
If I had to choose a language
―though there is no reason for no
t
 
choosing any one of them
―for me that language would be German
,
 
which has the possibility of forming compound words (like English, but 
more  so),  has  open  vowels  and  a  fine  music.  As  for  Italian,  the 
Commedia is enough.
Nothing  is  more  wonderful  than  the  fact  of  so  much  beauty 
dispersed among the various languages. My teacher, the great Spanish 
Jewish poet Rafael Cansinos-Asséns, left us a prayer to the Lord in 
which he says, “O Lord, let there not be so much beauty.” Browning 
wrote that:
Just when we're safest, there's a sunset-touch, 
A fancy from a flower bell, someone's death, 
A chorus-ending from Euripides―
and we are again lost.
Beauty waits in ambush for us. If we are sensitive, we will feel it 
in the poetry of all languages.
I ought to have studied the Oriental languages: I have only glanced 
at them through translations. But I have felt the punch, the impact of their 
beauty. For example, that line by the Persian poet Hafiz: “I fly, my dust 
will be what I am.” In this there is the whole doctrine of transmigration. 
“My dust will be what I am.” I will be reborn again and again; in another 
country, I will be Hafiz, the poet. All of this is given in a few words 
which I have read in English, but which cannot be very different in 
Persian. It is too simple to have been altered greatly.
73

Beauty is everywhere, perhaps in every moment of our lives. My 
friend  Roy  Bartholomew,  who  lived  for  some  years  in  Persia  and 
translated Omar Khayyam directly from the Farsi, has told me what I 
already guessed: that in the East, in general, they do not read literature 
and philosophy historically. They study the history of philosophy as 
though Aristotle were disputing with Bergson, Plato with Hume, all at 
the same time. This greatly disturbed Deussen and Max Müller, who 
could not determine the chronology of the authors they were studying.
I will end by citing three prayers by Phoenician sailors, from the 
first century. These prayers were spoken when the ship was on the verge 
of being lost. The first is:
Mother of Carthage, I return my oar.
Mother of Carthage is the city of Tyre, where Dido came from. 
And then, “I return my oar.” There is something extraordinary here: the 
Phoenician can only conceive of life as an oarsman. He has completed 
his life, and he gives back his oar so that others may continue to row.
Another of the prayers, one even more pathetic:
I sleep; presently I row again.
The man does not conceive of any other fate. It also shows the idea 
of cyclical time.
Finally, this one, which is quite disturbing and is different from the 
others, because it does not imply an acceptance of fate. It is the despair 
of a man who is going to die, who is going to be judged by terrible gods, 
and says:
Gods, judge me not as a God
but as a man
whom the Ocean has broken.
In these three prayers we immediately feel
―or at least I d
o―t
h
e
 
presence of poetry. Here is the aesthetic event, not in the libraries or the 
bibliographies or the studies of chronologies of manuscripts or the closed 
volumes.
74

I read those three prayers of Phoenician sailors in a story by 
Kipling, “The Manner of Men,” a story about St. Paul. Are they authentic 
(as they say) or were they written by Kipling, the great poet? After 
formulating  the question  I  felt  guilty, because  what is the  point in 
choosing? Let us look at the two possibilities, the two horns of the 
dilemma.
In the first case, we are dealing with the prayers of Phoenician 
sailors, people of the sea who could only conceive of life on the sea. 
From Phoenician, let us say, they passed to Greek, from Greek to Latin, 
from Latin to English. Kipling rewrote them.
In the second case, a great poet, Rudyard Kipling, imagines the 
Phoenician sailors: in some way he is close to them, in some way he is 
them. He conceives of life as a life on the sea, and he puts these prayers 
in  their  mouths.  Everything  happened  in  the  past:  the  anonymous 
Phoenician sailors are dead, Kipling is dead. What does it matter which 
of these ghosts wrote or thought these lines?
There is an odd metaphor in a Hindu poem, one which I am not 
sure I can completely appreciate. It says that the Himalayas
―those hig
h
 
mountains whose peaks are, according to Kipling, the knees of other 
mountains
―the Himalayas are the smile of Shiva. The high mountain
s
 
are the smile of a god, a terrible god. It is a startling metaphor.
For me, beauty is a physical sensation, something we feel with our 
whole body. It is not the result of a judgment. We do not arrive at it by 
way of rules. We either feel beauty or we don't.
I will end with a great line by the poet who, in the seventeenth 
century, took the strangely real and poetic name of Angelus Silesius. It is 
the summary of all I have said tonight
―except that I have said it b
y
 
means of reasoning and simulated reasoning. I will say it first in Spanish 
and then in German:
La rosa sin porqué florece porque florece.
Die Rose ist ohne warum; sie blühet weil sie blühet.
[The rose has no why, it flowers because it flowers.]
75

The Kabbalah
he  diverse,  and  occasionally  contradictory,  teachings  grouped 
under the name of the Kabbalah derive from a concept alien to the 
Western  mind,  that  of  the  sacred  book.  We  have  an  analogous 
concept
―the classic boo
k―but I think it is easy to demonstrate, with t
h
e
 
help of Oswald Spengler and his book Der Untergang des Abendlandes 
(The Decline of the West), that the two concepts are quite different.
T
Let us take the word classic. What does it mean, etymologically? 
Classic comes from classis: a frigate, a fleet. A classic book is a well-run 
book; everything must be on board it―shipshape as they say in English. 
Besides this relatively modest sentiment, a classic book is one that is 
eminent in its genre. Thus we say that Don Quixote, the Commedia, and 
Faust are classics.
Although the cult of those books has been carried to extremes that 
are perhaps excessive, they are not sacred texts. The Greeks considered 
the Iliad and the Odyssey to be classic works. Alexander, as Plutarch tells 
us, kept under his pillow a copy of the  Iliad  and his sword, the two 
symbols of his destiny as a warrior. But it never occurred to the Greeks 
that the Iliad  was perfect word for word. In Alexandria, the librarians 
gathered to study the  Iliad  and, in the course of those studies, they 
invented the indispensable (though at times now disgracefully forgotten) 
punctuation marks. The Iliad was an eminent book; it was considered the 
apex of poetry. But it was not thought that every word, every hexameter 
was inevitably admirable. It was seen as something changeable, and it 
was studied in historical fashion; it was placed within a context. The 
concept of a sacred book is something entirely different. Horace said, 
“At times, good Homer nodded.” No one would say that, at times, the 
good Holy Spirit nodded.
Today  we  think  of  a  book  as  an  instrument  for  justifying, 
76

defending,  disputing,  explicating,  or  chronicling  a  doctrine,  but  in 
Antiquity a book was seen only as a substitute for the spoken word. Let 
us remember the passage in Plato where he says that books are like 
statues: they may seem alive, but when you ask them something they do 
not reply. To overcome this difficulty, he invented the Platonic-dialogue, 
which explores all of the possibilities of a subject.
We also have the lovely and curious letter that, according to 
Plutarch, Alexander of Macedon sent to Aristotle. He had just published 
his  Metaphysics―that is, he had ordered various copies to be made. 
Alexander rebuked him, saying that now everyone could know what was 
previously known only to the elect. Aristotle responded in his own 
defense, no doubt with sincerity: “My treatise has been published and not 
published.”  He  did  not  believe  that  a  book  expounded  a  subject 
completely, but rather that it served as a sort of guide to accompany oral 
instruction.
Pythagoras did not leave a single written line. It is conjectured that 
he did not want to tie himself to a text. He hoped that his thought would 
continue, after his death, to live and to branch out in the minds of his 
disciples. From that arises the phrase  magister dixit,  which is always 
misused. Magister dixit does not mean “the master has said it”
―as a wa
y
 
to close off discussion. A Pythagorean proclaims a doctrine which is 
perhaps not in the tradition of Pythagoras, for example the doctrine of 
cyclical  time.  If  it  is  attacked
―“tha t  i s  no t  i n  th e  tradition
”―t
h
e
 
response is  magister dixit,  which allows him to innovate. Pythagoras 
believed that books enchain, or, in the words of the Scriptures, that the 
letter kills and the spirit brings life.
Spengler points out in his chapter on magical culture in  Der 
Untergang des Abendlandes that the prototype of the magical book is the 
Koran. For the ulema, the doctors of Moslem law, the Koran is not a 
book like the others. It is a book
―this is incredible, but this is how i
t
 
is
―tha t  i s  olde r  tha n  th e  Arabi c  language .  On e  ma y  no t  stud y  i
t
 
historically or philologically, because it is older than the Arabs, older 
than the language in which it exists, and older than the universe. Nor do 
they admit that the Koran is the work of God; it is something more 
intimate and mysterious. For the orthodox Moslems the Koran is an 
attribute of God, like His rage, His pity, or His justice. The Koran itself 
speaks of a mysterious book, the mother of  the  book, the  celestial 
77

archetype of the Koran. It is in heaven and is worshiped by the angels.
Thus the notion of a sacred book is completely different from that 
of a classic book. In a sacred book, not only the words but the letters 
with which the words are written are sacred. The Kabbalists applied this 
concept to the study of the Scriptures. I suspect that their modus operandi 
was indebted to a desire to incorporate Gnostic thought into Jewish 
mysticism, to justify it with Scripture, to be orthodox. In any case, we 
may see briefly
―I have almost no right to be discussing thi
s―what is 
o
r
 
what was the modus operandi of the Kabbalists, who began to apply their 
strange science in the south of France, in the north of Spain, in Catalonia, 
and then in Italy, Germany, and, to some extent, in other areas. They also 
reached Palestine, though it did not originate there: it came from the 
Gnostic and Catharist thinkers.
The idea is this: the Pentateuch, the Torah, is a sacred book. An 
infinite intelligence has condescended to the human task of producing a 
book.  The  Holy  Spirit  has  condescended  to  literature,  which  is  as 
incredible as imagining that God condescended to become a man. In that 
book, nothing can be accidental. (In human writing there is always 
something accidental.)
There  is  a  superstitious  veneration  surrounding  Don  Quixote, 
Macbeth,  or  the  Chanson  de  Roland,  as  there  is  for  other  books, 
generally one to a country. (Except in France, whose literature is so rich 
that it admits at least two classical traditions.) Well then
―if a Cervante
s
 
scholar were to say: Don Quixote begins with two monosyllabic words 
ending in n (en and un), followed by one word of five letters (lugar), two 
of two letters (de la], and one of six (Mancha); and if he then were to 
draw conclusions from that, we would immediately assume he was mad. 
The Bible has been studied in this fashion.
It is said, for example, that it begins with the letter bet, the first 
letter of the first word, b'reshit. Why does it begin with bet? Because that 
is the first letter of the Hebrew word b'rachah, which means blessing. 
The text must begin with a blessing; it could not possibly begin with a 
letter that corresponds to a curse.
There is another circumstance, a curious one, which must have 
influenced the Kabbalah: God, whose words were the instrument of his 
work (as the great  writer Saavedra  Fajardo said) created  the world 
through words: God said, Let there be light, and there was light. From 
78

this one came to the conclusion that light was created by the word light, 
or by the intonation with which God pronounced the word light. If He 
had said another word, or if he had pronounced the word in another way, 
the result might not have been light, but something else.
We now come to something as incredible as anything I've said so 
far.  To  something  that  must  shock  our  Western  minds
―i t  shock
s
 
mine
―but to which I must refer. When we think of words, we thin
k
 
historically: that words were first spoken and then later they became 
composed of letters. In contrast, the Kabbalah (which means reception, 
tradition)  believes  that  the  letters  came  first,  that  they  were  the 
instruments of God, not the words signified by the letters. It is as if one 
were  to  think  of  writing,  contrary  to  experience,  as  older  than  the 
speaking  of  the  language.  Nothing,  then,  can  be  accidental  in  the 
Scriptures; everything must be predetermined, including, for example, 
the number of letters in each verse.
They  invented  equivalences  for  the  letters.  They  treated  the 
Scriptures as if it were a coded writing, a cryptogram, and they devised 
various rules for deciphering it. One may, for example, take each letter 
of each word and read it as the first letter of another word, thereby 
revealing a hidden text.
They also formed two alphabets: one, let us say, of a to l and the 
other of  m  to  z.  They took the letters above to be equivalent to those 
below. They also read the text
―to use the Greek wor
d
―boustrephedon, 
that is, from right to left, then left to right, then right to left. They 
attributed  numerical  values  to  the  letters.  All  of  this  formed  a 
cryptography which could be deciphered, and the results were worthy of 
consideration,  because  they  had  all  been  foreseen  by  the  infinite 
intelligence of God. Thus they arrived, by means of this cryptography, 
by  this  operation  so  reminiscent  of  Poe's  “The  Gold-Bug,”  at  the 
teachings.  (I  suspect  that  the  teachings  are  older  than  the  modus 
operandi, that what happened with the Kabbalah is the same as what 
happened with the philosophy of Spinoza: the geometric order came 
later.  I  would  imagine  that  the  Kabbalists  were  influenced  by  the 
Gnostics and that, in order to link everything to the Hebrew tradition, 
they sought this strange system of deciphering letters.)
The cosmic system of the Kabbalah may be described like this: In 
the beginning there is a Being analogous to the God of Spinoza, except 
79

that the God of Spinoza is infinitely rich. The  en sof,  in contrast, is 
infinitely poor, for of that Being we cannot say that He exists, for if we 
say that He exists then we must also say that stars exist, men exist, ants 
exist. How can we put them all in the same category? No, that primordial 
Being does not exist. Nor can we say that He thinks, because thinking is 
a logical process, moving from a premise to a conclusion. Nor can we 
say that He wants, because to want something is to feel the lack of 
something. Nor that He works, because to work is to propose a goal and 
to labor toward it. Besides, if the  en sof  is infinite, how can He want 
something else? And what other thing could He create except another 
infinite Being which would become confused with Himself? However, 
since the creation of the world is unfortunately necessary, we have ten 
emanations, the Sefirot, which emerge from Him but come after Him.
The idea of an eternal Being which has always had these ten 
emanations is difficult to comprehend. These ten emanate one from the 
other. The text tells us that they correspond to the fingers of the hand. 
The first emanation is called the Crown, and it is comparable to a ray of 
light issuing from the  en sof, a ray of light that does not diminish, an 
unlimited being which cannot be diminished. From the Crown issues 
another emanation; from that, another; and from that, another
―unti
l
 
there  are  ten.  Each  emanation  is  tripartite.  One  of  the  three  parts 
communicates with the superior Being; the central part is the essence; 
and the third part communicates with the inferior Being.
The  ten  emanations  form  a  man  called  Adam  Kadmon,  the 
Archetypal Man. That man is in heaven, and we are his reflection. Adam 
Kadmon, formed  by the ten emanations,  himself  emanates  a  world, 
which emanates another, until there are four. The third is our material 
world, and the fourth is the infernal world. All of them are included in 
Adam Kadmon, who understands man and his microcosm: all things.
I  am  not  dealing  with  a  museum  piece  from  the  history  of 
philosophy. I believe the system has an application: it can serve as a 
means of thinking, of trying to understand the universe. The Gnostics 
preceded the Kabbalists by many centuries. They had a similar system 
which postulated an indeterminate god. From that god called Pleroma 
(the  Plenitude)  emanates  another  god
― I  a m  followin g  th e  pervers
e
 
version of Irenaeus
―and from that emanation another, and from tha
t
 
another. There is a tower of emanations, and each of them constitutes a 
80

heaven. There are three hundred and sixty-five in all, because astrology 
becomes mixed into it. When we reach the final emanation, where the 
divine part has been reduced to almost zero, we find the god called 
Jehovah, who created this world.
Why did He create this world so full of errors, so full of horror, so 
full of sins, so full of physical pain, so full of guilt, so full of crime? 
Because the Divinity had diminished itself until it reached Jehovah, who 
created this fallible world.
We have the same mechanism in the creations of the ten Sefirot 
and the four worlds. Those ten emanations, as they move farther from the 
en sof, from the limitless, from the hidden, from the hidden ones (as they 
are called in the figurative language of the Kabbalists), lose strength, 
until they reach the one who created this world, this world where we are, 
so exposed to misfortune, so momentary in its happiness. It is not an 
absurd idea. We are faced with an eternal problem, the problem of evil. It 
is treated splendidly in the Book of Job which, according to Froude, is 
the greatest work of literature.
You will recall the story of Job, the persecuted just man, the man 
who wants to justify himself before God, the man condemned by his 
friends. In the end God speaks to him from the whirlwind. He says that 
He  is beyond  human  measure.  He  takes two curious  examples,  the 
elephant  and the  whale,  and says  that He  created  them.  Max Brod 
observed that the elephant, Behemoth (“the animals”) is so big its name 
is plural. Leviathan may be two monsters, the whale or the crocodile. 
God says that he is as incomprehensible as those monsters and may not 
be measured by man.
Spinoza comes to the same point when he says that to give human 
attributes to God is as if a triangle were to say that God is eminently 
triangular. To say that God is just or pitiful is as anthropomorphic as to 
claim that God has a face or eyes or hands.
We have, then, a superior Divinity and other, inferior emanations. 
Emanations seems to be the word least offensive, so that God is not 
blamed for the creation of this world. As Schopenhauer said, the blame 
lies with his ministers, not with the king.
There have been various defenses of evil. First, the classic defense 
of the theologians, who declare that evil is negative, that evil is simply 
the absence of good. For any sensible person this is obviously false. A 
81

physical pain is as vivid or more vivid than any pleasure. Misfortune is 
not  the  absence  of  fortune,  it  is  something  positive.  When  we  are 
miserable, we feel it as misery.
Then there is the argument, elegant but quite false, of Leibniz. 
Imagine two libraries. The first is composed of a thousand copies of the 
Aeneid, which he assumes is a perfect book, as perhaps it is. The other 
contains a thousand books of various merit, and one of them is the 
Aeneid.  Which of the two libraries is superior? Obviously the second. 
Leibniz comes to the conclusion that evil is necessary for the variety of 
the world. But he seems to forget that it is one thing that there are bad 
books in the library, and another thing to be those books. And if we are 
those books we are condemned to hell.
Not everyone has the ecstasy
―and I don't know if he always ha
d
 
it
―of Kierkegaard, who said that if there were one soul in hell necessar
y
 
for the variety of the world, and if that soul were his, he would sing from 
the depths of hell the praises of the Almighty.
I don't know if it is easy to feel this. I don't know if, after a few 
minutes in hell, Kierkegaard would have continued to feel the same way. 
But the idea, as you see, refers to an essential problem, that of the 
existence of evil, which the Gnostics and the Kabbalists resolved in the 
same way.
They resolved it by declaring that the universe is the work of a 
deficient Divinity, one whose fraction of Divinity approaches zero, of a 
god who is not the God. Of a god who is a distant descendant of God. I 
don't know if our minds can function with words as vast and as vague as 
God or Divinity, or with Basilides' Gnostic doctrine of the three hundred 
and sixty-five emanations. But we can understand the idea of a deficient 
Divinity, one who must make this world out of shoddy materials. We 
come then to Bernard Shaw, who said “God is in the making.” God is 
something that does not pertain to the past, and perhaps does not pertain 
to the future: it is Eternity. God is something that may be future. If we 
are magnanimous, if we are intelligent, if we are lucid, we will be 
helping to construct God.
In Wells's The Undying Fire, the plot follows that of the Book of 
Job, and its hero is similar. Under anaesthesia, the protagonist dreams 
that he enters a laboratory. The equipment is poor, and an old man is 
working there. The old man is God, and he is quite irritated. I'm doing 
82

what I can, he says, but it's a struggle dealing with this difficult material. 
For God, evil is the intractable material, and good the malleable. But 
good, in the long run, is destined to triumph and is triumphing. I don't 
know if you believe in progress. I do, at least in the form of Goethe's 
spiral: we advance and retreat, but ultimately we are improving. Perhaps 
intellectually we are also improving. A proof of it may be this humble 
event in which we take an interest in what the Kabbalists thought.
I would like to talk now about one of the myths, one of the most 
curious legends of the Kabbalah; the golem, which inspired the famous 
novel by Meyrink, which inspired a poem of mine. God takes a lump of 
earth (Adam means red earth), blows life into it, and creates Adam, who 
for the Kabbalists is the first golem. He has been created by the Divine 
word, by a breath of life. The Kabbalah says that all of the Pentateuch is 
the name of God, except that the letters are scrambled. Thus, if one 
possesses the name of God, or discovers the Tetragrammaton, the name 
of the four letters of God, and knows how to pronounce them correctly, 
one can create a world, and one can also create a golem, a man.
The  legends  of  the  golem  have  been  beautifully  explored  by 
Gershom Scholem in his book  On the Kabbalah and Its Symbolism, 
which I have just read. I think it is the clearest book on the subject. He 
has proven that it is almost useless to search for the original sources. I 
have also read the beautiful and, I think, accurate translation
―I do no
t
 
know Hebrew
―by L
e
ón Dujovne of the  Sefer Yetsirah,  the  Book of 
Creation. These books were not written in order to teach the Kabbalah 
but to approach it; so that a student of the Kabbalah may read them and 
feel strengthened. But they do not tell all of the truth, like the treatises 
published and not published by Aristotle.
Let us return to the golem. It is believed that if a rabbi learns or 
happens to discover the secret name of God and pronounces it over a 
human figure made of clay, it will come to life and be a golem. In one of 
the versions of the legend, the word EMET, which means truth, is 
inscribed on the forehead of the golem. The golem grows. He becomes 
so tall that his master cannot reach him. He asks him to tie his shoes. The 
golem bends over, and the rabbi erases the aleph or first letter of EMET. 
This leaves MET
―death. The golem turns to dust
.
In another legend a rabbi or some rabbis, some magicians, create a 
golem and send it to another teacher, who is capable of making his own 
83

but is beyond such vanities. The rabbi speaks to it, but the golem does 
not answer,  because  he has been  denied  the  powers of  speech  and 
understanding.  The  rabbi  sentences  him,  “You  are  an  artifice  of 
magicians; return to your dust.” The golem is destroyed.
Finally, another legend told by Scholem. A group of disciples
―
a  
single man cannot study and understand the Book of Creation―manages 
to create a golem. He is born with a dagger in his hands, and he begs his 
creators to destroy him, because “if I live I may be worshiped as an 
idol.” For Israel, as for Protestantism, idolatry is one of the greatest sins. 
They kill the golem.
I have mentioned a few legends, but I would like to return to the 
beginning, to the doctrine that seems to me so worthy of attention. In 
each one of us there is a particle of divinity. This world, evidently, 
cannot be the work of an all-powerful and just god, but it depends on us. 
This is the lesson the Kabbalah gives us
―beyond being a curiosit
y
 
studied by historians or grammarians. Like the great poem of Hugo, “Ce 
que dit la bouche d'ombre,” the Kabbalah teaches the doctrine that the 
Greeks called  apokatastasis:  that all creatures, including Cain and the 
Devil, will return, at the end of great transmigrations, to be mingled 
again with the Divinity from which they once emerged.
84

Blindness
n the course of the many lectures
too many lectures
I have given,
―
―
 
I've observed that people tend to prefer the personal to the general, the 
concrete to the abstract. I will begin, then, by referring to my own 
modest blindness. Modest, because it is total blindness in one eye, but 
only partial in the other. I can still make out certain colors; I can still see 
blue and green. And yellow, in particular, has remained faithful to me. I 
remember when I was young I used to linger in front of certain cages in 
the Palermo zoo: the cages of the tigers and leopards. I lingered before 
the tigers' gold and black. Yellow is still with me, even now. I have 
written a poem entitled “The Gold of the Tigers,” in which I refer to this 
friendship.
I
People generally imagine the blind as enclosed in a black world. 
There is, for example, Shakespeare's line: “Looking on darkness which 
the  blind  do  see.”  If  we  understand  darkness  as  blackness,  then 
Shakespeare is wrong.
One of the colors that the blind
―or at least this blind ma
n―
d
o
 
not see is black; another is red. Le rouge et le noir are the colors denied 
us. I, who was accustomed to sleeping in total darkness, was bothered for 
a long time at having to sleep in this world of mist, in the greenish or 
bluish mist, vaguely luminous, which is the world of the blind. I wanted 
to lie down in darkness. The world of the blind is not the night that 
people imagine. (I should say that I am speaking for myself, and for my 
father and my grandmother, who both died blind
―blind, laughing, an
d
 
brave, as I also hope to die. They inherited many things
―blindness, fo
r
 
example
―bu t  one  does  no t  inherit  courage .  I  know  tha t  the y  wer
e
 
brave.)
The blind live in a world that is inconvenient, an undefined world 
85

from which certain colors emerge: for me, yellow, blue (except that the 
blue may be green), and green (except that the green may be blue). White 
has disappeared, or is confused with gray. As for red, it has vanished 
completely.  But  I  hope  some  day
― I  a m  followin g  a  treatmen
t―
t
o
 
improve and to be able to see that great color, that color which shines in 
poetry, and which has so many beautiful names in many languages. 
Think of scharlach in German, scarlet in English, escarlata in Spanish, 
écarlate in French. Words that are worthy of that great color. In contrast, 
amarillo, yellow, sounds weak in Spanish, in English it seems more like 
yellow. I think that in Old Spanish it was amariello.
I live in that world of colors, and if I speak of my own modest 
blindness, I do so, first, because it is not that perfect blindness which 
people imagine, and second, because it deals with me. My case is not 
especially dramatic. What is dramatic are those who suddenly lose their 
sight. In my case, that slow nightfall, that slow loss of sight, began when 
I began to see. It has continued since 1899 without dramatic moments, a 
slow nightfall that has lasted more than three quarters of a century. In 
1955 the pathetic moment came when I knew I had lost my sight, my 
reader's and writer's sight.
In my life I have received many unmerited honors, but there is one 
which has made me happier than all the others: the directorship of the 
National  Library.  For  reasons  more  political  than  literary,  I  was 
appointed by the Aramburu government.
I was named director of the library, and I returned to that building 
of which I had so many memories, on the Calle México in Monserrat, in 
the South of the city. I had never dreamed of the possibility of being 
director of the library. I had memories of another kind. I would go there 
with my father, at night. My father, a professor of psychology, would ask 
for some book by Bergson or William James, who were his favorite 
writers, or perhaps by Gustav Spiller. I, too timid to ask for a book, 
would look through some volume of the Encyclopedia Britannica or the 
German encyclopedias of Brockhaus or of Meyer. I would take a volume 
at random from the shelf and read. I remember one night when I was 
particularly rewarded, for I read three articles: on the Druids, the Druses, 
and Dryden
―a gift of the letters
 
dr. Other nights I was less fortunate.
I knew that Paul Groussac was in the building. I could have met 
him personally, but I was then quite shy; almost as shy as I am now. At 
86

the time, I believed that shyness was very important, but now I know that 
shyness is one of the evils one must try to overcome, that in reality to be 
shy doesn't matter
―it is like so many other things to which one gives a
n
 
exaggerated importance.
I received the nomination at the end of 1955. I was in charge of, I 
was  told,  a  million  books.  Later  I  found  out  it  was  nine  hundred 
thousand
― a  numbe r  that' s  mor e  tha n  enough .  (An d  perhap s  nin
e
 
hundred thousand seems more than a million.)
Little by little I came to realize the strange irony of events. I had 
always imagined Paradise as a kind of library. Others think of a garden 
or of a palace. There I was, the center, in a way, of nine hundred 
thousand books in various languages, but I found I could barely make out 
the title pages and the spines. I wrote the “Poem of the Gifts,” which 
begins:
No one should read self-pity or reproach 
into this statement of the majesty of God; 
who with such splendid irony 
granted me books and blindness at one touch.
[tr. Alastair Reid]
Those two gifts contradicted each other: the countless books and the 
night, the inability to read them.
I imagined the author of that poem to be Groussac, for Groussac 
was also the director of the library and also blind. Groussac was more 
courageous than I: he kept his silence. But I knew that there had certainly 
been moments when our lives had coincided, since we both had become 
blind and we both loved books. He honored literature with books far 
superior to mine. But we were both men of letters, and we both passed 
through the library of forbidden books
―one might say, for our darkene
d
 
eyes, of blank books, books without letters. I wrote of the irony of God, 
and in the end I asked myself which of us had written that poem of a 
plural I and a single shadow.
At the time I ignored the fact that there had been another director 
of the library who was blind, José Mármol. Here appears the number 
three,  which  seals  everything.  Two  is  a  mere  coincidence;  three  a 
confirmation. A confirmation of a ternary order, a divine or theological 
87

confirmation.
Mármol was director of the library when it was on the Calle 
Venezuela. These days it is usual to speak badly of Mármol, or not to 
mention him at all. But we must remember that when we speak of the 
time of Rosas, we do not think of the admirable book by Ramos Mejía, 
Rosas y su tiempo (“Rosas and his time”),  but of the era as it is 
described  in  Mármol's  wonderfully  gossipy  novel,  La  Amalia.  To 
bequeath the image of an age or of a country is no small glory.
We have, then, three people who shared the same fate. And, for 
me, the joy of returning to the Monserrat section, in the South. For 
everyone in Buenos Aires, the South is, in a mysterious way, the secret 
center of the city. Not the other, somewhat ostentatious center we show 
to tourists
―in those days there was not that bit of public relations calle
d
 
the Barrio de San Telmo. But the South has come to be the modest secret 
center of Buenos Aires.
When I think of Buenos Aires, I think of the Buenos Aires I knew 
as a child: the low houses, the patios, the porches, the cisterns with 
turtles in them, the grated windows. That Buenos Aires was all of Buenos 
Aires. Now only the southern section has been preserved. I felt that I had 
returned to the neighborhood of my elders.
There were the books, but I had to ask my friends the names of 
them. I remembered a sentence from Rudolf Steiner, in his books on 
anthroposophy, which was the name he gave to his theosophy. He said 
that when something ends, we must think that something begins. His 
advice is salutory, but the execution is difficult, for we only know what 
we have lost, not what we will gain. We have a very precise image
―a
n
 
image at times shameless
―of what we have lost, but we are ignorant o
f
 
what may follow or replace it.
I made a decision. I said to myself: since I have lost the beloved 
world of appearances, I must create something else. At the time I was a 
professor of English at the university. What could I do to teach that 
almost infinite literature, that literature which exceeds the life of a man, 
and even generations of men? What could I do in four Argentine months 
of national holidays and strikes? I did what I could to teach the love of 
that literature, and I refrained as much as possible from dates and names.
Some female students came to see me. They had taken the exam 
and passed. (All students pass with me!) To the girls
―there were nine o
r
 
88

ten
―I said: “I have an idea. Now that you have passed and I hav
e
 
fulfilled  my  obligation  as  a  professor,  wouldn't  it  be  interesting  to 
embark on the study of a language or a literature we hardly know?” They 
asked which language and which literature. “Well, naturally the English 
language and English literature. Let us begin to study them, now that we 
are free from the frivolity of the exams; let us begin at the beginning.”
I remembered that at home there were two books I could retrieve. I 
had placed them on the highest shelf, thinking I would never use them. 
They  were  Sweet's  Anglo-Saxon  Reader  and  The  Anglo-Saxon 
Chronicle. Both had glossaries. And so we gathered one morning in the 
National Library.
I thought: I have lost the visible world, but now I am going to 
recover another, the world of my distant ancestors, those tribes of men 
who rowed across the stormy northern seas, from Germany, Denmark, 
and the Low Countries, who conquered England, and after whom we 
name England
―sinc e
 
Angle-land,  land of the Angles, had previously 
been called the land of the Britons, who were Celts.
It was a Saturday morning. We gathered in Groussac's office, and 
we began to read. It was a situation that pleased and mortified us, and at 
the same time filled us with a certain pride. It was the fact that the 
Saxons, like the Scandinavians, used two runic letters to signify the two 
sounds of th, as in thing and the. This conferred an air of mystery to the 
page.
We were encountering a language which seemed different from 
English but similar to German. What always happens, when one studies a 
language, happened. Each one of the words stood out as though it had 
been carved, as though it were a talisman. For that reason the poems of a 
foreign language have a prestige they do not enjoy in their own language, 
for one hears, one sees, each one of the words individually. We think of 
the beauty, of the power, or simply of the strangeness of them.
We had good luck that morning. We discovered the sentence, 
“Julius  Caesar  was  the  first  Roman  to  discover  England.”  Finding 
ourselves with the Romans in a text of the North, we were moved. You 
must remember we knew nothing of the language; each word was a kind 
of talisman we unearthed. We found two words. And with those two 
words we became almost drunk. (It's true that I was an old man and they 
were young women
―likely stages for inebriation.) I thought: “I a
m
 
89

returning to the language my ancestors spoke fifty generations ago; I am 
returning to that language; I am reclaiming it. It is not the first time I 
speak it; when I had other names this was the language I spoke.” Those 
two words were the name of London,  Lundenburh,  and the name of 
Rome, which moved us even more, thinking of the light that had fallen 
on  those  northern  islands,  Romeburh.  I  think  we  left  crying, 
“Lundenburh, Romeburh. . .” in the streets.
Thus I began my study of Anglo-Saxon, which blindness brought 
me. And now I have a memory full of poetry that is elegiac, epic, Anglo-
Saxon.
I had replaced the visible world with the aural world of the Anglo-
Saxon language. Later I moved on to the richer world of Scandinavian 
literature:  I  went  on  to  the  Eddas  and  the  sagas.  I  wrote  Ancient 
Germanic Literature and many poems based on those themes, but most 
of all I enjoyed it. I am now preparing a book on Scandinavian literature.
I did not allow blindness to intimidate me. And besides, my editor 
made me an excellent offer: he told me that if I produced thirty poems in 
a  year,  he  would  publish  a  book.  Thirty  poems  means  discipline, 
especially when one must dictate every line, but at the same time it 
allows for a sufficient freedom, as it is impossible that in one year there 
will not be thirty occasions for poetry. Blindness has not been for me a 
total misfortune; it should not be seen in a pathetic way. It should be seen 
as a way of life: one of the styles of living.
Being blind has its advantages. I owe to the darkness some gifts: 
the gift of Anglo-Saxon, my limited knowledge of Icelandic, the joy of 
so many lines of poetry, of so many poems, and of having written 
another book, entitled, with a certain falsehood, with a certain arrogance, 
In Praise of Darkness.
I would like to speak now of other cases, of illustrious cases. I will 
begin  with  that  obvious  example  of  the  friendship  of  poetry  and 
blindness, with the one who has been called the greatest of poets: Homer. 
(We know of another blind Greek poet, Tamiris, whose work has been 
lost. Tamiris was defeated in a battle with the muses, who broke his lyre 
and took away his sight.)
Oscar Wilde had a curious hypothesis, one which I don't think is 
historically  correct  but  which  is intellectually  agreeable.  In  general, 
writers try to make what they say seem profound; Wilde was a profound 
90

man who tried to seem frivolous. He wanted us to think of him as a 
conversationalist; he wanted us to consider him as Plato considered 
poetry, as “that winged, fickle, sacred thing.” Well, that winged, fickle, 
sacred thing called Oscar Wilde said that Antiquity had deliberately 
represented Homer as blind.
We do not know if Homer existed. The fact that seven cities vie 
for his name is enough to make us doubt his historicity. Perhaps there 
was  no  single  Homer;  perhaps  there  were  many  Greeks  whom  we 
conceal under the name of Homer. The traditions are unanimous in 
showing us a blind poet, yet Homer's poetry is visual, often splendidly 
visual
―as was, to a far lesser degree, that of Oscar Wilde
.
Wilde realized that his poetry was too visual, and he wanted to 
cure himself of that defect. He wanted to make poetry that was aural, 
musical
―let us say like the poetry of Tennyson, or of Verlaine, who
m
 
he loved and admired so. Wilde said that the Greeks claimed that Homer 
was blind in order to emphasize that poetry must be aural, not visual. 
From that comes the “de la musique avant toute chose” of Verlaine and 
the symbolism contemporary to Wilde.
We may believe that Homer never existed, but that the Greeks 
imagined him as blind in order to insist on the fact that poetry is, above 
all, music; that poetry is, above all, the lyre; that the visual can or cannot 
exist in a poet. I know of great visual poets and great poets who are not 
visual
―intellectua l  poets ,  menta l  one
s―there ' s n o ne e d t o menti
o
n
 
names.
Let us go on to the example of Milton. Milton's blindness was 
voluntary. He knew from the beginning that he was going to be a great 
poet. This has occurred to other poets: Coleridge and De Quincey, before 
they wrote a single line, knew that their destiny was literary. I too, if I 
may mention myself, have always known that my destiny was, above all, 
a literary destiny
―that bad things and some good things would happe
n
 
to me, but that, in the long run, all of it would be converted into words. 
Particularly  the  bad  things,  since  happiness  does  not  need  to  be 
transformed: happiness is its own end.
Let us return to Milton. He destroyed his sight writing pamphlets 
in support of the execution of the king by Parliament. Milton said that he 
lost his sight voluntarily, defending freedom; he spoke of that noble task 
and never complained of being blind. He sacrificed his sight, and then he 
91

remembered his first desire, that of being a poet. They have discovered at 
Cambridge University a manuscript in which the young Milton proposes 
various subjects for a long poem. “I might perhaps leave something so 
written to after-times, as they should not willingly let it die,” he declared. 
He listed some ten or fifteen subjects, not knowing that one of them 
would prove prophetic: the subject of Samson. He did not know that his 
fate  would,  in  a  way,  be  that  of  Samson;  that  Samson,  who  had 
prophesied Christ in the Old Testament, also prophesied Milton, and 
with greater accuracy. Once he knew himself to be permanently blind, he 
embarked on two historical works, A Brief History of Muscovia and A 
History of England, both of which remained unfinished. And then the 
long poem Paradise Lost. He sought a theme that would interest all men, 
not merely the English. That subject was Adam, our common father.
He spent a good part of his time alone, composing verses, and his 
memory had grown. He would hold forty or fifty hendecasyllables of 
blank verse in his memory and then dictate them to whomever came to 
visit. The whole poem was written in this way. He thought of the fate of 
Samson, so close to his own, for now Cromwell was dead and the hour 
of the Restoration had come. Milton was persecuted and could have been 
condemned to death for having supported the execution of the king. But 
when they brought Charles II
―son of Charles I, “The Executed
”―t
h
e
 
list of those condemned to death, he put down his pen and said, not 
without nobility, “There is something in my right hand which will not 
allow me to sign a sentence of death.” Milton was saved, and many 
others with him.
He then wrote  Samson Agonistes.  He wanted to create a Greek 
tragedy. The action takes place in a single day, Samson's last. Milton 
thought on the similarity of destinies, since he, like Samson, had been a 
strong man who was ultimately defeated. He was blind. And he wrote 
those verses which, according to Landor, he punctuated badly, but which 
in fact had to be “Eyeless, in Gaza, at the mill, with the slaves”
―as if th
e
 
misfortunes were accumulating on Samson.
Milton has a sonnet in which he speaks of his blindness. There is a 
line one can tell was written by a blind man. When he has to describe the 
world, he says, “In this dark world and wide.” It is precisely the world of 
the  blind  when  they  are  alone,  walking  with  hands  outstretched, 
searching for props. Here we have an example
―much more importan
t
 
92

than mine
―of a man who overcomes blindness and does his work
:
 
Paradise Lost, Paradise Regained, Samson Agonistes, his best sonnets, 
part of A History of the England, from the beginnings to the Norman 
Conquest. All of this was executed while he was blind, all of it had to be 
dictated to casual visitors.
The  Boston  aristocrat  Prescott  was  helped  by  his  wife.  An 
accident, when he was a student at Harvard, had caused him to lose one 
eye and left him almost blind in the other. He decided that his life would 
be dedicated to literature. He studied, and learned, the literatures of 
England, France, Italy, and Spain. Imperial Spain offered him a world 
which was agreeable to his own rigid rejection of a democratic age. From 
an erudite he became a writer, and he dictated to his wife, who read to 
him, the histories of the conquest of Mexico and Peru, of the reign of the 
Catholic Kings and of Phillip II. It was a happy labor, almost impeccable, 
which took more than twenty years.
There are two examples which are closer to us. One I have already 
mentioned, Paul Groussac, who has been unjustly forgotten. People see 
him now as a French interloper in Argentina. It is said that his historical 
work  has  become  dated,  that  today  one  makes  use  of  greater 
documentation. But they forget that Groussac, like every writer, left two 
works:  first,  his  subject,  and  second,  the  manner  of  its  execution. 
Groussac revitalized Spanish prose. Alfonso Reyes, the greatest prose 
writer in Spanish in any era, once told me, “Groussac taught me how 
Spanish should be written.” Groussac overcame his blindness and left 
some of the best pages in prose that have been written in our country. It 
will always please me to remember this.
Let us recall another example, one more famous than Groussac. In 
James Joyce we are also given a twofold work. We have those two vast 
and
―why not say it
?―unreadable novels
,
 
Ulysses and Finnegans Wake. 
But that is only half of his work (which also includes beautiful poems 
and the admirable Portrait of an Artist as a Young Man). The other half, 
and perhaps the most redeeming aspect (as they now say) is the fact that 
he took on the almost infinite English language. That language
―whic
h
 
is statistically larger than all the others and offers so many possibilities 
for the writer, particularly in its concrete verbs
―was not enough fo
r
 
him. Joyce, an Irishman, recalled that Dublin had been founded by 
Danish Vikings. He studied Norwegian
―he wrote a letter to Ibsen i
n
 
93

Norwegian
―and then h e studied Greek , Latin. . . He knew all th
e
 
languages, and he wrote in a language invented by himself, difficult to 
understand but marked by a strange music. Joyce brought a new music to 
English. And he said, valorously (and mendaciously) that “of all the 
things that have happened to me, I think the least important was having 
been blind.” Part of his vast work was executed in darkness: polishing 
the sentences in his memory, working at times for a whole day on a 
single phrase, and then writing it and correcting it. All in the midst of 
blindness  or  periods  of  blindness.  In  comparison,  the  impotence  of 
Boileau, Swift, Kant, Ruskin, and George Moore was a melancholic 
instrument for the successful execution of their work; one might say the 
same of perversion, whose beneficiaries today have ensured that no one 
will ignore their names. Democritus of Abdera tore his eyes out in a 
garden so that the spectacle of reality would not distract him; Origen 
castrated himself.
I have enumerated enough examples. Some are so illustrious that I 
am ashamed to have spoken of my own personal case
―except for th
e
 
fact that people always hope for confessions and I have no reason to 
deny them mine. But, of course, it seems absurd to place my name next 
to those I have recalled.
I have said that blindness is a way of life, a way of life that is not 
entirely unfortunate. Let us recall those lines of the greatest Spanish poet, 
Fray Luis de León:
Vivir quiero conmigo,
gozar quiero del bien que debo al cielo,
a solas sin testigo,
libre de amor, de celo,
de odio, de esperanza, de recelo.
[I want to live with myself,
I want to enjoy the good that I owe to heaven,
alone, without witnesses,
free of love, of jealousy,
of hate, of hope, of fear.]
Edgar Allen Poe knew this stanza by heart. 
94

For me, to live without hate is easy, for I have never felt hate. To 
live without love I think is impossible, happily impossible for each one 
of us. But the first part
―“I want to live with myself, / I want to enjoy th
e
 
good that I owe to heaven”
―if we accept that in the good of heave
n
 
there can also be darkness, then who lives more with themselves? Who 
can explore themselves more? Who can know more of themselves? 
According to the Socratic phrase, who can know himself more than the 
blind man?
A writer lives. The task of being a poet is not completed at a fixed 
schedule. No one is a poet from eight to twelve and from two to six. 
Whoever is a poet is one always, and continually assaulted by poetry. I 
suppose a painter feels that colors and shapes are besieging him. Or a 
musician feels that the strange world of sounds
―the strangest world o
f
 
art
―is always seeking him out, that there are melodies and dissonance
s
 
looking  for  him.  For  the  task  of  an  artist,  blindness  is not  a  total 
misfortune. It may be an instrument. Fray Luis de León dedicated one of 
his most beautiful odes to Francisco Salinas, a blind musician.
A writer, or any man, must believe that whatever happens to him 
is an instrument; everything has been given for an end. This is even 
stronger in the case of the artist. Everything that happens, including 
humiliations, embarrassments, misfortunes, all has been given like clay, 
like material for one's art. One must accept it. For this reason I speak in a 
poem of the ancient food of heroes: humiliation, unhappiness, discord. 
Those things are given to us to transform, so that we may make from the 
miserable circumstances of our lives things that are eternal, or aspire to 
be so.
If a blind man thinks this way, he is saved. Blindness is a gift. I 
have exhausted you with the gifts it has given me. It gave me Anglo-
Saxon, it gave me some Scandinavian, it gave me a knowledge of a 
Medieval literature I had ignored, it gave me the writing of various 
books, good or bad, but which justified the moment in which they were 
written.  Moreover,  blindness  has  made  me  feel  surrounded  by  the 
kindness of others. People always feel good will toward the blind.
I want to end with a line of Goethe: “Alles Nahe werde fern,” 
everything near becomes distant. Goethe was referring to the evening 
twilight. Everything near becomes distant. It is true. At nightfall, the 
things closest to us seem to move away from our eyes. So the visible 
95

world has moved away from my eyes, perhaps forever.
Goethe could be referring not only to twilight but to life. All things 
go off, leaving us. Old age is probably the supreme solitude
―except tha
t
 
the supreme solitude is death. And “everything near becomes distant” 
also refers to the slow process of blindness, of which I hoped to show, 
speaking tonight, that it is not a complete misfortune. It is one more 
instrument among the many
―all of them so strang
e―that fate or chan
c
e
 
provide.
ΤΑΔΕ 17-5-9
96

