
The Aleph and Other Stories
1933-1969
“As sharp as the knives brandished by outlaws. 
The violence that saturates the tales has a 
peculiar purity, as if it existed apart from 
the will of man.
“In a story called The Meeting, two youths 
start quarreling over cards. They are drawn to a 
cabinet containing the knives of famous duelists 
of the past. They fight, one is killed, the other 
breaks down in tears over his senseless 
deed . . . the knives, not their tools, the 
men—knew how to fight.
“In The Challenge, one gaucho slashes another, 
then refrains from the fatal thrust. ‘I’m letting 
you live,’ he tells his antagonist, ‘so you’ll 
come back looking for me again.’ Life cannot be 
lived without the dignity of danger [and] there 
can hardly be a more powerful intimation of 
union through suffering than Borges’ fiercely 
compressed parable The Maker . . . This 1958 
work suggests Borges’ own fate by invoking 
the life of the blind Homer.”—Time


Together with Commentaries 
and an Autobiographical Essay
Edited and translated by 
NORMAN THOMAS Dl GIOVANNI 
in collaboration with the author

This low-priced Bantam Book 
has been completely reset in a type face 
designed for easy reading, and was printed 
from new plates. It contains the complete 
text of the original hard-cover edition. 
NOT ONE WORD HAS BEEN OMITTED.
Grateful 
acknowledgment 
is 
made 
to 
Grove 
Press, 
publishers 
of 
ficciones, 
for 
permission 
to 
make 
new 
translations 
of 
“The 
Circular 
Ruins” 
and 
“Death 
and 
the 
Compass,” 
and 
to 
the 
University 
of 
Texas 
Press, 
publishers 
of 
dreamtigers, 
for 
permission 
to 
retranslate 
“The 
Captive,” 
“Borges 
and 
Myself,” and “The Maker.”
Assistance 
for 
the 
translation 
of 
this 
volume 
was 
given 
by 
the 
Ingram 
Merrill 
Foundation.
All rights reserved.
English 
translations 
copyright 
© 
1968, 
1969, 
1970 
by 
Emecé 
Editores, 
S.A., 
and 
Norman 
Thomas 
di 
Giovanni; 
copyright 
© 
1970 
by 
Jorge 
Luis 
Borges, 
Adolfo 
Bioy-Casares 
and 
Norman 
Thomas 
di 
Giovanni. 
Autobiographical 
Essay 
and 
Commentaries 
© 
1970 
by 
Jorges 
Luis 
Borges 
and 
Norman 
Thomas 
di 
Giovanni. 
Original 
texts 
copyright, 
© 
1953, 
1954, 
1955, 
1956, 
1957, 
1960, 
1969, 
1970 
by 
Emecé 
Editores, 
S.A., 
Buenos 
Aires; 
copy- 
right © 1967 by Editorial Losada, S.A., Buenos Aires.
This book may not be reproduced in whole or in part, by 
mimeograph or any other means, without permission.
For information address: E. P. Dutton & Co., Inc.,
201 Park Avenue South, New York, N.Y. 10003.
Published simultaneously in the United States and Canada
Bantam Books are published by Bantam Books, Inc., a National 
General company. Its trade-mark, consisting of the words “Bantam 
Books” and the portrayal of a bantam, is registered in the United 
States Patent Office and in other countries. Marca Registrada. 
Bantam Books, Inc., 666 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10019.
P R I N T E D  I N  T H E  U N I T E D  S T A T E S  O F  A M E R I C A
the aleph and other stories 1933-1969 
A Bantam Book / published by arrangement with 
E. P. Dutton & Co., Inc. 
PRINTING HISTORY 
E, P. Dutton edition published November 1970 
2nd printing . . . . . January 1971
Certain 
of 
the 
translations 
in 
this 
volume 
made 
their 
first 
appearances 
in 
the 
following 
periodicals: 
buenos 
aires 
herald: 
“The 
Intruder,” 
“The 
Life 
of 
Tadeo 
Isidoro 
Cruz 
(1829—1874),” 
“The 
Dead 
Man,” 
“The 
Circular 
Ruins,” 
“The 
Captive,” 
“The 
Maker,” 
“Borges 
and 
Myself.” 
mundus 
artium: 
“Streetcorner 
Man,” 
“Rosendo’s 
Tale.” 
the 
new 
yorker: 
“The 
Other 
Death,” 
“The 
Immortals,” 
“The 
Man 
on 
the 
Threshold,” 
“Ibn 
Hakkan 
al-Bokhari, 
Dead 
in 
His 
Labyrinth,” 
“The 
Two 
Kings 
and 
Their 
Two 
Laby- 
rlnths,” 
“The 
Challenge,” 
“The 
Meeting.” 
the 
new 
york 
review 
of 
books: 
“Pedro 
Salvadores.” 
The 
“Autobiographical 
Essay” 
first 
appeared 
as 
a new yorker profile.
Bantam edition published November 1971
2nd printing

Contents
vii      Preface
1      The Aleph and Other Stories 1933-1969
3      The Aleph 
18      Streetcorner Man 
27      The Approach to al-Mu’tasim 
34      The Circular Ruins 
41      Death and the Compass 
54       The Life of Tadeo Isidoro Cruz (1829-1874) 
58      The Two Kings and Their Two Labyrinths

60      The Dead Man 
67      The Other Death 
75      Ibn Hakkan al-Bokhari, Dead in His Labyrinth 
85      The Man on the Threshold 
91      The Challenge 
96      The Captive 
98      Borges and Myself 
100      The Maker 
103      The Intruder 
109      The Immortals 
115      The Meeting 
122      Pedro Salvadores 
125      Rosendo’s Tale
135      An Autobiographical Essay
189      Commentaries
209      Bibliographical Note

Preface
Since my fame rests on my short stories, it is only natural 
that we should want to include a selection of them among 
the several volumes of my writings we are translating for 
E. P. Dutton. At the same time, one of our aims here has 
been to make available in English all my previously untrans- 
lated older stories, as well as to offer a sampling from my 
latest work in this form.
Perhaps the chief justification of this book is the transla- 
tion itself, which we have undertaken in what may be a 
new way. Working closely together in daily sessions, we 
have tried to make these stories read as though they had 
been written in English. We do not consider English and 
Spanish as compounded of sets of easily interchangeable 
synonyms; they are two quite different ways of looking at 
the world, each with a nature of its own. English, for 
example, is far more physical than Spanish. We have there- 
fore shunned the dictionary as much as possible and done 
our best to rethink every sentence in English words. This 
venture does not necessarily mean that we have willfully

tampered with the original, though in certain cases we have 
supplied the American reader with those things—geographi- 
cal, topographical, and historical—taken for granted by any 
Argentine.
We would have preferred a broader selection that might 
have included such stories as “Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius,” 
“El jardín de senderos que se bifurcan,” “Funes el mem- 
orioso,” “La secta del Fénix,” and “El Sur” from Ficciones, 
and “Los teólogos,” “Deutsches Requiem,” “La busca de 
Averroes,” and “El Zahir” from El Aleph. However, rights 
to make our own translations of these stories were denied 
us, despite the unselfish and unswerving efforts of Dr. 
Donald Yates on our behalf.
The autobiographical essay and commentaries, prepared 
especially for this volume, were written directly in English.
J.L.B. 
N.T. di G.
Buenos Aires, August 12,1970
Jorge Luis Borges

The
Aleph
and
Other
Stories
1933-1969


The Aleph
To Estela Canto 
(1945)
O God! I could be bounded in a nutshell, and count myself 
a King of infinite space. . . .
Hamlet, II, 2
But they will teach us that Eternity is the Standing still of the 
Present Time, a Nunc-stans (as the Schools call it); which 
neither they, nor any else understand, no more than they 
would a Hic-stans for an Infinite greatness of Place.
Leviathan, IV, 46
On the burning February morning Beatriz Viterbo died, 
after braving an agony that never for a single moment gave 
way to self-pity or fear, I noticed that the sidewalk bill- 
boards around Constitution Plaza were advertising some 
new brand or other of American cigarettes. The fact pained 
me, for I realized that the wide and ceaseless universe was 
already slipping away from her and that this slight change 
was the first of an endless series. The universe may change 
but not me, I thought with a certain sad vanity. I knew 
that at times my fruitless devotion had annoyed her; now 
that she was dead, I could devote myself to her memory, 
without hope but also without humiliation. I recalled that 
the thirtieth of April was her birthday; on that day to visit 
her house on Garay Street and pay my respects to her 
father and to Carlos Argentino Daneri, her first cousin, 
would be an irreproachable and perhaps unavoidable act of 
politeness. Once again I would wait in the twilight of the
3

small, cluttered drawing room, once again I would study 
the details of her many photographs: Beatriz Viterbo in 
profile and in full color; Beatriz wearing a mask, during 
the Carnival of 1921; Beatriz at her First Communion; 
Beatriz on the day of her wedding to Roberto Alessandri; 
Beatriz soon after her divorce, at a luncheon at the Turf 
Club; Beatriz at a seaside resort in Quilmes with Delia San 
Marco Porcel and Carlos Argentino; Beatriz with the Pe- 
kinese lapdog given her by Villegas Haedo; Beatriz, front 
and three-quarter views, smiling, hand on her chin. . . . I 
would not be forced, as in the past, to justify my presence 
with modest offerings of books—books whose pages I finally 
learned to cut beforehand, so as not to find out, months 
later, that they lay around unopened.
Beatriz Viterbo died in 1929. From that time on, I 
never let a thirtieth of April go by without a visit to her 
house. I used to make my appearance at seven-fifteen sharp 
and stay on for some twenty-five minutes. Each year, I 
arrived a little later and stayed a little longer. In 1933, a 
torrential downpour coming to my aid, they were obliged to 
ask me to dinner. Naturally, I took advantage of that lucky 
precedent. In 1934, I arrived, just after eight, with one of 
those large Santa Fe sugared cakes, and quite matter-of- 
factly I stayed to dinner. It was in this way, on these 
melancholy and vainly erotic anniversaries, that I came 
into the gradual confidences of Carlos Argentino Daneri.
Beatriz had been tall, frail, slightly stooped; in her walk 
there was (if the oxymoron may be allowed) a kind of 
uncertain grace, a hint of expectancy. Carlos Argentino was 
pink-faced, overweight, gray-haired, fine-featured. He held 
a minor position in an unreadable library out on the edge 
of the Southside of Buenos Aires. He was authoritarian but 
also unimpressive. Until only recently, he took advantage 
of his nights and holidays to stay at home. At a remove of 
two generations, the Italian “S” and demonstrative Italian 
gestures still survived in him. His mental activity was 
continuous, deeply felt, far-reaching, and—all in all— 
meaningless. He dealt in pointless analogies and in trivial 
4
Jorge Luis Borges

The Aleph
scruples. He had (as did Beatriz) large, beautiful, finely 
shaped hands. For several months he seemed to be obsessed 
with Paul Fort—less with his ballads than with the idea of a 
towering reputation. “He is the Prince of poets,” Daneri 
would repeat fatuously. “You will belittle him in vain—but 
no, not even the most venomous of your shafts will graze 
him.”
On the thirtieth of April, 1941, along with the sugared 
cake I allowed myself to add a bottle of Argentine cognac. 
Carlos Argentino tasted it, pronounced it “interesting,” 
and, after a few drinks, launched into a glorification of 
modern man.
“I view him,” he said with a certain unaccountable 
excitement, “in his inner sanctum, as though in his castle 
tower, supplied with telephones, telegraphs, phonographs, 
wireless sets, motion-picture screens, slide projectors, glos- 
saries, timetables, handbooks, bulletins. . . .”
He remarked that for a man so equipped, actual travel 
was superfluous. Our twentieth century had inverted the 
story of Mohammed and the mountain; nowadays, the 
mountain came to the modern Mohammed.
So foolish did his ideas seem to me, so pompous and so 
drawn out his exposition, that I linked them at once to 
literature and asked him why he didn’t write them down. 
As might be foreseen, he answered that he had already 
done so—that these ideas, and others no less striking, had 
found their place in the Proem, or Augural Canto, or, more 
simply, the Prologue Canto of the poem on which he had 
been working for many years now, alone, without publicity, 
without fanfare, supported only by those twin staffs uni- 
versally known as work and solitude. First, he said, he 
opened the floodgates of his fancy; then, taking up hand 
tools, he resorted to the file. The poem was entitled The 
Earth; it consisted of a description of the planet, and, of 
course, lacked no amount of picturesque digressions and 
bold apostrophes.
I asked him to read me a passage, if only a short one. He 
opened a drawer of his writing table, drew out a thick stack
5

Jorge Luis Borges
of papers—sheets of a large pad imprinted with the letter- 
head of the Juan Crisóstomo Lafinur Library—and, with 
ringing satisfaction, declaimed:
Mine eyes, as did the Greek’s, have known men’s towns 
and fame,
The works, the days in light that fades to amber;
I do not change a fact or falsify a name—
The voyage I set down is . . . autour de ma chambre.
“From any angle, a greatly interesting stanza,” he said, 
giving his verdict. “The opening line wins the applause of 
the professor, the academician, and the Hellenist—to say 
nothing of the would-be scholar, a considerable sector of 
the public. The second flows from Homer to Hesiod (gener- 
ous homage, at the very outset, to the father of didactic 
poetry), not without rejuvenating a process whose roots go 
back to Scripture—enumeration, congeries, conglomeration. 
The third—baroque? decadent? example of the cult of pure 
form?—consists of two equal hemistichs. The fourth, frankly 
bilingual, assures me the unstinted backing of all minds 
sensitive to the pleasures of sheer fun. I should, in all 
fairness, speak of the novel rhyme in lines two and four, 
and of the erudition that allows me—without a hint of 
pedantry!—to cram into four lines three learned allusions 
covering thirty centuries packed with literature—first to the 
Odyssey, second to Works and Days, and third to the 
immortal bagatelle bequeathed us by the frolicking pen of 
the Savoyard, Xavier de Maistre. Once more I’ve come to 
realize that modern art demands the balm of laughter, the 
scherzo. Decidedly, Goldoni holds the stage!”
He read me many other stanzas, each of which also won 
his own approval and elicited his lengthy explications. 
There was nothing remarkable about them. I did not even 
find them any worse than the first one. Application, resigna- 
tion, and chance had gone into the writing; I saw, however, 
that Daneri’s real work lay not in the poetry but in his 
invention of reasons why the poetry should be admired. Of 
6

The Aleph
course, this second phase of his effort modified the writing 
in his eyes, though not in the eyes of others. Daneri’s style 
of delivery was extravagant, but the deadly drone of his 
metric regularity tended to tone down and to dull that 
extravagance.*
Only once in my life have I had occasion to look into the 
fifteen thousand alexandrines of the Polyolbion, that topo- 
graphical epic in which Michael Drayton recorded the 
flora, fauna, hydrography, orography, military and monastic 
history of England. I am sure, however, that this limited 
but bulky production is less boring than Carlos Argentino’s 
similar vast undertaking. Daneri had in mind to set to 
verse the entire face of the planet, and, by 1941, had 
already displaced a number of acres of the State of 
Queensland, nearly a mile of the course run by the River 
Ob, a gasworks to the north of Veracruz, the leading 
shops in the Buenos Aires parish of Concepción, the villa of 
Mariana Cambaceres de Alvear in the Belgrano section of 
the Argentine capital, and a Turkish baths establishment 
not far from the well-known Brighton Aquarium. He read me 
certain long-winded passages from his Australian section, 
and at one point praised a word of his own coining, the 
color “celestewhite,” which he felt “actually suggests the 
sky, an element of utmost importance in the landscape of 
the continent Down Under.” But these sprawling, lifeless 
hexameters lacked even the relative excitement of the so- 
called Augural Canto. Along about midnight, I left.
Two Sundays later, Daneri rang me up—perhaps for the 
first time in his life. He suggested we get together at four 
o’clock “for cocktails in the salon-bar next door, which the 
forward-looking Zunino and Zungri—my landlords, as you
* Among my memories are also some lines of a satire in which he lashed 
out unsparingly at bad poets. After accusing them of dressing their poems 
in the warlike armor of erudition, and of flapping in vain their unavailing 
wings, he concluded with this verse:
But they forget, alas, one foremost fact—beauty!
Only the fear of creating an army of implacable and powerful enemies 
dissuaded him (he told me) from fearlessly publishing this poem.
7

doubtless recall—are throwing open to the public. It’s a 
place you’ll really want to get to know.”
More in resignation than in pleasure, I accepted. Once 
there, it was hard to find a table. The “salon-bar,” ruthless- 
ly modern, was only barely less ugly than what I had 
expected; at the nearby tables, the excited customers spoke 
breathlessly of the sums Zunino and Zungri had invested in 
furnishings without a second thought to cost. Carlos Argen- 
tino pretended to be astonished by some feature or other of 
the lighting arrangement (with which, I felt, he was already 
familiar), and he said to me with a certain severity, 
“Grudgingly, you’ll have to admit to the fact that these 
premises hold their own with many others far more in the 
public eye.”
He then reread me four or five different fragments of the 
poem. He had revised them following his pet principle of 
verbal ostentation: where at first “blue” had been good 
enough, he now wallowed in “azures,” “ceruleans,” and 
“ultramarines.” The word “milky” was too easy for him; 
in the course of an impassioned description of a shed where 
wool was washed, he chose such words as “lacteal,” “lactes- 
cent,” and even made one up—“lactinacious.” After that, 
straight out, he condemned our modern mania for having 
books prefaced, “a practice already held up to scorn by the 
Prince of Wits in his own graceful preface to the Quixote.” 
He admitted, however, that for the opening of his new work 
an attention-getting foreword might prove valuable—“an ac- 
colade signed by a literary hand of renown.” He next went 
on to say that he considered publishing the initial cantos of 
his poem. I then began to understand the unexpected tele- 
phone call; Daneri was going to ask me to contribute a 
foreword to his pedantic hodgepodge. My fear turned out 
unfounded; Carlos Argentino remarked, with admiration 
and envy, that surely he could not be far wrong in qualify- 
ing with the epithet “solid” the prestige enjoyed in every 
circle by Álvaro Melián Lafinur, a man of letters, who would, 
if I insisted on it, be only too glad to dash off some 
charming opening words to the poem. In order to avoid 
8
Jorge Luis Borges

The Aleph
ignominy and failure, he suggested I make myself spokes- 
man for two of the book’s undeniable virtues—formal per- 
fection and scientific rigor—“inasmuch as this wide garden 
of metaphors, of figures of speech, of elegances, is inhospi- 
table to the least detail not strictly upholding of truth.” He 
added that Beatriz had always been taken with Álvaro.
I agreed—agreed profusely—and explained for the sake 
of credibility that I would not speak to Álvaro the next day, 
Monday, but would wait until Thursday, when we got 
together for the informal dinner that follows every meeting 
of the Writers’ Club. (No such dinners are ever held, but it 
is an established fact that the meetings do take place on 
Thursdays, a point which Carlos Argentino Daneri could 
verify in the daily papers, and which lent a certain reality 
to my promise.) Half in prophecy, half in cunning, I said 
that before taking up the question of a preface I would 
outline the unusual plan of the work. We then said good- 
bye.
Turning the corner of Bernardo de Irigoyen, I reviewed 
as impartially as possible the alternatives before me. They 
were: a) to speak to Álvaro, telling him this first cousin of 
Beatriz’ (the explanatory euphemism would allow me to 
mention her name) had concocted a poem that seemed to 
draw out into infinity the possibilities of cacophony and 
chaos: b) not to say a word to Álvaro. I clearly foresaw that 
my indolence would opt for b.
But first thing Friday morning, I began worrying about 
the telephone. It offended me that that device, which had 
once produced the irrecoverable voice of Beatriz, could now 
sink so low as to become a mere receptacle for the futile 
and perhaps angry remonstrances of that deluded Carlos 
Argentino Daneri. Luckily, nothing happened—except the 
inevitable spite touched off in me by this man, who had 
asked me to fulfill a delicate mission for him and then had 
let me drop.
Gradually, the phone came to lose its terrors, but one 
day toward the end of October it rang, and Carlos Argen- 
tino was on the line. He was deeply disturbed, so much so
9

that at the outset I did not recognize his voice. Sadly but 
angrily he stammered that the now unrestrainable Zunino 
and Zungri, under the pretext of enlarging their already 
outsized “salon-bar,” were about to take over and tear 
down his house.
“My home, my ancestral home, my old and inveterate 
Garay Street home!” he kept repeating, seeming to forget 
his woe in the music of his words.
It was not hard for me to share his distress. After the age 
of fifty, all change becomes a hateful symbol of the passing 
of time. Besides, the scheme concerned a house that for me 
would always stand for Beatriz. I tried explaining this 
delicate scruple of regret, but Daneri seemed not to hear 
me. He said that if Zunino and Zungri persisted in this 
outrage, Doctor Zunni, his lawyer, would sue ipso facto and 
make them pay some fifty thousand dollars in damages.
Zunni’s name impressed me; his firm, although at the 
unlikely address of Caseros and Tacuarí, was nonetheless 
known as an old and reliable one. I asked him whether 
Zunni had already been hired for the case. Daneri said he 
would phone him that very afternoon. He hesitated, then 
with that level, impersonal voice we reserve for confiding 
something intimate, he said that to finish the poem he could 
not get along without the house because down in the cellar 
there was an Aleph. He explained that an Aleph is one of 
the points in space that contains all other points.
“It’s in the cellar under the dining room,” he went on, so 
overcome by his worries now that he forgot to be pompous. 
“It’s mine—mine. I discovered it when I was a child, all by 
myself. The cellar stairway is so steep that my aunt and 
uncle forbade my using it, but I’d heard someone say there 
was a world down there. I found out later they meant an 
old-fashioned globe of the world, but at the time I thought 
they were referring to the world itself. One day when no 
one was home I started down in secret, but I stumbled and 
fell. When I opened my eyes, I saw the Aleph.”
“The Aleph?” I repeated.
“Yes, the only place on earth where all places are—seen
Jorge Luis Borges
10

The Aleph
from every angle, each standing clear, without any confu- 
sion or blending. I kept the discovery to myself and went 
back every chance I got. As a child, I did not foresee that 
this privilege was granted me so that later I could write 
the poem. Zunino and Zungri will not strip me of what’s 
mine—no, and a thousand times no! Legal code in hand, 
Doctor Zunni will prove that my Aleph is inalienable.”
I tried to reason with him. “But isn’t the cellar very 
dark?” I said.
“Truth cannot penetrate a closed mind. If all places in 
the universe are in the Aleph, then all stars, all lamps, all 
sources of light are in it, too.”
“You wait there. I’ll be right over to see it.”
I hung up before he could say no. The full knowledge 
of a fact sometimes enables you to see all at once many 
supporting but previously unsuspected things. It amazed 
me not to have suspected until that moment that Carlos 
Argentino was a madman. As were all the Viterbos, when 
you came down to it. Beatriz (I myself often say it) was a 
woman, a child, with almost uncanny powers of clairvoy- 
ance, but forgetfulness, distractions, contempt, and a streak 
of cruelty were also in her, and perhaps these called for a 
pathological explanation. Carlos Argentino’s madness filled 
me with spiteful elation. Deep down, we had always de- 
tested each other.
On Garay Street, the maid asked me kindly to wait. The 
master was, as usual, in the cellar developing pictures. On 
the unplayed piano, beside a large vase that held no flow- 
ers, smiled (more timeless than belonging to the past) the 
large photograph of Beatriz, in gaudy colors. Nobody could 
see us; in a seizure of tenderness, I drew close to the 
portrait and said to it, “Beatriz, Beatriz Elena, Beatriz 
Elena Viterbo, darling Beatriz, Beatriz now gone forever, 
it’s me, it’s Borges.”
Moments later, Carlos came in. He spoke drily. I could 
see he was thinking of nothing else but the loss of the 
Aleph.
“First a glass of pseudo-cognac,” he ordered, “and then
11

down you dive into the cellar. Let me warn yon, you’ll have 
to lie flat on your back. Total darkness, total immobility, 
and a certain ocular adjustment will also be necessary. 
From the floor, you must focus your eyes on the nineteenth 
step. Once I leave you, I’ll lower the trapdoor and you’ll be 
quite alone. You needn’t fear the rodents very much— 
though I know you will. In a minute or two, you’ll see the 
Aleph—the microcosm of the alchemists and Kabbalists, our 
true proverbial friend, the multum in parvo!”
Once we were in the dining room, he added, “Of course, 
if you don’t see it, your incapacity will not invalidate what 
I have experienced. Now, down you go. In a short while 
you can babble with all of Beatriz’ images.”
Tired of his inane words, I quickly made my way. The 
cellar, barely wider than the stairway itself, was something 
of a pit. My eyes searched the dark, looking in vain for the 
globe Carlos Argentino had spoken of. Some cases of empty 
bottles and some canvas sacks cluttered one corner. Carlos 
picked up a sack, folded it in two, and at a fixed spot 
spread it out.
“As a pillow,” he said, “this is quite threadbare, but if 
it’s padded even a half-inch higher, you won’t see a thing, 
and there you’ll lie, feeling ashamed and ridiculous. All 
right now, sprawl that hulk of yours there on the floor and 
count off nineteen steps.”
I went through with his absurd requirements, and at last 
he went away. The trapdoor was carefully shut. The black- 
ness, in spite of a chink that I later made out, seemed to 
me absolute. For the first time, I realized the danger I was 
in: I’d let myself be locked in a cellar by a lunatic, after 
gulping down a glassful of poison! I knew that back of 
Carlos’ transparent boasting lay a deep fear that I might 
not see the promised wonder. To keep his madness unde- 
tected, to keep from admitting that he was mad, Carlos had 
to kill me. I felt a shock of panic, which I tried to pin to my 
uncomfortable position and not to the effect of a drug. I 
shut my eyes—I opened them. Then I saw the Aleph.
I arrive now at the ineffable core of my story. And here
Jorge Luis Borges
12

The Aleph
begins my despair as a writer. All language is a set of 
symbols whose use among its speakers assumes a shared 
past. How, then, can I translate into words the limitless 
Aleph, which my floundering mind can scarcely encompass? 
Mystics, faced with the same problem, fall back on sym- 
bols: to signify the godhead, one Persian speaks of a bird 
that somehow is all birds; Alanus de Insulis, of a sphere 
whose center is everywhere and circumference is nowhere; 
Ezekiel, of a four-faced angel who at one and the same time 
moves east and west, north and south. (Not in vain do I 
recall these inconceivable analogies; they bear some relation 
to the Aleph.) Perhaps the gods might grant me a similar 
metaphor, but then this account would become contaminated 
by literature, by fiction. Really, what I want to do is im- 
possible, for any listing of an endless series is doomed to be 
infinitesimal. In that single gigantic instant I saw millions 
of acts both delightful and awful; not one of them amazed 
me more than the fact that all of them occupied the same 
point in space, without overlapping or transparency. What 
my eyes beheld was simultaneous, but what I shall now 
write down will be successive, because language is succes- 
sive. Nonetheless, I’ll try to recollect what I can.
On the back part of the step, toward the right, I saw a 
small iridescent sphere of almost unbearable brilliance. At 
first I thought it was revolving; then I realized that this 
movement was an illusion created by the dizzying world it 
bounded. The Aleph’s diameter was probably little more 
than an inch, but all space was there, actual and undimin- 
ished. Each thing (a mirror’s face, let us say) was infinite 
things, since I distinctly saw it from every angle of the 
universe. I saw the teeming sea; I saw daybreak and 
nightfall; I saw the multitudes of America; I saw a silvery 
cobweb in the center of a black pyramid; I saw a splintered 
labyrinth (it was London); I saw, close up, unending eyes 
watching themselves in me as in a mirror; I saw all the 
mirrors on earth and none of them reflected me; I saw in a 
backyard of Soler Street the same tiles that thirty years 
before I’d seen in the entrance of a house in Fray Bentos; I
13

saw bunches of grapes, snow, tobacco, lodes of metal, 
steam; I saw convex equatorial deserts and each one of 
their grains of sand; I saw a woman in Inverness whom I 
shall never forget; I saw her tangled hair, her tall figure, I 
saw the cancer in her breast; I saw a ring of baked mud in 
a sidewalk, where before there had been a tree; I saw a 
summer house in Adrogué and a copy of the first English 
translation of Pliny—Philemon Holland’s—and all at the 
same time saw each letter on each page (as a boy, I used to 
marvel that the letters in a closed book did not get scram- 
bled and lost overnight); I saw a sunset in Querétaro that 
seemed to reflect the color of a rose in Bengal; I saw my 
empty bedroom; I saw in a closet in Alkmaar a terrestrial 
globe between two mirrors that multiplied it endlessly; I 
saw horses with flowing manes on a shore of the Caspian 
Sea at dawn; I saw the delicate bone structure of a hand; I 
saw the survivors of a battle sending out picture postcards; 
I saw in a showcase in Mirzapur a pack of Spanish playing 
cards; I saw the slanting shadows of ferns on a greenhouse 
floor; I saw tigers, pistons, bison, tides, and armies; I saw 
all the ants on the planet; I saw a Persian astrolabe; I saw 
in the drawer of a writing table (and the handwriting made 
me tremble) unbelievable, obscene, detailed letters, which 
Beatriz had written to Carlos Argentino; I saw a monument 
I worshiped in the Chacarita cemetery; I saw the rotted 
dust and bones that had once deliciously been Beatriz 
Viterbo; I saw the circulation of my own dark blood; I saw 
the coupling of love and the modification of death; I saw 
the Aleph from every point and angle, and in the Aleph I 
saw the earth and in the earth the Aleph and in the Aleph 
the earth; I saw my own face and my own bowels; I saw 
your face; and I felt dizzy and wept, for my eyes had seen 
that secret and conjectured object whose name is common 
to all men but which no man has looked upon—the unimag- 
inable universe.
I felt infinite wonder, infinite pity.
“Feeling pretty cockeyed, are you, after so much spying 
into places where you have no business?” said a hated and 
14
Jorge Luis Borges

The Aleph
jovial voice. “Even if you were to rack your brains, you 
couldn’t pay me back in a hundred years for this revelation. 
One hell of an observatory, eh, Borges?”
Carlos Argentino’s feet were planted on the topmost step. 
In the sudden dim light, I managed to pick myself up and 
utter, “One hell of a—yes, one hell of a.”
The matter-of-factness of my voice surprised me. Anx- 
iously, Carlos Argentino went on.
“Did you see everything—really clear, in colors?”
At that very moment I found my revenge. Kindly, open- 
ly pitying him, distraught, evasive, I thanked Carlos Ar- 
gentino Daneri for the hospitality of his cellar and urged 
him to make the most of the demolition to get away from 
the pernicious metropolis, which spares no one—believe me, 
I told him, no one! Quietly and forcefully, I refused to 
discuss the Aleph. On saying goodbye, I embraced him and 
repeated that the country, that fresh air and quiet were the 
great physicians.
Out on the street, going down the stairways inside Con- 
stitution Station, riding the subway, every one of the faces 
seemed familiar to me. I was afraid that not a single thing 
on earth would ever again surprise me; I was afraid I 
would never again be free of all I had seen. Happily, after 
a few sleepless nights, I was visited once more by oblivion.
Postscript of March first, 1943—Some six months after 
the pulling down of a certain building on Garay Street, Pro- 
crustes & Co., the publishers, not put off by the consider- 
able length of Daneri’s poem, brought out a selection of its 
“Argentine sections.” It is redundant now to repeat what 
happened. Carlos Argentino Daneri won the Second Na- 
tional Prize for Literature.* First Prize went to Dr. Aita; 
Third Prize, to Dr. Mario Bonfanti. Unbelievably, my own 
book The Sharper’s Cards did not get a single vote. Once
* “I received your pained congratulations,” he wrote me. “You rage, my 
poor friend, with envy, but you must confess—even if it chokes you!—that 
this time I have crowned my cap with the reddest of feathers; my turban 
with the most caliph of rubies.”
15

again dullness and envy had their triumph! It’s been some 
time now that I’ve been trying to see Daneri; the gossip is 
that a second selection of the poem is about to be pub- 
lished. His felicitous pen (no longer cluttered by the Aleph) 
has now set itself the task of writing an epic on our national 
hero, General San Martín.
I want to add two final observations: one, on the nature 
of the Aleph; the other, on its name. As is well known, the 
Aleph is the first letter of the Hebrew alphabet. Its use for 
the strange sphere in my story may not be accidental. For 
the Kabbalah, that letter stands for the En Soph, the pure 
and boundless godhead; it is also said that it takes the 
shape of a man pointing to both heaven and earth, in order 
to show that the lower world is the map and mirror of the 
higher; for Cantor’s Mengenlehre, it is the symbol of trans- 
finite numbers, of which any part is as great as the whole. 
I would like to know whether Carlos Argentino chose that 
name or whether he read it—applied to another point where 
all points converge—in one of the numberless texts that the 
Aleph in his cellar revealed to him. Incredible as it may 
seem, I believe that the Aleph of Garay Street was a false 
Aleph.
Here are my reasons. Around 1867, Captain Burton 
held the post of British Consul in Brazil. In July, 1942, 
Pedro Henríquez Ureña came across a manuscript of Bur- 
ton’s, in a library at Santos, dealing with the mirror which 
the Oriental world attributes to Iskander Zu al-Karnayn, or 
Alexander Bicornis of Macedonia. In its crystal the whole 
world was reflected. Burton mentions other similar devices— 
the sevenfold cup of Kai Kosru; the mirror that Tariq 
ibn-Ziyad found in a tower (Thousand and One Nights, 
272); the mirror that Lucian of Samosata examined on the 
moon (True History, I, 26); the mirrorlike spear that the 
first book of Capella’s Satyricon attributes to Jupiter; Mer- 
lin’s universal mirror, which was “round and hollow . . . and 
seem’d a world of glas” (The Faerie Queene, III, 2, 19)— 
and adds this curious statement: “But the aforesaid objects 
(besides the disadvantage of not existing) are mere optical 
16
Jorge Luis Borges

The Aleph
instruments. The Faithful who gather at the mosque of 
Amr, in Cairo, are acquainted with the fact that the entire 
universe lies inside one of the stone pillars that ring its 
central court. . . . No one, of course, can actually see it, but 
those who lay an ear against the surface tell that after some 
short while they perceive its busy hum. . . . The mosque 
dates from the seventh century; the pillars come from other 
temples of pre-Islamic religions, since, as ibn-Khaldun has 
written: ‘In nations founded by nomads, the aid of for- 
eigners is essential in all concerning masonry.’ ”
Does this Aleph exist in the heart of a stone? Did I see it 
there in the cellar when I saw all things, and have I now 
forgotten it? Our minds are porous and forgetfulness seeps 
in; I myself am distorting and losing, under the wearing 
away of the years, the face of Beatriz.
17

Streetcorner Man
To Enrique Amorim 
(1933)
Fancy your coming out and asking me, of all people, about 
the late Francisco Real. Sure, I knew him, even though he 
wasn’t from around here. He was a big shot on the North- 
side—that whole stretch from the Guadalupe pond to the old 
Artillery Barracks. I never laid eyes on the guy above three 
times and these three times were all the same night. But 
nights like that you don’t forget. It was when La Lujanera 
got it in her head to come around to my shack and bed down 
with me, and Rosendo Juárez took off from the Maldonado 
for good. Of course, you’re not the kind that name would 
mean much to. But around Villa Santa Rita, Rosendo 
Juárez—the Slasher we called him—had a reputation for 
being pretty tough. He was one of don Nicolás Paredes’ 
boys, the same as Paredes was one of Morel’s gang, and 
he’d earned respect for the way he handled a knife. Sharp 
dresser too. Always rode up to the whorehouse on a dark 
horse, his riding gear decked out with silver. There wasn’t a 
man or dog around didn’t hold him in regard—and that goes 
18

Streetcorner Man
for the women as well. Everybody knew he had at least a 
couple of killings to his name. He’d have on one of those 
soft hats with a narrow brim and tall crown, and it would 
sit there kind of cocky on his long thick hair he wore 
slicked straight back. Lady luck smiled on him, like they 
say, and around Villa all us younger guys used to ape him 
even to the way he spit. But then one night we got a good 
look at what this Rosendo was made of.
All this might seem made-up, but the story of what 
happened that particular night starts when this flashy red- 
wheeled buggy—jamful of men—comes barreling its way 
down those hard-packed dirt roads out between the brick 
kilns and the empty lots. Two guys in black were making a 
big racket twanging away on guitars, and the driver kept 
cracking his whip at the stray dogs snapping at the legs of 
the horse. Sitting all quiet in the middle was one guy 
wrapped in a poncho. This was the famous Butcher—he’d 
picked that name up working in the stockyards—and he was 
out for a good fight and maybe a killing. The night was 
cool and welcome. A couple of them sat up on the folded 
hood just like they were parading along some downtown 
avenue in Carnival. A lot more things happened that night, 
but it was only later on we got wind of this first part. Our 
gang was there at Julia’s pretty early. This dance hall of 
hers, between the Gauna road and the river, was really just 
a big shed made out of sheets of corrugated iron. You could 
spot the place from two or three blocks off either by the red 
lamp hanging out front or by the rumpus. Julia, even 
though she was a darkle, took trouble to run things right— 
there was always plenty of fiddlers and good booze and 
dancing partners ready to go all night But La Lujanera— 
she was Rosendo’s woman—had the others all beat by a 
mile. She’s dead now, and I can tell you years go by when I 
don’t give her a thought anymore. But in her day you ought 
to have seen her—what eyes she had! One look at her was 
enough to make a man lose sleep.
The rum, the music, the women, Rosendo with that 
rough talk pouring out of his mouth and a slap on the back
19

for each of us that I tried to take for a sign of real 
friendship—the thing is, I was happy as they come. I was 
lucky too. I had me a partner who could follow my steps 
just like she knew ahead of time which way I was going to 
turn. The tango took hold of us, driving us along and then 
splitting us up and then bringing us back together again. 
There we were in the middle of all this fun, like in some 
kind of dream, when all of a sudden I feel the music sort of 
getting louder. Turns out it was those two guitar pickers 
riding in the buggy, coming closer and closer, their music 
getting mixed up with ours. Then the breeze shifted, you 
couldn’t hear them anymore, and my mind went back to 
my own steps and my partner’s, and to the ins and outs of 
the dance. A good half hour later there was this pounding 
on the door and a big voice calling out like it could have 
been the cops. Everything went silent. Then somebody out 
there starts shouldering the door and the next thing we 
know a guy busts in. Funny thing is he looked exactly like 
his voice.
To us he wasn’t Francisco Real—not yet—but just some 
big hefty guy. He was all in black from head to toe, except 
for this reddish-brown scarf draped over one shoulder. I 
remember his face. There was something Indian and kind 
of angular about it.
When the door come flying in it smacked right into me. 
Before I even knew what I was doing I was on top of the 
guy, throwing him a left square in the teeth while my right 
goes inside my vest for my knife. But I never got a chance. 
Steadying himself, he puts his arms out and shoves me 
aside like he’s brushing something out of the way. There I 
was down on my ass—back of him now—my hand still inside 
the jacket grabbing for the knife. And him wading forward 
like nothing happened. Just wading forward, a whole head 
taller than all these guys he’s pushing his way through—and 
acting like he never even saw them. The first of our guys— 
bunch of gaping wops—just back out of his way, scared as 
hell. But only the first. In the next bunch the Redhead was 
waiting for him, and before the newcomer could lay a hand 
20
Jorge Luis Borges

Streetcorner Man
on his shoulder, Red’s knife was out and he let him have 
one across the face with the flat of the blade. Soon as they 
saw that they all jumped the guy. The hall was pretty long, 
maybe more than nine or ten yards, and they drove him 
from one end almost to the other—like Christ in one of the 
Stations—roughing him up, hooting at him, spitting all over 
him. First they let him have it with their fists, then, seeing 
he didn’t bother shielding the blows, they started slapping 
him openhanded and flicking the fringes of their scarves at 
him, mocking him. At the same time they were saving him 
for Rosendo, who all this time was standing with his back 
against the far wall and not moving a muscle, not saying a 
word. All he did was puff on his cigarette, a little worried- 
looking, like he already knew what came clear to the rest of 
us only later on. The Butcher, who was hanging on but was 
beginning to bleed here and there—that whole hooting pack 
behind him—got pushed closer and closer to Rosendo. 
Laughed at, lashed at, spit on, he only started talking when 
the two of them came face to face. Then he looked at 
Rosendo and, wiping his face on his sleeve, said something 
like this:
“I’m Francisco Real and I come from the Northside. 
People call me the Butcher. I let all these punks lay their 
hands on me just now because what I’m looking for is a 
man. Word’s going around there’s someone out in these 
lousy mudflats supposed to be pretty good with a knife. 
They call him the Slasher and they say he’s pretty tough. 
I’d like to meet up with the guy. Maybe he can teach a 
nobody like me how a man with guts handles himself.”
He had his say looking straight at Rosendo, and all at 
once this big knife he must have had up his sleeve was 
flashing in his hand. Instead of pressing in, now everyone 
starts opening up space for a fight—at the same time staring 
at the two of them in dead silence. Even the thick lips of 
the blind nigger playing the fiddle were turned that way.
Right then I hear this commotion behind me and in the 
frame of the door I get me a glimpse of six or seven men 
who must have been the Butcher’s gang. The oldest, a
21

Jorge Luis Borges
leathery-faced guy with a big gray moustache, who looked 
like a hick, comes in a few steps and, going all goggle-eyed 
at the women and the lights, takes off his hat, respectful. 
The rest of them kept their eyes peeled, ready to swing into 
action if anything underhanded went on.
What was the matter with Rosendo all this time, not 
bouncing that loudmouth the hell out? He was still keeping 
quiet, not even raising his eyes. I don’t know if he spit his 
cigarette out or if it fell from his mouth. Finally he man- 
ages to come up with a couple of words, but so low the rest 
of us at the other end of the dance floor didn’t get what he 
said. Francisco Real challenged him again, and again Rosen- 
do refused. At this point, the youngest of the newcomers 
lets out a whistle. La Lujanera gave the guy a look that went 
right through him. Then, her hair swinging down over her 
shoulders, she wedged her way through the crowd and, going 
up to her man, slips his knife out and hands it to him.
“Rosendo,” she says to him, “I think you’re going to 
need this.”
Way up under the roof was this kind of long window that 
opened out over the river. Rosendo took the knife in his 
two hands and turned it over like he never laid eyes on it 
before. Then all of a sudden he raises his arms up over his 
head and flips the knife behind him out the window into 
the Maldonado. I felt a chill go through me.
“The only reason I don’t carve you up is cause you 
sicken me,” the Butcher says then, making to let Rosendo 
have it. That split second La Lujanera threw her arms 
around the Butcher’s neck, giving him one of those looks of 
hers, and says to him, mad as hell, “Let the bastard alone— 
making us think he was a man.”
For a minute Francisco Real couldn’t figure it out. Then 
wrapping his arms around her like it was forever, he calls to 
the musicians to play loud and strong and orders the rest of 
us to dance. The music went like wildfire from one end of 
the hall to the other. Real danced sort of stiff but held his 
partner up tight, and in nothing flat he had her charmed. 
When they got near the door he shouted, “Make way, boys, 
22

Streetcorner Man
she’s all mine now!” and out they went, cheek to cheek, 
like the tango was floating them off.
I must have turned a little red with shame. I took a 
couple of turns with some woman, then dropped her cold. 
On account of the heat and the jam, I told her, then edged 
my way around the room toward the door. It was a nice 
night out—but for who? There was their buggy at the corner 
of the alley with two guitars standing straight up on the 
seat like men. Boy, it galled me seeing that—it was as much 
as saying we weren’t even good enough to clip a lousy 
guitar. The thought that we were a bunch of nobodys really 
had me burned up, and I snatched the carnation from 
behind my ear and threw it in a puddle. I stood there a 
while staring at it, trying to take my mind off things. I 
wished it was already tomorrow—I wished that night were 
over. Then the next thing I knew there’s this elbow shoving 
me aside and it almost came like a relief. It was Rosendo— 
all by himself, slinking off.
“You’re always getting in the way, kid,” he says to me 
half snarling. I couldn’t tell if he was just getting something 
off his chest or what. He disappeared in the dark toward 
the Maldonado. I never laid eyes on him again.
I stood there looking at the things I’d seen all my 
life—the big wide sky, the river going on down there in its 
own blind way, a horse half asleep, the dirt roads, the 
kilns—and it came to me that in the middle of this ragweed 
and all these dump heaps and this whole stinking place, I’d 
grown up just another weed myself. What else was going to 
come out of this crap but us—lots of lip but soft inside, all 
talk but no standing up to anyone? Then I thought no, the 
worse the neighborhood the tougher it had to be. Crap? 
Back toward the dance hall the music was still going 
strong, and on the breeze came a smell of honeysuckle. 
Nice night, but so what? There were so many stars, some 
right on top of others, it made you dizzy just looking at 
them. I tried hard to tell myself that what happened meant 
nothing to me, but I just couldn’t get over Rosendo’s yellow 
streak and the newcomer’s plain guts. Real even managed to
23

get hold of a woman for the night—for that night and a lot 
of nights and maybe forever, I thought, because La Lujanera 
was really something. God knows which way they headed. 
They couldn’t have wandered very far. By then the two of 
them were probably going at it in some ditch.
When I got back, the dance was in full swing. I slipped 
into the crowd, quiet as I could, noticing that some of our 
boys had taken off and that the Northside bunch were 
dancing along with everyone else. There was no shoving, no 
rough stuff. Everybody was watching out and on good 
behavior. The music sounded sleepy, and the girls tangoing 
away with the outsiders didn’t have much to say.
I was on the lookout for something, but not for what 
happened. Outside there were sounds of a woman crying 
and then that voice we all knew by then—but real low, 
almost too low, like somehow it didn’t belong to anyone 
anymore.
“Go on in, you slut,” it was telling her—then more tears. 
After that the voice sounded desperate.
“Open the door, you understand me? Open it, you lousy 
tramp. Open it, bitch.”
At that point the shaky door opens and in comes La 
Lujanera, all alone. Just like someone’s herding her.
“Must be a ghost out there behind her,” said the Red- 
head.
“A dead man, friend.” It was the Butcher, and he stag- 
gers in, his face like a drunk’s, and in the space we opened 
up for him he takes a couple of reeling steps—tall, hardly 
seeing—then all at once goes down like a log. One of his 
friends rolled him over and fixed him a pillow with his 
scarf, but all this fussing only got him smeared with blood. 
We could see there was a big gash in his chest. The blood 
was welling up and blackening a bright red neckerchief I 
hadn’t noticed before because his scarf covered it. For first 
aid one of the women brought rum and some scorched rags. 
The man was in no shape to explain. La Lujanera looked at 
him in a daze, her arms hanging by her sides. There was 
one question on everyone’s face and finally she got out an 
24
Jorge Luis Borges

Streetcorner Man
answer. She said after leaving with the Butcher they went 
to a little field and at that point someone she didn’t know 
turned up and challenged him to fight and then gave him 
this stab. She swore she didn’t know who it was, but that it 
wasn’t Rosendo. Was anyone going to believe that?
The man at our feet was dying. It looked to me like the 
hand that done the job done it well. Just the same, the man 
hung on. When he knocked that second time Julia was 
brewing some matés. The cup went clear around the circle 
and back to me before he died. When the end came, he said 
in a low voice, “Cover my face.” All he had left was pride 
and he didn’t want us gaping at him while his face went 
through its agony. Someone put his hat over him and that’s 
how he died—without a sound—under that high black crown. 
It was only when his chest stopped heaving they dared 
uncover him. He had that worn-out look dead men have. In 
his day, from the Artillery Barracks all the way to the 
Southside, he was one of the scrappiest men around. When 
I knew he was dead and couldn’t talk, I stopped hating 
him.
“All it takes to die is being alive,” says one of the girls in 
the crowd. And in the same way another one says, “A man’s 
so full of pride and now look—all he’s good for is gathering 
flies.”
Right then the Northside gang starts talking to each 
other in low voices. Then two of them come out together 
saying, “The woman killed him.” After that, in a real loud 
voice, one of them threw the accusation in her face, and 
they all swarmed in around her. Forgetting I had to be 
careful, I was on them like a light. I don’t know what kept 
me from reaching for my knife. There were a lot of eyes 
watching—maybe everybody’s—and I said, putting them 
down, “Look at this woman’s hands. How could she get the 
strength of the nerve to knife a man?”
Then, kind of offhand, I added, “Whoever would have 
dreamed the deceased, who—like they say—was a pretty 
tough guy in his own neck of the woods, would end up this 
way? And in a place sleepy as this, where nothing ever
25

happens till some outsider comes around trying to show us 
a little fun and for all his pains only gets himself spit on?”
Nobody offered his hide for a whipping.
Right then, in the dead silence, you could make out the 
approach of riders. It was the law. Everybody—some more, 
some less—had his own good reason for staying clear of the 
police. The best thing was to dump the body in the Maldo- 
nado. You remember that long window the knife went 
flying out of? Well, that’s where the man in black went. A 
bunch of guys lifted him up. There were hands stripping 
him of every cent and trinket he had, and someone even 
hacked off one of his fingers to steal his ring. They helped 
themselves, all right—real daring bunch with a poor defense- 
less stiff once a better guy already straightened him out. 
One good heave and the current did the rest. To keep him 
from floating, they maybe even tore out his guts. I don’t 
know—I didn’t want to look. The old-timer with the gray 
moustache never took his eyes off me. Making the best of 
all the commotion, La Lujanera slipped away.
When the lawmen came in for a look, the dance was 
going good again. That blind fiddler could really scrape 
some lively numbers on that violin of his—the kind of thing 
you never hear anymore. It was beginning to get light 
outside. The fence posts on a nearby slope seemed to stand 
alone, the strands of wire still invisible in the early dawn.
Nice and easy, I walked the two or three blocks back to 
my shack. A candle was burning in the window, then all at 
once went out. Let me tell you, I hurried when I saw that. 
Then, Borges, I put my hand inside my vest—here by the 
left armpit where I always carry it—and took my knife out 
again. I turned the blade over, real slow. It was as good as 
new, innocent-looking, and you couldn’t see the slightest 
trace of blood on it.
Jorge Luis Borges
26

The Approach to 
al-Mu’tasim
(1935)
Philip Guedalla informs us that the novel The Approach to 
al-Mu’tasim by the Bombay barrister Mir Bahadur Ali “is 
a rather uneasy combination of those Islamic allegories 
which never fail to impress their own translators, and of 
that brand of detective stories which inevitably outdoes 
even Dr. Watson and heightens the horror of human life as 
it is found in the most respectable boardinghouses of 
Brighton.” Before him, Mr. Cecil Roberts had blasted 
Bahadur’s book for “its unaccountable double influence of 
Wilkie Collins and of the famed twelfth-century Persian, 
Ferid Eddin Attar”—a simple enough observation which 
Guedalla merely parrots, though in a more angry jargon. 
Essentially, both reviewers are in agreement, pointing out 
the book’s detective-story mechanism and its undercurrent 
of mysticism. This hybridization may lead us to suspect a 
certain kinship with Chesterton; we shall presently find 
out, however, that no such affinity exists.
The first edition of The Approach to al-Mu’tasim ap-
27

peared in Bombay toward the end of 1932. The paper on 
which the volume was issued, I am told, was almost news- 
print; the jacket announced to the purchaser that the book 
was the first detective novel to be written by a native oí 
Bombay City. Within a few months, four printings of a thou- 
sand copies each were sold out. The Bombay Quarterly 
Review, the Bombay Gazette, the Calcutta Review, the 
Hindustani Review (of Allahabad), and the Calcutta En- 
glishman all sang its praises. Bahadur then brought out an 
illustrated edition, which he retitled The Conversation with 
the Man Called al-Mu’tasim and rather beautifully sub- 
titled A Game with Shifting Mirrors. This is the edition 
which Victor Gollancz has just reissued in London, with a 
foreword by Dorothy L. Sayers and the omission—perhaps 
merciful—of the illustrations. It is this edition that I have 
at hand; I have not been able to obtain a copy of the 
earlier one, which I surmise may be a better book. I am led 
to this suspicion by an appendix summarizing the differ- 
ences between the 1932 and the 1934 editions. Before 
attempting a discussion of the novel, it might be well to 
give some idea of the general plot.
Its central figure—whose name we are never told—is a law 
student in Bombay. Blasphemously, he disbelieves in the 
Islamic faith of his fathers, but on the tenth night of the 
moon of Muharram, he finds himself in the midst of a civil 
disorder between Muslims and Hindus. It is a night of 
drums and prayers. Among the mob of the heathen, the 
great paper canopies of the Muslim procession force their 
way. A hail of Hindu bricks flies down from a roof terrace. 
A knife is sunk into a belly. Someone—Muslim? Hindu?— 
dies and is trampled on. Three thousand men are fighting— 
stick against revolver, obscenity against curse, God the Indi- 
visible against the many Gods. Instinctively, the student 
freethinker joins in the fighting. With his bare hands, he 
kills (or thinks he has killed) a Hindu. The Government 
police—mounted, thunderous, and barely awake—intervene, 
dealing impartial whiplashes. The student flees, almost un- 
der the legs of the horses, heading for the farthest ends of 
28
Jorge Luis Borges

The Approach to al-Mu’tasim
town. He crosses two sets of railroad tracks, or the same 
tracks twice. He scales the wall of an unkempt garden at 
one corner of which rises a circular tower. “A lean and evil 
mob of mooncoloured hounds” lunges at him from the 
black rosebushes. Pursued, he seeks refuge in the tower. He 
climbs an iron ladder—two or three rungs are missing—and 
on the fiat roof, which has a blackish pit in the middle, 
comes upon a squalid man in a squatting position, urinating 
vigorously by the light of the moon. The man confides to 
him that his profession is stealing gold teeth from the 
white-shrouded corpses that the Parsis leave on the roof of 
the tower. He says a number of other vile things and 
mentions, in passing, that fourteen nights have lapsed since 
he last cleansed himself with buffalo dung. He speaks with 
obvious anger of a band of horse thieves from Gujarat, 
“eaters of dogs and lizards—men, in short, as abominable as 
the two of us.” Day is dawning. In the air there is a low 
flight of well-fed vultures. The student, in utter exhaustion, 
lies down to sleep. When he wakes up, the sun is high over- 
head and the thief is gone. Gone also are a couple of Tri- 
chinopoly cigars and a few silver rupees. Threatened by the 
events of the night before, the student decides to lose 
himself somewhere within the bounds of India. He knows 
he has shown himself capable of killing an infidel, but not 
of knowing with certainty whether the Muslim is more jus- 
tified in his beliefs than the infidel. The name of Gujarat 
haunts him, and also the name of a malka-sansi (a woman 
belonging to a caste of thieves) from Palanpur, many times 
favored by the curses and hatred of the despoiler of 
corpses. He reasons that the anger of a man so thoroughly 
vile is in itself a kind of praise. He resolves—though rather 
hopelessly—to find her. He prays and sets out slowly and 
deliberately on his long journey. So ends the novel’s second 
chapter.
It is hardly possible to outline here the involved adven- 
tures that befall him in the remaining nineteen. There is a 
baffling pullulation of dramatis personae, to say nothing of a 
biography that seems to exhaust the range of the human
29

spirit (running from infamy to mathematical speculation) 
or of a pilgrimage that covers the vast geography of India. 
The story begun in Bombay moves on into the lowlands of 
Palanpur, lingers for an evening and a night before the 
stone gates of Bikaner, tells of the death of a blind astrol- 
oger in a sewer of Benares; the hero takes part in a conspir- 
acy in a mazelike palace in Katmandu, prays and forni- 
cates in the pestilential stench of the Machua Bazaar in 
Calcutta, sees the day born out of the sea from a law office 
in Madras, sees evenings die in the sea from a balcony in 
the state of Travancore, falters and kills in Indapur. The 
adventure closes its orbit of miles and years back in Bom- 
bay itself, only steps away from the garden of the “moon- 
coloured hounds.” The underlying plot is this: a man, the 
fugitive student freethinker we already know, falls among 
the lowest class of people and, in a kind of contest of 
evildoing, takes up their ways. All at once, with the wonder 
and terror of Robinson Crusoe upon discovering the foot- 
print of a man in the sand, he becomes aware of a brief and 
sudden change in that world of ruthlessness—a certain ten- 
derness, a moment of happiness, a forgiving silence in one 
of his loathsome companions. “It was as though a stranger, 
a third and more subtle person, had entered into the con- 
versation.” The hero knows that the scoundrel with whom 
he is talking is quite incapable of this sudden turn; from 
this, he guesses that the man is echoing someone else, a 
friend, or the friend of a friend. Rethinking the problem, he 
arrives at the mysterious conclusion that “somewhere on 
the face of the earth is a man from whom this light has 
emanated; somewhere on the face of the earth there exists 
a man who is equal to this light.” The student decides to 
spend his life in search of him.
The story’s outline is now plain: the untiring search for a 
human soul through the barely perceptible reflections cast 
by this soul in others—in the beginning, the faint trace of a 
smile or a single word; in the end, the differing and branch- 
ing splendors of reason, of the imagination, and of right- 
eousness. The nearer to al-Mu’tasim the men he examines 
30
Jorge Luis Borges

The Approach to al-Mu’tasim
are, the greater is their share of the divine, though it is 
understood that they are but mirrors. A mathematical anal- 
ogy may be helpful here. Bahadur’s populous novel is an 
ascendant progression whose last term is the foreshadowed 
“man called al-Mu’tasim.” Al-Mu’tasim’s immediate prede- 
cessor is a Persian bookseller of striking happiness and 
politeness; the man before the bookseller, a saint. Finally, 
after many years, the student comes to a corridor “at whose 
end is a door and a cheap beaded curtain, and behind the 
curtain a shining light.” The student claps his hands once 
or twice and asks for al-Mu’tasim. A man’s voice—the un- 
imaginable voice of al-Mu’tasim—prays him to enter. The 
student parts the curtain and steps forward. At this point the 
novel comes to its end.
If I am not mistaken, the proper handling of such a plot 
places the writer under two obligations. One, to abound 
richly in prophetic touches; the other, to make us feel that 
the person foreshadowed by these touches is more than a 
mere convention or phantom. Bahadur fulfills the first; how 
far he achieves the second, I wonder. In other words, the 
unheard and unseen al-Mu’tasim should leave us with the 
impression of a real character, not of a clutter of insipid 
superlatives. In the 1932 version, there are but few super- 
natural traces; “the man called al-Mu’tasim” is obviously a 
symbol, though certain personal traits are not lacking. Un- 
fortunately, this literary good conduct did not last. In the 
1934 version—the one I have read—the novel declines into 
allegory. Al-Mu’tasim is God and the hero’s various wan- 
derings are in some way the journey of a soul on its ascend- 
ing steps toward the divine union. There are a few re- 
grettable details: a black Jew from Cochin speaks of 
al-Mu’tasim as having dark skin; a Christian describes him 
standing on a height with his arms spread open; a Red 
lama recalls him seated “like that image of yak butter that 
I modeled and worshiped in the monastery of Tachilhun- 
po.” These statements seem to suggest a single God who 
reconciles himself to the many varieties of mankind. In my 
opinion, the idea is not greatly exciting. I will not say the
31

same of another idea—the hint that the Almighty is also in 
search of Someone, and that Someone of Someone above 
him (or Someone simply indispensable and equal), and so 
on to the End (or rather, Endlessness) of Time, or perhaps 
cyclically. Al-Mu’tasim (the name of that eighth Abbasid 
caliph who was victorious in eight battles, fathered eight 
sons and eight daughters, left eight thousand slaves, and 
ruled for a period of eight years, eight moons, and eight 
days) means etymologically “The Seeker after Help.” In 
the 1932 version, the fact that the object of the pilgrimage 
was himself a pilgrim justified well enough the difficulty of 
finding him. The later version gives way to the quaint 
theology I have just spoken of. In the twentieth chapter, 
words attributed by the Persian bookseller to al-Mu’tasim 
are, perhaps, the mere heightening of others spoken by the 
hero; this and other hidden analogies may stand for the 
identity of the Seeker with the Sought. They may also 
stand for an influence of Man on the Divinity. Another 
chapter hints that al-Mu’tasim is the Hindu the student 
believes he has killed. Mir Bahadur Ali, as we have seen, 
cannot refrain from the grossest temptation of art—that of 
being a genius.
On reading over these pages, I fear I have not called 
sufficient attention to the book’s many virtues. It includes 
a number of fine distinctions. For example, a conversation 
in chapter nineteen in which one of the speakers, who is a 
friend of al-Mu’tasim, avoids pointing out the other man’s 
sophisms “in order not to be obviously in the right.”
It is considered admirable nowadays for a modern book 
to have its roots in an ancient one, since nobody (as Dr. 
Johnson said) likes owing anything to his contemporaries. 
The many but superficial contacts between Joyce’s Ulysses 
and Homer’s Odyssey go on receiving—I shall never know 
why—the harebrained admiration of critics. The points of 
contact between Bahadur’s novel and the celebrated Parlia- 
ment of Birds by Farid ud-Din Attar, have awakened the 
no less mysterious approval of London, and even of Allaha- 
32
Jorge Luis Borges

The Approach to al-Mu’tasim
bad and Calcutta. As far as I can judge, the points of 
contact between the two works are not many. Other sources 
are present. Some inquisitor has listed certain analogies 
between the novel’s opening scene and Kipling’s story “On 
the City Wall.” Bahadur admits this, but argues that it 
would be highly abnormal if two descriptions of the tenth 
night of Muharram were quite unlike each other. Eliot, 
more to the point, is reminded of the seventy cantos of the 
unfinished allegory The Faerie Queene, in which the her- 
oine, Gloriana, does not appear even once—a fault previ- 
ously 
noted 
by 
Richard 
William 
Church 
(Spenser,
1879). With due humility, I suggest a distant and pos- 
sible forerunner, the Jerusalem Kabbalist Isaac Luria, who 
in the sixteenth century advanced the notion that the soul 
of an ancestor or a master may, in order to comfort or 
instruct him, enter into the soul of someone who has 
suffered misfortune. Ibbür is the name given to this variety 
of metempsychosis.*
* In the course of this review, I have referred to the Mantiq ut-Tair (Par- 
liament of Birds) by the Persian mystic Farid al-Din Abu Talib Moham- 
mad ibn-Ibraham Attar, who was killed by the soldiers of Tului, one of 
Genghis Khan’s sons, during the sack of Nishapur. Perhaps it would be 
useful to summarize the poem. The distant king of birds, the Simurgh, 
drops one of his splendid feathers somewhere in the middle of China; on 
learning of this, the other birds, tired of their age-old anarchy, decide to 
seek him. They know that the king’s name means “thirty birds”; they know 
that his castle lies in the Kaf, the range of mountains that ring the earth. 
Setting out on the almost endless adventure, they cross seven valleys or seas, 
the next to last bearing the name Bewilderment, the last, the name Anni- 
hilation. Many of the pilgrims desert; the journey takes its toll among the 
rest. Thirty, made pure by their sufferings, reach the great peak of the 
Simurgh. At last they behold him; they realize that they are the Simurgh 
and that the Simurgh is each of them and all of them. (Plotinus [Enneads, 
V, 8, 4] also states a divine extension of the principle of identity: “All things 
in the intelligible heavens are in all places. Any one thing is all other things. 
The sun is all the stars, and each star is all the other stars and the sun.”) 
The Mantiq ut-Tair has been translated into French by Garcin de Tassy; 
parts of it into English by Edward FitzGerald. For this footnote, I have 
consulted the tenth volume of Burton’s Arabian Nights and Margaret 
Smith’s study The Persian Mystics: Attar (1932).
33

The Circular Ruins
(1940)
And if he left off dreaming about you. . . .
Through the Looking-Glass, IV
Nobody saw him come ashore in the encompassing night, 
nobody saw the bamboo craft run aground in the sacred 
mud, but within a few days everyone knew that the quiet 
man had come from the south and that his home was 
among the numberless villages upstream on the steep slopes 
of the mountain, where the Zend language is barely tainted 
by Greek and where lepers are rare. The fact is that the 
gray man pressed his lips to the mud, scrambled up the 
bank without parting (perhaps without feeling) the brushy 
thorns that tore his flesh, and dragged himself, faint and 
bleeding, to the circular opening watched over by a stone 
tiger, or horse, which once was the color of fire and is now 
the color of ash. This opening is a temple which was 
destroyed ages ago by flames, which the swampy wilderness 
later desecrated, and whose god no longer receives the 
reverence of men. The stranger laid himself down at the 
foot of the image.
Wakened by the sun high overhead, he noticed—somehow
34

The Circular Ruins
without amazement—that his wounds had healed. He shut 
his pale eyes and slept again, not because of weariness but 
because he willed it. He knew that this temple was the 
place he needed for his unswerving purpose; he knew that 
downstream the encroaching trees had also failed to choke 
the ruins of another auspicious temple with its own fire- 
ravaged, dead gods; he knew that his first duty was to 
sleep. Along about midnight, he was awakened by the 
forlorn call of a bird. Footprints, some figs, and a water jug 
told him that men who lived nearby had looked on his sleep 
with a kind of awe and either sought his protection or else 
were in dread of his witchcraft. He felt the chill of fear and 
searched the crumbling walls for a burial niche, where he 
covered himself over with leaves he had never seen before.
His guiding purpose, though it was supernatural, was not 
impossible. He wanted to dream a man; he wanted to 
dream him down to the last detail and project him into the 
world of reality. This mystical aim had taxed the whole 
range of his mind. Had anyone asked him his own name or 
anything about his life before then, he would not have 
known what to answer. This forsaken, broken temple suited 
him because it held few visible things, and also because the 
neighboring villagers would look after his frugal needs. The 
rice and fruit of their offerings were nourishment enough 
for his body, whose one task was to sleep and to dream.
At the outset, his dreams were chaotic; later on, they 
were of a dialectic nature. The stranger dreamed himself at 
the center of a circular amphitheater which in some way 
was also the burnt-out temple. Crowds of silent disciples 
exhausted the tiers of seats; the faces of the farthest of 
them hung centuries away from him and at a height of the 
stars, but their features were clear and exact. The man 
lectured on anatomy, cosmography, and witchcraft. The 
faces listened, bright and eager, and did their best to 
answer sensibly, as if they felt the importance of his ques- 
tions, which would raise one of them out of an existence as 
a shadow and place him in the real world. Whether asleep 
or awake, the man pondered the answers of his phantoms
35

and, not letting himself be misled by impostors, divined in 
certain of their quandaries a growing intelligence. He was 
in search of a soul worthy of taking a place in the world.
After nine or ten nights he realized, feeling bitter over it, 
that nothing could be expected from those pupils who 
passively accepted his teaching, but that he might, how- 
ever, hold hopes for those who from time to time hazarded 
reasonable doubts about what he taught. The former, 
although they deserved love and affection, could never 
become real; the latter, in their dim way, were already real. 
One evening (now his evenings were also given over to 
sleeping, now he was only awake for an hour or two at 
dawn) he dismissed his vast dream-school forever and kept 
a single disciple. He was a quiet, sallow, and at times 
rebellious young man with sharp features akin to those of 
his dreamer. The sudden disappearance of his fellow pupils 
did not disturb him for very long, and his progress, at the 
end of a few private lessons, amazed his teacher. Nonethe- 
less, a catastrophe intervened. One day, the man emerged 
from his sleep as from a sticky wasteland, glanced up at 
the faint evening light, which at first he confused with 
the dawn, and realized that he had not been dreaming. 
All that night and the next day, the hideous lucidity of 
insomnia weighed down on him. To tire himself out he tried 
to explore the surrounding forest, but all he managed, there 
in a thicket of hemlocks, were some snatches of broken 
sleep, fleetingly tinged with visions of a crude and worthless 
nature. He tried to reassemble his school, and barely had 
he uttered a few brief words of counsel when the whole 
class went awry and vanished. In his almost endless wake- 
fulness, tears of anger stung his old eyes.
He realized that, though he may penetrate all the riddles 
of the higher and lower orders, the task of shaping the 
senseless and dizzying stuff of dreams is the hardest that a 
man can attempt—much harder than weaving a rope of sand 
or of coining the faceless wind. He realized that an initial 
failure was to be expected. He then swore he would forget 
the populous vision which in the beginning had led him 
36
Jorge Luis Borges

The Circular Ruins
astray, and he sought another method. Before attempting 
it, he spent a month rebuilding the strength his fever had 
consumed. He gave up all thoughts of dreaming and almost 
at once managed to sleep a reasonable part of the day. The 
few times he dreamed during this period he did not dwell 
on his dreams. Before taking up his task again, he waited 
until the moon was a perfect circle. Then, in the evening, he 
cleansed himself in the waters of the river, worshiped the 
gods of the planets, uttered the prescribed syllables of an 
all-powerful name, and slept. Almost at once, he had a dream 
of a beating heart.
He dreamed it throbbing, warm, secret. It was the size of 
a closed fist, a darkish red in the dimness of a human body 
still without a face or sex. With anxious love he dreamed it 
for fourteen lucid nights. Each night he perceived it more 
clearly. He did not touch it, but limited himself to witness- 
ing it, to observing it, to correcting it now and then with a 
look. He felt it, he lived it from different distances and 
from many angles. On the fourteenth night he touched the 
pulmonary artery with a finger and then the whole heart, 
inside and out. The examination satisfied him. For one 
night he deliberately did not dream; after that he went 
back to the heart again, invoked the name of a planet, and 
set out to envision another of the principal organs. Before a 
year was over he came to the skeleton, the eyelids. The 
countless strands of hair were perhaps the hardest task of 
all. He dreamed a whole man, a young man, but the young 
man could not stand up or speak, nor could he open his 
eyes. Night after night, the man dreamed him asleep.
In the cosmogonies of the Gnostics, the demiurges mold a 
red Adam who is unable to stand on his feet; as clumsy and 
crude and elementary as that Adam of dust was the Adam 
of dreams wrought by the nights of the magician. One 
evening the man was at the point of destroying all his 
handiwork (it would have been better for him had he done 
so), but in the end he restrained himself. Having exhausted 
his prayers to the gods of the earth and river, he threw 
himself down at the feet of the stone image that may have
37

been a tiger or a stallion, and asked for its blind aid. That 
same evening he dreamed of the image. He dreamed it 
alive, quivering; it was no unnatural cross between tiger 
and stallion but at one and the same time both these 
violent creatures and also a bull, a rose, a thunderstorm. 
This manifold god revealed to him that its earthly name 
was Fire, that there in the circular temple (and in others 
like it) sacrifices had once been made to it, that it had been 
worshiped, and that through its magic the phantom of the 
man’s dreams would be wakened to life in such a way 
that—except for Fire itself and the dreamer—every being in 
the world would accept him as a man of flesh and blood. 
The god ordered that, once instructed in the rites, the 
disciple should be sent downstream to the other ruined 
temple, whose pyramids still survived, so that in that 
abandoned place some human voice might exalt him. In the 
dreamer’s dream, the dreamed one awoke.
The magician carried out these orders. He devoted a 
period of time (which finally spanned two years) to initiat- 
ing his principle into the riddles of the universe and the 
worship of Fire. Deep inside, it pained him to say goodbye 
to his creature. Under the pretext of teaching him more 
fully, each day he drew out the hours set aside for sleep. 
Also, he reshaped the somewhat faulty right shoulder. From 
time to time, he was troubled by the feeling that all this 
had already happened, but for the most part his days were 
happy. On closing his eyes he would think, “Now I will be 
with my son.” Or, less frequently, “The son I have begotten 
awaits me and he will not exist if I do not go to him.”
Little by little, he was training the young man for reality. 
On one occasion he commanded him to set up a flag on a 
distant peak. The next day, there on the peak, a fiery 
pennant shone. He tried other, similar exercises, each bolder 
than the one before. He realized with a certain bitterness 
that his son was ready—and perhaps impatient—to be born. 
That night he kissed him for the first time and sent him 
down the river to the other temple, whose whitened ruins 
were still to be glimpsed over miles and miles of impenetra- 
38
Jorge Luis Borges

The Circular Ruins
ble forest and swamp. At the very end (so that the boy 
would never know he was a phantom, so that he would think 
himself a man like all men), the magician imbued his 
disciple with total oblivion of his long years of appren- 
ticeship.
His triumph and his peace were blemished by a touch of 
weariness. In the morning and evening dusk, he prostrated 
himself before the stone idol, perhaps imagining that his 
unreal son was performing the same rites farther down the 
river in other circular ruins. At night he no longer dreamed, 
or else he dreamed the way all men dream. He now per- 
ceived with a certain vagueness the sounds and shapes of 
the world, for his absent son was taking nourishment from 
the magician’s decreasing consciousness. His life’s purpose 
was fulfilled; the man lived on in a kind of ecstasy. After a 
length of time that certain tellers of the story count in 
years and others in half-decades, he was awakened one 
midnight by two rowers. He could not see their faces, but 
they spoke to him about a magic man in a temple up north 
who walked on fire without being burned. The magician 
suddenly remembered the god’s words. He remembered that 
of all the creatures in the world, Fire was the only one who 
knew his son was a phantom. This recollection, comforting 
at first, ended by tormenting him. He feared that his son 
might wonder at this strange privilege and in some way 
discover his condition as a mere appearance. Not to be a 
man but to be the projection of another man’s dreams—what 
an unparalleled humiliation, how bewildering! Every father 
cares for the child he has begotten—he has allowed—in some 
moment of confusion or happiness. It is understandable, 
then, that the magician should fear for the future of a son 
thought out organ by organ and feature by feature over the 
course of a thousand and one secret nights.
The end of these anxieties came suddenly, but certain 
signs foretold it. First (after a long drought), a far-off cloud 
on a hilltop, as light as a bird; next, toward the south, the 
sky, which took on the rosy hue of a leopard’s gums; then, 
the pillars of smoke that turned the metal of the nights to
39

Jorge Luis Borges
rust; finally, the headlong panic of the forest animals. For 
what had happened many centuries ago was happening 
again. The ruins of the fire god’s shrine were destroyed by 
fire. In a birdless dawn the magician saw the circling sheets 
of fíame closing in on him. For a moment, he thought of 
taking refuge in the river, but then he realized that death 
was coming to crown his years and to release him from his 
labors. He walked into the leaping pennants of flame. They 
did not bite into his flesh, but caressed him and flooded him 
without heat or burning. In relief, in humiliation, in terror, 
he understood that he, too, was an appearance, that some- 
one else was dreaming him.
40

Death and the 
Compass
To Mandie Molina Vedia 
(1942)
Of the many problems ever to tax Erik Lönnrot’s rash mind, 
none was so strange—so methodically strange, let us say—as 
the intermittent series of murders which came to a culmina- 
tion amid the incessant odor of eucalyptus trees at the villa 
Triste-le-Roy. It is true that Lönnrot failed to prevent the 
last of the murders, but it is undeniable that he foresaw it. 
Neither did he guess the identity of Yarmolinsky’s ill- 
starred killer, but he did guess the secret shape of the evil 
series of events and the possible role played in those events 
by Red Scharlach, also nicknamed Scharlach the Dandy. 
The gangster (like so many others of his ilk) had sworn on 
his honor to get Erik Lönnrot, but Lönnrot was not in- 
timidated. Lönnrot thought of himself as a pure logician, a 
kind of Auguste Dupin, but there was also a streak of the 
adventurer and even of the gambler in him.
The first murder took place in the Hôtel du Nord—that 
tall prism which overlooks the estuary whose broad waters 
are the color of sand. To that tower (which, as everyone
41

knows, brings together the hateful blank white walls of a 
hospital, the numbered chambers of a cell block, and the 
overall appearance of a brothel) there arrived on the third 
of December Rabbi Marcel Yarmolinsky, a gray-bearded, 
gray-eyed man, who was a delegate from Podolsk to the 
Third Talmudic Congress. We shall never know whether 
the Hôtel du Nord actually pleased him or not, since he 
accepted it with the ageless resignation that had made it 
possible for him to survive three years of war in the 
Carpathians and three thousand years of oppression and 
pogroms. He was given a room on floor R, across from the 
suite occupied—not without splendor—by the Tetrarch of 
Galilee.
Yarmolinsky had dinner, put off until the next day a tour 
of the unfamiliar city, arranged in a closet his many books 
and his few suits of clothes, and before midnight turned off 
his bed lamp. (So said the Tetrarch’s chauffeur, who slept 
in the room next door.) On the fourth of December, at 
three minutes past eleven in the morning, an editor of the 
Jüdische Zeitung called him by telephone. Rabbi Yarmo- 
linsky did not answer; soon after, he was found in his 
room, his face already discolored, almost naked under a 
great old-fashioned cape. He lay not far from the hall door. 
A deep knife wound had opened his chest. A couple of 
hours later, in the same room, in the throng of reporters, 
photographers, and policemen, Inspector Treviranus and 
Lönnrot quietly discussed the case.
“We needn’t lose any time here looking for three-legged 
cats,” Treviranus said, brandishing an imperious cigar. 
“Everyone knows the Tetrarch of Galilee owns the world’s 
finest sapphires. Somebody out to steal them probably 
found his way in here by mistake. Yarmolinsky woke up 
and the thief was forced to kill him. What do you make of 
it?”
“Possible, but not very interesting,” Lönnrot answered. 
“You’ll say reality is under no obligation to be interesting. 
To which I’d reply that reality may disregard the obliga- 
tion but that we may not. In your hypothesis, chance plays a 
42
Jorge Luis Borges

Death and the Compass
large part. Here’s a dead rabbi. I’d much prefer a purely 
rabbinical explanation, not the imagined mistakes of an 
imagined jewel thief.”
“I’m not interested in rabbinical explanations,” Trevi- 
ranus replied in bad humor; “I’m interested in apprehend- 
ing the man who murdered this unknown party.”
“Not so unknown,” corrected Lönnrot. “There are his 
complete works.” He pointed to a row of tall books on a 
shelf in the closet. There were a Vindication of the Kab- 
balah, a Study of the Philosophy of Robert Fludd, a literal 
translation of the Sefer Yeçirah, a Biography of the Baal 
Shem, a History of the Hasidic Sect, a treatise (in Ger- 
man) on the Tetragrammaton, and another on the names of 
God in the Pentateuch. The Inspector stared at them in 
fear, almost in disgust. Then he burst into laughter.
“I’m only a poor Christian,” he said. “You may cart off 
every last tome if you feel like it. I have no time to waste 
on Jewish superstitions.”
“Maybe this crime belongs to the history of Jewish 
superstitions,” Lönnrot grumbled.
“Like Christianity,” the editor from the Jüdische Zeitung 
made bold to add. He was nearsighted, an atheist, and very 
shy.
Nobody took any notice of him. One of the police detec- 
tives had found in Yarmolinsky’s small typewriter a sheet 
of paper on which these cryptic words were written:
The first letter of the Name has been uttered
Lönnrot restrained himself from smiling. Suddenly turning 
bibliophile and Hebraic scholar, he ordered a package made 
of the dead man’s books and he brought them to his 
apartment. There, with complete disregard for the police 
investigation, he began studying them. One royal-octavo 
volume revealed to him the teachings of Israel Baal Shem 
Tobh, founder of the sect of the Pious; another, the magic 
and the terror of the Tetragrammaton, which is God’s 
unspeakable name; a third, the doctrine that God has a 
secret name in which (as in the crystal sphere that the
43

Persians attribute to Alexander of Macedonia) His ninth 
attribute, Eternity, may be found—that is to say, the imme- 
diate knowledge of everything under the sun that will be, 
that is, and that was. Tradition lists ninety-nine names of 
God; Hebrew scholars explain that imperfect cipher by a 
mystic fear of even numbers; the Hasidim argue that the 
missing term stands for a hundredth name—the Absolute 
Name.
It was out of this bookworming that Lönnrot was distract- 
ed a few days later by the appearance of the editor from 
the Jüdische Zeitung, who wanted to speak about the mur- 
der. Lönnrot, however, chose to speak of the many names of 
the Lord. The following day, in three columns, the journalist 
stated that Chief Detective Erik Lönnrot had taken up the 
study of the names of God in order to find out the name of 
the murderer. Lönnrot, familiar with the simplifications of 
journalism, was not surprised. It also seemed that one of 
those tradesmen who have discovered that any man is willing 
to buy any book was peddling a cheap edition of Yarmo- 
linsky’s History of the Hasidic Sect.
The second murder took place on the night of January 
third out in the most forsaken and empty of the city’s 
western reaches. Along about daybreak, one of the police 
who patrol this lonely area on horseback noticed on the 
doorstep of a dilapidated paint and hardware store a man 
in a poncho laid out flat. A deep knife wound had ripped 
open his chest, and his hard features looked as though they 
were masked in blood. On the wall, on the shop’s conven- 
tional red and yellow diamond shapes, were some words 
scrawled in chalk. The policeman read them letter by 
letter. That evening, Treviranus and Lönnrot made their way 
across town to the remote scene of the crime. To the left 
and right of their car the city fell away in shambles; the 
sky grew wider and houses were of much less account than 
brick kilns or an occasional poplar. They reached their 
forlorn destination, an unpaved back alley with rose-colored 
walls that in some way seemed to reflect the garish sunset. 
The dead man had already been identified. He turned out 
44
Jorge Luis Borges

Death and the Compass
to be Daniel Simon Azevedo, a man with a fair reputation 
in the old northern outskirts of town who had risen from 
teamster to electioneering thug and later degenerated into a 
thief and an informer. (The unusual manner of his death 
seemed to them fitting, for Azevedo was the last example of 
a generation of criminals who knew how to handle a knife 
but not a revolver.) The words chalked up on the wall were 
these:
The second letter of the Name has been uttered
The third murder took place on the night of February 
third. A little before one o’clock, the telephone rang in the 
office of Inspector Treviranus. With pointed secrecy, a man 
speaking in a guttural voice said his name was Ginzberg (or 
Ginsburg) and that he was ready—for a reasonable consider- 
ation—to shed light on the facts surrounding the double 
sacrifice of Azevedo and Yarmolinsky. A racket of whistles 
and tin horns drowned out the informer’s voice. Then the 
line went dead. Without discounting the possibility of a 
practical joke (they were, after all, at the height of Carni- 
val), Treviranus checked and found that he had been 
phoned from a sailors’ tavern called Liverpool House on the 
Rue de Toulon—that arcaded waterfront street in which we 
find side by side the wax museum and the dairy bar, the 
brothel and the Bible seller. Treviranus called the owner 
back. The man (Black Finnegan by name, a reformed Irish 
criminal concerned about and almost weighed down by 
respectability) told him that the last person to have used 
the telephone was one of his roomers, a certain Gryphius, 
who had only minutes before gone out with some friends. 
At once Treviranus set out for Liverpool House. There the 
owner told him the following story:
Eight days earlier, Gryphius had taken a small room 
above the bar. He was a sharp-featured man with a misty 
gray beard, shabbily dressed in black. Finnegan (who used 
that room for a purpose Treviranus immediately guessed) 
had asked the roomer for a rent that was obviously steep, 
and Gryphius paid the stipulated sum on the spot. Hardly
45

ever going out, he took lunch and supper in his room; in 
fact, his face was hardly known in the bar. That night he 
had come down to use the telephone in Finnegan’s office. A 
coupé had drawn up outside. The coachman had stayed on 
his seat; some customers recalled that he wore the mask of 
a bear. Two harlequins got out of the carriage. They were 
very short men and nobody could help noticing that they 
were very drunk. Bleating their horns, they burst into 
Finnegan’s office, throwing their arms around Gryphius, who 
seemed to know them but who did not warm to their 
company. The three exchanged a few words in Yiddish—he 
in a low, guttural voice, they in a piping falsetto—and they 
climbed the stairs up to his room. In a quarter of an hour 
they came down again, very happy. Gryphius, staggering, 
seemed as drunk as the others. He walked in the middle, 
tall and dizzy, between the two masked harlequins. (One of 
the women in the bar remembered their costumes of red, 
green, and yellow lozenges.) Twice he stumbled; twice 
the harlequins held him up. Then the trio climbed into the 
coupé and, heading for the nearby docks (which enclosed a 
string of rectangular bodies of water), were soon out of 
sight. Out front, from the running board, the last harlequin 
had scrawled an obscene drawing and certain words on one 
of the market slates hung from a pillar of the arcade.
Treviranus stepped outside for a look. Almost predict- 
ably, the phrase read:
The last letter of the Name has been uttered
He next examined Gryphius-Ginzberg’s tiny room. On 
the floor was a star-shaped spatter of blood; in the corners, 
cigarette butts of a Hungarian brand; in the wardrobe, a 
book in Latin—a 1739 edition of Leusden’s Philologus He- 
braeo-Graecus—with a number of annotations written in by 
hand. Treviranus gave it an indignant look and sent for 
Lönnrot. While the Inspector questioned the contradictory 
witnesses to the possible kidnapping, Lönnrot, not even both- 
ering to take off his hat, began reading. At four o’clock they 
left. In the twisted Rue de Toulon, as they were stepping 
46
Jorge Luis Borges

Death and the Compass
over last night’s tangle of streamers and confetti,” Trevi- 
ranus remarked, “And if tonight’s events were a put-up 
job?”
Erik Lönnrot smiled and read to him with perfect gravity 
an underlined passage from the thirty-third chapter of the 
Philologus: “ ‘Dies Judaeorum incipit a solis occasu usque 
ad solis occasum diei sequentis.’ Meaning,” he added, “ ‘the 
Jewish day begins at sundown and ends the following sun- 
down.’ ”
The other man attempted a bit of irony. “Is that the 
most valuable clue you’ve picked up tonight?” he said.
“No. Far more valuable is one of the words Ginzberg 
used to you on the phone.”
The evening papers made a great deal of these recurrent 
disappearances. La Croix de l’Épée contrasted the present 
acts of violence with the admirable discipline and order 
observed by the last Congress of Hermits. Ernst Palast, in 
The Martyr, condemned “the unbearable pace of this unau- 
thorized and stinting pogrom, which has required three 
months for the liquidation of three Jews.” The Jüdische 
Zeitung rejected the ominous suggestion of an anti-Semitic 
plot, “despite the fact that many penetrating minds admit 
of no other solution to the threefold mystery.” The leading 
gunman of the city’s Southside, Dandy Red Scharlach, 
swore that in his part of town crimes of that sort would 
never happen, and he accused Inspector Franz Treviranus 
of criminal negligence.
On the night of March first, Inspector Treviranus re- 
ceived a great sealed envelope. Opening it, he found it 
contained a letter signed by one “Baruch Spinoza” and, 
evidently torn out of a Baedeker, a detailed plan of the 
city. The letter predicted that on the third of March there 
would not be a fourth crime because the paint and hard- 
ware store on the Westside, the Rue de Toulon tavern, and 
the Hôtel du Nord formed “the perfect sides of an 
equilateral and mystical triangle.” In red ink the map 
demonstrated that the three sides of the figure were exactly 
the same length. Treviranus read this Euclidean reasoning
47

Jorge Luis Borges
with a certain weariness and sent the letter and map to 
Erik Lönnrot—the man, beyond dispute, most deserving of 
such cranky notions.
Lönnrot studied them. The three points were, in fact, 
equidistant. There was symmetry in time (December third, 
January third, February third); now there was symmetry 
in space as well. All at once he felt he was on the verge of 
solving the riddle. A pair of dividers and a compass com- 
pleted his sudden intuition. He smiled, pronounced the 
word Tetragrammaton (of recent acquisition) and called 
the Inspector on the phone.
“Thanks for the equilateral triangle you sent me last 
night,” he told him. “It has helped me unravel our mys- 
tery. Tomorrow, Friday, the murderers will be safely behind 
bars; we can rest quite easy.”
“Then they aren’t planning a fourth crime?”
“Precisely because they are planning a fourth crime we 
can rest quite easy.”
Lönnrot hung up the receiver. An hour later, he was 
traveling on a car of the Southern Railways on his way to 
the deserted villa Triste-le-Roy. To the south of the city of 
my story flows a dark muddy river, polluted by the waste 
of tanneries and sewers. On the opposite bank is a factory 
suburb where, under the patronage of a notorious political 
boss, many gunmen thrive. Lönnrot smiled to himself, think- 
ing that the best-known of them—Red Scharlach—would 
have given anything to know about this sudden excursion of 
his. Azevedo had been a henchman of Scharlach’s. Lönnrot 
considered the remote possibility that the fourth victim 
might be Scharlach himself. Then he dismissed it. He had 
practically solved the puzzle; the mere circumstances— 
reality (names, arrests, faces, legal and criminal proceed- 
ings)—barely held his interest now. He wanted to get away, 
to relax after three months of desk work and of snail-pace 
investigation. He reflected that the solution of the killings 
lay in an anonymously sent triangle and in a dusty Greek 
word. The mystery seemed almost crystal clear. He felt 
ashamed for having spent close to a hundred days on it.
48

Death and the Compass
The train came to a stop at a deserted loading platform. 
Lönnrot got off. It was one of those forlorn evenings that 
seem as empty as dawn. The air off the darkening prairies 
was damp and cold. Lönnrot struck out across the fields. He 
saw dogs, he saw a flatcar on a siding, he saw the line of the 
horizon, he saw a pale horse drinking stagnant water out of 
a ditch. Night was falling when he saw the rectangular 
mirador of the villa Triste-le-Roy, almost as tall as the 
surrounding black eucalyptus trees. He thought that only 
one more dawn and one more dusk (an ancient light in the 
east and another in the west) were all that separated him 
from the hour appointed by the seekers of the Name.
A rusted iron fence bounded the villa’s irregular perime- 
ter. The main gate was shut. Lönnrot, without much hope of 
getting in, walked completely around the place. Before the 
barred gate once again, he stuck a hand through the pal- 
ings—almost mechanically—and found the bolt. The squeal 
of rusted iron surprised him. With clumsy obedience, the 
whole gate swung open.
Lönnrot moved forward among the eucalyptus trees, step- 
ping on the layered generations of fallen leaves. Seen from 
up close, the house was a clutter of meaningless symmetries 
and almost insane repetitions: one icy Diana in a gloomy 
niche matched another Diana in a second niche; one bal- 
cony appeared to reflect another; double outer staircases 
crossed at each landing. A two-faced Hermes cast a mon- 
strous shadow. Lönnrot made his way around the house as he 
had made his way around the grounds. He went over every 
detail; below the level of the terrace he noticed a narrow 
shutter.
He pushed it open. A few marble steps went down into a 
cellar. Lönnrot, who by now anticipated the architect’s 
whims, guessed that in the opposite wall he would find a 
similar sets of steps. He did. Climbing them, he lifted his 
hands and raised a trapdoor.
A stain of light led him to a window. He opened it. A 
round yellow moon outlined two clogged fountains in the 
unkempt garden. Lönnrot explored the house. Through serv-
49

ing pantries and along corridors he came to identical court- 
yards and several times to the same courtyard. He climbed 
dusty stairways to circular anterooms, where he was multi- 
plied to infinity in facing mirrors. He grew weary of 
opening or of peeping through windows that revealed, out- 
side, the same desolate garden seen from various heights 
and various angles; and indoors he grew weary of the rooms 
of furniture, each draped in yellowing slipcovers, and the 
crystal chandeliers wrapped in tarlatan. A bedroom caught 
his attention—in it, a single flower in a porcelain vase. At a 
touch, the ancient petals crumbled to dust. On the third 
floor, the last floor, the house seemed endless and growing. 
The house is not so large, he thought. This dim light, the 
sameness, the mirrors, the many years, my unfamiliarity, 
the loneliness are what make it large.
By a winding staircase he reached the mirador. That eve- 
ning’s moon streamed in through the diamond-shaped panes; 
they were red, green, and yellow. He was stopped by an 
awesome, dizzying recollection.
Two short men, brutal and stocky, threw themselves on 
him and disarmed him: another, very tall, greeted him 
solemnly and told him, “You are very kind. You’ve saved 
us a night and a day.”
It was Red Scharlach. The men bound Lönnrot’s wrists. 
After some seconds, Lönnrot at last heard himself saying, 
“Scharlach, are you after the Secret Name?”
Scharlach remained standing, aloof. He had taken no 
part in the brief struggle and had barely held out his hand 
for Lönnrot’s revolver. He spoke. Lönnrot heard in his voice 
the weariness of final triumph, a hatred the size of the 
universe, a sadness as great as that hatred.
“No,” said Scharlach. “I’m after something more ephem- 
eral, more frail. I’m after Erik Lönnrot. Three years ago, 
in a gambling dive on the Rue de Toulon, you yourself 
arrested my brother and got him put away. My men man- 
aged to get me into a coupé before the shooting was over, 
but I had a cop’s bullet in my guts. Nine days and nine 
nights I went through hell, here in this deserted villa, 
50
Jorge luís Borges

Death and the Compass
racked with fever. The hateful two-faced Janus that looks 
on the sunsets and the dawns filled both my sleep and my 
wakefulness with its horror. I came to loathe my body, I 
came to feel that two eyes, two hands, two lungs, are as 
monstrous as two faces. An Irishman, trying to convert me 
to the faith of Jesus, kept repeating to me the saying of the 
goyim—All roads lead to Rome. At night, my fever fed on 
that metaphor. I felt the world was a maze from which 
escape was impossible since all roads, though they seemed 
to be leading north or south, were really leading to Rome, 
which at the same time was the square cell where my 
brother lay dying and also this villa, Triste-le-Roy. During 
those nights, I swore by the god who looks with two faces 
and by all the gods of fever and of mirrors that I would 
weave a maze around the man who sent my brother to 
prison. Well, I have woven it and it’s tight. Its materials 
are a dead rabbi, a compass, an eighteenth-century sect, a 
Greek word, a dagger, and the diamond-shaped patterns on 
a paint-store wall.”
Lönnrot was in a chair now, with the two short men at his 
side.
“The first term of the series came to me by pure 
chance,” Scharlach went on. “With some associates of 
mine—among them Daniel Azevedo—I’d planned the theft 
of the Tetrarch’s sapphires. Azevedo betrayed us. He got 
drunk on the money we advanced him and tried to pull the 
job a day earlier. But there in the hotel he got mixed up 
and around two in the morning blundered into Yarmolin- 
sky’s room. The rabbi, unable to sleep, had decided to do 
some writing. In all likelihood, he was preparing notes or a 
paper on the Name of God and had already typed out the 
words ‘The first letter of the Name has been uttered.’ 
Azevedo warned him not to move. Yarmolinsky reached his 
hand toward the buzzer that would have wakened all the 
hotel staff; Azevedo struck him a single blow with his 
knife. It was probably a reflex action. Fifty years of vio- 
lence had taught him that the easiest and surest way is to 
kill. Ten days later, I found out through the Jüdische
51

Zeitung that you were looking for the key to Yarmolinsky’s 
death in his writings. I read his History of the Hasidic 
Sect. I learned that the holy fear of uttering God’s Name 
had given rise to the idea that that Name is secret and 
all-powerful. I learned that some of the Hasidim, in search 
of that secret Name, had gone as far as to commit human 
sacrifices. The minute I realized you were guessing that the 
Hasidim had sacrificed the rabbi, I did my best to justify 
that guess. Yarmolinsky died the night of December third. 
For the second Sacrifice’ I chose the night of January 
third. The rabbi had died on the Northside; for the second 
‘sacrifice’ we wanted a spot on the Westside. Daniel 
Azevedo was the victim we needed. He deserved death—he 
was impulsive, a traitor. If he’d been picked up, it would 
have wiped out our whole plan. One of my men stabbed 
him; in order to link his corpse with the previous one, I 
scrawled on the diamonds of the paint-store wall ‘The 
second letter of the Name has been uttered.’ ”
Scharlach looked his victim straight in the face, then 
continued. “The third ‘crime’ was staged on the third of 
February. It was, as Treviranus guessed, only a plant. 
Gryphius-Ginzberg-Ginsburg was me. I spent an intermina- 
ble week (rigged up in a false beard) in that flea-ridden 
cubicle on the Rue de Toulon until my friends came to 
kidnap me. From the running board of the carriage, one of 
them wrote on the pillar, ‘The last letter of the Name has 
been uttered.’ That message suggested that the series of 
crimes was threefold. That was how the public understood 
it. I, however, threw in repeated clues so that you, Erik 
Lönnrot the reasoner, might puzzle out that the crime was 
fourfold. A murder in the north, others in the east and 
west, demanded a fourth murder in the south. The Te- 
tragrammaton—the Name of God, JHVH—is made up of 
four letters; the harlequins and the symbol on the paint store 
also suggest four terms. I underlined a certain passage in 
Leusden’s handbook. That passage makes it clear that the 
Jews reckoned the day from sunset to sunset; that passage 
makes it understood that the deaths occurred on the fourth 
52
Jorge Luis Borges

Death and the Compass
of each month. I was the one who sent the triangle to 
Treviranus, knowing in advance that you would supply the 
missing point—the point that determines the perfect rhom- 
bus, the point that fixes the spot where death is expecting 
you. I planned the whole thing, Erik Lönnrot, so as to lure 
you to the loneliness of Triste-le-Roy.”
Lönnrot avoided Scharlach’s eyes. He looked off at the 
trees and the sky broken into dark diamonds of red, green, 
and yellow. He felt a chill and an impersonal, almost 
anonymous sadness. It was night now; from down in the 
abandoned garden came the unavailing cry of a bird. 
Lönnrot, for one last time, reflected on the problem of the 
patterned, intermittent deaths.
“In your maze there are three lines too many,” he said at 
last. “I know of a Greek maze that is a single straight line. 
Along this line so many thinkers have lost their way that a 
mere detective may very well lose his way. Scharlach, when 
in another incarnation you hunt me down, stage (or com- 
mit) a murder at A, then a second murder at B, eight miles 
from A, then a third murder at C, four miles from A and B, 
halfway between the two. Lay in wait for me then at D, two 
miles from A and C, again halfway between them. Kill me 
at D, the way you are going to kill me here at Triste-le- 
Roy.”
“The next time I kill you,” said Scharlach, “I promise you 
such a maze, which is made up of a single straight line and 
which is invisible and unending.”
He moved back a few steps. Then, taking careful aim, 
he fired.
53

The Life of 
Tadeo Isidoro Cruz
(1829-1874)
(1944)
I’m looking for the face I had 
Before the world was made.
Yeats, A Woman Young and Old
On the sixth of February, 1829, a troop of gaucho mili- 
tia, harried all day by Lavalle on their march north to join 
the army under the command of López, made a halt some 
nine or ten miles from Pergamino at a ranch whose name 
they did not know. Along about dawn, one of the men had 
a haunting nightmare and, in the dim shadows of a shed 
where he lay sleeping, his confused outcry woke the woman 
who shared his bed. Nobody ever knew what he dreamed, 
for around four o’clock that afternoon the gauchos were 
routed by a detachment of Suárez’ cavalry in a chase that 
went on for over twenty miles and ended, in thickening 
twilight, in tall swamp grasses, where the man died in a 
ditch, his skull split by a saber that had seen service in the 
Peruvian and Brazilian wars. The woman’s name was 
Isidora Cruz. The son born to her was given the name 
Tadeo Isidoro.
My aim here is not to recount his whole personal history. 
Of the many days and nights that make up his life, only a 
54

The Life of Tadeo Isidoro Cruz (1829—1874)
single night concerns me; as to the rest, I shall tell only 
what is necessary to that night’s full understanding. The 
episode belongs to a famous poem—that is to say, to a poem 
which has come to mean “all things to all men” (I 
Corinthians 9:22), since almost endless variations, ver- 
sions, and perversions have been read into its pages. Those 
who have theorized about Tadeo Isidoro’s story—and they 
are many—lay stress upon the influence of the wide-open 
plains on his character, but gauchos exactly like him were 
born and died along the wooded banks of the Paraná and in 
the hilly back country of Uruguay. He lived, it must be 
admitted, in a world of unrelieved barbarism. When he 
died, in 1874, in an outbreak of smallpox, he had never 
laid eyes on a mountain or a gas jet or a windmill pump. 
Nor on a city. In 1849, he went to Buenos Aires on a 
cattle drive from the ranch of Francisco Xavier Acevedo. 
The other drovers went into town on a spending spree; 
Cruz, somewhat wary, did not stray far from a shabby inn 
in the neighborhood of the stockyards. There he spent 
several days, by himself, sleeping on the ground, brewing his 
maté, getting up at daybreak, and going to bed at dusk. He 
realized (beyond words and even beyond understanding) 
that he could not cope with the city. One of the drovers, 
having drunk too much, began poking fun at him. Cruz 
ignored him, but several times on the way home, at night 
around the campfire, the other man kept on with his gibes, 
and Cruz (who up till then had shown neither anger nor 
annoyance) laid him out with his knife.
On the run, Cruz was forced to hide out in a marshy 
thicket. A few nights later, the cries of a startled plover 
warned him he had been ringed in by the police. He tested 
his knife in a thick clump of grass and, to keep from 
entangling his feet, took off his spurs. Choosing to fight it 
out rather than be taken, he got himself wounded in the 
forearm, in the shoulder, and in the left hand. When he felt 
the blood dripping between his fingers; he fought harder 
than ever, badly wounding the toughest members of the 
search party. Toward daybreak, weak with loss of blood, he
55

was disarmed. The army in those days acted as a kind of 
penal institution; Cruz was sent off to serve in an outpost 
on the northern frontier. As a common soldier, he took part 
in the civil wars, sometimes fighting for the province of his 
birth, sometimes against. On the twenty-third of January, 
1856, in the Cardoso marshes, he was one of thirty white 
men who, led by Sergeant Major Eusebio Laprida, fought 
against two hundred Indians. In this action he was wound- 
ed by a spear.
The dim and hardy story of his life is full of gaps. 
Around 1868, we hear of him once more in Pergamino, 
married or living with a woman, father of a son, and owner 
of a small holding of land. In 1869, he was appointed 
sergeant of the local police. He had made up for his past 
and, in those days, may have thought of himself as a happy 
man, though deep down he wasn’t. (What lay in wait for 
him, hidden in the future, was a night of stark illumination— 
the night in which at last he glimpsed his own face, the 
night in which at last he heard his name. Fully understood, 
that night exhausts his story; or rather, one moment in that 
night, one deed, since deeds are our symbols.) Any life, no 
matter how long or complex it may be, is made up essen- 
tially of a single moment—the moment in which a man finds 
out, once and for all, who he is. It has been said that 
Alexander the Great saw his iron future in the fabled story 
of Achilles, and Charles XII of Sweden, his in the story of 
Alexander. To Tadeo Isidoro Cruz, who did not know how 
to read, this revelation was not given by a book; it was in a 
manhunt and in the man he was hunting that he learned 
who he was. The thing happened in this way:
During the last days of the month of June, 1870, he 
received orders to capture an outlaw who had killed two 
men. The man was a deserter from the forces of Colonel 
Benito Machado on the southern frontier; he had killed a 
Negro in a drunken brawl in a whorehouse and, in another 
brawl, a man from the district of Rojas. The report added 
that he had last been seen near the Laguna Colorada. This 
was the same place where the troop of gaucho militia had 
56
Jorge Luis Borges

The Life of Tadeo Isidoro Cruz (1829—1874)
gathered, some forty years earlier, before starting out on 
the misadventure that gave their flesh to the vultures and 
dogs. Out of this spot had come Manuel Mesa, who was 
later made to stand before a firing squad in the central 
square of Buenos Aires while the drums rolled in order to 
drown out his last words; out of this spot had come the 
unknown man who fathered Cruz and died in a ditch, his 
skull split by a saber that had seen action on the bat- 
tlefields of Peru and Brazil. Cruz had forgotten the name of 
the place. Now, after a vague and puzzling uneasiness, it 
came to him.
Pursued by the soldiers and shuttling back and forth on 
horseback, the hunted man had woven a long maze, but 
nonetheless, on the night of July twelfth, the troops tracked 
him down. He had taken shelter in a growth of tall reeds. 
The darkness was nearly impenetrable; Cruz and his men, 
stealthily and on foot, advanced toward the clumps in 
whose swaying center the hidden man lay in wait or asleep. 
A startled plover let out a cry. Tadeo Isidoro Cruz had the 
feeling of having lived this moment before. The hunted 
man came out of his hiding place to fight them in the open. 
Cruz made out the hideous figure—his overgrown hair and 
gray beard seemed to eat away his face. An obvious reason 
keeps me from describing the fight that followed. Let me 
simply point out that the deserter badly wounded or killed 
several of Cruz’s men. Cruz, while he fought in the dark 
(while his body fought in the dark), began to understand. 
He understood that one destiny is no better than another, 
but that every man must obey what is within him. He 
understood that his shoulder braid and his uniform were 
now in his way. He understood that his real destiny was as 
a lone wolf, not a gregarious dog. He understood that the 
other man was himself. Day dawned over the boundless 
plain. Cruz threw down his kepi, called out that he would 
not be party to the crime of killing a brave man, and began 
fighting against his own soldiers, shoulder to shoulder with 
Martín Fierro, the deserter.
57

The Two Kings and 
Their Two Labyrinths
(1946)
[This is the story the Reverend Allaby tells from the pulpit 
in “Ibn Hakkan al-Bokhari, Dead in His Labyrinth.”
See page 77]
Chroniclers worthy of trust have recorded (but only Allah 
is All-Knowing) that in former times there was a king of 
the isles of Babylon who called together his architects and 
his wizards and set them to build him a labyrinth so 
intricate that no wise man would dare enter inside, and so 
subtle that those who did would lose their way. This under- 
taking was a blasphemy, for confusion and marvels belong 
to God alone and not to man. With the passage of time 
there came to his court a king of the Arabs, and the king of 
Babylon (wishing to mock his guest’s simplicity) allowed 
him to set foot in his labyrinth, where he wandered in 
humiliation and bewilderment until the coming of night. It 
was then that the second king implored the help of God 
and soon after came upon the door. He suffered his lips to 
utter no complaint, but he told the king of Babylon that 
he, too, had a labyrinth in his land and that, God willing, 
he would one day take pleasure in showing it to his host. 
Then he returned to Arabia, gathered his captains and his 
58

The Two Kings and Their Two Labyrinths
armies, and overran the realms of Babylon with so fair a 
fortune that he ravaged its castles, broke its peoples, and 
took captive the king himself. He bound him onto a swift 
camel and brought him into the desert. Three days they 
rode, and then the captor said, “O king of time and crown 
of the century! In Babylon you lured me into a labyrinth 
of brass cluttered with many stairways, doors, and walls; 
now the Almighty has brought it to pass that I show you 
mine, which has no stairways to climb, nor doors to force, 
nor unending galleries to wear one down, nor walls to block 
one’s way.”
He then loosened the bonds of the first king and left him 
in the heart of the desert to die of thirst and hunger. Glory 
be to the Living, who dieth not.
59

The Dead Man
(1946)
That a man from the outlying slums of a city like Buenos 
Aires, that a sorry hoodlum with little else to his credit 
than a passion for recklessness, should find his way into 
that wild stretch of horse country between Brazil and 
Uruguay and become the leader of a band of smugglers, 
seems on the face of it unbelievable. To those who think so, 
I’d like to give an account of what happened to Benjamín 
Otálora, of whom perhaps not a single memory lingers in 
the neighborhood where he grew up, and who died a fitting 
death, struck down by a bullet, somewhere on the border of 
Rio Grande do Sul. Of the details of his adventures I know 
little; should I ever be given the facts, I shall correct and 
expand these pages. For the time being, this outline may 
prove of some use.
Benjamín Otálora, along about 1891, is a strapping 
young man of nineteen. He has a low forehead, candid blue 
eyes, and that country-boy appearance that goes with 
Basque ancestry. A lucky blow with a knife has made clear 
60

The Dead Man
to him that he is also brave; his opponent’s death causes 
him no concern, nor does his need to flee the country. The 
political boss of the district gives him a letter of introduc- 
tion to a certain Azevedo Bandeira, in Uruguay. Otálora 
books passage; the crossing is stormy and the ship pitches 
and creaks. The next day, he wanders the length and 
breadth of Montevideo, with unacknowledged or perhaps 
unsuspected homesickness. He does not find Azevedo Ban- 
deira. Getting on toward midnight, in a small saloon out on 
the northern edge of town, he witnesses a brawl between 
some cattle drovers. A knife flashes. Otálora has no idea 
who is in the right or wrong, but the sheer taste of danger 
lures him, just as cards or music lure other men. In the 
confusion, he blocks a lunging knife thrust that one off the 
gauchos aims at a man wearing a rough countryman’s 
poncho and, oddly, the dark derby of a townsman. The 
man turns out to be Azevedo Bandeira. (As soon as he finds 
this out, Otálora destroys the letter, preferring to be under 
no one’s obligation.) Azevedo Bandeira, though of stocky 
build, gives the unaccountable impression of being somehow 
misshapen. In his large face, which seems always to be too 
close, are the Jew, the Negro, and the Indian; in his 
bearing, the tiger and the ape. The scar that cuts across his 
cheek is one ornament more, like his bristling black 
moustache.
A fantasy or a mistake born of drunkenness, the fight 
ends as quickly as it broke out. Otálora takes a drink with 
the drovers and then goes along with them to an all-night 
party and after that—the sun high in the sky by now—to a 
rambling house in the Old Town. Inside, on the bare 
ground of the last patio, the men lay out their sheepskin 
saddle blankets to sleep. Dimly, Otálora compares this past 
night with the night before; here he is, on solid ground 
now, among friends. A pang of remorse for not missing his 
Buenos Aires nags at him, however. He sleeps until night- 
fall, when he is wakened by the same gaucho who, blind 
drunk, had tried to knife Bandeira. (Otálora recalls that 
the man has shared the high-spirited night with the rest of
61

them, and that Bandeira had seated him at his right hand 
and forced him to go on drinking.) The man says the boss 
has sent for him. In a kind of office opening into the 
entrance passage (Otálora has never before seen an en- 
trance with doors opening into it from the sides), Azevedo 
Bandeira, in the company of an aloof and showy red-haired 
woman, is waiting for him. Bandeira praises him up and 
down, offers him a shot of rum, tells him he has the 
makings of a man of guts, suggests that he go up north with 
the others to bring back a large cattle herd. Otálora agrees; 
toward dawn they are on the road, heading for Tac- 
uarembó.
For Otálora a new kind of life opens up, a life of 
far-flung sunrises and long days in the saddle, reeking of 
horses. It is an untried and at times unbearable life, but it’s 
already in his blood, for just as the men of certain countries 
worship and feel the call of the sea, we Argentines in turn 
(including the man who weaves these symbols) yearn for 
the boundless plains that ring under a horse’s hooves. Otá- 
lora has grown up in a neighborhood of teamsters and 
liverymen. In under a year, he makes himself into a 
gaucho. He learns to handle a horse, to round up and 
slaughter cattle, to throw a rope for holding an animal fast 
or bolas for bringing it down, to fight off sleep, to weather 
storms and frosts and sun, to drive a herd with whistles and 
hoots. Only once during this whole apprenticeship does he 
set eyes on Azevedo Bandeira, but he has him always in 
mind because to be one of Bandeira’s men is to be looked up 
to and feared, and because after any feat or hard job the 
gauchos always say Bandeira does it better. Somebody has 
it that Bandeira was born on the Brazilian side of the 
Cuareim, in Rio Grande do Sul; this, which should lower 
him in Otálora’s eyes, somehow—with its suggestion of dense 
forests and of marshes and of inextricable and almost end- 
less distances—only adds to him. Little by little, Otálora 
comes to realize that Bandeira’s interests are many and 
that chief among them is smuggling. To be a cattle drover 
is to be a servant; Otálora decides to work himself up to the 
62
Jorge Luis Borges

The Dead Man
level of smuggler. One night, as two of his companions are 
about to go over the border to bring back a consignment of 
rum, Otálora picks a fight with one of them, wounds him, 
and takes his place. He is driven by ambition and also by a 
dim sense of loyalty. The man (he thinks) will come to find 
out that I’m worth more than all his Uruguayans put 
together.
Another year goes by before Otálora sees Montevideo 
again. They come riding through the outskirts and into the 
city (which to Otálora now seems enormous); reaching the 
boss’s house, the men prepare to bed down in the last patio. 
The days pass, and Otálora still has not laid eyes on 
Bandeira. It is said, in fear, that he is ailing; every after- 
noon a Negro goes up to Bandeira’s room with a kettle and 
maté. One evening, the job is assigned to Otálora. He feels 
vaguely humiliated, but at the same time gratified.
The bedroom is bare and dark. There’s a balcony that 
faces the sunset, there’s a long table with a shining disarray 
of riding crops, bullwhips, cartridge belts, firearms, and 
knives. On the far wall there’s a mirror and the glass is 
faded. Bandeira lies face up, dreaming and muttering in his 
sleep; the sun’s last rays outline his features. The big white 
bed seems to make him smaller, darker. Otálora notes his 
graying hair, his exhaustion, his weakness, the deep wrin- 
kles of his years. It angers him being mastered by this old 
man. He thinks that a single blow would be enough to 
finish him. At this moment, he glimpses in the mirror that 
someone has come in. It’s the woman with the red hair; she 
is barefoot and only half-dressed, and looks at him with 
cold curiosity. Bandeira sits up in bed; while he speaks of 
business affairs of the past two years and drinks maté after 
maté, his fingers toy with the woman’s braided hair. In the 
end, he gives Otálora permission to leave.
A few days later, they get orders to head north again. 
There, in a place that might be anywhere on the face of the 
endless plains, they come to a forlorn ranch. Not a single 
tree or a brook. The sun’s first and last rays beat down on
63

it. There are stone fences for the lean longhorn cattle. This 
rundown set of buildings is called “The Last Sigh.”
Sitting around the fire with the ranch hands, Otálora 
hears that Bandeira will soon be on his way from Montevi- 
deo. He asks what for, and someone explains that there’s an 
outsider turned gaucho among them who’s giving too many 
orders. Otálora takes this as a friendly joke and is flattered 
that the joke can be made. Later on, he finds out that 
Bandeira has had a falling out with one of the political 
bosses, who has withdrawn his support. Otálora likes this 
bit of news.
Crates of rifles arrive; a pitcher and washbasin, both of 
silver, arrive for the woman’s bedroom; intricately figured 
damask draperies arrive; one morning, from out of the 
hills, a horseman arrives—a sullen man with a full beard and 
a poncho. His name is Ulpiano Suárez and he is Azevedo 
Bandeira’s strong-arm man, or bodyguard. He speaks very 
little and with a thick Brazilian accent. Otálora does not 
know whether to put down his reserve to unfriendliness, or 
to contempt, or to mere backwoods manners. He realizes, 
however, that to carry out the scheme he is hatching he 
must win the other man’s friendship.
Next into Benjamín Otálora’s story comes a black-legged 
bay horse that Azevedo Bandeira brings from the south, 
and that carries a fine saddle worked with silver and a 
saddle blanket trimmed with a jaguar skin. This spirited 
horse is a token of Bandeira’s authority and for this reason 
is coveted by the young man, who comes also—with a 
desire bordering on spite—to hunger for the woman with the 
shining hair. The woman, the saddle, and the big bay are 
attributes or trappings of a man he aspires to bring down.
At this point the story takes another turn. Azevedo Ban- 
deira is skilled in the art of slow intimidation, in the 
diabolical trickery of leading a man on, step by step, 
shifting from sincerity to mockery. Otálora decides to apply 
this ambiguous method to the hard task before him. He 
decides to replace Azevedo Bandeira, but to take his time 
over it. During days of shared danger, he gains Suárez’ 
64
Jorge Luis Borges

The Dead Man
friendship. He confides his plan to him; Suárez pledges to 
help. Then a number of things begin happening of which I 
know only a few. Otálora disobeys Bandeira’s orders; he 
takes to overlooking them, changing them, defying them. 
The whole world seems to conspire with him, hastening 
events. One noontime, somewhere around Tacuarembó, 
there is an exchange of gunfire with a gang from Brazil; 
Otálora takes Bandeira’s place and shouts out orders to the 
Uruguayans. A bullet hits him in the shoulder, but that 
afternoon Otálora rides back to “The Last Sigh” on the 
boss’s horse, and that evening some drops of his blood stain 
the jaguar skin, and that night he sleeps with the woman 
with the shining hair. Other accounts change the order of 
these events, denying they happened all in the same day.
Bandeira, nevertheless, remains nominally the boss. He 
goes on giving orders which are not carried out. Benjamín 
Otálora leaves him alone, out of mixed reasons of habit and 
pity.
The closing scene of the story coincides with the commo- 
tion of the closing night of the year 1894. On this night, 
the men of “The Last Sigh” eat freshly slaughtered meat and 
fall into quarreling over their liquor; someone picks out on 
the guitar, over and over again, a milonga that gives him a 
lot of trouble. At the head of the table, Otálora, feeling his 
drink, piles exultation upon exultation, boast upon boast; 
this dizzying tower is a symbol of his irresistible destiny. 
Bandeira, silent amid the shouting, lets the night flow 
noisily on. When the clock strikes twelve, he gets up like a 
man just remembering he has something to do. He gets up 
and softly knacks at the woman’s door. She opens at once, 
as though waiting to be called. She steps out barefoot and 
half-dressed. In an almost feminine, soft-spoken drawl, 
Bandeira gives her an order.
“Since you and the Argentine care so much for each 
other,” he says, “you’re going to kiss him right now in front 
of everyone.”
He adds an obscene detail. The woman tries to resist, but 
two men have taken her by the arms and fling her upon
65

Otálora. Brought to tears, she kisses his face and chest, 
Ulpiano Suárez has his revolver out. Otálora realizes, be- 
fore dying, that he has been betrayed from the start, that he 
has been sentenced to death—that love and command and 
triumph have been accorded him because his companions 
already thought of him as a dead man, because to Ban- 
deira he already was a dead man.
Suárez, almost in contempt, fires the shot.
Jorge Luis Borges
66

The Other Death
(1948)
I have mislaid the letter, but a couple of years or so ago 
Gannon wrote me from his ranch up in Gualeguaychú 
saying he would send me a translation, perhaps the very 
first into Spanish, of Ralph Waldo Emerson’s poem “The 
Past,” and adding in a P.S. that don Pedro Damián, whom 
I might recall, had died of a lung ailment a few nights 
earlier. The man (Gannon went on), wasted by fever, had 
in his delirium relived the long ordeal of the battle of 
Masoller. It seemed to me there was nothing unreasonable 
or out of the ordinary about this news since don Pedro, 
when he was nineteen or twenty, had been a follower of the 
banners of Aparicio Saravia. Pedro Damián had been work- 
ing as a hand up north on a ranch in Río Negro or 
Paysandú when the 1904 revolution broke out. Although 
he was from Gualeguaychú, in the province of Entre Ríos, 
he went along with his friends and, being as cocky and 
ignorant as they were, joined the rebel army. He fought in 
one or two skirmishes and in the final battle. Returned
67

home in 1905, Damián, with a kind of humble stubborn- 
ness, once more took up his work as a cowhand. For all I 
know, he never left his native province again. He spent his 
last thirty years living in a small lonely cabin eight or ten 
miles from Ñancay. It was in that out-of-the-way place that 
I spoke with him one evening (that Í tried to speak with 
him one evening) back around 1942; he was a man of few 
words, and not very bright. Masoller, it turned out, was the 
whole of his personal history. And so I was not surprised to 
find out that he had lived the sound and fury of that battle 
over again at the hour of his death. When I knew I would 
never see Damián another time, I wanted to remember 
him, but so poor is my memory for faces that all I could 
recall was the snapshot Gannon had taken of him. There is 
nothing unusual in this fact, considering that I saw the man 
only once at the beginning of 1942, but had looked at his 
picture many times. Gannon sent me the photograph and 
it, too, has been misplaced. I think now that if I were to 
come across it, I would feel afraid.
The second episode took place in Montevideo, months 
later. Don Pedro’s fever and his agony gave me the idea for 
a tale of fantasy based on the defeat at Masoller; Emir 
Rodríguez Monegal, to whom I had told the plot, wrote me 
an introduction to Colonel Dionisio Tabares, who had 
fought in that campaign. The Colonel received me one 
evening after dinner. From a rocking chair out in the side 
yard, he recalled the old days with great feeling but at the 
same time with a faulty sense of chronology. He spoke of 
ammunition that never reached him and of reserves of 
horses that arrived worn out, of sleepy dust-covered men 
weaving labyrinths of marches, of Saravia, who might have 
ridden into Montevideo but who passed it by “because the 
gaucho has a fear of towns,” of throats hacked from ear to 
ear, of a civil war that seemed to me less a military 
operation than the dream of a cattle thief or an outlaw. 
Names of battles kept coming up: Illescas, Tupambaé, 
Masoller. The Colonel’s pauses were so effective and his 
manner so vivid that I realized he had told and retold these 
68
Jorge Luis Borges

The Other Death
same things many times before, and I feared that behind 
his words almost no true memories remained. When he 
stopped for a breath, I managed to get in Damián’s name.
“Damián? Pedro Damián?” said the Colonel. “He served 
with me. A little half-breed. I remember the boys used 
to call him Daymán—after the river.” The Colonel let 
out a burst of loud laughter, then cut it off all at once. I 
could not tell whether his discomfort was real or put on.
In another voice, he stated that war, like women, served as 
a test of men, and that nobody knew who he really was 
until he had been under fire. A man might think himself a 
coward and actually be brave. And the other way around, 
too, as had happened to that poor Damián, who bragged his 
way in and out of saloons with his white ribbon marking 
him as a Blanco, and later on lost his nerve at Masoller. In 
one exchange of gunfire with the regulars, he handled him- 
self like a man, but then it was something else again when 
the two armies met face to face and the artillery began 
pounding away and every man felt as though there were five 
thousand other men out there grouping to kill him. That 
poor kid. He’d spent his life on a farm dipping sheep, and 
then all of a sudden he gets himself dragged along and 
mixed up in the grim reality of war. . . .
For some absurd reason Tabares’ version of the story 
made me uncomfortable. I would have preferred things to 
have happened differently. Without being aware of it, I had 
made a kind of idol out of old Damián—a man I had seen 
only once on a single evening many years earlier. Tabares’ 
story destroyed everything. Suddenly the reasons for Dam- 
ián’s aloofness and his stubborn insistence on keeping to 
himself were clear to me. They had not sprung from modes- 
ty but from shame. In vain, I told myself that a man 
pursued by an act of cowardice is more complex and more 
interesting than one who is merely courageous. The gaucho 
Martín Fierro, I thought, is less memorable than Lord Jim or 
Razumov. Yes, but Damián, as a gaucho, should have been 
Martín Fierro—especially in the presence of Uruguayan 
gauchos. In what Tabares left unsaid, I felt his assumption
69

(perhaps undeniable) that Uruguay is more primitive than 
Argentina and therefore physically braver. I remember we 
said goodbye to each other that night with a cordiality that 
was a bit marked.
During the winter, the need of one or two details for my 
story (which somehow was slow in taking shape) sent me 
back to Colonel Tabares again. I found him with another 
man of his own age, a Dr. Juan Francisco Amaro from 
Paysandú, who had also fought in Saravia’s revolution. 
They spoke, naturally, of Masoller.
Amaro told a few anecdotes, then slowly added, in the 
manner of someone who is thinking aloud, “We camped for 
the night at Santa Irene, I recall, and some of the men 
from around there joined us. Among them a French veter- 
inarian, who died the night before the battle, and a boy, a 
sheepshearer from Entre Ríos. Pedro Damián was his 
name.”
I cut him off sharply. “Yes, I know,” I said. “The Argen- 
tine who couldn’t face the bullets.”
I stopped. The two of them were looking at me, puzzled.
“You are mistaken, sir,” Amaro said after a while. 
“Pedro Damián died as any man might wish to die. It was 
about four o’clock in the afternoon. The regular troops had 
dug themselves in on the top of a hill and our men charged 
them with lances. Damián rode at the head, shouting, and a 
bullet struck him square in the chest. He stood up in his 
stirrups, finished his shout, and then rolled to the ground, 
where he lay under the horses’ hooves. He was dead, and 
the whole last charge of Masoller trampled over him. So 
fearless, and barely twenty.”
He was speaking, doubtless, of another Damián, but 
something made me ask what it was the boy had shouted.
“Filth,” said the Colonel. “That’s what men shout in 
action.”
“Maybe,” said Amaro, “but he also cried out, ‘Long live 
Urquiza!’ ”
We were silent. Finally the Colonel murmured, “Not as 
if we were fighting at Masoller, but at Cagancha or India 
70
Jorge Luis Borges

The Other Death
Muerta a hundred years ago.” He added, genuinely bewil- 
dered, “I commanded those troops, and I could swear it’s 
the first time I’ve ever heard of this Damián.”
We had no luck in getting the Colonel to remember him.
Back in Buenos Aires, the amazement that his forgetful- 
ness produced in me repeated itself. Browsing through the 
eleven pleasurable volumes of Emerson’s works in the base- 
ment of Mitchell’s, the English bookstore, I met Patricio 
Gannon one afternoon. I asked him for his translation of 
“The Past.” He told me that he had no translation of it in 
mind, and that, besides, Spanish literature was so boring it 
made Emerson quite superfluous. I reminded him that he 
had promised me the translation in the same letter in which 
he wrote me of Damián’s death. He asked me who was 
Damián. I told him in vain. With rising terror, I noticed 
that he was listening to me very strangely, and I took 
refuge in a literary discussion on the detractors of Emer- 
son, a poet far more complex, far more skilled, and truly 
more extraordinary than the unfortunate Poe.
I must put down some additional facts. In April, I had a 
letter from Colonel Dionisio Tabares; his mind was no 
longer vague and now he remembered quite well the boy 
from Entre Ríos who spearheaded the charge at Masoller 
and whom his men buried that night in a grave at the foot 
of the hill. In July, I passed through Gualeguaychú; I did 
not come across Damián’s cabin, and nobody there seemed 
to remember him now. I wanted to question the foreman 
Diego Abaroa, who saw Damián die, but Abaroa had passed 
away himself at the beginning of the winter. I tried to call 
to mind Damián’s features; months later, leafing through 
some old albums, I found that the dark face I had at- 
tempted to evoke really belonged to the famous tenor Tam- 
berlik, playing the role of Othello.
Now I move on to conjectures. The easiest, but at the 
same time the least satisfactory, assumes two Damiáns: the 
coward who died in Entre Ríos around 1946, and the man 
of courage who died at Masoller in 1904. But this falls 
apart in its inability to explain what are really the puzzles:
71

the strange fluctuations of Colonel Tabares’ memory, for 
one, and the general forgetfulness, which in so short a time 
could blot out the image and even the name of the man 
who came back. (I cannot accept, I do not want to accept, 
a simpler possibility—that of my having dreamed the first 
man.) Stranger still is the supernatural conjecture thought 
up by Ulrike von Kühlmann. Pedro Damián, said Ulrike, 
was killed in the battle and at the hour of his death asked 
God to carry him back to Entre Ríos. God hesitated a 
moment before granting the request, but by then the man 
was already dead and had been seen by others to have 
fallen. God, who cannot unmake the past but can affect its 
images, altered the image of Damián’s violent death into 
one of falling into a faint. And so it was the boy’s ghost 
that came back to his native province. Came back, but we 
must not forget that it did so as a ghost. It lived in 
isolation without a woman and without friends; it loved 
and possessed everything, but from a distance, as from the 
other side of a mirror; ultimately it “died” and its frail 
image just disappeared, like water in water. This conjecture 
is faulty, but it may have been responsible for pointing out 
to me the true one (the one I now believe to be true), 
which is at the same time simpler and more unprecedented. 
In a mysterious way I discovered it in the treatise De 
Omnipotentia by Pier Damiani, after having been referred 
to him by two lines in Canto XXI of the Paradiso, in which 
the problem of Damiani’s identity is brought up. In the 
fifth chapter of that treatise, Pier Damiani asserts—against 
Aristotle and against Fredegarius de Tours—that it is within 
God’s power to make what once was into something that 
has never been. Reading those old theological discussions, I 
began to understand don Pedro Damián’s tragic story.
This is my solution. Damián handled himself like a 
coward on the battlefield at Masoller and spent the rest of 
his life setting right that shameful weakness. He returned to 
Entre Ríos; he never lifted a hand against another man, he 
never cut anyone up, he never sought fame as a man of 
72
Jorge Luis Borges

The Other Death
courage. Instead, living out there in the hill country of 
Ñancay and struggling with the backwoods and with wild 
cattle, he made himself tough, hard. Probably without real- 
izing it, he was preparing the way for the miracle. He 
thought from his innermost self, If destiny brings me an- 
other battle, I’ll be ready for it. For forty years he waited 
and waited, with an inarticulate hope, and then, in the end, 
at the hour of his death, fate brought him his battle. It 
came in the form of delirium, for, as the Greeks knew, we 
are all shadows of a dream. In his final agony he lived his 
battle over again, conducted himself as a man, and in 
heading the last charge he was struck by a bullet in the 
middle of the chest. And so, in 1946, through the working 
out of a long, slow-burning passion, Pedro Damián died in 
the defeat at Masoller, which took place between winter 
and spring in 1904.
In the Summa Theologiae, it is denied that God can 
unmake the past, but nothing is said of the complicated 
concatenation of causes and effects which is so vast and so 
intimate that perhaps it might prove impossible to annul a 
single remote fact, insignificant as it may seem, without 
invalidating the present. To modify the past is not to 
modify a single fact; it is to annul the consequences of that 
fact, which tend to be infinite. In other words, it involves 
the creation of two universal histories. In the first, let us 
say, Pedro Damián died in Entre Ríos in 1946; in the 
second, at Masoller in 1904. It is this second history that 
we are living now, but the suppression of the first was not 
immediate and produced the odd contradictions that I have 
related. It was in Colonel Dionisio Tabares that the differ- 
ent stages took place. At first, he remembered that Damián 
acted as a coward; next, he forgot him entirely; then he 
remembered Damián’s fearless death. No less illuminating 
is the case of the foreman Abaroa; he had to die, as I 
understand it, because he held too many memories of don 
Pedro Damián.
As for myself, I do not think I am running a similar risk. 
I have guessed at and set down a process beyond man’s
73

understanding, a kind of exposure of reason; but there are 
certain circumstances that lessen the dangers of this privi- 
lege of mine. For the present, I am not sure of having 
always written the truth. I suspect that in my story there 
are a few false memories. It is my suspicion that Pedro 
Damián (if he ever existed) was not called Pedro Damián 
and that I remember him by that name so as to believe 
someday that the whole story was suggested to me by Pier 
Damiani’s thesis. Something similar happens with the poem 
I mentioned in the first paragraph, which centers around 
the irrevocability of the past. A few years from now, I shall 
believe I made up a fantastic tale, and I will actually have 
recorded an event that was real, just as some two thousand 
years ago in all innocence Virgil believed he was setting 
down the birth of a man and foretold the birth of Christ.
Poor Damián! Death carried him off at the age of twenty 
in a local battle of a sad and little-known war, but in the 
end he got what he longed for in his heart, and he was a 
long time getting it, and perhaps there is no greater hap- 
piness.
Jorge Luis Borges
74

Ibn Hakkan al-Bokhari, 
Dead in His Labyrinth
(1949)
. . . like the spider, which 
builds itself a feeble house.
The Koran, xxix, 40
“This,” said Dunraven with a sweeping gesture that did not 
fail to embrace the misty stars while it took in the bleak 
moor, the sea, the dunes, and an imposing, tumbledown 
building that somehow suggested a stable long since fallen 
into disrepair, “this is the land of my forebears.”
Unwin, his companion, drew the pipe out of his mouth 
and made some faint sounds of approval. It was the first 
summer evening of 1914; weary of a world that lacked the 
dignity of danger, the two friends set great value on these 
far reaches of Cornwall. Dunraven cultivated a dark beard 
and thought of himself as the author of a substantial epic, 
which his contemporaries would barely be able to scan and 
whose subject had not yet been revealed to him; Unwin 
had published a paper on the theory supposed to have been 
written by Fermat in the margin of a page of Diophantus. 
Both men—need it be said?—were young, dreamy, and pas- 
sionate.
“It’s about a quarter of a century ago now,” said Dun-
75

raven, “that Ibn Hakkan al-Bokhari, chief or king of I 
don’t know what Nilotic tribe, died in the central room of 
this house at the hands of his cousin Zaid. After all these 
years, the facts surrounding his death are still unclear.” 
Unwin, as was expected of him, asked why.
“For several reasons,” was the answer. “In the first 
place, this house is a labyrinth. In the second place, it was 
watched over by a slave and a lion. In the third place, a 
hidden treasure vanished. In the fourth place, the murderer 
was dead when the murder happened. In the fifth place—” 
Tired out, Unwin stopped him.
“Don’t go on multiplying the mysteries,” he said. “They 
should be kept simple. Bear in mind Poe’s purloined letter, 
bear in mind Zangwill’s locked room.”
“Or made complex,” replied Dunraven. “Bear in mind 
the universe.”
Climbing the steep dunes, they had reached the laby- 
rinth. It seemed to them, up close, a straight and almost 
endless wall of unplastered brick, barely higher than a 
man’s head. Dunraven said that the building had the shape 
of a circle, but so wide was this circle that its curve was 
almost invisible. Unwin recollected Nicholas of Cusa, to 
whom a straight line was the arc of an infinite circle. They 
walked on and on, and along about midnight discovered a 
narrow opening that led into a blind, unsafe passage. Dun- 
raven said that inside the house were many branching ways 
but that, by turning always to the left, they would reach 
the very center of the network in little more than an hour. 
Unwin assented. Their cautious footsteps resounded off the 
stone-paved floor; the corridor branched into other, narrow- 
er corridors. The roof was very low, making the house seem 
to want to imprison them, and they had to walk one behind 
the other through the complex dark. Unwin went ahead, 
forced to slacken the pace because of the rough masonry 
and the many turns. The unseen wall flowed on by his 
hand, endlessly. Unwin, slow in the blackness, heard from 
his friend’s lips the tale of the death of Ibn Hakkan.
“Perhaps the oldest of my memories,” Dunraven said, “is
Jorge Luis Borges
76

Ibn Hakkan al-Bokhari, Dead in His Labyrinth
the one of Ibn Hakkan al-Bokhari in the port of Pentreath. 
At his heels followed a black man with a lion— 
unquestionably they were the first black man and the first 
lion my eyes had ever seen, outside of engravings from the 
Bible. I was a boy then, but the beast the color of the sun 
and the man the color of night impressed me less than Ibn 
Hakkan himself. To me, he seemed very tall; he was a man 
with sallow skin, half-shut black eyes, an insolent nose, 
fleshy lips, a saffron-colored beard, a powerful chest, and a 
way of walking that was self-assured and silent. At home, I 
said, ‘A king has come on a ship.’ Later, when the bricklay- 
ers were at work here, I broadened his title and dubbed 
him King of Babel.
“The news that this stranger would settle in Pentreath 
was received with welcome, but the scale and shape of his 
house aroused disapproval and bewilderment. It was not 
right that a house should consist of a single room and of 
miles and miles of corridors. ‘Among foreigners such houses 
might be common,’ people said, ‘but hardly here in En- 
gland.’ Our rector, Mr. Allaby, a man with out-of-the-way 
reading habits, exhumed an Eastern story of a king whom 
the Divinity had punished for having built a labyrinth, and 
he told this story from the pulpit. The very next day, Ibn 
Hakkan paid a visit to the rectory; the circumstances of 
the brief interview were not known at the time, but no 
further sermon alluded to the sin of pride, and the Moor 
was able to go on contracting masons. Years afterward, 
when Ibn Hakkan was dead, Allaby stated to the authori- 
ties the substance of their conversation.
“Ibn Hakkan, refusing a chair, had told him these or 
similar words: ‘No man can place judgment upon what I 
am doing now. My sins are such that were I to invoke for 
hundreds upon hundreds of years the Ultimate Name of 
God, this would be powerless to set aside the least of my 
torments; my sins are such that were I to kill you, Rever- 
end Allaby, with these very hands, my act would not 
increase even slightly the torments that Infinite Justice 
holds in store for me. There is no land on earth where my
77

name is unknown. I am Ibn Hakkan al-Bokhari, and in my 
day I ruled over the tribes of the desert with a rod of iron. 
For years and years, with the help of my cousin Zaid, I 
trampled them underfoot until God heard their outcry and 
suffered them to rebel against me. My armies were broken 
and put to the sword; I succeeded in escaping with the 
wealth I had accumulated during my reign of plunder. Zaid 
led me to the tomb of a holy man, at the foot of a stone 
hill. I ordered my slave to watch the face of the desert. 
Zaid and I went inside with our chest of gold coins and 
slept, utterly worn out. That night, I believed that a tangle 
of snakes had trapped me. I woke up in horror. By my 
side, in the dawn, Zaid lay asleep; a spider web against my 
flesh had made me dream that dream. It pained me that 
Zaid, who was a coward, should be sleeping so restfully. I 
reflected that the wealth was not infinite and that Zaid 
might wish to claim part of it for himself. In my belt was 
my silver-handled dagger; I slipped it from its sheath and 
pierced his throat with it. In his agony, he muttered words 
I could not make out. I looked at him. He was dead, but, 
fearing that he might rise up, I ordered my slave to obliter- 
ate the dead man’s face with a heavy rock. Then we wand- 
ered under the sun, and one day we spied a sea. Very tall 
ships plowed a course through it. I thought that a dead man 
would be unable to make his way over such waters, and I 
decided to seek other lands. The first night after we sailed, 
I dreamed that I killed Zaid. Everything was exactly the 
same, but this time I understood his words. He said: “As 
you now kill me, I shall one day kill you, wherever you 
may hide.” I have sworn to avert that threat. I shall bury 
myself in the heart of a labyrinth so that Zaid?s ghost will 
lose its way.’
“After having said this, he went away. Allaby did his 
best to think that the Moor was mad and that his absurd 
labyrinth was a symbol and a clear mark of his madness. 
Then he reflected that this explanation agreed with the 
extravagant building and with the extravagant story but not 
with the strong impression left by the man Ibn Hakkan. 
78
Jorge Luis Borges

Ibn Hakkan al-Bokhari, Dead in His Labyrinth
Who knew whether such tales might not be common in the 
sand wastes of Egypt, who knew whether such queer things 
corresponded (like Pliny’s dragons) less to a person than to 
a culture? On a visit to London, Allaby combed back num- 
bers of the Times; he verified the fact of the uprising and 
of the subsequent downfall of al-Bokhari and of his vizier, 
whose cowardice was well known.
“Al-Bokhari, as soon as the bricklayers had finished, 
installed himself in the center of the labyrinth. He was not 
seen again in the town; at times, Allaby feared that Zaid 
had caught up with the king and killed him. At night, the 
wind carried to us the growling of the lion, and the sheep in 
their pens pressed together with an ancient fear.
“It was customary for ships from Eastern ports, bound 
for Cardiff or Bristol, to anchor in the little bay. The slave 
used to go down from the labyrinth (which at that time, I 
remember, was not its present rose color but was crimson) 
and exchanged guttural-sounding words with the ships’ 
crews, and he seemed to be looking among the men for the 
vizier’s ghost. It was no secret that these vessels carried 
cargoes of contraband, and if of alcohol or of forbidden 
ivories, why not of dead men as well?
“Some three years after the house was finished, the Rose 
of Sharon anchored one October morning just under the 
bluffs. I was not among those who saw this sailing ship, and 
perhaps the image of it I hold in my mind is influenced by 
forgotten prints of Aboukir or of Trafalgar, but I believe it 
was among that class of ships so minutely detailed that 
they seem less the work of a shipbuilder than of a carpen- 
ter, and less of a carpenter than of a cabinetmaker. It was 
(if not in reality, at least in my dreams) polished, dark, 
fast, and silent, and its crew was made up of Arabs and 
Malayans.
“It anchored at dawn, and in the late afternoon of that 
same day Ibn Hakkan burst into the rectory to see Allaby. 
He was dominated—completely dominated—by a passion of 
fear, and was scarcely able to make it clear that Zaid had 
entered the labyrinth and that his slave and his lion had
79

already been killed. He asked in all seriousness whether the 
authorities might be able to help him. Before Allaby could 
say a word, al-Bokhari was gone—as if torn away by the 
same terror that had brought him for the second and last 
time to the rectory. Alone in his library, Allaby reflected in 
amazement that this fear-ridden man had kept down 
Sudanese tribes by the knife, knew what a battle was, and 
knew what it was to kill. Allaby found out the next day that 
the boat had already set sail (bound for the Red Sea port 
of Suakin, he later learned). Feeling it was his duty to 
verify the death of the slave, he made his way up to the 
labyrinth. Al-Bokhari’s breathless tale seemed to him utter- 
ly fantastic, but at one turn of the corridor he came upon 
the lion, and the lion was dead, and at another turn there 
was the slave, who was also dead, and in the central room 
he found al-Bokhari—with his face obliterated. At the man’s 
feet was a small chest inlaid with mother-of-pearl; the lock 
had been forced, and not a single coin was left.”
Dunraven’s final sentences, underlined by rhetorical 
pauses, were meant to be impressive; Unwin guessed that 
his friend had gone over them many times before, always 
with the same confidence—and with the same flatness of 
effect. He asked, in order to feign interest, “How were the 
lion and the slave killed?”
The relentless voice went on with a kind of gloomy 
satisfaction, “Their faces were also bashed in.”
A muffled sound of rain was now added to the sound of 
the men’s steps. Unwin realized that they would have to 
spend the night in the labyrinth, in the central chamber, 
but that in time this uncomfortable experience could be 
looked back on as an adventure. He kept silent. Dunraven 
could not restrain himself, and asked, in the manner of one 
who wants to squeeze the last drop, “Can this story be 
explained?”
Unwin answered, as though thinking aloud, “I have no 
idea whether it can be explained or not. I only know it’s a 
lie.”
Dunraven broke out in a torrent of strongly flavored 
80
Jorge Luis Borges

Ibn Hakkan al-Bokhari, Dead in His Labyrinth
language and said that all the population of Pentreath 
could bear witness to the truth of what he had told and 
that if he had to make up a story, he was a writer after all 
and could easily have invented a far better one. No less 
astonished than Dunraven, Unwin apologized. Time in the 
darkness seemed more drawn out; both men began to fear 
they had gone astray, and were feeling their tiredness when 
a faint gleam of light from overhead revealed the lower 
steps of a narrow staircase. They climbed up and came to a 
round room that lay in ruin. Two things were left that 
attested to the fear of the ill-starred king: a slit of a 
window that looked out onto the moors and the sea, and a 
trapdoor in the floor that opened above the curve of the 
stairway. The room, though spacious, had about it some- 
thing of a prison cell.
Less because of the rain than because of a wish to have a 
ready anecdote for friends, the two men spent the night in 
the labyrinth. The mathematician slept soundly; not so the 
poet, who was hounded by verses that his judgment knew 
to be worthless:
Faceless the sultry and overpowering lion,
Faceless the stricken slave, faceless the king.
Unwin felt that the story of al-Bokhari’s death had left 
him indifferent, but he woke up with the conviction of 
having unraveled it. All that day, he was preoccupied and 
unsociable, trying to fit the pieces of the puzzle together, 
and two nights later he met Dunraven in a pub back in 
London and said to him these or similar words: “In Corn- 
wall, I said your story was a lie. The facts were true, or 
could be thought of as true, but told the way you told them 
they were obviously lies. I will begin with the greatest lie of 
all—with the unbelievable labyrinth. A fugitive does not 
hide himself in a maze. He does not build himself a laby- 
rinth on a bluff overlooking the sea, a crimson labyrinth that 
can be sighted from afar by any ship’s crew. He has no need 
to erect a labyrinth when the whole world already is one.
81

For anyone who really wants to hide away, London is a 
better labyrinth than a lookout tower to which all the 
corridors of a building lead. The simple observation I have 
just propounded to you came to me the night before last 
while we were listening to the rain on the roof and were 
waiting for sleep to fall upon us. Under its influence, I 
chose to put aside your absurdities and to think about 
something sensible.”
“About the theory of series, say, or about a fourth di- 
mension of space?” asked Dunraven.
“No,” said Unwin, serious. “I thought about the laby- 
rinth of Crete. The labyrinth whose center was a man with 
the head of a bull.”
Dunraven, steeped in detective stories, thought that the 
solution of a mystery is always less impressive than the 
mystery itself. Mystery has something of the supernatural 
about it, and even of the divine; its solution, however, is 
always tainted by sleight of hand. He said, to put off the 
inevitable, “On coins and in sculpture the Minotaur has a 
bull’s head. Dante imagined it as having the body of a bull 
and a man’s head.”
“That version also fits my solution,” Unwin agreed. 
“What matters is that both the dwelling and the dweller be 
monstrous. The Minotaur amply justifies its maze. The 
same can hardly be said of a threat uttered in a dream. The 
Minotaur’s image once evoked (unavoidably, of course, in a 
mystery in which there is a labyrinth), the problem was 
virtually solved. Nonetheless, I confess I did not fully 
understand that this ancient image held the key, but in 
your story I found a detail I could use—the spider web.” 
“The spider web?” repeated Dunraven, baffled.
“Yes. It wouldn’t surprise me at all if the spider web 
(the Platonic spider web—let’s keep this straight) may have 
suggested to the murderer (for there is a murderer) his 
crime. You remember that al-Bokhari, in the tomb, 
dreamed about a tangle of snakes, and upon waking found 
that a spider web had prompted his dream. Let us go back to 
that night in which al-Bokhari had that dream. The de- 
82
Jorge Luis Borges

Ibn Hakkan al-Bokhari, Dead in His Labyrinth
feated king and the vizier and the slave are escaping over 
the desert with treasure. They take shelter for the night in 
a tomb. The vizier, whom we know to be a coward, sleeps; 
the king, whom we know to be a brave man, does not sleep. 
In order not to share the treasure, the king knifes the 
vizier. Several nights later, the vizier’s ghost threatens the 
king in a dream. All this is unconvincing. To my under- 
standing, the events took place in another way. That night, 
the king, the brave man, slept, and Zaid, the coward, lay 
awake. To sleep is to forget all things, and this particular 
forgetfulness is not easy when you know you are being 
hunted down with drawn swords. Zaid, greedy, bent over 
the sleeping figure of his king. He thought about killing 
him (maybe he even played with his dagger), but he did 
not dare. He woke the napping slave, they buried part of 
the treasure in the tomb, and they fled to Suakin and to 
England. Not to hide themselves from al-Bokhari but to 
lure him and to kill him, they built—like the spider its 
web—the crimson labyrinth on the high dunes in sight of the 
sea. The vizier knew that ships would carry to Nubian 
ports the tale of the red-bearded man, of the slave, and of 
the lion, and that sooner or later al-Bokhari would come in 
search of them in their labyrinth. In the last passageway of 
the maze, the trap lay waiting. Al-Bokhari had always 
underrated Zaid, and now did not lower himself to take the 
slightest precaution. At last, the wished-for day came; Ibn 
Hakkan landed in England, went directly to the door of the 
maze, made his way into its blind corridors, and perhaps 
had already set foot on the first steps when his vizier killed 
him—I don’t know whether with a bullet—from the trapdoor 
in the ceiling. The slave would finish off the lion and 
another bullet would finish off the slave. Then Zaid crushed 
the three faces with a rock. He had to do it that way; one 
dead man with his face bashed in would have suggested a 
problem of identity, but the beast, the black man, and the 
king formed a series, and, given the first two terms, the last 
one would seem natural. It is not to be wondered at that he 
was driven by fear when he spoke to Allaby; he had just
83

finished his awful job and was about to flee England and 
unearth the treasure.”
A thoughtful silence, or disbelief, followed Unwin’s 
words. Dunraven asked for another tankard before giving 
his judgment.
“I admit,” he said, “that my Ibn Hakkan could have 
been Zaid. Such metamorphoses are classic rules of the 
game, are accepted conventions demanded by the reader. 
What I am unwilling to admit is your conjecture that a 
part of the treasure remained in the Sudan. Remember that 
Zaid fled from the king and from the king’s enemies both; 
it is easier to picture him stealing the whole hoard than 
taking the time to bury a portion of it. At the very end, 
perhaps no coins were found in the chest because no coins 
were left. The bricklayers would have eaten up a fortune 
that, unlike the red gold of the Nibelungs, was not inex- 
haustible. And so we have Ibn Hakkan crossing the seas in 
order to recover a treasure already squandered.”
“I shouldn’t say squandered,” Unwin said. “The vizier 
invested it, putting together on an island of infidels a great 
circular trap made of brick and destined not only to lure a 
king but to be his grave. Zaid, if your guess is correct, 
acted out of hate and fear, and not out of greed. He stole 
the treasure, and only later found that he was really after 
something else. He really wanted to see Ibn Hakkan dead. 
He pretended to be Ibn Hakkan, he killed Ibn Hakkan, 
and in the end he became Ibn Hakkan.”
“Yes,” agreed Dunraven. “He was a good-for-nothing 
who, before becoming a nobody in death, wanted one day 
to look back on having been a king or having been taken 
for a king.”
Jorge Luis Borges
84

The Man 
on the Threshold
(1952)
Bioy-Casares brought back with him from London a strange 
dagger with a triangular blade and a hilt in the shape of an 
H; a friend of ours, Christopher Dewey of the British 
Council, told us that such weapons were commonly used in 
India. This statement prompted him to mention that he 
had held a job in that country between the two wars. 
(“Ultra Auroram et Gangen,” I recall his saying in Latin, 
misquoting a line from Juvenal.) Of the stories he enter- 
tained us with that night, I venture to set down the one 
that follows. My account will be faithful; may Allah deliver 
me from the temptation of adding any circumstantial de- 
tails or of weighing down the tale’s Oriental character with 
interpolations from Kipling. It should be remarked that the 
story has a certain ancient simplicity that it would be a 
pity to lose—something perhaps straight out of the Arabian 
Nights.
The precise geography [Dewey said] of the events I am 
going to relate is of little importance. Besides, what would
85

the names of Amritsar or Oudh mean in Buenos Aires? Let 
me only say, then, that in those years there were distur- 
bances in a Muslim city and that the central government 
sent out one of their best people to restore order. He was a 
Scotsman from an illustrious clan of warriors, and in his 
blood he bore a tradition of violence. Only once did I lay 
eyes on him, but I shall not forget his deep black hair, the 
prominent cheekbones, the somehow avid nose and mouth, 
the broad shoulders, the powerful set of a Viking. David 
Alexander Glencairn is what he’ll be called in my story 
tonight; the names are fitting, since they belonged to kings 
who ruled with an iron scepter. David Alexander Glencairn 
(as I shall have to get used to calling him) was, I suspect, 
a man who was feared; the mere news of his coming was 
enough to quell the city. This did not deter him from 
putting into effect a number of forceful measures. A few 
years passed. The city and the outlying district were at 
peace; Sikhs and Muslims had laid aside their ancient 
enmities, and suddenly Glencairn disappeared. Naturally 
enough, there was no lack of rumors that he had been 
kidnapped or murdered.
These things I learned from my superior, for the censor- 
ship was strict and the newspapers made no comment on 
(nor did they even record, for all I recall) Glencairn’s 
disappearance. There’s a saying that India is larger than 
the world; Glencairn, who may have been all powerful in 
the city to which he was destined by a signature scrawled 
across the bottom of some document, was no more than a 
cog in the administration of Empire. The inquiries of the 
local police turned up nothing; my superior felt that a 
civilian might rouse less suspicion and achieve greater re- 
sults. Three or four days later (distances in India are 
generous), I was appointed to my mission and was working 
my way without hope of success through the streets of the 
commonplace city that had somehow whisked away a man.
I felt, almost at once, the invisible presence of a conspir- 
acy to keep Glencairn’s fate hidden. There’s not a soul in 
this city (I suspected) who is not in on the secret and who is 
86
Jorge Luis Borges

The Man on the Threshold
not sworn to keep it. Upon being questioned, most people 
professed an unbounded ignorance; they did not know who 
Glencairn was, had never seen him, had never heard anyone 
speak of him. Others, instead, had caught a glimpse of him 
only a quarter of an hour before talking to So-and-So, and 
they even accompanied me to the house the two had en- 
tered and in which nothing was known of them, or which 
they had just that moment left. Some of those meticulous 
liars I went so far as to knock down. Witnesses approved 
my outbursts, and made up other lies. I did not believe 
them, but neither did I dare ignore them. One afternoon, I 
was handed an envelope containing a slip of paper on which 
there was an address.
The sun had gone down when I got there. The quarter 
was poor but not rowdy; the house was quite low; from the 
street I caught a glimpse of a succession of unpaved inner 
courtyards, and somewhere at the far end an opening. 
There, some kind of Muslim ceremony was being held; a 
blind man entered with a lute made of a reddish wood.
At my feet, motionless as an object, an old, old man 
squatted on the threshold. I’ll tell what he was like, for he 
is an essential part of the story. His many years had worn 
him down and polished him as smooth as water polishes a 
stone, or as the generations of men polish a sentence. Long 
rags covered him, or so it seemed to me, and the cloth he 
wore wound around his head was one rag more. In the 
dusk, he lifted a dark face and a white beard. I began 
speaking to him without preamble, for by now I had given 
up all hope of ever finding David Alexander Glencairn. The 
old man did not understand me (perhaps he did not hear 
me), and I had to explain that Glencairn was a judge and 
that I was looking for him. I felt, on speaking these words, 
the pointlessness of questioning this old man for whom the 
present was hardly more than a dim rumor. This man 
might give me news of the Mutiny or of Akbar (I thought) 
but not of Glencairn. What he told me confirmed this 
suspicion.
“A judge!” he cried with weak surprise. “A judge who
87

has got himself lost and is being searched for. That hap- 
pened when I was a boy. I have no memory for dates, but 
Nikal Seyn (Nicholson) had not yet been killed before the 
wall of Delhi. Time that has passed stays on in memory; I 
may be able to summon back what happened then. God, in 
his wrath, had allowed people to fall into corruption; the 
mouths of men were full of blasphemy and of deceit and of 
fraud. Yet not all were evil, and when it was known that the 
queen was about to send a man who would carry out in this 
land the law of England, those who were less evil were 
cheered, for they felt that law is better than disorder. The 
Christian came to us, but it was not long before he too was 
deceiving and oppressing us, concealing abominable crimes, 
and selling decisions. We did not blame him in the begin- 
ning; the English justice he administered was not familiar 
to anyone, and the apparent excesses of the new judge may 
have obeyed certain valid arcane reasoning. Everything must 
have a justification in his book, we wished to think, but his 
kinship with all evil judges the world over was too obvious 
to be overlooked, and at last we were forced to admit that 
he was simply a wicked man. He turned out to be a tyrant, 
and the unfortunate people (in order to avenge themselves 
for the false hopes they had once placed in him) began to 
toy with the idea of kidnapping him and submitting him to 
judgment. To talk was not enough; from plans they had to 
move to action. Nobody, perhaps, save the very foolish or 
the very young, believed that that rash scheme could be 
carried out, but thousands of Sikhs and Muslims kept their 
word and one day they executed—incredulous—what to each 
of them had seemed impossible. They sequestered the judge 
and held him prisoner in a farmhouse beyond the outskirts 
of the town. Then they called together all those who had 
been wronged by him, or, in some cases, orphans and 
widows, for during those years the executioner’s sword had 
not rested. In the end—this was perhaps the most difficult— 
they sought and named a judge to judge the judge.”
At this point, the old man was interrupted by some
Jorge Luis Borges
88

The Man on the Threshold
women who were entering the house. Then he went on, 
slowly.
“It is well known that there is no generation that does 
not include in it four upright men who are the secret pillars 
of the world and who justify it before the Lord: one of these 
men would have made the perfect judge. But where are 
they to be found if they themselves wander the world lost 
and nameless, and do not know each other when they meet, 
and are unaware of the high destiny that is theirs? Some- 
one then reasoned that if fate forbade us wise men, we 
should seek out the witless. This opinion prevailed. Stu- 
dents of the Koran, doctors of law, Sikhs who bear the 
name of lions and who worship one God, Hindus who 
worship a multitude of gods, Mahavira monks who teach 
that the shape of the universe is that of a man with his legs 
spread apart, worshipers of fire, and black Jews made up 
the court, but the final ruling was entrusted to a madman.”
Here he was interrupted by people who were leaving the 
ceremony.
“To a madman,” he repeated, “so that God’s wisdom 
might speak through his mouth and shame human pride. 
His name has been forgotten, or was never known, but he 
went naked through the streets, or was clothed in rags, 
counting his fingers with a thumb and mocking at the 
trees.”
My common sense rebelled. I said that to hand over the 
verdict to a madman was to nullify the trial.
“The defendant accepted the judge,” was his answer, 
“seeing, perhaps, that because of the risk the conspirators 
would run if they set him free, only from a man who was 
mad might he not expect a sentence of death. I heard that 
he laughed when he was told who the judge was. The trial 
lasted many days and nights, drawn out by the swelling of 
the number of witnesses.”
The old man stopped. Something was troubling him. In 
order to bridge the lapse, I asked him how many days.
“At least nineteen,” he replied.
People who were leaving the ceremony interrupted him
89

again; wine is forbidden to Muslims, but the faces and 
voices were those of drunkards. One, on passing, shouted 
something to the old man.
“Nineteen 
days—exactly,” 
he 
said, 
setting 
matters 
straight. “The faithless dog heard sentence passed, and 
the knife feasted on his throat.”
He had spoken fiercely, joyfully. With a different voice 
now he brought the story to an end. “He died without fear; 
In the most vile of men there is some virtue.”
“Where did all this happen?” I asked him, “In a farm- 
house?”
For the first time, he looked into my eyes. Then he made 
things clear, slowly, measuring his words. “I said that he 
had been confined in a farmhouse, not that he was tried 
there. He was tried in this city, in a house like any other, 
like this one. One house differs little from another; what is 
important to know is whether the house is built in hell or in 
heaven.”
I asked him about the fate of the conspirators.
“I don’t know,” he told me patiently. “These things took 
place and were forgotten many years ago now. Maybe what 
they did was condemned by men, but not by the Lord.” 
Having said this, he got up. I felt his words as a dismis- 
sal, and from that moment I no longer existed for him. Men 
and women from all the corners of the Punjab swarmed 
over us, praying and intoning, and nearly swept us away. I 
wondered how, from courtyards so narrow they were little 
more than long passageways, so many persons could be 
pouring out. Others were coming from the neighboring 
houses; it seems they had leaped over the walls. By shoving 
and cursing, I forced my way inside. At the heart of the 
innermost courtyard I came upon a naked man, crowned 
with yellow flowers, whom everyone kissed and caressed, 
with a sword in his hand. The sword was stained, for it had 
dealt Glencairn his death. I found his mutilated body in 
the stables out back.
Jorge Luis Borges
90

The Challenge
(1952)
All over the Argentine runs a story that may belong to 
legend or to history or (which may be just another way of 
saying it belongs to legend) to both things at once. Its best 
recorded versions are to be found in the unjustly forgotten 
novels about outlaws and desperadoes written in the last 
century by Eduardo Gutiérrez; among its oral versions, the 
first one I heard came from a neighborhood of Buenos Aires 
bounded by a penitentiary, a river, and a cemetery, and 
nicknamed Tierra del Fuego. The hero of this version was 
Juan Muraña, a wagon driver and knife fighter to whom are 
attributed all the stories of daring that still survive in what 
were once the outskirts of the city’s Northside. That first 
version was quite simple. A man from the Stockyards or 
from Barracas, knowing about Muraña’s reputation (but 
never having laid eyes on him), sets out all the way across 
town from the Southside to take him on. He picks the fight 
in a corner saloon, and the two move into the street to have
91

it out. Each is wounded, but in the end Muraña slashes the 
other man’s face and tells him, “I’m letting you live so 
you’ll come back looking for me again.”
What impressed itself in my mind about the duel was 
that it had no ulterior motive. In conversation thereafter 
(my friends know this only too well), I grew fond of 
retelling the anecdote. Around 1927, I wrote it down, 
giving it the deliberately laconic title “Men Fought.” Years 
later, this same anecdote helped me work out a lucky 
story—though hardly a good one—called “Streetcorner 
Man.” Then, in 1950, Adolfo Bioy-Casares and I made use 
of it again to plot a film script that the producers turned 
down and that would have been called On the Outer Edge. 
It was about hard-bitten men like Muraña who lived on the 
outskirts of Buenos Aires before the turn of the century. I 
thought, after such extensive labors, that I had said fare- 
well to the story of the disinterested duel. Then, this year, 
out in Chivilcoy, I came across a far better version. I hope 
this is the true one, although since fate seems to take 
pleasure in a thing’s happening many times over, both may 
very well be authentic. Two quite bad stories and a script 
that I still think of as good came out of the poorer first 
version; out of the second, which is complete and perfect, 
nothing can come. Without working in metaphors or details 
of local color, I shall tell it now as it was told to me. The 
story took place to the west, in the district of Chivilcoy, 
sometime back in the 1870’s.
The hero’s name is Wenceslao Suárez. He earns his 
wages braiding ropes and making harnesses, and lives in a 
small adobe hut. Forty or fifty years old, he’s a man who 
has won a reputation for courage, and it is quite likely 
(given the facts of the story) that he has a killing or two to 
his credit. But these killings, because they were in fair 
fights, neither trouble his conscience nor tarnish his good 
name. One evening, something out of the ordinary happens 
in the routine life of this man: at a crossroads saloon, he is 
told that a letter has come for him. Don Wenceslao does
Jorge Luis Borges
92

The Challenge
not know how to read; the saloonkeeper puzzles out word 
by word an epistle certainly not written by the man who 
sent it. In the name of certain friends, who value dexterity 
and true composure, an unknown correspondent sends his 
compliments to don Wenceslao, whose renown has crossed 
over the Arroyo del Medio into the Province of Santa Fe, 
and extends him the hospitality of his humble home in a 
town of the said province. Wenceslao Suárez dictates a 
reply to the saloonkeeper. Thanking the other man for his 
expression of friendship, and explaining that he dare not 
leave his mother—who is well along in years—alone, he in- 
vites the other man to his own place in Chivilcoy, where a 
barbecue and a bottle or so of wine may be looked forward 
to. The months drag by, and one day a man riding a horse 
harnessed and saddled in a style unknown in the area in- 
quires at the saloon for the way to Suárez’ house. Suárez, 
who has come to the saloon to buy meat, overhears the 
question and tells the man who he is. The stranger reminds 
him of the letters they exchanged some time back. Suárez 
shows his pleasure that the other man has gone to the 
trouble of making the journey; then the two of them go off 
into a nearby field and Suárez prepares the barbecue. They 
eat and drink and talk at length. About what? I suspect 
about subjects involving blood and cruelty—but with each 
man on his guard, wary.
They have eaten, and the oppressive afternoon heat 
weighs over the land when the stranger invites don 
Wenceslao to join in a bit of harmless knife play. To say no 
would dishonor the host. They fence, and at first they only 
play at fighting, but it’s not long before Wenceslao feels 
that the stranger is out to kill him. Realizing at last what 
lay behind the ceremonious letter, Wenceslao regrets having 
eaten and drunk so much. He knows he will tire before the 
other man, on whom he has a good nine or ten years. Out of 
scorn or politeness, the stranger offers him a short rest. Don 
Wenceslao agrees and, as soon as they take up their dueling 
again, he allows the other man to wound him on the left
93

Jorge Luis Borges
hand, in which he holds his rolled poncho.* The knife slices 
through his wrist, the hand dangles loose. Suárez, springing 
back, lays the bleeding hand on the ground, clamps it down 
under his boot, tears it off, feints a thrust at the amazed 
stranger’s chest, then rips open his belly with a solid stab. 
So the story ends, except that, according to one teller, the 
man from Santa Fe is left lifeless, while to another (who 
withholds from him the dignity of death) he rides back to 
his own province. In this latter version, Suárez gives him 
first aid with the rum remaining from their lunch.
In this feat of Manco (One Hand) Wenceslao—as Suárez 
is now known to fame—certain touches of mildness or po- 
liteness (his trade as harness and rope maker, his qualms 
about leaving his mother alone, the exchange of flowery 
letters, the two men’s leisurely conversation, the lunch) 
happily tone down and make the barbarous tale more effec- 
tive. These touches lend it an epic and even chivalrous 
quality that we hardly find, for example—unless we have 
made up our minds to do so—in the drunken brawls of 
Martín Fierro or in the closely related but poorer story of 
Juan Muraña and the man from the Southside. A trait 
common to the two may, perhaps, be significant. In both of 
them, the challenger is defeated. This may be due to the 
mere and unfortunate necessity for the local champion to 
triumph, but also (and this is preferable) to a tacit disap- 
proval of aggression, or (which would be best of all) to the 
dark and tragic suspicion that man is the worker of his own 
downfall, like Ulysses in Canto XXVI of the Inferno or 
like that other doomed captain in Moby Dick.
* Montaigne (Essays, I, 49) says that this manner of fighting with cloak 
and dagger is very old, and quotes Caesar’s finding, “Sinistras sagis invol- 
vunt, gladiosque distringunt”—“They wrapped their cloaks around their left 
arms and drew their swords” (Civil War, I, 75). Lugones, in El payador 
(1916), quotes these verses from a sixteenth-century romance of Bernardo 
del Carpio:
Revolviendo el manto al brazo, 
la espada fuera a sacar.
[Wrapping the cape round his arm, he drew his sword.] 
94

The Challenge
Something fundamental in the brutal story just told 
saves it from falling into unalloyed barbarousness—an epi- 
sode out of La Terre or Hemingway. I speak of a religious 
core. “His beliefs,” said the poet Lugones of the gaucho, 
“could be reduced to a few superstitions, which had no 
great bearing on his everyday life.” He then adds, “The 
one thing he respected was courage, which he cultivated 
with a chivalrous passion.” I would say that the gaucho, 
without realizing it, forged a religion—the hard and blind 
religion of courage—and that this faith (like all others) had 
its ethic, its mythology, and its martyrs. On the plains and 
out on the raw edges of the city, men who led extremely 
elementary lives—herders, stockyard workers, drovers, out- 
laws, and pimps—rediscovered in their own way the age-old 
cult of the gods of iron. In a thirteenth-century saga, we 
read:
“Tell me, what do you believe in?” said the earl.
“I believe in my own strength,” said Sigmund.
Wenceslao Suárez and his nameless antagonist, and many 
others whom myth has forgotten or has absorbed in these 
two, doubtless held this manly faith, and in all likelihood it 
was no mere form of vanity but rather an awareness that 
God may be found in any man.
95

The Captive
(1956)
This story is told out in one of the old frontier towns—either 
Junín or Tapalquén. A boy was missing after an Indian 
raid; it was said that the marauders had carried him away. 
The boy’s parents searched for him without any luck; years 
later, a soldier just back from Indian territory told them 
about a blue-eyed savage who may have been their son. At 
long last they traced him (the circumstances of the search 
have not come down to us and I dare not invent what I 
don’t know) and they thought they recognized him. The 
man, marked by the wilderness and by primitive life, no 
longer understood the words of the language he spoke in 
childhood, but he let himself be led, uncurious and willing, 
to his old house. There he stopped—maybe because the 
others stopped. He stared at the door as though not under- 
standing what it was. All of a sudden, ducking his head, he 
let out a cry, cut through the entranceway and the two long 
patios on the run, and burst into the kitchen. Without a 
second’s pause, he buried his arm in the soot-blackened 
96

The Captive
oven chimney and drew out the small knife with the horn 
handle that he had hidden there as a boy. His eyes lit up 
with joy and his parents wept because they had found their 
lost child.
Maybe other memories followed upon this one, but the 
Indian could not live indoors and one day he left to go 
back to his open spaces. I would like to know what he felt 
in that first bewildering moment in which past and present 
merged; I would like to know whether in that dizzying 
instant the lost son was born again and died, or whether he 
managed to recognize, as a child or a dog might, his people 
and his home.
97

Borges and Myself
(1956)
It’s to the other man, to Borges, that things happen. I walk 
along the streets of Buenos Aires, stopping now and then— 
perhaps out of habit—to look at the arch of an old entrance- 
way or a grillwork gate; of Borges I get news through the 
mail and glimpse his name among a committee of professors 
or in a dictionary of biography. I have a taste for hourglass- 
es, maps, eighteenth-century typography, the roots of 
words, the smell of coffee, and Stevenson’s prose; the other 
man shares these likes, but in a showy way that turns them 
into stagy mannerisms. It would be an exaggeration to say 
that we are on bad terms; I live, I let myself live, so that 
Borges can weave his tales and poems, and those tales and 
poems are my justification. It is not hard for me to admit 
that he has managed to write a few worthwhile pages, but 
these pages cannot save me, perhaps because what is good 
no longer belongs to anyone—not even the other man—but 
rather to speech or tradition. In any case, I am fated to 
become lost once and for all, and only some moment of 
98

Borges and Myself
myself will survive in the other man. Little by little, I have 
been surrendering everything to him, even though I have 
evidence of his stubborn habit of falsification and exagger- 
ating. Spinoza held that all things try to keep on being 
themselves; a stone wants to be a stone and the tiger, a 
tiger. I shall remain in Borges, not in myself (if it is so that 
I am someone), but I recognize myself less in his books 
than in those of others or than in the laborious tuning of a 
guitar. Years ago, I tried ridding myself of him and I went 
from myths of the outlying slums of the city to games with 
time and infinity, but those games are now part of Borges 
and I will have to turn to other things. And so, my life is a 
running away, and I lose everything and everything is left 
to oblivion or to the other man.
Which of us is writing this page I don’t know.
99

The Maker
(1958)
Until then, he had never dwelled on the pleasures of memo- 
ry. Impressions had always washed over him, fleeting and 
vivid. A potter’s design in vermilion; the vault of heaven 
clustered with stars that were also gods; the moon, from 
which a lion had fallen; the smoothness of marble under 
one’s lingering fingertips; the taste of boar meat, which he 
liked to strip with quick flashing bites; a Phoenician word; 
the black shadow cast by a spear on yellow sand; the 
nearness of the sea or of women; the heavy wine whose 
roughness he cut with honey—any of these could wholly 
encompass the range of his mind. He was acquainted with 
fear as well as with anger and courage, and once he was the 
first to scale an enemy wall. Eager, curious, unquestioning, 
following no other law than to enjoy things and forget 
them, he wandered over many lands and, on. one side or the 
other of the sea, looked on the cities of men and their 
palaces. In bustling marketplaces or at the foot of a moun- 
tain whose hidden peak may have sheltered satyrs, he had 
100

The Maker
heard entangled stories, which he accepted as he accepted 
reality, without attempting to find out whether they were 
true or imaginary.
Little by little, the beautiful world began to leave him; a 
persistent mist erased the lines of his hand, the night lost 
Its multitude of stars, the ground became uncertain beneath 
his steps. Everything grew distant and blurred. When he 
knew he was going blind, he cried out; stoic fortitude had 
not yet been invented, and Hector could flee from Achilles 
without dishonor. I shall no longer look upon the sky and 
its mythological dread (he felt), nor this face which the 
years will transform. Days and nights passed over these 
fears of his body, but one morning he awoke, looked (with- 
out astonishment now) at the dim things around him, and 
unexplainably felt—the way one recognizes a strain of music 
or a voice—that all this had already happened to him and 
that he had faced it with fear, but also with joy, hope, and 
curiosity. Then he went deep into his past, which seemed to 
him bottomless, and managed to draw out of that dizzying 
descent the lost memory that now shone like a coin under 
the rain, maybe because he had never recalled it before 
except in some dream.
This was the memory. Another boy had wronged him and 
he had gone to his father and told him the story. His 
father, letting him speak, appeared not to listen or under- 
stand, and took down from the wall a bronze dagger, beau- 
tiful and charged with power, which in secret the boy had 
coveted. Now it lay in his hands and the suddenness of 
possession wiped out the injury he had suffered, but his 
father’s voice was telling him, “Let them know you’re a 
man,” and in that voice was a command. Night blinded the 
paths. Clasping the dagger, in which he felt a magic power, 
he scrambled down the steep hillside that surrounded the 
house and ran to the edge of the sea, thinking of himself as 
Ajax and Perseus, and peopling with wounds and battles 
the dark salt air. The exact taste of that moment was what 
he now sought. The rest mattered little to him—the insults
101

Jorge Luis Borges
leading to the challenge, the clumsy fight, the way home 
with the blade dripping blood.
Another memory, also involving night and an expectation 
of adventure, sprang out of that one. A woman, the first to 
be given him by the gods, had waited for him in the shadow 
of a crypt until he reached her through galleries that were 
like nets of stone and down slopes that sank into darkness. 
Why did these memories come back to him and why with- 
out bitterness, as if foretelling of things about to happen?
With slow amazement he understood. In this nighttime of 
his mortal eyes into which he was now descending, love and 
danger were also in wait for him—Ares and Aphrodite— 
because he already divined (because he was already ringed 
in by) a rumor of hexameters and glory, a rumor of men 
defending a shrine which the gods would not save and of 
black ships roaming the seas in search of a loved island, the 
rumor of the Odysseys and the Iliads it was his destiny to 
sing and to leave resounding forever in mankind’s hollow 
memory. These things we know, but not what he felt when 
he went down into his final darkness.
102

The Intruder
(1966)
. . . passing the love of women.
2 Samuel 1: 26
People say (but this is unlikely) that the story was first 
told by Eduardo, the younger of the Nelsons, at the wake 
of his elder brother Cristián, who died in his sleep some- 
time back in the nineties out in the district of Morón. The 
fact is that someone got it from someone else during the 
course of that drawn-out and now dim night, between one 
sip of maté and the next, and told it to Santiago Dabove, 
from whom I heard it. Years later, in Turdera, where the 
story had taken place, I heard it again. The second and 
more elaborate version closely followed the one Santiago 
told, with the usual minor variations and discrepancies. I 
set down the story now because I see in it, if I’m not 
mistaken, a brief and tragic mirror of the character of those 
hard-bitten men living on the edge of Buenos Aires before 
the turn of the century. I hope to do this in a straight- 
forward way, but I see in advance that I shall give in to the 
writer’s temptation of emphasizing or adding certain de- 
tails.
103

Jorge Luis Borges
In Turdera, where they lived, they were called the 
Nilsens. The priest there told me that his predecessor 
remembered having seen in the house of these people— 
somewhat in amazement—a worn Bible with a dark binding 
and black-letter type; on the back flyleaf he caught a 
glimpse of names and dates written in by hand. It was the 
only book in the house—the roaming chronicle of the 
Nilsens, lost as one day all things will be lost. The rambling 
old house, which no longer stands, was of unplastered 
brick; through the arched entranceway you could make out 
a patio paved with red tiles and beyond it a second one of 
hard-packed earth. Few people, at any rate, ever set foot 
inside; the Nilsens kept to themselves. In their almost bare 
rooms they slept on cots. Their extravagances were horses, 
silver-trimmed riding gear, the short-bladed dagger, and 
getting dressed up on Saturday nights, when they blew 
their money freely and got themselves into boozy brawls. 
They were both tall, I know, and wore their red hair long. 
Denmark or Ireland, which they probably never heard of, 
ran in the blood of these two Argentine brothers. The 
neighborhood feared the Redheads; it is likely that one of 
them, at least, had killed his man. Once, shoulder to shoul- 
der, they tangled with the police. It is said that the younger 
brother was in a fight with Juan Iberra in which he didn’t 
do too badly, and that, according to those in the know, is say- 
ing something. They were drovers, teamsters, horse thieves, 
and, once in a while, professional gamblers. They had 
a reputation for stinginess, except when drink and card- 
playing turned them into spenders. Of their relatives or 
where they themselves came from, nothing is known. They 
owned a cart and a yoke of oxen.
Their physical makeup differed from that of the rest of 
the toughs who gave the Costa Brava its unsavory reputa- 
tion. This, and a lot that we don’t know, helps us under- 
stand the close ties between them. To fall out with one of 
them was to reckon with two enemies.
The Nilsens liked carousing with women, but up until 
then their amorous escapades had always been carried out 
104

The Intruder
in darkened passageways or in whorehouses. There was no 
end of talk, then, when Cristián brought Juliana Burgos to 
live with him. Admittedly, in this way he gained a servant, 
but it is also true that he took to squandering his money 
buying her the most hideous junk jewelry and showing her 
off at parties. At those dingy parties held in tenements, 
where suggestive dance steps were strictly forbidden and 
where, at that time, partners still danced with a good six 
inches of light showing between them. Juliana was a dark 
girl and her eyes had a slight slant to them; all anyone had 
to do was look at her and she’d break into a smile. For a 
poor neighborhood, where drudgery and neglect wear women 
out, she was not bad-looking.
In the beginning, Eduardo went places with them. Later, 
at one point, he set out on a journey north to Arrecifes on 
some business or other, returning home with a girl he had 
picked up along the way. But after a few days he threw her 
out. He turned more sullen; he took to drinking alone at 
the corner saloon and kept completely to himself. He had 
fallen in love with Cristián’s woman. The whole neighbor- 
hood, which may have realized it before he did, maliciously 
and cheerfully looked forward to the enmity about to break 
out between the two brothers.
Late one night, on coming home from the corner, Eduardo 
saw Cristián’s horse, a big bay, tied to the hitching post. 
Inside in the patio, dressed in his Sunday best, his older 
brother was waiting for him. The woman shuttled in and 
out serving maté. Cristián said to Eduardo, “I’m on my 
way over to Farias’ place, where they’re throwing a party. 
Juliana stays here with you; if you want her, use her.”
His tone was half commanding, half friendly. Eduardo 
stood there a while staring at him, not knowing what to do. 
Cristián got up, said goodbye—to his brother, not to Juli- 
ana, who was no more than an object—mounted his horse, 
and rode off at a jog, casually.
From that night on they shared her. Nobody will ever 
know the details of this strange partnership which outraged
105

even the Costa Brava’s sense of decency. The arrangement 
went well for several weeks, but it could not last. Between 
them the brothers never mentioned her name, not even to 
call her, but they kept looking for, and finding, reasons to 
be at odds. They argued over the sale of some hides, but 
what they were really arguing about was something else. 
Cristián took to raising his voice, while Eduardo kept 
silent. Without knowing it, they were watching each other. 
In tough neighborhoods a man never admits to anyone—not 
even to himself—that a woman matters beyond lust and 
possession, but the two brothers were in love. This, in some 
way, made them feel ashamed.
One afternoon, in the square in Lomas, Eduardo ran into 
Juan Iberra, who congratulated him on this beauty he’d got 
hold of. It was then, I believe, that Eduardo let him have 
it. Nobody—not to his face—was going to poke fun at Cris- 
tián.
The woman attended both men’s wants with an animal 
submission, but she was unable to keep hidden a certain 
preference, probably for the younger man, who had not 
refused sharing her but who had not proposed it either.
One day, they ordered Juliana to bring two chairs out 
into the first patio and then not show her face for a while 
because they had things to talk over. Expecting a long 
session between them, she lay down for a nap, but before 
very long they woke her up. She was to fill a sack with all 
her belongings, including her glass-bead rosary and the tiny 
crucifix her mother had left her. Without any explanation, 
they lifted her onto the oxcart and set out on a long, 
tiresome, and silent journey. It had rained; the roads were 
heavy with mud, and it was nearly daybreak before they 
reached Morón. There they sold her to the woman who 
ran the whorehouse. The terms had already been agreed to; 
Cristián pocketed the money and later on split it with his 
brother.
Back in Turdera, the Nilsens, up till then trapped in the 
web (which was also a routine) of this monstrous love 
106
Jorge Luis Borges

The Intruder
affair, tried to take up their old life of men among men. 
They went back to cardplaying, to cockfights, to their 
Saturday night binges. At times, perhaps, they felt they 
were saved, but they often indulged—each on his own—in 
unaccountable or only too accountable absences. A little 
before the year was out, the younger brother said he had 
business in the city. Immediately, Cristián went off to 
Morón; at the hitching post of the whorehouse he recog- 
nized Eduardo’s piebald. Cristián walked in; there was his 
brother, sure enough, waiting his turn. It is said that 
Cristián told him, “If we go on this way, we’ll wear out the 
horses. We’d be better off keeping her close at hand.”
He spoke with the owner of the place, drew a handful of 
coins out of his money belt, and they took the girl away. 
Juliana rode with Cristián. Eduardo dug his spurs into his 
horse, not wanting to see them together.
They went back to what has already been told. Their 
solution had ended in failure, for the two had fallen into 
cheating. Cain was on the loose here, but the affection 
between the Nilsens was great—who knows what hard times 
and what dangers they may have faced together!—and they 
preferred taking their feelings out on others. On strangers, 
on the dogs, on Juliana, who had set this wedge between 
them.
The month of March was coming to a close and there 
was no sign of the heat’s letting up. One Sunday (oh 
Sundays people go to bed early), Eduardo, on his way 
home from the corner saloon, saw that Cristián was yoking 
the oxen. Cristián said to him, “Come on. We have to 
leave some hides off at Pardo’s place. I’ve already loaded 
them; let’s make the best of the night air.”
Pardo’s warehouse lay, I believe, farther south; they 
took the old cattle trail, then turned down a side road. As 
night fell, the countryside seemed wider and wider.
They skirted a growth of tall reeds; Cristián threw 
down the cigar he had just lit and said evenly, “Let’s get 
busy, brother. In a while the buzzards will take over. This
107

afternoon I killed her. Let her stay here with all her trin- 
kets, she won’t cause us any more harm.”
They threw their arms around each other, on the verge of 
tears. One more link bound them now—the woman they had 
cruelly sacrificed and their common need to forget her.
Jorge Luis Borges
108

The Immortals
With Adolfo Bioy-Casares 
(1966)
And see, no longer blinded by our eyes.
Rupert Brooke
Whoever could have foreseen, way back in that innocent 
summer of 1923, that the novelette The Chosen One by 
Camilo N. Huergo, presented to me by the author with his 
personal inscription on the flyleaf (which I had the de- 
corum to tear out before offering the volume for sale to 
successive men of the book trade), hid under the thin 
varnish of fiction a prophetic truth. Huergo’s photograph, 
in an oval frame, adorns the cover. Each time I look at it, I 
have the impression that the snapshot is about to cough, a 
victim of that lung disease which nipped in the bud a 
promising career. Tuberculosis, in short, denied him the 
happiness of acknowledging the letter I wrote him in one of 
my characteristic outbursts of generosity.
The epigraph prefixed to this thoughtful essay has been 
taken from the aforementioned novelette; I requested Dr. 
Montenegro, of the Academy, to render it into Spanish, but 
the results were negative. To give the unprepared reader
109

the gist of the matter, I shall now sketch, in condensed 
form, an outline of Huergo’s narrative, as follows:
The storyteller pays a visit, far to the south in Chubut, 
to the English rancher don Guillermo Blake, who devotes 
his energies not only to the breeding of sheep but also to 
the ramblings of the world-famous Plato and to the latest 
and more freakish experiments in the field of surgical medi- 
cine. On the basis of his reading, don Guillermo concludes 
that the five senses obstruct or deform the apprehension of 
reality and that, could we free ourselves of them, we would 
see the world as it is—endless and timeless. He comes to 
think that the eternal models of things lie in the depths of 
the soul and that the organs of perception with which the 
Creator has endowed us are, grosso modo, hindrances. They 
are no better than dark spectacles that blind us to what 
exists outside, diverting our attention at the same time from 
the splendor we carry within us.
Blake begets a son by one of the farm girls so that the 
boy may one day become acquainted with reality. To anes- 
thetize him for life, to make him blind and deaf and dumb, 
to emancipate him from the senses of smell and taste, were 
the father’s first concerns. He took, in the same way, all 
possible measures to make the chosen one unaware of his 
own body. As to the rest, this was arranged with con- 
trivances designed to take over respiration, circulation, 
nourishment, digestion, and elimination. It was a pity that 
the boy, fully liberated, was cut off from all human contact.
Owing to the press of practical matters, the narrator goes 
away. After ten years, he returns. Don Guillermo has died; 
his son goes on living after his fashion, with natural breath- 
ing, heart regular, in a dusty shack cluttered with mechani- 
cal devices. The narrator, about to leave for good, drops a 
cigarette butt that sets fire to the shack and he never quite 
knows whether this act was done on purpose or by pure 
chance. So ends Huergo’s story, strange enough for its time 
but now, of course, more than outstripped by the rockets 
and astronauts of our men of science.
Having dashed off this disinterested compendium of the 
110
Jorge Luis Borges

The Immortals
tale of a now dead and forgotten author—from whom I have 
nothing to gain—I steer back to the heart of the matter. 
Memory restores to me a Saturday morning in 1964 when 
I had an appointment with the eminent gerontologist Dr. 
Raúl Narbondo. The sad truth is that we young bloods of 
yesteryear are getting on; the thick mop begins to thin, one 
or another ear stops up, the wrinkles collect grime, molars 
grow hollow, a cough takes root, the backbone hunches up, 
the foot trips on a pebble, and, to put it plainly, the 
paterfamilias falters and withers. There was no doubt 
about it, the moment had come to see Dr. Narbondo for a 
general checkup, particularly considering the fact that he 
specialized in the replacement of malfunctioning organs.
Sick at heart because that afternoon the Palermo Juniors 
and the Spanish Sports were playing a return match and 
maybe I could not occupy my place in the front row to 
bolster my team, I betook myself to the clinic on Corrientes 
Avenue near Pasteur. The clinic, as its fame betrays, occu- 
pies the fifteenth floor of the Adamant Building. I went up 
by elevator (manufactured by the Electra Company). Eye 
to eye with Narbondo’s brass shingle, I pressed the bell, 
and at long last, taking my courage in both hands, I slipped 
through the partly open door and entered into the waiting 
room proper. There, alone with the latest issues of the 
Ladies’ Companion and Jumbo, I whiled away the passing 
hours until a cuckoo clock struck twelve and sent me leaping 
from my armchair. At once, I asked myself, What hap- 
pened? Planning my every move now like a sleuth, I took a 
step or two toward the next room, peeped in, ready, ad- 
mittedly, to fly the coop at the slightest sound. From the 
streets far below came the noise of horns and traffic, the cry 
of a newspaper hawker, the squeal of brakes sparing some 
pedestrian, but, all around me, a reign of silence. I crossed 
a kind of laboratory, or pharmaceutical back room, fur- 
nished with instruments and flasks of all sorts. Stimulated 
by the aim of reaching the men’s room, I pushed open a 
door at the far end of the lab.
Inside, I saw something that my eyes did not understand.
111

The small enclosure was circular, painted white, with a low 
ceiling and neon lighting, and without a single window to 
relieve the sense of claustrophobia. The room was inhabited 
by four personages, or pieces of furniture. Their color was 
the same as the walls, their material wood, their form cubic. 
On each cube was another small cube with a latticed opening 
and below it a slot as in a mailbox. Carefully scrutinizing the 
grilled opening, you noted with alarm that from the interior 
you were being watched by something like eyes. The slots 
emitted, from time to time, a chorus of sighs or whisperings 
that the good Lord himself could not have made head or tail 
of. The placement of these cubes was such that they faced 
each other in the form of a square, composing a kind of 
conclave. I don’t know how many minutes lapsed. At this 
point, the doctor came in and said to me, “My pardon, 
Bustos, for having kept you waiting. I was just out getting 
myself an advance ticket for today’s match between the 
Palermo Juniors and the Spanish Sports.” He went on, 
indicating the cubes, “Let me introduce you to Santiago 
Silberman, to retired clerk-of-court Ludueña, to Aquiles 
Molinari, and to Miss Bugard.”
Out of the furniture came faint rumbling sounds. I 
quickly reached out a hand and, without the pleasure of 
shaking theirs, withdrew in good order, a frozen smile on 
my lips. Reaching the vestibule as best I could, I managed 
to stammer, “A drink. A stiff drink.”
Narbondo came out of the lab with a graduated beaker 
filled with water and dissolved some effervescent drops into 
it. Blessed concoction—the wretched taste brought me to my 
senses. Then, the door to the small room closed and locked 
tight, came the explanation:
‘I’m glad to see, my dear Bustos, that my immortals 
have made quite an impact on you. Whoever would have 
thought that Homo sapiens, Darwin’s barely human ape, 
could achieve such perfection? This, my house, I assure 
you, is the only one in all Indo-America where Dr. Eric 
Stapledon’s methodology has been fully applied. You recall, 
no doubt, the consternation that the death of the late 
112
Jorge Luis Borges

The Immortals
lamented doctor, which took place in New Zealand, occa- 
sioned in scientific circles. I flatter myself, furthermore, for 
having implemented his precursory labors with a few Ar- 
gentinean touches. In itself, the thesis—Newton’s apple all 
over again—is fairly simple. The death of the body is a 
result, always, of the failure of some organ or other, call it 
the kidney, lungs, heart, or what you like. With the replace- 
ment of the organism’s various components, in themselves 
perishable, with other corresponding stainless or polyethyl- 
ene parts, there is no earthly reason whatever why the 
soul, why you yourself—Bustos Domecq—should not be im- 
mortal. None of your philosophical niceties here; the body 
can be vulcanized and from time to time recaulked, and so 
the mind keeps going. Surgery brings immortality to man- 
kind. Life’s essential aim has been attained—the mind lives 
on without fear of cessation. Each of our immortals is 
comforted by the certainty, backed by our firm’s guarantee, 
of being a witness in aeternum. The brain, refreshed night 
and day by a system of electrical charges, is the last 
organic bulwark in which ball bearings and cells collabo- 
rate. The rest is Formica, steel, plastics. Respiration, ali- 
mentation, generation, mobility—elimination itself!—belong 
to the past. Our immortal is real estate. One or two minor 
touches are still missing, it’s true. Oral articulation, dia- 
logue, may still be improved. As for the cost, you need not 
worry yourself. By means of a procedure that circumvents 
legal red tape, the candidate transfers his property to us, 
and the Narbondo Company, Inc.—I, my son, his descend- 
ants—guarantees your upkeep, in statu quo, to the end of 
time. And, I might add, a money-back guarantee.”
It was then that he laid a friendly hand on my shoulder. 
I felt his will taking power over me. “Ha-ha! I see I’ve 
whetted your appetite, I’ve tempted you, dear Bustos. 
You’ll need a couple of months or so to get your affairs in 
order and to have your stock portfolio signed over to us. As 
far as the operation goes, naturally, as a friend, I want to 
save you a little something. Instead of our usual fee of ten 
thousand dollars, for you, ninety-five hundred—in cash, of
113

course. The rest is yours. It goes to pay your lodging, care, 
and service. The medical procedure in itself is painless. No 
more than a question of amputation and replacement. 
Nothing to worry about. On the eve, just keep yourself 
calm, untroubled. Avoid heavy meals, tobacco, and alcohol, 
apart from your accustomed and imported, I hope, Scotch 
or two. Above all, refrain from impatience.”
“Why two months?” I asked him. “One’s enough, and 
then some. I come out of the anesthesia and I’m one more 
of your cubes. You have my address and phone number. 
We’ll keep in touch. I’ll be back next Friday at the latest.”
At the escape hatch he handed me the card of Nemirov- 
ski, Nemirovski, & Nemirovski, Counsellors at Law, who 
would put themselves at my disposal for all the details of 
drawing up the will. With perfect composure I walked to 
the subway entrance, then took the stairs at a run. I lost no 
time. That same night, without leaving the slightest trace 
behind, I moved to the New Impartial, in whose register I 
figure under the assumed name of Aquiles Silberman. Here, 
in my bedroom at the far rear of this modest hotel, wearing 
a false beard and dark spectacles, I am setting down this 
account of the facts.
Jorge Luis Borges
114

The Meeting
To Susana Bombal 
(1969)
Anyone leafing his way through the morning paper does so 
either to escape his surroundings or to provide himself with 
small talk for later in the day, so it is not to be wondered 
at that no one any longer remembers—or else remembers as 
in a dream—the famous and once widely discussed case of 
Maneco Uriarte and of Duncan. The event took place, 
furthermore, back around 1910, the year of the comet and 
the Centennial, and since then we have had and have lost 
so many things. Both protagonists are now dead; those who 
witnessed the episode solemnly swore silence. I, too, raised 
my hand for the oath, feeling the importance of the ritual 
with all the romantic seriousness of my nine or ten years. I 
do not know whether the others noticed that I had given my 
word; I do not know whether they kept theirs. Anyway, 
here is the story, with all the inevitable variations brought 
about by time and by good or bad writing.
My cousin Lafinur took me to a barbecue that evening at 
a country house called The Laurels, which belonged to some
115

friends of his. I cannot fix its exact location; let us take 
any of those suburban towns lying just to the north, shaded 
and quiet, that slope down to the river and that have 
nothing in common with sprawling Buenos Aires and its 
surrounding prairie. The journey by train lasted long 
enough to seem endless to me, but time for children—as is 
well known—flows slowly. It was already dark when we 
passed through the villa’s main gate. Here, I felt, were all 
the ancient, elemental things: the smell of meat cooking 
golden brown, the trees, the dogs, the kindling wood, and 
the fire that brings men together.
The guests numbered about a dozen; all were grown-ups. 
The eldest, I learned later, was not yet thirty. They were 
also—this I was soon to find out—well versed in matters 
about which I am still somewhat backward: race horses, the 
right tailors, motorcars, and notoriously expensive women. 
No one ruffled my shyness, no one paid any attention to me. 
The lamb, slowly and skillfully prepared by one of the 
hired men, kept us a long time in the big dining room. The 
dates of vintages were argued back and forth. There was a 
guitar; my cousin, if I remember correctly, sang a couple of 
Elías Regules’ ballads about gauchos in the back country 
of Uruguay and some verses in dialect, in the incipient 
lunfardo of those days, about a knife fight in a brothel on 
Junín Street. Coffee and Havana cigars were brought in. 
Not a word about getting back. I felt (in the words of the 
poet Lugones) the fear of what is suddenly too late. I dared 
not look at the clock. In order to disguise my boyish 
loneliness among grown-ups, I put away—not really liking 
it—a glass or two of wine. Uriarte, in a loud voice, proposed 
to Duncan a two-handed game of poker. Someone objected 
that that kind of play made for a poor game and suggested 
a hand of four. Duncan agreed, but Uriarte, with a stub- 
bornness that I did not understand and that I did not try 
to understand, insisted on the first scheme. Outside of 
truco—a game whose real aim is to pass time with mischief 
and verses—and of the modest mazes of solitaire, I never 
enjoyed cards. I slipped away without anyone’s noticing. A 
116
Jorge Luis Borges

The Meeting
rambling old house, unfamiliar and dark (only in the din- 
ing room was there light), means more to a boy than a new 
country means to a traveler. Step by step, I explored the 
rooms; I recall a billiard room, a long gallery with rectan- 
gular and diamond-shaped panes, a couple of rocking 
chairs, and a window from which you could just make out a 
summerhouse. In the darkness I lost my way; the owner of 
the house, whose name, as I recall after all these years, may 
have been Acevedo or Acebal, finally came across me some- 
how. Out of kindness or perhaps out of a collector’s vanity, 
he led me to a display cabinet. On lighting a lamp, I saw 
the glint of steel. It was a collection of knives that had once 
been in the hands of famous fighters. He told me that he 
had a bit of land somewhere to the north around Pergami- 
no, and that he had been picking up these things on his 
travels back and forth across the province. He opened the 
cabinet and, without looking at what was written on the 
tags, he began giving me accounts of each item; they were 
more or less the same except for dates and place names. I 
asked him whether among the weapons he might have the 
dagger of Juan Moreira, who was in that day the archetype 
of the gaucho, as later Martín Fierro and Don Segundo 
Sombra would be. He had to confess that he hadn’t but 
that he could show me one like it, with a U-shaped cross- 
piece in the hilt. He was interrupted by the sound of 
angry voices. At once he shut the cabinet and turned to 
leave; I followed him.
Uriarte was shouting that his opponent had tried to cheat 
him. All the others stood around the two players. Duncan, I 
remember, was a taller man than the rest of the company, 
and was well built, though somewhat round-shouldered; his 
face was expressionless, and his hair was so light it was 
almost white. Maneco Uriarte was nervous, dark, with per- 
haps a touch of Indian blood, and wore a skimpy, petulant 
moustache. It was obvious that everybody was drunk; I do 
not know whether there were two or three emptied bottles 
on the floor or whether an excess of movies suggests this 
false memory to me. Uriarte’s insults did not let up; at first
117

sharp, they now grew obscene. Duncan appeared not to 
hear, but finally, as though weary, he got up and threw a 
punch. From the floor, Uriarte snarled that he was not 
going to take this outrage, and he challenged Duncan to 
fight.
Duncan said no, and added, as though to explain, “The 
trouble is I’m afraid of you.”
Everybody howled with laughter.
Uriarte, picking himself up, answered, “I’m going to have 
it out with you, and right now.”
Someone—may he be forgiven for it—remarked that 
weapons were not lacking.
I do not know who went and opened the glass cabinet. 
Maneco Uriarte picked out the showiest and longest dag- 
ger, the one with the U-shaped crosspiece; Duncan, almost 
absentmindedly, picked a wooden-handled knife with the 
stamp of a tiny tree on the blade. Someone else said it was 
just like Maneco to play it safe, to choose a sword. It 
astonished no one that his hand began shaking; what was 
astonishing is that the same thing happened with Duncan.
Tradition demands that men about to fight should re- 
spect the house in which they are guests, and step outside. 
Half on a spree, half seriously, we all went out into the 
damp night. I was not drunk—at least, not on wine—but I 
was reeling with adventure; I wished very hard that some- 
one would be killed, so that later I could tell about it and 
always remember it. Maybe at that moment the others were 
no more adult than I was, I also had the feeling that an 
overpowering current was dragging us on and would drown 
us. Nobody believed the least bit in Maneco’s accusation; 
everyone saw it as the fruit of an old rivalry, exacerbated 
by the wine.
We pushed our way through a clump of trees, leaving 
behind the summerhouse. Uriarte and Duncan led the way, 
wary of each other. The rest of us strung ourselves out 
around the edge of an opening of lawn. Duncan had 
stopped there in the moonlight and said, with mild authori- 
ty, “This looks like the right place.”
Jorge Luis Borges
118

The Meeting
The two men stood in the center, not quite knowing what 
to do. A voice rang out: “Let go of all that hardware and use 
your hands!”
But the men were already fighting. They began clumsily, 
almost as if they were afraid of hurting each other; they 
began by watching the blades, but later their eyes were on 
one another. Uriarte had laid aside his anger, Duncan his 
contempt or aloofness. Danger, in some way, had transfig- 
ured them; these were now two men fighting, not boys. I 
had imagined the fight as a chaos of steel; instead, I was 
able to follow it, or almost follow it, as though it were a 
game of chess. The intervening years may, of course, have 
exaggerated or blurred what I saw. I do not know how long 
it lasted; there are events that fall outside the common 
measure of time.
Without ponchos to act as shields, they used their 
forearms to block each lunge of the knife. Their sleeves, 
soon hanging in shreds, grew black with blood. I thought 
that we had gone wrong in supposing that they knew 
nothing about this kind of fencing. I noticed right off that 
they handled themselves in different ways. Their weapons 
were unequal. Duncan, in order to make up for his disad- 
vantage, tried to stay in close to the other man; Uriarte 
kept stepping back to be able to lunge out with long, low 
thrusts. The same voice that had called attention to the 
display cabinet shouted out now: “They’re killing each 
other! Stop them!”
But no one dared break it up. Uriarte had lost ground; 
Duncan charged him. They were almost body to body now. 
Uriarte’s weapon sought Duncan’s face. Suddenly the blade 
seemed shorter, for it was piercing the taller man’s chest. 
Duncan lay stretched out on the grass. It was at this point 
that he said, his voice very low, “How strange. All this is 
like a dream.”
He did not shut his eyes, he did not move, and I had 
seen a man kill another man.
Maneco Uriarte bent over the body, sobbing openly, and 
begged to be forgiven. The thing he had just done was
119

beyond him. I know now that he regretted less having 
committed a crime than having carried out a senseless act.
I did not want to look anymore. What I had wished for 
so much had happened, and it left me shaken. Lafinur told 
me later that they had had to struggle hard to pull out the 
weapon. A makeshift council was formed. They decided to 
lie as little as possible and to elevate this duel with knives 
to a duel with swords. Four of them volunteered as seconds, 
among them Acebal. In Buenos Aires anything can be 
fixed; someone always has a friend.
On top of the mahogany table where the men had been 
playing, a pack of English cards and a pile of bills lay in a 
jumble that nobody wanted to look at or to touch.
In the years that followed, I often considered revealing 
the story to some friend, but always I felt that there was a 
greater pleasure in being the keeper of a secret than in 
telling it. However, around 1929, a chance conversation 
suddenly moved me one day to break my long silence. The 
retired police captain, don José Olave, was recalling stories 
about men from the tough riverside neighborhood of the 
Retiro who had been handy with their knives; he remarked 
that when they were out to kill their man, scum of this 
kind had no use for the rules of the game, and that before 
all the fancy playing with daggers that you saw now on the 
stage, knife fights were few and far between. I said I had 
witnessed one, and gave him an account of what had hap- 
pened nearly twenty years earlier.
He listened to me with professional attention, then said, 
“Are you sure Uriarte and What’s-His-Name never handled 
a knife before? Maybe they had picked up a thing or two 
around their fathers’ ranches.”
“I don’t think so,” I said. “Everybody there that night 
knew one another pretty well, and I can tell you they were 
all amazed at the way the two men fought.”
Olave went on in his quiet manner, as if thinking aloud, 
“One of the weapons had a U-shaped crosspiece in the 
handle. There were two daggers of that kind which became 
120
Jorge Luis Borges

The Meeting
quite famous—Moreira’s and Juan Almada’s. Almada was 
from down south, in Tapalquén.”
Something seemed to come awake in my memory. Olave 
continued. “You also mentioned a knife with a wooden 
handle, one with the Little Tree brand. There are thousands 
of them, but there was one—”
He broke off for a moment, then said, “Señor Acevedo 
had a big property up around Pergamino. There was anoth- 
er of these famous tough, from up that way—Juan Almanza 
was his name. This was along about the turn of the centu- 
ry. When he was fourteen, he killed his first man with one 
of these knives. From then on, for luck, he stuck to the 
same one. Juan Almanza and Juan Almada had it in for 
each other, jealous of the fact that many people confused 
the two. For a long time they searched high and low for one 
another, but they never met. Juan Almanza was killed by a 
stray bullet during some election brawl or other. The other 
man, I think, died a natural death in a hospital bed in Las 
Flores.”
Nothing more was said. Each of us was left with his own 
conclusions.
Nine or ten men, none of whom is any longer living, saw 
what my eyes saw—that sudden stab and the body under the 
night sky—but perhaps what we were really seeing was the 
end of another story, an older story. I began to wonder 
whether it was Maneco Uriarte who killed Duncan or 
whether in some uncanny way it could have been the 
weapons, not the men, which fought. I still remember how 
Uriarte’s hand shook when he first gripped his knife, and 
the same with Duncan, as though the knives were coming 
awake after a long sleep side by side in the cabinet. Even 
after their gauchos were dust, the knives—the knives, not 
their tools, the men—knew how to fight. And that night they 
fought well.
Things last longer than people; who knows whether these 
knives will meet again, who knows whether the story ends 
here.
121

Pedro Salvadores
To Juan Murchison 
(1969)
I want to leave a written record (perhaps the first to be 
attempted) of one of the strangest and grimmest happen- 
ings in Argentine history. To meddle as little as possible in 
the telling, to abstain from picturesque details or personal 
conjectures is, it seems to me, the only way to do this.
A man, a woman, and the overpowering shadow of a 
dictator are the three characters. The man’s name was 
Pedro Salvadores; my grandfather Acevedo saw him days 
or weeks after the dictator’s downfall in the battle of 
Caseros. Pedro Salvadores may have been no different from 
anyone else, but the years and his fate set him apart. He 
was a gentleman like many other gentlemen of his day. He 
owned (let us suppose) a ranch in the country and, op- 
posed to the tyranny, was on the Unitarian side. His wife’s 
family name was Planes; they lived together on Suipacha 
Street near the corner of Temple in what is now the heart 
of Buenos Aires. The house in which the event took place 
was much like any other, with its street door, long arched 
122

Pedro Salvadores
entranceway, inner grillwork gate, its rooms, its row of two 
or three patios. The dictator, of course, was Rosas.
One night, around 1842, Salvadores and his wife heard 
the growing, muffled sound of horses’ hooves out on the 
unpaved street and the riders shouting their drunken vivas 
and their threats. This time Rosas’ henchmen did not ride 
on. After the shouts came repeated knocks at the door; 
while the men began forcing it, Salvadores was able to pull 
the dining-room table aside, lift the rug, and hide himself 
down in the cellar. His wife dragged the table back in 
place. The mazorca broke into the house; they had come to 
take Salvadores. The woman said her husband had run 
away to Montevideo. The men did not believe her; they 
flogged her, they smashed all the blue chinaware (blue was 
the Unitarian color), they searched the whole house, but 
they never thought of lifting the rug. At midnight they rode 
away, swearing that they would soon be back.
Here is the true beginning of Pedro Salvadores’ story. He 
lived nine years in the cellar. For all we may tell ourselves 
that years are made of days and days of hours and that nine 
years is an abstract term and an impossible sum, the story 
is nonetheless gruesome. I suppose that in the darkness, 
which his eyes somehow learned to decipher, he had no 
particular thoughts, not even of his hatred or his danger. 
He was simply there—in the cellar—with echoes of the world 
he was cut off from sometimes reaching him from overhead: 
his wife’s footsteps, the bucket clanging against the lip of 
the well, a heavy rainfall in the patio. Every day of his 
imprisonment, for all he knew, could have been the last.
His wife let go all the servants, who could possibly have 
informed against them, and told her family that Salvadores 
was in Uruguay. Meanwhile, she earned a living for them 
both sewing uniforms for the army. In the course of time, 
she gave birth to two children; her family turned from her, 
thinking she had a lover. After the tyrant’s fall, they got 
down on their knees and begged to be forgiven.
What was Pedro Salvadores? Who was he? Was it his 
fear, his love, the unseen presence of Buenos Aires, or—in
123

the long run—habit that held him prisoner? In order to keep 
him with her, his wife would make up news to tell him 
about whispered plots and rumored victories. Maybe he was 
a coward and she loyally hid it from him that she knew. I 
picture him in his cellar perhaps without a candle, without 
a book. Darkness probably sank him into sleep. His dreams, 
at the outset, were probably of that sudden night when the 
blade sought his throat, of the streets he knew so well, of 
the open plains. As the years went on, he would have been 
unable to escape even in his sleep; whatever he dreamed 
would have taken place in the cellar. At first, he may have 
been a man hunted down, a man in danger of his life; later 
(we will never know for certain), an animal at peace in its 
burrow or a sort of dim god.
All this went on until that summer day of 1852 when 
Rosas fled the country. It was only then that the secret 
man came out into the light of day; my grandfather spoke 
with him. Flabby, overweight, Salvadores was the color of 
wax and could not speak above a low voice. He never got 
back his confiscated lands; I think he died in poverty.
As with so many things, the fate of Pedro Salvadores 
strikes us as a symbol of something we are about to under- 
stand, but never quite do.
Jorge Luis Borges
124

Rosendo’s Tale
(1969)
It was about eleven o’clock at night; I had entered the old 
grocery store-bar (which today is just a plain bar) at the 
corner of Bolívar and Venezuela. From off on one side a 
man signaled me with a “psst.” There must have been 
something forceful in his manner because I heeded him at 
once. He was seated at one of the small tables in front of 
an empty glass, and I somehow felt he had been sitting 
there for a long time. Neither short nor tall, he had the 
appearance of a common working man or maybe an old 
farmhand. His thin moustache was graying. Fearful of his 
health, like most people in Buenos Aires, he had not taken 
off the scarf that draped his shoulders. He asked me to have 
a drink with him. I sat down and we chatted. All this took 
place sometime back in the early thirties. This is what the 
man told me.
You don’t know me except maybe by reputation, but I 
know who you are. I’m Rosendo Juárez. The late Paredes
125

Jorge Luis Borges
must have told you about me. The old man could pull the 
wool over people’s eyes and liked to stretch a point—not to 
cheat anybody, mind you, but just in fun. Well, seeing you 
and I have nothing better to do, I’m going to tell you 
exactly what happened that night. The night the Butcher 
got killed. You put all that down in a storybook, which I’m 
not equipped to pass judgment on, but I want you to know 
the truth about all that trumped-up stuff.
Things happen to you and it’s only years later you begin 
understanding them. What happened to me that night real- 
ly had its start a long time back. I grew up in the neighbor- 
hood of the Maldonado, way out past Floresta. The Maldo- 
nado was just a ditch then, a kind of sewer, and it’s a good 
thing they’ve covered it over now. I’ve always been of the 
opinion that the march of progress can’t be held back—not 
by anybody. Anyway, a man’s born where he’s born. It 
never entered my head to find out who my father was. 
Clementina Juárez—that was my mother—was a decent 
woman who earned a living doing laundry. As far as I 
know, she was from Entre Ríos or Uruguay; anyhow, she 
always talked about her relatives from Concepción del 
Uruguay. I grew up like a weed. I first learned to handle a 
knife the way everyone else did, fencing with a charred 
stick. If you jabbed your man, it left a mark. Soccer hadn’t 
taken us over yet—it was still in the hands of the English.
One night at the corner bar a young guy named Garmen- 
dia began taunting me, trying to pick a fight. I played deaf, 
but this other guy, who’d had a few, kept it up. We stepped 
out. Then from the sidewalk he swung open the door and 
said back inside to the people, “Don’t anybody worry, I’ll 
be right back.”
I somehow got hold of a knife. We went off toward the 
brook, slow, our eyes on each other, He had a few years on 
me. We’d played at that fencing game a number of times 
together, and I had the feeling he was going to cut me up 
in ribbons. I went down the right-hand side of the road and 
he went down the left. He stumbled on some dry clods of 
mud. That moment was all I needed. I got the jump on 
126

Rosendo’s Tale
him, almost without thinking, and opened a slice in his 
face. We got locked in a clinch, there was a minute when 
anything might have happened, and in the end I got my 
knife in and it was all over. Only later on did I find out I’d 
been cut up, too. But only a few scratches. That night I saw 
how easy it was to kill a man or to get killed. The water in 
the brook was pretty low; stalling for time, I half hid him 
behind one of the brick kilns. Fool that I was, I went and 
slipped off that fancy ring of his that he always wore with 
the nice stone in it. I put it on, I straightened my hat, and 
I went back to the bar. I walked in nonchalant, saying to 
them, “Looks like the one who came back was me.”
I asked for a shot of rum and, to tell the truth, I needed 
it bad. It was then somebody noticed the blood on my 
sleeve.
I spent that whole night tossing and turning on my cot, 
and it was almost light outside before I dropped off and 
slept. Late the next day two cops came looking for me. My 
mother (may she rest in peace) began shrieking. They 
herded me along just like I was some kind of criminal. Two 
nights and two days I had to wait there in the cooler. 
Nobody came to see me, either, outside of Luis Irala—a real 
friend—only they wouldn’t let him in. Then the third morn- 
ing the police captain sent for me. He sat there in his chair, 
not even looking at me, and said, “So you’re the one who 
took care of Garmendia, are you?”
“If that’s what you say,” I answered.
“You call me sir. And don’t get funny or try beating 
around the bush. Here are the sworn statements of wit- 
nesses and the ring that was found in your house. Just sign 
this confession and get it over with.”
He dipped the pen in the inkwell and handed it to me.
“Let me do some thinking, Captain sir,” I came out with. 
“I’ll give you twenty-four hours where you can do some 
hard thinking—in the cooler. I’m not going to rush you. If 
you don’t care to see reason, you can get used to the idea of 
a little vacation up on Las Heras—the penitentiary.”
As you can probably imagine, I didn’t understand.
127

“Look,” he said, “if you come around, all you’ll get is a 
few days. Then I’ll let you go, and don Nicolás Paredes 
has already given me his word he’ll straighten things out for 
you.”
Actually, it was ten days. Then at last they remembered 
me. I signed what they wanted, and one of the two cops 
took me around to Paredes’ house on Cabrera Street.
Horses were tied to the hitching post, and in the en- 
tranceway and inside the place there were more people than 
around a whorehouse. It looked to me like the party head- 
quarters. Don Nicolás, who was sipping his maté, finally 
got around to me. Taking his good time, he told me he was 
sending me out to Morón, where they were getting ready 
for the elections. He was putting me in touch with Mr. 
Laferrer, who would try me out. He had the letter written by 
some kid all dressed in black, who, from what I heard, 
made up poems about tenements and filth—stuff that no 
refined public would dream of reading. I thanked Paredes 
for the favor and left. When I got to the corner, the cop 
wasn’t tailing me any more.
Providence knows what it’s up to; everything had turned 
out for the best. Garmendia’s death, which at first had 
caused me a lot of worry, now opened things up for me. Of 
course, the law had me in the palm of their hands. If I was 
no use to the party they’d clap me back inside, but I felt 
pretty good and was counting on myself.
Mr. Laferrer warned me I was going to have to walk the 
straight and narrow with him, and said if I did I might 
even become his bodyguard. I came through with what was 
expected of me. In Morón, and later on in my part of 
town, I earned the trust of my bosses. The cops and the 
party kept on building up my reputation as a tough guy. I 
turned out to be pretty good at organizing the vote around 
the polls here in the capital and out in the province. I 
won’t take up your time going into details about brawls and 
bloodletting, but let me tell you, in those days elections 
were lively affairs. I could never stand the Radicals, who 
down to this day are still hanging onto the beard of their 
128
Jorge Luis Borges

Rosendo’s Tale
chief Alem. There wasn’t a soul around who didn’t hold me 
in respect. I got hold of a woman, La Lujanera, and a fine- 
looking sorrel. For years I tried to live up to the part of the 
outlaw Moreira, who, in his time—the way I figure it—was 
probably trying to play the part of some other gaucho 
outlaw. I took to cards and absinthe.
An old man has a way of rambling on and on, but now 
I’m coming to the part I want you to hear. I wonder if I’ve 
already mentioned Luis Irala. The kind of friend you don’t 
find every day. Irala was a man already well along in years. 
He never was afraid of work, and he took a liking to me. In 
his whole life he never had anything to do with politics. He 
was a carpenter by trade. He never caused anyone trouble 
and never allowed anyone to cause him trouble. One morn- 
ing he came to see me and he said, “Of course, you’ve 
heard by now that Casilda’s left me. Rufino Aguilera took 
her away from me.”
I’d known that customer around Morón. I answered, 
“Yes, I know all about him. Of all the Aguileras, he’s the 
least rotten.”
“Rotten or not, now he’ll have to reckon with me.”
I thought that over for a while and told him, “Nobody 
takes anything away from anybody. If Casilda left you, it’s 
because she cares for Rufino and you mean nothing to her.” 
“And what are people going to say? That I’m a cow- 
ard?”
“My advice is don’t get yourself mixed up in gossip 
about what people might say or about a woman who has no 
use for you.”
“It’s not her I’m worried about. A man who thinks five 
minutes straight about a woman is no man, he’s a queer. 
Casilda has no heart. The last night we spent together she 
told me I wasn’t as young as I used to be.”
“Maybe she was telling you the truth.”
“That’s what hurts. What matters to me now is Rufino.” 
“Be careful there. I’ve seen Rufino in action around the 
polls in Merlo. He’s a flash with a knife.”
“You think I’m afraid of him?”
129

Jorge Luis Borges
“I know you’re not afraid of him, but think it over. One 
of two things—if you kill him, you get put away; if he kills 
you, you go six feet under.”
“Maybe so. What would you do in my shoes?”
“I don’t know, but my own life isn’t exactly a model. I’m 
only a guy who became a party strong-arm man trying to 
cheat a jail sentence.”
“I’m not going to the strong-arm guy for any party, I’m 
only out to settle a debt.”
“So you’re going to risk your peace and quiet for a man 
you don’t know and a woman you don’t love any more?”
He wouldn’t hear me out. He just left. The next day the 
news came that he challenged Rufino in a saloon in Morón, 
and Rufino killed him. He was out to kill, and he got 
killed—but a fair fight, man to man. I’d given him my 
honest advice as a friend, but somehow I felt guilty just the 
same.
A few days after the wake, I went to a cockfight. I’d 
never been very big on cockfights, and that Sunday, to tell 
the truth, I had all I could do to stomach the thing. What 
is it in these animals, I kept thinking, that makes them 
gouge each other’s eyes like that?
The night of my story, the night of the end of my story, 
I had told the boys I’d show up at Blackie’s for the dance. 
So many years ago now, and that dress with the flowers my 
woman was wearing still comes back to me. The party was 
out in the backyard. Of course, there was the usual drunk 
or two trying to raise hell, but I took good care to see that 
things went off the way they ought to. It wasn’t twelve yet 
when these strangers put in an appearance. One of them— 
the one they called the Butcher and who got himself 
stabbed in the back that same night—stood us all to a round 
of drinks. The odd thing was that the two of us looked a lot 
alike. Something was in the air; he drew up to me and 
began praising me up and down. He said he was from the 
Northside, where he’d heard a thing or two about me. I let 
him go on, but I was already sizing him up. He wasn’t 
letting the gin alone, either, maybe to work up his courage, 
130

Rosendo’s Tale
and finally he came out and asked me to fight. Then 
something happened that nobody ever understood. In that 
big loudmouth I saw myself, the same as in a mirror, and it 
made me feel ashamed. I wasn’t scared; maybe if I’d been 
scared I’d have fought with him. I just stood there as if 
nothing happened. This other guy, with his face just inches 
away from mine, began shouting so everyone could hear, 
“The trouble is you’re nothing but a coward.”
“Maybe so,” I said. “I’m not afraid of being taken for a 
coward. If it makes you feel good, why don’t you say 
you’ve called me a son of a bitch, too, and that I’ve let you 
spit all over me. Now—are you any happier?”
La Lujanera took out the knife I always carried in my vest 
lining and, burning up inside, she shoved it into my hand. 
To clinch it, she said, “Rosendo, I think you’re going to 
need this.”
I let it drop and walked out, but not hurrying. The boys 
made way for me. They were stunned. What did it matter 
to me what they thought.
To make a clean break with that life, I took off for 
Uruguay, where I found myself work as a teamster. Since 
coming back to Buenos Aires I’ve settled around here. San 
Telmo always was a respectable neighborhood.
131


An Auto- 
biographical
Essay
With Norman Thomas 
di Giovanni


An Auto- 
biographical 
Essay
Family and Childhood
I cannot tell whether my first memories go back to the 
eastern or to the western bank of the muddy, slow-moving 
Río de la Plata—to Montevideo, where we spent long, lazy 
holidays in the villa of my uncle Francisco Haedo, or to 
Buenos Aires. I was born there, in the very heart of that 
city, in 1899, on Tucumán Street, between Suipacha and 
Esmeralda, in a small, unassuming house belonging to my 
maternal grandparents. Like most of the houses of that day, 
it had a flat roof; a long, arched entranceway, called a 
zaguán; a cistern, where we got our water; and two patios. 
We must have moved out to the suburb of Palermo quite 
soon, because there I have my first memories of another 
house with two patios, a garden with a tall windmill pump, 
and, on the other side of the garden, an empty lot. Palermo 
at that time—the Palermo where we lived, Serrano and 
Guatemala—was on the shabby northern outskirts of town,
135

and many people, ashamed of saying they lived there, 
spoke in a dim way of living on the Northside. We lived in 
one of the few two-story homes on our street; the rest of 
the neighborhood was made up of low houses and vacant 
lots. I have often spoken of this area as a slum, but I do 
not quite mean that in the American sense of the word. In 
Palermo lived shabby, genteel people as well as more unde- 
sirable sorts. There was also a Palermo of hoodlums, called 
compadritos, famed for their knife fights, but this Palermo 
was only later to capture my imagination, since we did our 
best—our successful best—to ignore it. Unlike our neighbor 
Evaristo Carriego, however, who was the first Argentine 
poet to explore the literary possibilities that lay there at 
hand. As for myself, I was hardly aware of the existence of 
compadritos, since I lived essentially indoors.
My father, Jorge Guillermo Borges, worked as a lawyer. 
He was a philosophical anarchist—a disciple of Spencer— 
and also a teacher of psychology at the Normal School for 
Modern Languages, where he gave his course in English, 
using as his text William James’s shorter book of psycholo- 
gy. My father’s English came from the fact that his moth- 
er, Frances Haslam, was born in Staffordshire of Northum- 
brian stock. A rather unlikely set of circumstances brought 
her to South America. Fanny Haslam’s elder sister married 
an Italian-Jewish engineer named Jorge Suárez, who 
brought the first horse-drawn tramcars to Argentina, where 
he and his wife settled and sent for Fanny. I remember an 
anecdote concerning this venture. Suárez was a guest at 
General Urquiza’s “palace” in Entre Ríos, and very im- 
providently won his first game of cards with the General, 
who was the stern dictator of that province and not above 
throat-cutting. When the game was over, Suárez was told 
by alarmed fellow-guests that if he wanted the license to 
run his tramcars in the province, it was expected of him to 
lose a certain amount of gold coins each night. Urquiza was 
such a poor player that Suárez had a great deal of trouble 
losing the appointed sums.
It was in Paraná, the capital city of Entre Ríos, that 
136
Jorge Luis Borges

An Autobiographical Essay
Fanny Haslam met Colonel Francisco Borges. This was in 
1870 or 1871, during the siege of the city by the 
montoneros, or gaucho militia, of Ricardo López Jordán. 
Borges, riding at the head of his regiment, commanded the 
troops defending the city. Fanny Haslam saw him from the 
flat roof of her house; that very night a ball was given to 
celebrate the arrival of the government relief forces. Fanny 
and the Colonel met, danced, fell in love, and eventually 
married.
My father was the younger of two sons. He had been 
born in Entre Ríos and used to explain to my grandmoth- 
er, a respectable English lady, that he wasn’t really an 
Entrerriano, since “I was begotten on the pampa.” My 
grandmother would say, with English reserve, “I’m sure I 
don’t know what you mean.” My father’s words, of course, 
were true, since my grandfather was, in the early 1870’s, 
Commander-in-Chief of the northern and western frontiers 
of the Province of Buenos Aires. As a child, I heard many 
stories from Fanny Haslam about frontier life in those 
days. One of these I set down in my “Story of the Warrior 
and the Captive.” My grandmother had spoken with a 
number of Indian chieftains, whose rather uncouth names 
were, I think, Simón Coliqueo, Catriel, Pincén, and Na- 
muncurá. In 1874, during one of our civil wars, my 
grandfather, Colonel Borges, met his death. He was forty- 
one at the time. In the complicated circumstances surround- 
ing his defeat at the battle of La Verde, he rode out slowly 
on horseback, wearing a white poncho and followed by ten 
or twelve of his men, toward the enemy lines, where he was 
struck by two Remington bullets. This was the first time 
Remington rifles were used in the Argentine, and it tickles 
my fancy to think that the firm that shaves me every 
morning bears the same name as the one that killed my 
grandfather.
Fanny Haslam was a great reader. When she was over 
eighty, people used to say, in order to be nice to her, that 
nowadays there were no writers who could vie with Dickens 
and Thackeray. My grandmother would answer, “On the
137

whole, I rather prefer Arnold Bennett, Galsworthy, and 
Wells.” When she died, at the age of ninety, in 1935, she 
called us to her side and said, in English (her Spanish was 
fluent but poor), in her thin voice, “I am only an old 
woman dying very, very slowly. There is nothing remark- 
able or interesting about this.” She could see no reason 
whatever why the whole household should be upset, and she 
apologized for taking so long to die.
My father was very intelligent and, like all intelligent 
men, very kind. Once, he told me that I should take a good 
look at soldiers, uniforms, barracks, flags, churches, priests, 
and butcher shops, since all these things were about to 
disappear, and I could tell my children that I had actually 
seen them. The prophecy has not yet come true, unfortu- 
nately. My father was such a modest man that he would 
have liked being invisible. Though he was very proud of his 
English ancestry, he used to joke about it, saying with 
feigned perplexity, “After all, what are the English? Just a 
pack of German agricultural laborers.” His idols were Shel- 
ley, Keats, and Swinburne. As a reader, he had two inter- 
ests. First, books on metaphysics and psychology (Berke- 
ley, Hume, Royce, and William James). Second, literature 
and books about the East (Lane, Burton, and Payne). It was 
he who revealed the power of poetry to me—the fact that 
words are not only a means of communication but also 
magic symbols and music. When I recite poetry in English 
now, my mother tells me I take on his very voice. He also, 
without my being aware of it, gave me my first lessons in 
philosophy. When I was still quite young, he showed me, 
with the aid of a chessboard, the paradoxes of Zeno— 
Achilles and the tortoise, the unmoving flight of the arrow, 
the impossibility of motion. Later, without mentioning 
Berkeley’s name, he did his best to teach me the rudiments 
of idealism.
My mother, Leonor Acevedo de Borges, comes of old 
Argentine and Uruguayan stock, and at ninety-four is still 
hale and hearty and a good Catholic. When I was growing 
up, religion belonged to women and children; most men in 
138
Jorge Luis Borges

An Autobiographical Essay
Buenos Aires were freethinkers—though, had they been 
asked, they might have called themselves Catholics. I think 
I inherited from my mother her quality of thinking the best 
of people and also her strong sense of friendship. My 
mother has always had a hospitable mind. From the time 
she learned English, through my father, she has done most 
of her reading in that language. After my father’s death, 
finding that she was unable to keep her mind on the printed 
page, she tried her hand at translating William Saroyan’s 
The Human Comedy in order to compel herself to concen- 
trate. The translation found its way into print, and she was 
honored for this by a society of Buenos Aires Armenians. 
Later on, she translated some of Hawthorne’s stories and one 
of Herbert Read’s books on art, and she also produced 
some of the translations of Melville, Virginia Woolf, and 
Faulkner that are considered mine. She has always been a 
companion to me—especially in later years, when I went 
blind—and an understanding and forgiving friend. For 
years, until recently, she handled all my secretarial work, 
answering letters, reading to me, taking down my dictation, 
and also traveling with me on many occasions both at home 
and abroad. It was she, though I never gave a thought to it 
at the time, who quietly and effectively fostered my literary 
career.
Her grandfather was Colonel Isidoro Suárez, who, in 
1824, at the age of twenty-four, led a famous charge of 
Peruvian and Colombian cavalry, which turned the tide of 
the battle of Junín, in Peru. This was the next to last battle 
of the South American War of Independence. Although 
Suárez was a second cousin to Juan Manuel de Rosas, who 
ruled as dictator in Argentina from 1835 to 1852, he 
preferred exile and poverty in Montevideo to living under a 
tyranny in Buenos Aires. His lands were, of course, confis- 
cated, and one of his brothers was executed. Another 
member of my mother’s family was Francisco de Laprida, 
who, in 1816, in Tucumán, where he presided over the 
Congress, declared the independence of the Argentine 
Confederation, and was killed in 1829 in a civil war. My
139

mother’s father, Isidoro Acevedo, though a civilian, took 
part in the fighting of yet other civil wars in the 1860’s 
and 1880’s. So, on both sides of my family, I have 
military forebears; this may account for my yearning after 
that epic destiny which my gods denied me, no doubt 
wisely.
I have already said that I spent a great deal of my 
boyhood indoors. Having no childhood friends, my sister 
and I invented two imaginary companions, named, for some 
reason or other, Quilos and The Windmill. (When they 
finally bored us, we told our mother that they had died.) I 
was always very nearsighted and wore glasses, and I was 
rather frail. As most of my people had been soldiers—even 
my father’s brother had been a naval officer—and I knew I 
would never be, I felt ashamed, quite early, to be a bookish 
kind of person and not a man of action. Throughout my 
boyhood, I thought that to be loved would have amounted 
to an injustice. I did not feel I deserved any particular 
love, and I remember my birthdays filled me with shame, 
because everyone heaped gifts on me when I thought that I 
had done nothing to deserve them—that I was a kind of 
fake. After the age of thirty or so, I got over the feeling.
At home, both English and Spanish were commonly used. 
If I were asked to name the chief event in my life, I should 
say my father’s library. In fact, I sometimes think I have 
never strayed outside that library. I can still picture it. It 
was in a room of its own, with glass-fronted shelves, and 
must have contained several thousand volumes. Being so 
nearsighted, I have forgotten most of the faces of that time 
(perhaps even when I think of my grandfather Acevedo I 
am thinking of his photograph), and yet I vividly remem- 
ber so many of the steel engravings in Chambers’s Ency- 
clopædia and in the Britannica. The first novel I ever 
read through was Huckleberry Finn. Next came Roughing 
It and Flush Days in California. I also read books by 
Captain Marryat, Wells’s First Men in the Moon, Poe, a 
one-volume edition of Longfellow, Treasure Island, Dickens, 
Don Quixote, Tom Brown’s School Days, Grimms’ Fairy 
140
Jorge Luis Borges

An Autobiographical Essay
Tales, Lewis Carroll, The Adventures of Mr Verdant Green 
(a now forgotten book), Burton’s A Thousand Nights and a 
Night. The Burton, filled with what was then considered 
obscenity, was forbidden, and I had to read it in hiding up 
on the roof. But at the time, I was so carried away with 
the magic that I took no notice whatever of the objection- 
able parts, reading the tales unaware of any other signifi- 
cance. All the foregoing books I read in English. When 
later I read Don Quixote in the original, it sounded like a 
bad translation to me. I still remember those red volumes 
with the gold lettering of the Garnier edition. At some 
point, my father’s library was broken up, and when I read 
the Quixote in another edition I had the feeling that it 
wasn’t the real Quixote. Later, I had a friend get me the 
Gamier, with the same steel engravings, the same footnotes, 
and also the same errata. All those things form part of the 
book for me; this I consider the real Quixote.
In Spanish, I also read many of the books by Eduardo 
Gutiérrez about Argentine outlaws and desperadoes—Juan 
Moreira foremost among them—as well as his Siluetas mili- 
tares, which contains a forceful account of Colonel Borges’ 
death. My mother forbade the reading of Martín Fierro, 
since that was a book fit only for hoodlums and schoolboys 
and, besides, was not about real gauchos at all. This too I 
read on the sly. Her feelings were based on the fact that 
Hernández had been an upholder of Rosas and therefore 
an enemy to our Unitarian ancestors, I read also Sarmien- 
to’s Facundo, many books on Greek mythology, and later 
Norse. Poetry came to me through English—Shelley, Keats, 
FitzGerald, and Swinburne, those great favorites of my 
father, who could quote them voluminously, and often did.
A tradition of literature ran through my father’s family. 
His great-unde Juan Crisóstomo Lafinur was one of the first 
Argentine poets, and he wrote an ode on the death of his 
friend General Manuel Belgrano, in 1820. One of my 
father’s cousins, Álvaro Melián Lafinur, whom I knew 
from childhood, was a leading minor poet and later found 
his way into the Argentine Academy of Letters. My father’s
141

maternal grandfather, Edward Young Haslam, edited one of 
the first English papers in Argentina, the Southern Cross, 
and was a Doctor of Philosophy or Letters, I’m not sure 
which, of the University of Heidelberg. Haslam could not 
afford Oxford or Cambridge, so he made his way to Germa- 
ny, where he got his degree, going through the whole course 
in Latin. Eventually, he died in Paraná. My father wrote a 
novel, which he published in Majorca in 1921, about the 
history of Entre Ríos. It was called The Caudillo. He also 
wrote (and destroyed) a book of essays, and published a 
translation of FitzGerald’s Omar Khayyám in the same 
meter as the original. He destroyed a book of Oriental 
stories—in the manner of the Arabian Nights—and a drama, 
Hacia la nada (Toward Nothingness), about a man’s disap- 
pointment in his son. He published some fine sonnets after 
the style of the Argentine poet Enrique Banchs. From the 
time I was a boy, when blindness came to him, it was 
tacitly understood that I had to fulfill the literary destiny 
that circumstances had denied my father. This was some- 
thing that was taken for granted (and such things are far 
more important than things that are merely said). I was 
expected to be a writer.
I first started writing when I was six or seven. I tried to 
imitate classic writers of Spanish—Miguel de Cervantes, for 
example. I had set down in quite bad English a kind of 
handbook on Greek mythology, no doubt cribbed from 
Lemprière. This may have been my first literary venture. 
My first story was a rather nonsensical piece after the 
manner of Cervantes, an old-fashioned romance called “La 
visera fatal” (The Fatal Helmet). I very neatly wrote these 
things into copybooks. My father never interfered. He 
wanted me to commit all my own mistakes, and once said, 
“Children educate their parents, not the other way 
around.” When I was nine or so, I translated Oscar Wilde’s 
“The Happy Prince” into Spanish, and it was published in 
one of the Buenos Aires dailies, El País. Since it was 
signed merely “Jorge Borges,” people naturally assumed 
the translation was my father’s.
Jorge Luis Borges
142

An Autobiographical Essay
I take no pleasure whatever in recalling my early 
schooldays. To begin with, I did not start school until I was 
nine. This was because my father, as an anarchist, dis- 
trusted all enterprises run by the State. As I wore specta- 
cles and dressed in an Eton collar and tie, I was jeered at 
and bullied by most of my schoolmates, who were amateur 
hooligans. I cannot remember the name of the school but 
recall that it was on Thames Street. My father used to say 
that Argentine history had taken the place of the 
catechism, so we were expected to worship all things Argen- 
tine. We were taught Argentine history, for example, before 
we were allowed any knowledge of the many lands and 
many centuries that went into its making. As far as Spanish 
composition goes, I was taught to write in a flowery way: 
Aquellos que lucharon por una patria libre, independiente, 
gloriosa . . . (Those who struggled for a free, independent, 
and glorious nation . . .). Later on, in Geneva, I was to be 
told that such writing was meaningless and that I must see 
things through my own eyes. My sister Norah, who was 
born in 1901, of course attended a girls’ school.
During all these years, we usually spent our summers out 
in Adrogué, some ten or fifteen miles to the south of 
Buenos Aires, where we had a place of our own—a large 
one-story house with grounds, two summerhouses, a wind- 
mill, and a shaggy brown sheepdog. Adrogué then was a 
lost and undisturbed maze of summer homes surrounded by 
iron fences with masonry planters on the gateposts, of 
parks, of streets that radiated out of the many plazas, and 
of the ubiquitous smell of eucalyptus trees. We continued 
to visit Adrogué for decades.
My first real experience of the pampa came around 1909, 
on a trip we took to a place belonging to relatives near San 
Nicolás, to the northwest of Buenos Aires. I remember that 
the nearest house was a kind of blur on the horizon. This 
endless distance, I found out, was called the pampa, and 
when I learned that the farmhands were gauchos, like the 
characters in Eduardo Gutiérrez, that gave them a certain 
glamor. I have always come to things after coming to books.
143

Jorge Luis Borges
Once, I was allowed to accompany them on horseback, tak- 
ing cattle to the river early one morning. The men were small 
and darkish and wore bombachas, a kind of wide, baggy 
trousers. When I asked them if they knew how to swim, they 
replied, “Water is meant for cattle.” My mother gave a doll, 
in a large cardboard box, to the foreman’s daughter. The 
next year, we went back and asked after the little girl. 
“What a delight the doll has been to her!” they told us. And 
we were shown it, still in its box, nailed to the wall like an 
image. Of course, the girl was allowed only to look at it, not 
to touch it, for it might have been soiled or broken. There 
it was, high up out of harm’s way, worshiped from afar. 
Lugones has written that in Córdoba, before magazines 
came in, he had many times seen a playing card used as a 
picture and nailed to the wall in gauchos’ shacks. The four 
of copas, with its small lion and two towers, was particular- 
ly coveted. I think I began writing a poem about gauchos, 
probably under the influence of the poet Ascasubi, before I 
went to Geneva. I recall trying to work in as many gaucho 
words as I could, but the technical difficulties were beyond 
me. I never got past a few stanzas.
Europe
In 1914, we moved to Europe. My father’s eyesight had 
begun to fail and I remember his saying, “How on earth 
can I sign my name to legal papers when I am unable to 
read them?” Forced into early retirement, he planned our 
trip in exactly ten days. The world was unsuspicious then; 
there were no passports or other red tape. We first spent 
some weeks in Paris, a city that neither then nor since has 
particularly charmed me, as it does every other good Ar- 
gentine. Perhaps, without knowing it, I was always a bit of 
a Britisher; in fact, I always think of Waterloo as a victo- 
ry. The idea of the trip was for my sister and me to go to 
school in Geneva; we were to live with my maternal grand- 
mother, who traveled with us and eventually died there, 
144

An Autobiographical Essay
while my parents toured the Continent. At the same time, 
my father was to be treated by a famous Genevan eye 
doctor. Europe in those days was cheaper than Buenos 
Aires, and Argentine money then stood for something. We 
were so ignorant of history, however, that we had no idea 
that the First World War would break out in August. My 
mother and father were in Germany when it happened, but 
managed to get back to us in Geneva. A year or so later, 
despite the war, we were able to journey across the Alps 
into northern Italy. I have vivid memories of Verona and 
Venice. In the vast and empty amphitheater of Verona I 
recited, loud and bold, several gaucho verses from As- 
casubi.
That first fall—1914—I started school at the College of 
Geneva, founded by John Calvin. It was a day school. In 
my class there were some forty of us; a good half were 
foreigners. The chief subject was Latin, and I soon found out 
that one could let other studies slide a bit as long as one’s 
Latin was good. All these other courses, however—algebra, 
chemistry, 
physics, 
mineralogy, 
botany, 
zoology—were 
studied in French. That year, I passed all my exams suc- 
cessfully, except for French itself. Without a word to me, 
my fellow-schoolmates sent a petition around to the head- 
master, which they had all signed. They pointed out that I 
had had to study all of the different subjects in French, a 
language I also had to learn. They asked the headmaster to 
take this into account, and he very kindly did so. At first, I 
had not even understood when a teacher was calling on me, 
because my name was pronounced in the French manner, in 
a single syllable (rhyming roughly with “forge”), while we 
pronounce it with two syllables, the “g” sounding like a 
strong Scottish “h.” Every time I had to answer, my 
schoolmates would nudge me.
We lived in a flat on the southern, or old, side of town. I 
still know Geneva far better than I know Buenos Aires, 
which is easily explained by the fact that in Geneva no two 
streetcorners are alike and one quickly learns the differ- 
ences. Every day, I walked along that green and icy river,
145

the Rhone, which runs through the very heart of the city, 
spanned by seven quite different-looking bridges. The Swiss 
are rather proud and standoffish. My two bosom friends 
were of Polish-Jewish origin—Simon Jichlinski and Maurice 
Abramowicz. One became a lawyer and the other a physi- 
cian. I taught them to play truco, and they learned so well 
and fast that at the end of our first game they left me 
without a cent. I became a good Latin scholar, while I did 
most of my private reading in English. At home, we spoke 
Spanish, but my sister’s French soon became so good she 
even dreamed in it. I remember my mother’s coming home 
one day and finding Norah hidden behind a red plush 
curtain, crying out in fear, “Une mouche, une mouche!” It 
seems she had adopted the French notion that flies are 
dangerous. “You come out of there,” my mother told her, 
somewhat unpatriotically. “You were born and bred among 
flies!” As a result of the war—apart from the Italian trip 
and journeys inside Switzerland—we did no traveling. Later 
on, braving German submarines and in the company of 
only four or five other passengers, my English grandmother 
joined us.
On my own, outside of school, I took up the study of 
German. I was sent on this adventure by Carlyle’s Sartor 
Resartus (The Tailor Retailored), which dazzled and also 
bewildered me. The hero, Diogenes Devil’sdung, is a Ger- 
man professor of idealism. In German literature I was 
looking for something Germanic, akin to Tacitus, but I was 
only later to find this in Old English and in Old Norse. 
German literature turned out to be romantic and sickly. At 
first, I tried Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason but was de- 
feated by it, as most people—including most Germans—are. 
Then I thought verse would be easier, because of its brevi- 
ty. So I got hold of a copy of Heine’s early poems, the 
Lyrisches Intermezzo, and a German-English dictionary. Lit- 
tle by little, owing to Heine’s simple vocabulary, I found I 
could do without the dictionary. Soon I had worked my 
way into the loveliness of the language. I also managed to 
read Meyrink’s novel Der Golem. (In 1969, when I was in 
146
Jorge Luis Borges

An Autobiographical Essay
Israel, I talked over the Bohemian legend of the Golem 
with Gershom Scholem, a leading scholar of Jewish mysti- 
cism, whose name I had twice used as the only possible 
rhyming word in a poem of my own on the Golem.) I tried 
to be interested in Jean-Paul Richter, for Carlyle’s and De 
Quincey’s sake—this was around 1917—but I soon discov- 
ered that I was very bored by the reading. Richter, in spite 
of his two British champions, seemed to me very long- 
winded and perhaps a passionless writer. I became, howev- 
er, very interested in German expressionism and still think 
of it as beyond other contemporary schools, such as 
imagism, cubism, futurism, surrealism, and so on. A few 
years later, in Madrid, I was to attempt some of the first, 
and perhaps the only, translations of a number of expres- 
sionist poets into Spanish.
At some point while in Switzerland, I began reading 
Schopenhauer. Today, were I to choose a single philoso- 
pher, I would choose him. If the riddle of the universe can 
be stated in words, I think these words would be in his 
writings. I have read him many times over, both in German 
and, with my father and his close friend Macedonio Fer- 
nández, in translation. I still think of German as being a 
beautiful language—perhaps more beautiful than the litera- 
ture it has produced. French, rather paradoxically, has a 
fine literature despite its fondness for schools and move- 
ments, but the language itself is, I think, rather ugly. 
Things tend to sound trivial when they are said in French. 
In fact, I even think of Spanish as being the better of the 
two languages, though Spanish words are far too long and 
cumbersome. As an Argentine writer, I have to cope with 
Spanish and so am only too aware of its shortcomings. I 
remember that Goethe wrote that he had to deal with the 
worst language in the world—German. I suppose most writ- 
ers think along these lines concerning the language they 
have to struggle with. As for Italian, I have read and reread 
The Divine Comedy in more than a dozen different edi- 
tions. I’ve also read Ariosto, Tasso, Croce, and Gentile, but
147

I am quite unable to speak Italian or to follow an Italian 
play or film.
It was also in Geneva that I first met Walt Whitman, 
through a German translation by Johannes Schlaf (“Als ich 
in Alabama meinen Morgengang machte”—“As I have 
walk’d in Alabama my morning walk”). Of course, I was 
struck by the absurdity of reading an American poet in 
German, so I ordered a copy of Leaves of Grass from Lon- 
don. I remember it still—bound in green. For a time, I 
thought of Whitman not only as a great poet but as the only 
poet. In fact, I thought that all poets the world over had 
been merely leading up to Whitman until 1855, and that not 
to imitate him was a proof of ignorance. This feeling had 
already come over me with Carlyle’s prose, which is now 
unbearable to me, and with the poetry of Swinburne. These 
were phases I went through. Later on, I was to go through 
similar experiences of being overwhelmed by some particu- 
lar writer.
We remained in Switzerland until 1919. After three or 
four years in Geneva, we spent a year in Lugano. I had my 
bachelor’s degree by then, and it was now understood that I 
should devote myself to writing. I wanted to show my 
manuscripts to my father, but he told me he didn’t believe 
in advice and that I must work my way all by myself 
through trial and error. I had been writing sonnets in 
English and in French. The English sonnets were poor 
imitations of Wordsworth, and the French, in their own 
watery way, were imitative of symbolist poetry. I still 
recall one line of my French experiments: “Petite boîte 
noire pour le violon casse.” The whole piece was titled 
“Poeme pour être recité avec un accent russe.” As I 
knew I wrote a foreigner’s French, I thought a Russian 
accent better than an Argentine one. In my English experi- 
ments, I affected some eighteenth-century mannerisms, such 
as “o’er” instead of “over” and, for the sake of metrical 
ease, “doth sing” instead of “sings.” I knew, however, that 
Spanish would be my unavoidable destiny.
We decided to go home, but to spend a year or so in 
148
Jorge Luis Borges

An Autobiographical Essay
Spain first. Spain at that time was slowly being discovered 
by Argentines. Until then, even eminent writers like Leo- 
poldo Lugones and Ricardo Güiraldes deliberately left 
Spain out of their European travels. This was no whim. In 
Buenos Aires, Spaniards always held menial jobs—as domes- 
tic servants, waiters, and laborers—or were small tradesmen, 
and we Argentines never thought of ourselves as Spanish. 
We had, in fact, left off being Spaniards in 1816, when 
we declared our independence from Spain. When, as a boy, 
I read Prescott’s Conquest of Peru, it amazed me to find 
that he portrayed the conquistadors in a romantic way. To 
me, descended from certain of these officials, they were an 
uninteresting lot. Through French eyes, however, Latin 
Americans saw the Spaniards as picturesque, thinking of 
them in terms of the stock in trade of García Lorca— 
gypsies, bullfights, and Moorish architecture. But though 
Spanish was our language and we came mostly of Spanish 
and Portuguese blood, my own family never thought of our 
trip in terms of going back to Spain after an absence of 
some three centuries.
We went to Majorca because it was cheap, beautiful, and 
had hardly any tourists but ourselves. We lived there near- 
ly a whole year, in Palma and in Valldemosa, a village high 
up in the hills. I went on studying Latin, this time under the 
tutelage of a priest, who told me that since the innate was 
sufficient to his needs, he had never attempted reading a 
novel. We went over Virgil, of whom I still think highly. I 
remember I astonished the natives by my fine swimming, 
for I had learned in swift rivers, such as the Uruguay and 
the Rhone, while Majorcans were used only to a quiet, 
tideless sea. My father was writing his novel, which harked 
back to old times during the civil war of the 1870’s in his 
native Entre Ríos. I recall giving him some quite bad 
metaphors, borrowed from the German expressionists, which 
he accepted out of resignation. He had some five hundred 
copies of the book printed, and brought them back to 
Buenos Aires, where he gave them away to friends. Every 
time the word “Paraná”—his home town—had come up
149

in the manuscript, the printers changed it to “Panamá,” 
thinking they were correcting a mistake. Not to give them 
trouble, and also seeing it was funnier that way, my father 
let this pass. Now I repent my youthful intrusions into his 
book. Seventeen years later, before he died, he told me that 
he would very much like me to rewrite the novel in a
straightforward way, with all the fine writing and purple
patches left out. I myself in those days wrote a story about 
a werewolf and sent it to a popular magazine in Madrid, La 
Esfera, whose editors very wisely turned it down.
The winter of 1919-20 we spent in Seville, where I saw 
my first poem into print. It was titled “Hymn to the Sea” 
and appeared in the magazine Grecia, in its issue of De- 
cember 31, 1919. In the poem, I tried my hardest to be 
Walt Whitman:
O sea! O myth! O sun! O wide resting place!
I know why 1 love you. I know that we are both very old, 
that we have known each other for centuries. . . .
O Protean, I have been born of you—
both of us chained and wandering,
both of us hungering for stars,
both of us with hopes and disappointments. . . !
Today, I hardly think of the sea, or even of myself, as 
hungering for stars. Years after, when I came across Arnold 
Bennett’s phrase “the third-rate grandiose,” I understood at 
once what he meant. And yet when I arrived in Madrid a 
few months later, as this was the only poem I had ever 
printed, people there thought of me as a singer of the sea.
In Seville, I fell in with the literary group formed around 
Grecia. This group, who called themselves ultraists, had set 
out to renew literature, a branch of the arts of which they 
knew nothing whatever. One of them once told me his 
whole reading had been the Bible, Cervantes, Darío, and 
one or two of the books of the Master, Rafael Cansinos- 
Assens. It baffled my Argentine mind to learn that they 
had no French and no inkling at all that such a thing as 
150
Jorge Luis Borges

An Autobiographical Essay
English literature existed. I was even introduced to a local 
worthy popularly known as “the Humanist” and was not 
long in discovering that his Latin was far smaller than mine. 
As for Grecia itself, the editor, Isaac del Vando Villar, had 
the whole corpus of his poetry written for him by one or 
another of his assistants. I remember one of them telling 
me one day, “I’m very busy—Isaac is writing a poem.”
Next, we went to Madrid, and there the great event to 
me was my friendship with Rafael Cansinos-Assens. I still 
like to think of myself as his disciple. He had come from 
Seville, where he had studied for the priesthood, but, having 
found the name Cansinos in the archives of the Inquisition, 
he decided he was a Jew. This led him to the study of 
Hebrew, and later on he even had himself circumcised. 
Literary friends from Andalusia took me to meet him. I 
timidly congratulated him on a poem he had written about 
the sea. “Yes,” he said, “and how I’d like to see it before I 
die.” He was a tall man with the Andalusian contempt for 
all things Castilian. The most remarkable fact about Can- 
sinos was that he lived completely for literature, without 
regard for money or fame. He was a fine poet and wrote a 
book of psalms—chiefly erotic—called El candelabro de los 
siete brazos, which was published in 1914. He also wrote 
novels, stories, and essays, and, when I knew him, presided 
over a literary circle.
Every Saturday I would go to the Café Colonial, where 
we met at midnight, and the conversation lasted until 
daybreak. Sometimes there were as many as twenty or 
thirty of us. The group despised all Spanish local color— 
cante jongo and bullfights. They admired American jazz, 
and were more interested in being Europeans than Span- 
iards. Cansinos would propose a subject—The Metaphor, 
Free Verse, The Traditional Forms of Poetry, Narrative 
Poetry, The Adjective, The Verb. In his own quiet way, he 
was a dictator, allowing no unfriendly allusions to contem- 
porary writers and trying to keep the talk on a high plane.
Cansinos was a wide reader. He had translated De 
Quincey’s Opium-Eater, the Meditations of Marcus Aureli-
151

us from the Greek, novels of Barbusse, and Schwob’s Vies 
imaginaires. Later, he was to undertake complete translations 
of Goethe and Dostoevski. He also made the first Spanish 
version of the Arabian Nights, which is very free compared 
to Burton’s or Lane’s, but which makes, I think, for more 
pleasurable reading. Once, I went to see him and he took 
me into his library. Or, rather, I should say his whole house 
was a library. It was like making your way through a 
woods. He was too poor to have shelves, and the books were 
piled one on top of the other from floor to ceiling, forcing 
you to thread your way among the vertical columns. Can- 
sinos seemed to me as if he were all the past of that Europe 
I was leaving behind—something like the symbol of all 
culture, Western and Eastern. But he had a perversity that 
made him fail to get on with his leading contemporaries. It 
lay in writing books that lavishly praised second- or third- 
rate writers. At the time, Ortega y Gasset was at the height 
of his fame, but Cansinos thought of him as a bad philoso- 
pher and a bad writer. What I got from him, chiefly, was 
the pleasure of literary conversation. Also, I was stimulated 
by him to far-flung reading. In writing, I began aping him. 
He wrote long and flowing sentences with an un-Spanish 
and strongly Hebrew flavor to them.
Oddly, it was Cansinos who, in 1919, invented the term 
“ultraism.” He thought Spanish literature had always been 
behind the times. Under the pen name of Juan Las, he wrote 
some short, laconic ultraist pieces. The whole thing—I see 
now—was done in a spirit of mockery. But we youngsters 
took it very seriously. Another of the earnest followers was 
Guillermo de Torre, whom I met in Madrid that spring and 
who married my sister Norah nine years later.
In Madrid at this time, there was another group gathered 
around Ramón Gómez de la Serna. I went there once and 
didn’t like the way they behaved. They had a buffoon who 
wore a bracelet with a rattle attached. He would be made 
to shake hands with people and the rattle would rattle and 
Gómez de la Serna would invariably say, “Where’s the 
snake?” That was supposed to be funny. Once, he turned to 
152
Jorge Luis Borges

An Autobiographical Essay
me proudly and remarked, “You’ve never seen this kind of 
thing in Buenos Aires, have you?” I owned, thank God, 
that I hadn’t.
In Spain, I wrote two books. One was a series of essays 
called, I now wonder why, Los naipes del tahur (The Sharp- 
er’s Cards). They were literary and political essays (I was 
still an anarchist and a freethinker and in favor of pac- 
ifism), written under the influence of Pío Baroja. Their 
aim was to be bitter and relentless, but they were, as a 
matter of fact, quite tame. I went in for using such words 
as “fools,” “harlots,” “liars.” Failing to find a publisher, I 
destroyed the manuscript on my return to Buenos Aires. 
The second book was titled either The Red Psalms or The 
Red Rhythms. It was a collection of poems—perhaps some 
twenty in all—in free verse and in praise of the Russian 
Revolution, the brotherhood of man, and pacifism. Three or 
four of them found their way into magazines—“Bolshevik 
Epic,” “Trenches,” “Russia.” This book I destroyed in 
Spain on the eve of our departure. I was then ready to go 
home.
Buenos Aires
We returned to Buenos Aires on the Reina Victoria Eugenia 
toward the end of March, 1921. It came to me as a 
surprise, after living in so many European cities—after so 
many memories of Geneva, Zurich, Nîmes, Córdoba, and 
Lisbon—to find that my native town had grown, and that it 
was now a very large, sprawling, and almost endless city of 
low buildings with flat roofs, stretching west toward what 
geographers and literary hands call the pampa. It was more 
than a homecoming; it was a rediscovery. I was able to see 
Buenos Aires keenly and eagerly because I had been away 
from it for a long time. Had I never gone abroad, I wonder 
whether I would ever have seen it with the peculiar shock 
and glow that it now gave me. The city—not the whole city, 
of course, but a few places in it that became emotionally
153

significant to me—inspired the poems of my first published 
book, Fervor de Buenos Aires.
I wrote these poems in 1921 and 1922, and the 
volume came out early in 1923. The book was actually 
printed in five days; the printing had to be rushed, because 
it was necessary for us to return to Europe. (My father 
wanted to consult his Genevan doctor about his sight.) I 
had bargained for sixty-four pages, but the manuscript ran 
too long and at the last minute five poems had to be left 
out—mercifully. I can’t remember a single thing about 
them. The book was produced in a somewhat boyish spirit. 
No proofreading was done, no table of contents was 
provided, and the pages were unnumbered. My sister made 
a woodcut for the cover, and three hundred copies were 
printed. In those days, publishing a book was something of 
a private venture. I never thought of sending copies to the 
booksellers or out for review. Most of them I just gave 
away. I recall one of my methods of distribution. Having 
noticed that many people who went to the offices of Noso- 
tros—one of the older, more solid literary magazines of the 
time—left their overcoats hanging in the cloak room, I 
brought fifty or a hundred copies to Alfredo Bianchi, one of 
the editors. Bianchi stared at me in amazement and said, 
“Do you expect me to sell these books for you?”
“No,” I answered. “Although I’ve written them, I’m not 
altogether a lunatic. I thought I might ask you to slip some 
of these books into the pockets of those coats hanging out 
there.” He generously did so. When I came back after a 
year’s absence, I found that some of the inhabitants of the 
overcoats had read my poems, and a few had even written 
about them. As a matter of fact, in this way I got myself a 
small reputation as a poet.
The book was essentially romantic, though it was written 
in a rather lean style and abounded in laconic metaphors. 
It celebrated sunsets, solitary places, and unfamiliar cor- 
ners; it ventured into Berkeleyan metaphysics and family 
history; it recorded early loves. At the same time, I also 
154
Jorge Luis Borges

An Autobiographical Essay
mimicked the Spanish seventeenth century and cited Sir 
Thomas Browne’s Religio Medici in my preface. I’m afraid 
the book was a plum pudding—there was just too much in 
it. And yet, looking back on it now, I think I have never 
strayed beyond that book. I feel that all my subsequent 
writing has only developed themes first taken up there; I 
feel that all during my lifetime I have been rewriting that 
one book.
Were the poems in Fervor de Buenos Aires ultraist poet- 
ry? When I came back from Europe in 1921, I came 
bearing the banners of ultraism. I am still known to literary 
historians as “the father of Argentine ultraism.” When I 
talked things over at the time with fellow-poets Eduardo 
González Lanuza, Norah Lange, Francisco Piñero, my cous- 
in Guillermo Juan (Borges), and Roberto Ortelli, we came 
to the conclusion that Spanish ultraism was overburdened— 
after the manner of futurism—with modernity and gadgets. 
We were unimpressed by railway trains, by propellers, by 
airplanes, and by electric fans. While in our manifestos we 
still upheld the primacy of the metaphor and the elimina- 
tion of transitions and decorative adjectives, what we 
wanted to write was essential poetry—poems beyond the 
here and now, free of local color and contemporary circum- 
stances. I think the poem “Plainness” sufficiently illustrates 
what I personally was after:
The garden’s grillwork gate 
opens with the ease of a page 
in a much thumbed book, 
and, once inside, our eyes 
have no need to dwell on objects 
already fixed and exact in memory.
Here habits and minds and the private language
all families invent
are everyday things to me.
What necessity is there to speak 
or pretend to be someone else?
155

The whole house knows me,
they’re aware of my worries and weakness.
This is the best that can happen—
what Heaven perhaps will grant us:
not to be wondered at or required to succeed
but simply to be let in
as part of an undeniable Reality,
like stones of the road, like trees.
I think this is a far cry from the timid extravagances of 
my earlier Spanish ultraist exercises, when I saw a trolley 
car as a man shouldering a gun, or the sunrise as a shout, 
or the setting sun as being crucified in the west. A sane 
friend to whom I later recited such absurdities remarked, 
“Ah, I see you held the view that poetry’s chief aim is to 
startle.” As to whether the poems in Fervor are ultraist or 
not, the answer—for me—was given by my friend and 
French translator Néstor Ibarra, who said, “Borges left off 
being an ultraist poet with the first ultraist poem he wrote.” 
I can now only regret my early ultraist excesses. After near- 
ly a half century, I find myself still striving to live down that 
awkward period of my life.
Perhaps the major event of my return was Macedonio 
Fernández. Of all the people I have met in my life—and I 
have met some quite remarkable men—no one has ever 
made so deep and so lasting an impression on me as 
Macedonio. A tiny figure in a black bowler hat, he was 
waiting for us on the Dársena Norte when we landed, and 
I came to inherit his friendship from my father. Both men 
had been born in 1874. Paradoxically, Macedonio was an 
outstanding conversationalist and at the same time a man 
of long silences and few words. We met on Saturday eve- 
ning at a café—the Perla, in the Plaza del Once. There we 
would talk till daybreak, Macedonio presiding. As in 
Madrid Cansinos had stood for all learning, Macedonio now 
stood for pure thinking. At the time, I was a great reader 
and went out very seldom (almost every night after dinner, 
I used to go to bed and read), but my whole week was lit 
156
Jorge Luis Borges

An Autobiographical Essay
up with the expectation that on Saturday I’d be seeing and 
hearing Macedonio. He lived quite near us and I could 
have seen him whenever I wanted, but I somehow felt that 
I had no right to that privilege and that in order to give 
Macedonio’s Saturday its full value I had to forgo him 
throughout the week. At these meetings, Macedonio would 
speak perhaps three or four times, risking only a few 
quiet observations, which were addressed—seemingly—to his 
neighbor alone. These remarks were never affirmative. Mace- 
donio was very courteous and soft-spoken and would say, for 
example, “Well, I suppose you’ve noticed . . .” And there- 
upon he would let loose some striking, highly original 
thought. But, invariably, he attributed his remark to the 
hearer.
He was a frail, gray man with the kind of ash-colored 
hair and moustache that made him look like Mark Twain. 
The resemblance pleased him, but when he was reminded 
that he also looked like Paul Valéry, he resented it, since 
he had little use for Frenchmen. He always wore that black 
bowler, and for all I know may even have slept in it. He 
never undressed to go to bed, and at night, to fend off 
drafts that he thought might cause him toothache, he 
draped a towel around his head. This made him look like 
an Arab. Among his other eccentricities were his national- 
ism (he admired one Argentine president after another for 
the sufficient reason that the Argentine electorate could not 
be wrong), his fear of dentistry (this led him to tugging at 
his teeth, in public, behind a hand, so as to stave off the 
dentist’s pliers), and a habit of falling sentimentally in love 
with streetwalkers.
As a writer, Macedonio published several rather unusual 
volumes, and papers of his are still being collected close to 
twenty years after his death. His first book, published in 
1928, was called No toda es vigilia la de los ojos abiertos 
(We’re Not Always Awake When Our Eyes Are Open). It 
was an extended essay on idealism, written in a deliberately 
tangled and crabbed style, in order, I suppose, to match the 
tangledness of reality. The next year, a miscellany of his
157

writings appeared—Papeles de Recienvenido (Newcomer’s 
Papers)—in which I myself took a hand, collecting and 
ordering the chapters. This was a sort of miscellany of 
jokes within jokes. Macedonio also wrote novels and poems, 
all of them startling but hardly readable. One novel of 
twenty chapters is prefaced by fifty-six different forewords. 
For all his brilliance, I don’t think Macedonio is to be 
found in his writings at all. The real Macedonio was in his 
conversation.
Macedonio lived modestly in boardinghouses, which he 
seemed to change with frequency. This was because he was 
always skipping out on the rent. Every time he would 
move, he’d leave behind piles and piles of manuscripts. 
Once, his friends scolded him about this, telling him it was 
a shame all that work should be lost. He said to us, “Do 
you really think I’m rich enough to lose anything?”
Readers of Hume and Schopenhauer may find little that 
is new in Macedonio, but the remarkable thing about him is 
that he arrived at his conclusions by himself. Later on, he 
actually read Hume, Schopenhauer, Berkeley, and William 
James, but I suspect he had not done much other reading, 
and he always quoted the same authors. He considered Sir 
Walter Scott the greatest of novelists, maybe just out of 
loyalty to a boyhood enthusiasm. He had once exchanged 
letters with William James, whom he had written in a 
medley of English, German, and French, explaining that it 
was because “I knew so little in any one of these languages 
that I had constantly to shift tongues.” I think of Macedo- 
nio as reading a page or so and then being spurred into 
thought. He not only argued that we are such stuff as 
dreams are made on, but he really believed that we are all 
living in a dream world. Macedonio doubted whether truth 
was communicable. He thought that certain philosophers 
had discovered it but that they had failed to communicate 
it completely. However, he also believed that the discovery 
of truth was quite easy. He once told me that if he could lie 
out on the pampa, forgetting the world, himself, and his 
quest, truth might suddenly reveal itself to him. He added 
158
Jorge Luis Borges

An Autobiographical Essay
that, of course, it might be impossible to put that sudden 
wisdom into words.
Macedonio was fond of compiling small oral catalogs of 
people of genius, and in one of them I was amazed to find 
the name of a very lovable lady of our acquaintance, Quica 
González Acha de Tomkinson Alvear. I stared at him 
open-mouthed. I somehow did not think Quica ranked with 
Hume and Schopenhauer. But Macedonio said, “Philoso- 
phers have had to try and explain the universe, while Quica 
simply feels and understands it” He would turn to her and 
ask, “Quica, what is Being?” Quica would answer, “I don’t 
know what you mean, Macedonio.” “You see,” he would 
say to me, “she understands so perfectly that she cannot 
even grasp the fact that we are puzzled.” This was his 
proof of Quica’s being a woman of genius. When I later told 
him he might say the same of a child or a cat, Macedonio 
took it angrily.
Before Macedonio, I had always been a credulous reader. 
His chief gift to me was to make me read skeptically. At 
the outset, I plagiarized him devotedly, picking up certain 
stylistic mannerisms of his that I later came to regret. I 
look back on him now, however, as an Adam bewildered by 
the Garden of Eden. His genius survives in but a few of his 
pages; his influence was of a Socratic nature. I truly loved 
the man, on this side idolatry, as much as any.
This period, from 1921 to 1930, was one of great 
activity, but much of it was perhaps reckless and even 
pointless. I wrote and published no less than seven books— 
four of them essays and three of them verse. I also founded 
three magazines and contributed with fair frequency to 
nearly a dozen other periodicals, among them La Prensa, 
Nosostros, Inicial, Criterio, and Síntesis. This productivity 
now amazes me as much as the fact that I feel only the 
remotest kinship with the work of these years. Three of the 
four essay collections—whose names are best forgotten—I 
have never allowed to be reprinted. In fact, when in 1953 
my present publisher—Emecé—proposed to bring out my 
“complete writings,” the only reason I accepted was that it
159

would allow me to keep those preposterous volumes sup- 
pressed. This reminds me of Mark Twain’s suggestion that 
a fine library could be started by leaving out the works of 
Jane Austen, and that even if that library contained no 
other books it would still be a fine library, since her books 
were left out.
In the first of these reckless compilations, there was a 
quite bad essay on Sir Thomas Browne, which may have 
been the first ever attempted on him in the Spanish lan- 
guage. There was another essay that set out to classify 
metaphors as though other poetic elements, such as rhythm 
and music, could be safely ignored. There was a longish 
essay on the nonexistence of the ego, cribbed from Bradley 
or the Buddha or Macedonio Fernández. When I wrote 
these pieces, I was trying to play the sedulous ape to two 
Spanish baroque seventeenth-century writers, Quevedo and 
Saavedra Fajardo, who stood in their own stiff, arid, Span- 
ish way for the same kind of writing as Sir Thomas Browne 
in “Urne-Buriall.” I was doing my best to write Latin in 
Spanish, and the book collapses under the sheer weight of 
its involutions and sententious judgments. The next of 
these failures was a kind of reaction. I went to the other 
extreme—I tried to be as Argentine as I could. I got hold of 
Segovia’s dictionary of Argentinisms and worked in so 
many local words that many of my countrymen could 
hardly understand it. Since I have mislaid the dictionary, 
I’m not sure I would any longer understand the book 
myself, and so have given it up as utterly hopeless. The 
third of these unmentionables stands for a kind of partial 
redemption. I was creeping out of the second book’s style 
and slowly going back to sanity, to writing with some 
attempt at logic and at making things easy for the reader 
rather than dazzling him with purple passages. One such 
experiment, of dubious value, was “Hombres pelearon” 
(Men Fought), my first venture into the mythology of 
the old Northside of Buenos Aires. In it, I was trying 
to tell a purely Argentine story in an Argentine way. 
This story is one I have been retelling, with small varia- 
160
Jorge Luis Borges

An Autobiographical Essay
tions, ever since. It is the tale of the motiveless, or disinter- 
ested, duel—of courage for its own sake. I insisted when I 
wrote it that in our sense of the language we Argentines 
were different from the Spaniards. Now, instead, I think we 
should try to stress our linguistic affinities. I was still writ- 
ing, but in a milder way, so that Spaniards would not 
understand me—writing, it might be said, to be un- 
understood. The Gnostics claimed that the only way to 
avoid a sin was to commit it and be rid of it. In my books 
of these years, I seem to have committed most of the major 
literary sins, some of them under the influence of a great 
writer, Leopoldo Lugones, whom I still cannot help admiring. 
These sins were fine writing, local color, a quest for the 
unexpected, and a seventeenth-century style. Today, I no 
longer feel guilty over these excesses; those books were 
written by somebody else. Until a few years ago, if the 
price were not too stiff, I would buy up copies and burn 
them.
Of the poems of this time, I should perhaps have also 
suppressed my second collection, Luna de enfrente (Moon 
Across the Way). It was published in 1925 and is a kind 
of riot of sham local color. Among its tomfooleries were the 
spelling of my first name in the nineteenth-century Chilean 
fashion as “Jorje” (it was a halfhearted attempt at phonetic 
spelling); the spelling of the Spanish for “and” as “i” 
instead of “y” (our greatest writer, Sarmiento, had done 
the same, trying to be as un-Spanish as he could); and the 
omission of the final “d” in words like “autoridá” and 
“ciudá” In later editions, I dropped the worst poems, 
pruned the eccentricities, and, successively—through several 
reprintings—revised and toned down the verses. The third 
collection of the time, Cuaderno San Martín (the title has 
nothing to do with the national hero; it was merely the 
brand name of the out-of-fashion copybook into which I 
wrote the poems), includes some quite legitimate pieces, 
such as “La noche que en el Sur lo velaron,” whose title has 
been strikingly translated by Robert Fitzgerald as “Death- 
watch on the Southside,” and “Muertes de Buenos Aires”
161

(Deaths of Buenos Aires), about the two chief graveyards 
of the Argentine capital. One poem in the book (no favorite 
of mine) has somehow become a minor Argentine classic: 
“The Mythical Founding of Buenos Aires.” This book, too, 
has been improved, or purified, by cuts and revisions down 
through the years.
In 1929, that third book of essays won the Second 
Municipal Prize of three thousand pesos, which in those 
days was a lordly sum of money. I was, for one thing, to 
acquire with it a secondhand set of the Eleventh Edition of 
the Encyclopædia Britannica. For another, I was insured 
a year’s leisure and decided I would write a longish book on 
a wholly Argentine subject. My mother wanted me to write 
about any of three really worthwhile poets—Ascasubi, Alma- 
fuerte, or Lugones. I now wish I had. Instead, I chose to 
write about a nearly invisible popular poet, Evaristo Car- 
riego. My mother and father pointed out that his poems were 
not good. “But he was a friend and neighbor of ours,” I 
said. “Well, if you think that qualifies him as the subject 
for a book, go ahead,” they said. Carriego was the man who 
discovered the literary possibilities of the run-down and 
ragged outskirts of the city—the Palermo of my boyhood. 
His career followed the same evolution as the tango— 
rollicking, daring, courageous at first, then turning senti- 
mental. In 1912, at the age of twenty-nine, he died of 
tuberculosis, leaving behind a single volume of his work. I 
remember that a copy of it, inscribed to my father, was one 
of several Argentine books we had taken to Geneva and 
that I read and reread there. Around 1909, Carriego had 
dedicated a poem to my mother. Actually, he had written it 
in her album. In it, he spoke of me: “And may your son 
. . . go forth, led by the trusting wing of inspiration, to 
carry out the vintage of a new annunciation, which from 
lofty grapes will yield the wine of Song.” But when I began 
writing my book the same thing happened to me that 
happened to Carlyle as he wrote his Frederick the Great. 
The more I wrote, the less I cared about my hero. I had 
started out to do a straight biography, but on the way I 
162
Jorge Luis Borges

An Autobiographical Essay
became more and more interested in old-time Buenos Aires. 
Readers, of course, were not slow in finding out that the 
book hardly lived up to its title, Evaristo Carriego, and so 
it fell flat. When the second edition appeared twenty-five 
years later, in 1955, as the fourth volume of my “com- 
plete” works, I enlarged the book with several new chap- 
ters, one a “History of the Tango.” As a consequence of 
these additions, I feel Evaristo Carriego has been rounded 
out for the better.
Prisma (Prism), founded in 1921 and lasting two num- 
bers, was the earliest of the magazines I edited. Our small 
ultraist group was eager to have a magazine of its own, but 
a real magazine was beyond our means. I had noticed 
billboard ads, and the thought came to me that we might 
similarly print a “mural magazine” and paste it up ourselves 
on the walls of buildings in different parts of town. Each 
issue was a large single sheet and contained a manifesto 
and some six or eight short, laconic poems, printed with 
plenty of white space around them, and a woodcut by my 
sister. We sallied forth at night—González Lanuza, Piñero, 
my cousin, and I—armed with pastepots and brushes 
provided by my mother, and, walking miles on end, slapped 
them up along Santa Fe, Callao, Entre Ríos, and Mexico 
Streets. Most of our handiwork was torn down by baffled 
readers almost at once, but luckily for us Alfredo Bianchi, 
of Nosotros, saw one of them and invited us to publish an 
ultraist anthology among the pages of his solid magazine. 
After Prisma, we went in for a six-page magazine, which 
was really just a single sheet printed on both sides and 
folded twice. This was the first Proa (Prow), and three 
numbers of it were published. Two years later, in 1924, 
came the second Proa. One afternoon, Brandán Caraffa, a 
young poet from Córdoba, came to see me at the Garden 
Hotel, where we were living upon return from our second 
European trip. He told me that Ricardo Güiraldes and 
Pablo Rojas Paz had decided to found a magazine that 
would represent the new literary generation, and that ev- 
eryone had said that if that were its goal I could not
163

possibly be left out. Naturally, I was flattered. That night, 
I went around to the Phoenix Hotel, where Güiraldes was 
staying. He greeted me with these words: “Brandán told 
me that the night before last all of you got together to 
found a magazine of young writers, and everyone said I 
couldn’t be left out.” At that moment, Rojas Paz came in 
and told us excitedly, “I’m quite flattered.” I broke in and 
said, “The night before last, the three of us got together 
and decided that in a magazine of new writers you couldn’t 
be left out.” Thanks to this innocent stratagem, Proa was 
born. Each one of us put in fifty pesos, which paid for an 
edition of three to five hundred copies with no misprints 
and on fine paper. But a year and a half and fifteen issues 
later, for lack of subscriptions and ads, we had to give it 
up.
Jorge Luis Borges
These years were quite happy ones because they stood 
for many friendships. There were those of Norah Lange, 
Macedonio, Piñero, and my father. Behind our work was a 
sincerity; we felt we were renewing both prose and poetry. 
Of course, like all young men, I tried to be as unhappy as I 
could—a kind of Hamlet and Raskolnikov rolled into one. 
What we achieved was quite bad, but our comradeships 
endured.
In 1924, I found my way into two different literary 
sets. One, whose memory I still enjoy, was that of Ricardo 
Güiraldes, who was yet to write Don Segundo Sombra. 
Güiraldes was very generous to me. I would give him a 
quite clumsy poem and he would read between the lines 
and divine what I had been trying to say but what my 
literary incapacity had prevented me from saying. He 
would then speak of the poem to other people, who were 
baffled not to find these things in the text. The other set, 
which I rather regret, was that of the magazine Martín 
Fierro. I disliked what Martín Fierro stood for, which was 
the French idea that literature is being continually re- 
newed—that Adam is reborn every morning, and also for 
the idea that, since Paris had literary cliques that wallowed 
164

An Autobiographical Essay
in publicity and bickering, we should be up to date and do 
the same. One result of this was that a sham literary feud 
was cooked up in Buenos Aires—that between Florida and 
Boedo. Florida represented downtown and Boedo the pro- 
letariat. I’d have preferred to be in the Boedo group, since I 
was writing about the old Northside and slums, sadness, 
and sunsets. But I was informed by one of the two conspir- 
ators—they were Ernesto Palacio, of Florida, and Roberto 
Mariani, of Boedo—that I was already one of the Florida 
warriors and that it was too late for me to change. The 
whole thing was just a put-up job. Some writers belonged to 
both groups—Roberto Arlt and Nicolás Olivari, for exam- 
ple. This sham is now taken into serious consideration by 
“credulous universities.” But it was partly publicity, partly 
a boyish prank.
Linked to this time are the names of Silvina and Victoria 
Ocampo, of the poet Carlos Mastronardi, of Eduardo Mal- 
lea, and, not least, of Alejandro Xul-Solar. In a rough-and- 
ready way, it may be said that Xul, who was a mystic, a 
poet, and a painter, is our William Blake. I remember 
asking him on one particularly sultry afternoon about what 
he had done that stifling day. His answer was “Nothing 
whatever, except for founding twelve religions after lunch.” 
Xul was also a philologist and the inventor of two lan- 
guages. One was a philosophical language after the manner 
of John Wilkins and the other a reformation of Spanish 
with many English, German, and Greek words thrown in. 
He came of Baltic and Italian stock. “Xul” was his version 
of “Schulz” and “Solar” of “Solari.” At this time, I also 
met Alfonso Reyes. He was the Mexican ambassador to 
Argentina, and used to invite me to dinner every Sunday at 
the embassy. I think of Reyes as the finest Spanish prose 
stylist of this century, and in my writing I learned a great 
deal about simplicity and directness from him.
Summing up this span of my life, I find myself complete- 
ly out of sympathy with the priggish and rather dogmatic 
young man I then was. Those friends, however, are still
165

very living and very close to me. In fact, they form a 
precious part of me. Friendship is, I think, the one redeem- 
ing Argentine passion.
Jorge Luis Borges
Maturity
In the course of a lifetime devoted chiefly to books, I have 
read but few novels, and, in most cases, only a sense of 
duty has enabled me to find my way to their last page. At 
the same time, I have always been a reader and rereader of 
short stories. Stevenson, Kipling, James, Conrad, Poe, 
Chesterton, the tales of Lane’s Arabian Nights, and certain 
stories by Hawthorne have been habits of mine since I can 
remember. The feeling that great novels like Don Quixote 
and Huckleberry Finn are virtually shapeless served to 
reinforce my taste for the short-story form, whose indispen- 
sable elements are economy and a clearly stated beginning, 
middle, and end. As a writer, however, I thought for years 
that the short story was beyond my powers, and it was only 
after a long and roundabout series of timid experiments in 
narration that I sat down to write real stories.
It took me some six years, from 1927 to 1933, to go 
from that all too self-conscious sketch “Hombres pelearon” 
to my first outright short story, “Hombre de la esquina 
rosada” (Streetcorner Man). A friend of mine, don Nico- 
lás Paredes, a former political boss and professional gambler 
of the Northside, had died, and I wanted to record some- 
thing of his voice, his anecdotes, and his particular way 
of telling them. I slaved over my every page, sounding 
out each sentence and striving to phrase it in his exact 
tones. We were living out in Adrogué at the time and, 
because I knew my mother would heartily disapprove of 
the subject matter, I composed in secret over a period of 
several months. Originally titled “Hombres de las orillas” 
(Men from the Edge of Town), the story appeared in the 
Saturday supplement, which I was editing, of a yellow-press 
daily called Crítica. But out of shyness, and perhaps a 
166

An Autobiographical Essay
feeling that the story was a bit beneath me, I signed it with 
a pen name—the name of one of my great-great grandfa- 
thers, Francisco Bustos. Although the story became popular 
to the point of embarrassment (today I only find it stagy 
and mannered and the characters bogus), I never regarded 
it as a starting point. It simply stands there as a kind of 
freak.
The real beginning of my career as a story writer starts 
with the series of sketches entitled Historia universal de la 
infamia (A Universal History of Infamy), which I con- 
tributed to the columns of Crítica in 1933 and 1934. The 
irony of this is that “Streetcorner Man” really was a story 
but that these sketches and several of the fictional pieces 
which followed them, and which very slowly led me to 
legitimate stories, were in the nature of hoaxes and pseudo- 
essays. In my Universal History, I did not want to repeat 
what Marcel Schwob had done in his Imaginary Lives. He 
had invented biographies of real men about whom little or 
nothing is recorded. I, instead, read up on the lives of 
known persons and then deliberately varied and distorted 
them according to my own whims. For example, after read- 
ing Herbert Asbury’s The Gangs of New York, I set down 
my free version of Monk Eastman, the Jewish gunman, in 
flagrant contradiction of my chosen authority. I did the 
same for Billy the Kid, for John Murrel (whom I rechris- 
tened Lazarus Morell), for the Veiled Prophet of Khorassan, 
for the Tichborne Claimant, and for several others. I never 
thought of book publication. The pieces were meant for 
popular consumption in Crítica and were pointedly pic- 
turesque. I suppose now the secret value of those sketches— 
apart from the sheer pleasure the writing gave me—lay in 
the fact that they were narrative exercises. Since the gener- 
al plots or circumstances were all given me, I had only to 
embroider sets of vivid variations.
My next story, “The Approach to al-Mu’tasim,” written 
in 1935, is both a hoax and a pseudo-essay. It purports to 
be a review of a book published originally in Bombay three 
years earlier. I endowed its fake second edition with a real
167

publisher, Victor Gollancz, and a preface by a real writer, 
Dorothy L. Sayers. But the author and the book are entirely 
my own invention. I gave the plot and details of some 
chapters—borrowing from Kipling and working in the 
twelfth-century Persian mystic Farid ud-Din Attar—and 
then carefully pointed out its shortcomings. The story ap- 
peared the next year in a volume of my essays, Historia de 
la eternidad (A History of Eternity), buried at the back of 
the book together with an article on the “Art of Insult.” 
Those who read “The Approach to al-Mu’tasim” took it at 
face value, and one of my friends even ordered a copy from 
London. It was not until 1942 that I openly published it as 
a short story in my first story collection, El jardín de 
senderos que se bifurcan (The Garden of Branching 
Paths). Perhaps I have been unfair to this story; it now 
seems to me to foreshadow and even to set the pattern for 
those tales that were somehow awaiting me, and upon which 
my reputation as a storyteller was to be based.
Along about 1937, I took my first regular full-time job. 
I had previously worked at small editing tasks. There was 
the Crítica supplement, which was a heavily and even 
gaudily illustrated entertainment sheet. There was El 
Hogar, a popular society weekly, to which, twice a month, I 
contributed a couple of literary pages on foreign books and 
authors. I had also written newsreel texts and had been 
editor of a pseudo-scientific magazine called Urbe, which 
was really a promotional organ of a privately owned Buenos 
Aires subway system. These had all been small-paying jobs, 
and I was long past the age when I should have begun 
contributing to our household upkeep. Now, through friends, 
I was given a very minor position as First Assistant in 
the Miguel Cané branch of the Municipal Library, out in 
a drab and dreary part of town to the southwest. While 
there were Second and Third Assistants below me, there 
were also a Director and First, Second, and Third Officials 
above me. I was paid two hundred and ten pesos a month 
and later went up to two hundred and forty. These were 
168
Jorge Luis Borges

An Autobiographical Essay
sums roughly equivalent to seventy or eighty American 
dollars.
At the library, we did very little work. There were some 
fifty of us doing what fifteen could easily have done. My 
particular job, shared with fifteen or twenty colleagues, was 
classifying and cataloging the library’s holdings, which un- 
til that time were uncatalogued. The collection, however, 
was so small that we knew where to find the books without 
the system, so the system, though laboriously carried out, 
was never needed or used. The first day, I worked honestly. 
On the next, some of my fellows took me aside to say that I 
couldn’t do this sort of thing because it showed them up. 
“Besides,” they argued, “as this cataloging has been 
planned to give us some semblance of work, you’ll put us 
out of our jobs.” I told them I had classified four hundred 
titles instead of their one hundred. “Well, if you keep that 
up,” they said, “the boss will be angry and won’t know 
what to do with us.” For the sake of realism, I was told 
that from then on I should do eighty-three books one day, 
ninety another, and one hundred and four the third.
I stuck out the library for about nine years. They were 
nine years of solid unhappiness. At work, the other men 
were interested in nothing but horse racing, soccer matches, 
and smutty stories. Once, a woman, one of the readers, was 
raped on her way to the ladies’ room. Everybody said such 
things were bound to happen, since the men’s and ladies’ 
rooms were adjoining. One day, two rather posh and well- 
meaning friends—society ladies—came to see me at work. 
They phoned me a day or two later to say, “You may think 
it amusing to work in a place like that, but promise us you 
will find at least a nine-hundred-peso job before the month 
is out.” I gave them my word that I would. Ironically, at 
the time I was a fairly well-known writer—except at the 
library. I remember a fellow employee’s once noting in an 
encyclopedia the name of a certain Jorge Luis Borges—a fact 
that set him wondering at the coincidence of our identical 
names and birth dates. Now and then during these years, 
we municipal workers were rewarded with gifts of a two-
169

Jorge luís Borges
pound package of maté to take home. Sometimes in the 
evening, as I walked the ten blocks to the tramline, my 
eyes would be filled with tears. These small gifts from 
above always underlined my menial and dismal existence.
A couple of hours each day, riding back and forth on the 
tram, I made my way through The Divine Comedy, helped 
as far as “Purgatory” by John Aitken Carlyle’s prose trans- 
lation and then ascending the rest of the way on my own. 
I would do all my library work in the first hour and then 
steal away to the basement and pass the other five hours in 
reading or writing. I remember in this way rereading the 
six volumes of Gibbon’s Decline and Fall and the many 
volumes of Vicente Fidel López’ History of the Argentine 
Republic. I read Léon Bloy, Claudel, Groussac, and Ber- 
nard Shaw. On holidays, I translated Faulkner and Virginia 
Woolf. At some point, I was moved up to the dizzying 
height of Third Official. One morning, my mother rang me 
up and I asked for leave to go home, arriving just in time 
to see my father die. He had undergone a long agony and 
was very impatient for his death.
It was on Christmas Eve of 1938—the same year my 
father died—that I had a severe accident. I was running up 
a stairway and suddenly felt something brush my scalp. I 
had grazed a freshly painted open casement window. In 
spite of first-aid treatment, the wound became poisoned, 
and for a period of a week or so I lay sleepless every night 
and had hallucinations and high fever. One evening, I lost 
the power of speech and had to be rushed to the hospital 
for an immediate operation. Septicemia had set in, and for 
a month I hovered, all unknowingly, between life and 
death. (Much later, I was to write about this in my story 
“The South.”) When I began to recover, I feared for my 
mental integrity. I remember that my mother wanted to 
read to me from a book I had just ordered, C. S. Lewis’ Out 
of the Silent Planet, but for two or three nights I kept 
putting her off. At last, she prevailed, and after hearing a 
page or two I fell to crying. My mother asked me why the 
tears. “I’m crying because I understand,” I said. A bit 
170

An Autobiographical Essay
later, I wondered whether I could ever write again. I had 
previously written quite a few poems and dozens of short 
reviews. I thought that if I tried to write a review now and 
failed, I’d be all through intellectually but that if I tried 
something I had never really done before and failed at that 
it wouldn’t be so bad and might even prepare me for the 
final revelation. I decided I would try to write a story. The 
result was “Pierre Menard, Author of Don Quixote.”
“Pierre Menard,” like its forerunner “The Approach to 
al-Mu’tasim,” was still a halfway house between the essay 
and the true tale. But the achievement spurred me on. I 
next tried something more ambitious—“TIön, Uqbar, Orbis 
Tertius,” about the discovery of a new world that finally 
replaces our present world. Both were published in Victoria 
Ocampo’s magazine Sur. I kept up my writing at the 
library. Though my colleagues thought of me as a traitor 
for not sharing their boisterous fun, I went on with work of 
my own in the basement, or, when the weather was warm, 
up on the flat roof. My Kafkian story “The Library of 
Babel” was meant as a nightmare version or magnification 
of that municipal library, and certain details in the text 
have no particular meaning. The numbers of books and 
shelves that I recorded in the story were literally what I 
had at my elbow. Clever critics have worried over those 
ciphers, and generously endowed them with mystic signifi- 
cance. “The Lottery in Babylon,” “Death and the Com- 
pass,” and “The Circular Ruins” were also written, in 
whole or part, while I played truant. These tales and others 
were to become The Garden of Branching Paths, a book 
expanded and retitled Ficciones in 1944. Ficciones and El 
Aleph (1949 and 1952), my second story collection, are, 
I suppose, my two major books.
In 1946, a president whose name I do not want to 
remember came into power. One day soon after, I was 
honored with the news that I had been “promoted” out of 
the library to the inspectorship of poultry and rabbits in 
the public markets. I went to the City Hall to find out what 
it was all about. “Look here,” I said. “It’s rather strange
171

that among so many others at the library I should be 
singled out as worthy of this new position.” “Well,” the 
clerk answered, “you were on the side of the Allies—what do 
you expect?” His statement was unanswerable; the next 
day, I sent in my resignation. My friends rallied round me 
at once and offered me a public dinner. I prepared a speech 
for the occasion but, knowing I was too shy to read it 
myself, I asked my friend Pedro Henríquez Ureña to 
read it for me.
I was now out of a job. Several months before, an old 
English lady had read my tea leaves and had foretold that 
I was soon to travel, to lecture, and to make vast sums of 
money thereby. When I told my mother about it, we both 
laughed, for public speaking was far beyond me. At this 
juncture, a friend came to the rescue, and I was made a 
teacher of English literature at the Asociación Argentina de 
Cultura Inglesa. I was also asked at the same time to 
lecture on classic American literature at the Colegio Libre de 
Estudios Superiores. Since this pair of offers was made three 
months before classes opened, I accepted, feeling quite 
safe. As the time grew near, however, I grew sicker and 
sicker. My series of lectures was to be on Hawthorne, Poe, 
Thoreau, Emerson, Melville, Whitman, Twain, Henry 
James, and Veblen. I wrote the first one down. But I had 
no time to write out the second one. Besides, thinking of 
the first lecture as Doomsday, I felt that only eternity 
could come after. The first one went off well enough— 
miraculously. Two nights before the second lecture, I took 
my mother for a long walk around Adrogué and had her 
time me as I rehearsed my talk. She said she thought it was 
overlong. “In that case,” I said, “I’m safe.” My fear had 
been of running dry. So, at forty-seven, I found a new and 
exciting life opening up for me. I traveled up and down 
Argentina and Uruguay, lecturing on Swedenborg, Blake, 
the Persian and Chinese mystics, Buddhism, gauchesco 
poetry, Martin Buber, the Kabbalah, the Arabian Nights, 
T. E. Lawrence, medieval Germanic poetry, the Icelandic 
sagas, Heine, Dante, expressionism, and Cervantes. I went 
172
Jorge Luis Borges

An Autobiographical Essay
from town to town, staying overnight in hotels I’d never see 
again. Sometimes my mother or a friend accompanied me. 
Not only did I end up making far more money than at the 
library but I enjoyed the work and felt that it justified me.
One of the chief events of these years—and of my life— 
was the beginning of my friendship with Adolfo Bioy- 
Casares. We met in 1930 or 1931, when he was about seven- 
teen and I was just past thirty. It is always taken for granted 
in these cases that the older man is the master and the 
younger his disciple. This may have been true at the 
outset, but several years later, when we began to work 
together, Bioy was really and secretly the master. He and I 
attempted many different literary ventures. We compiled 
anthologies of Argentine poetry, tales of the fantastic, and 
detective stories; we wrote articles and forewords; we anno- 
tated Sir Thomas Browne and Gracián; we translated 
short stories by writers like Beerbohm, Kipling, Wells, and 
Lord Dunsany; we founded a magazine, Destiempo, which 
lasted three issues; we wrote film scripts, which were in- 
variably rejected. Opposing my taste for the pathetic, the 
sententious, and the baroque, Bioy made me feel that 
quietness and restraint are more desirable. If I may be 
allowed a sweeping statement, Bioy led me gradually 
toward classicism.
It was at some point in the early forties that we began 
writing in collaboration—a feat that up to that time I had 
thought impossible. I had invented what we thought was a 
quite good plot for a detective story. One rainy morning, he 
told me we ought to give it a try. I reluctantly agreed, and 
a little later that same morning the thing happened. A third 
man, Honorio Bustos Domecq, emerged and took over. In 
the long run, he ruled us with a rod of iron and to our 
amusement, and later to our dismay, he became utterly 
unlike ourselves, with his own whims, his own puns, and his 
own very elaborate style of writing. Domecq was the name 
of a great-grandfather of Bioy’s and Bustos of a great- 
grandfather of mine from Córdoba. Bustos Domecq’s first 
book was Six Problems for don Isidro Parodi (1942),
173

Jorge Luis Borges
and during the writing of that volume he never got out of 
hand. Max Carrados had attempted a blind detective; Bioy 
and I went one step further and confined our detective to a 
jail cell. The book was at the same time a satire on the 
Argentine. For many years, the dual identity of Bustos 
Domecq was never revealed. When finally it was, people 
thought that, as Bustos was a joke, his writing could hardly 
be taken seriously.
Our next collaboration was another detective novel, A 
Model for Death. This one was so personal and so full of 
private jokes that we published it only in an edition that 
was not for sale. The author of this book we named B. 
Suárez Lynch. The “B.” stood, I think, for Bioy and Borges, 
“Suárez” for another great-grandfather of mine, and Lynch 
for another great-grandfather of Bioy’s. Bustos Domecq 
reappeared in 1946 in another private edition, this time of 
two stories, entitled Two Memorable Fantasies. After a 
long eclipse, Bustos took up his pen again, and in 1967 
brought out his Chronicles. These are articles written on 
imaginary, extravagantly modern artists—architects, sculp- 
tors, painters, chefs, poets, novelists, couturiers—by a 
devotedly modern critic. But both the author and his sub- 
jects are fools, and it is hard to tell who is taking in whom. 
The book is inscribed, “To those three forgotten greats— 
Picasso, Joyce, Le Corbusier.” The style is itself a parody. 
Bustos writes a literary journalese, abounding in neologisms, 
a Latinate vocabulary, clichés, mixed metaphors, non sequi- 
turs, and bombast.
I have often been asked how collaboration is possible. I 
think it requires a joint abandoning of the ego, of vanity, 
and maybe of common politeness. The collaborators should 
forget themselves and think only in terms of the work. In 
fact, when somebody wants to know whether such-and-such 
a joke or epithet came from my side of the table or Bioy’s, 
I honestly cannot tell him. I have tried to collaborate with 
other friends—some of them very close ones—but their in- 
ability to be blunt on the one hand or thick-skinned on the 
other has made the scheme impossible. As to the Chronicles 
174

An Autobiographical Essay
of Bustos Domecq, I think they are better than anything I 
have published under my own name and nearly as good as 
anything Bioy has written on his own.
In 1950, I was elected President of the Sociedad Argen- 
tina de Escritores (Argentine Society of Writers). The 
Argentine Republic, then as now, is a soft country, and the 
S.A.D.E. was one of the few strongholds against the dicta- 
torship. This was so evident that many distinguished men 
of letters did not dare set foot inside its doors until after 
the revolution. One curious trait of the dictatorship was 
that even its professed upholders made it clear that they 
did not really take the government seriously but were 
acting out of self-interest. This was understood and forgiv- 
en, since most of my countrymen have an intellectual, if 
not a moral, conscience. Nearly all the smutty jokes made 
up about Perón and his wife were the invention of Peron- 
istas themselves, trying to save face. The S.A.D.E. was 
eventually closed. I remember the last lecture I was al- 
lowed to give there. The audience, quite a small one, 
included a very puzzled policeman who did his clumsy best 
to set down a few of my remarks on Persian Sufism. During 
this drab and hopeless period, my mother—then in her 
seventies—was under house arrest. My sister and one of my 
nephews spent a month in jail. I myself had a detective on 
my heels, whom I first took on long, aimless walks and at 
last made friends with. He admitted that he too hated 
Perón, but said that he was obeying orders. Ernesto Pala- 
cio once offered to introduce me to the Unspeakable, but I 
did not want to meet him. How could I be introduced to a 
man whose hand I would not shake?
The long-hoped-for revolution came in September, 
1955. After a sleepless, anxious night, nearly the whole 
population came out into the streets, cheering the revolu- 
tion and shouting the name of Córdoba, where most of the 
fighting had taken place. We were so carried away that for 
some time we were quite unaware of the rain that was 
soaking us to the bone. We were so happy that not a single 
word was even uttered against the fallen dictator. Perón
175

went into hiding, and was later allowed to leave the coun- 
try. No one knows how much money he got away with.
Two very dear friends of mine, Esther Zemborain de 
Torres and Victoria Ocampo, dreamed up the possibility of 
my being appointed Director of the National Library. I 
thought the scheme a wild one, and hoped at most to be 
given the directorship of some small-town library, prefer- 
ably to the south of the city. Within the space of a day, a 
petition was signed by the magazine Sur (read Victoria 
Ocampo), by the reopened S.A.D.E. (read Carlos Alberto 
Erro), by the Sociedad Argentina de Cultura Inglesa (read 
Carlos del Campillo), and by the Colegio Libre de Estudios 
Superiores (read Luis Reissig). This was placed on the desk 
of the Minister of Education, and eventually I was appoint- 
ed to the directorship by General Eduardo Lonardi, who was 
Acting President. A few days earlier, my mother and I had 
walked to the Library one night to take a look at the 
building, but, feeling superstitious, I refused to go in. “Not 
until I get the job,” I said. That same week, I was called to 
come to the Library to take over. My family was present, 
and I made a speech to the employees, telling them I was 
actually the Director—the incredible Director. At the same 
time, José Edmundo Clemente, who a few years before 
had managed to persuade Emecé to bring out an edition of 
my works, became the Assistant Director. Of course, I felt 
very important, but we got no pay for the next three 
months. I don’t think my predecessor, who was a Peronista, 
was ever officially fired. He just never came around to the 
Library again. They named me to the job but did not take 
the trouble to unseat him.
Another pleasure came to me the very next year, when I 
was named to the professorship of English and American 
Literature at the University of Buenos Aires. Other candi- 
dates had sent in painstaking lists of their translations, 
papers, lectures, and other achievements. I limited myself 
to the following statement: “Quite unwittingly, I have been 
qualifying myself for this position throughout my life.” My 
176
Jorge Luis Borges

An Autobiographical Essay
plain approach gained the day. I was hired, and spent ten 
or twelve happy years at the University.
My blindness had been coming on gradually since child- 
hood. It was a slow, summer twilight. There was nothing 
particularly pathetic or dramatic about it. Beginning in 
1927, I underwent eight eye operations, but since the late 
1950’s, when I wrote my “Poem of the Gifts,” for reading 
and writing purposes I have been blind. Blindness ran in 
my family; a description of the operation performed on the 
eyes of my great-grandfather, Edward Young Haslam, ap- 
peared in the pages of the London medical journal, the 
Lancet. Blindness also seems to run among the Directors of 
the National Library. Two of my eminent forerunners, José 
Mármol and Paul Groussac, suffered the same fate. In my 
poem, I speak of God’s splendid irony in granting me at 
one time 800,000 books and darkness.
One salient consequence of my blindness was my gradual 
abandonment of free verse in favor of classical metrics. In 
fact, blindness made me take up the writing of poetry 
again. Since rough drafts were denied me, I had to fall back 
on memory. It is obviously easier to remember verse than 
prose, and to remember regular verse forms rather than free 
ones. Regular verse is, so to speak, portable. One can walk 
down the street or be riding the subway while composing 
and polishing a sonnet, for rhyme and meter have mnemon- 
ic virtues. In these years, I wrote dozens of sonnets and 
longer poems consisting of eleven-syllable quatrains. I 
thought I had taken Lugones as my master, but when the 
verses were written my friends told me that, regrettably, 
they were quite unlike him. In my later poetry, a narrative 
thread is always to be found. As a matter of fact, I even 
think of plots for poems. Perhaps the main difference be- 
tween Lugones and me is that he held French literature as 
his model and lived intellectually in a French world, where- 
as I look to English literature. In this new poetic activity, I 
never thought of building a sequence of poems, as I always 
formerly did, but was chiefly interested in each piece for its 
own sake. In this way, I wrote poems on such different
177

subjects as Emerson and wine, Snorri Sturluson and the 
hourglass, my grandfather’s death and the beheading of 
Charles I. I also went in for summing up my literary 
heroes: Poe, Swedenborg, Whitman, Heine, Camões, Jona- 
than Edwards, and Cervantes. Due tribute, of course, was 
also paid to mirrors, the Minotaur, and knives.
I had always been attracted to the metaphor, and this 
leaning led me to the study of the simple Saxon kennings 
and overelaborate Norse ones. As far back as 1932, I had 
even written an essay about them. The quaint notion of 
using, as far as it could be done, metaphors instead of 
straightforward nouns, and of these metaphors’ being at 
once traditional and arbitrary, puzzled and appealed to me. 
I was later to surmise that the purpose of these figures lay 
not only in the pleasure given by the pomp and circum- 
stance of compounding words but also in the demands of 
alliteration. Taken by themselves, the kennings are not 
especially witty, and calling a ship “a sea-stallion” and the 
open sea “the whale’s-road” is no great feat. The Norse 
skalds went a step further, calling the sea “the sea- 
stallion’s-road,” so that what originally was an image be- 
came a laborious equation. In turn, my investigation of 
kennings led me to the study of Old English and Old 
Norse. Another factor that impelled me in this direction 
was my ancestry. It may be no more than a romantic 
superstition of mine, but the fact that the Haslams lived in 
Northumbria and Mercia—or, as they are today called, 
Northumberland and the Midlands—links me with a Saxon 
and perhaps a Danish past. (My fondness for such a 
northern past has been resented by some of my more 
nationalistic countrymen, who dub me an Englishman, but 
I hardly need point out that many things English are 
utterly alien to me: tea, the Royal Family, “manly” sports, 
the worship of every line written by the uncaring Shake- 
speare.)
At the end of one of my University courses, several of 
my students came to see me at the Library. We had just 
polished off all English literature from Beowulf to Bernard 
178
Jorge Luis Borges

An Autobiographical Essay
Shaw in the span of four months, and I thought we might 
now do something in earnest. I proposed that we begin at 
the beginning, and they agreed. I knew that at home, on a 
certain top shelf, I had copies of Sweet’s Anglo-Saxon 
Reader and the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle. When the students 
came the next Saturday morning, we began reading these 
two books. We skipped grammar as much as we could and 
pronounced the words like German. All at once, we fell in 
love with a sentence in which Rome (Romeburh) was 
mentioned. We got drunk on these words and rushed down 
Peru Street shouting them at the top of our voices. And so 
we had set out on a long adventure. I had always thought 
of English literature as the richest in the world; the discov- 
ery now of a secret chamber at the very threshold of that 
literature came to me as an additional gift. Personally, I 
knew that the adventure would be an endless one, and that 
I could go on studying Old English for the rest of my days. 
The pleasure of studying, not the vanity of mastering, has 
been my chief aim, and I have not been disappointed these 
past twelve years. As for my recent interest in Old Norse, 
this is only a logical step, since the two languages are 
closely linked and since of all medieval Germanic literature 
Old Norse is the crown. My excursions into Old English 
have been wholly personal and, therefore, have made their 
way into a number of my poems. A fellow-academician once 
took me aside and said in alarm, “What do you mean by 
publishing a poem entitled ‘Embarking on the Study of 
Anglo-Saxon Grammar’?” I tried to make him understand 
that Anglo-Saxon was as intimate an experience to me as 
looking at a sunset or falling in love.
Around 1954, I began writing short prose pieces— 
sketches and parables. One day, my friend Carlos Frías, of 
Emecé, told me he needed a new book for the series of my 
so-called complete works. I said I had none to give him, but 
Frías persisted, saying, “Every writer has a book if he 
only looks for it.” Going through drawers at home one idle 
Sunday, I began ferreting out uncollected poems and prose 
pieces, some of the latter going back to my days on Crítica.
179

These odds and ends, sorted out and ordered and pub- 
lished in 1960, became El hacedor (The Maker). Re- 
markably, this book, which I accumulated rather than 
wrote, seems to me my most personal work and, to my 
taste, maybe my best. The explanation is only too easy: the 
pages of El hacedor contain no padding. Each piece was 
written for its own sake and out of an inner necessity. By 
the time it was undertaken, I had come to realize that fine 
writing is a mistake, and a mistake born out of vanity. 
Good writing, I firmly believe, should be done in an unob- 
trusive way.
On the closing page of that book, I told of a man who 
sets out to make a picture of the universe. After many 
years, he has covered a blank wall with images of ships, 
towers, horses, weapons, and men, only to find out at the 
moment of his death that he has drawn a likeness of his 
own face. This may be the case of all books; it is certainly 
the case of this particular book.
Jorge Luis Borges
Crowded Years
Fame, like my blindness, had been coming gradually to me. 
I had never expected it, I had never sought it. Néstor 
Ibarra and Roger Caillois, who in the early 1950’s daring- 
ly translated me into French, were my first benefactors. I 
suspect that their pioneer work paved the way for my 
sharing with Samuel Beckett the Formentor Prize in 
1961, for until I appeared in French I was practically 
invisible—not only abroad but at home in Buenos Aires. As 
a consequence of that prize, my books mushroomed over- 
night throughout the western world.
This same year, under the auspices of Edward Larocque 
Tinker, I was invited as Visiting Professor to the University 
of Texas. It was my first physical encounter with America. 
In a sense, because of my reading, I had always been there, 
and yet how strange it seemed when in Austin I heard ditch 
diggers who worked on campus speaking in English, a 
180

An Autobiographical Essay
language I had until then always thought of as being 
denied that class of people. America, in fact, had taken on 
such mythic proportions in my mind that I was sincerely 
amazed to find there such commonplace things as weeds, 
mud, puddles, dirt roads, flies, and stray dogs. Though at 
times we fell into homesickness, I know now that my 
mother—who accompanied me—and I grew to love Texas. 
She, who always loathed football, even rejoiced over our 
victory when the Longhorns defeated the neighboring Bears. 
At the University, when I finished one class I was giving in 
Argentine literature, I would sit in on another as a student 
of Saxon verse under Dr. Rudolph Willard. My days were 
full. I found American students, unlike the run of students 
in the Argentine, far more interested in their subjects than 
in their grades. I tried to interest people in Ascasubi and 
Lugones, but they stubbornly questioned and interviewed me 
about my own output. I spent as much time as I could with 
Ramón Martínez López, who, as a philologist, shared my 
passion for etymologies and taught me many things. During 
those six months in the States, we traveled widely, and I 
lectured at universities from coast to coast. I saw New 
Mexico, San Francisco, New York, New England, Washing- 
ton. I found America the friendliest, most forgiving, and 
most generous nation I had ever visited. We South Ameri- 
cans tend to think in terms of convenience, whereas people 
in the United States approach things ethically. This— 
amateur Protestant that I am—I admired above all. It even 
helped me overlook skyscrapers, paper bags, television, 
plastics, and the unholy jungle of gadgets.
My second American trip came in 1967, when I held 
the Charles Eliot Norton Chair of Poetry at Harvard, and 
lectured to well-wishing audiences on “This Craft of 
Verse.” I spent seven months in Cambridge, also teaching a 
course on Argentine writers and traveling all over New 
England, where most things American, including the West, 
seem to have been invented. I made numerous literary 
pilgrimages—to Hawthorne’s haunts in Salem, to Emerson’s 
in Concord, to Melville’s in New Bedford, to Emily Dick- 
181

Jorge Luis Borges
inson’s in Amherst, and to Longfellow’s around the corner 
from where I lived. Friends seemed to multiply in Cam- 
bridge: Jorge Guillén, John Murchison, Juan Marichal, 
Raimundo Lida, Héctor Ingrao, and a Persian physicist 
who had worked out a theory of spherical time that I do 
not quite understand but hope someday to plagiarize—Farid 
Hushfar. I also met writers like Robert Fitzgerald, John 
Updike, and the late Dudley Fitts. I availed myself of 
chances to see new parts of the continent: Iowa, where I 
found my native pampa awaiting me; Chicago, recalling 
Carl Sandburg; Missouri; Maryland; Virginia. At the end 
of my stay, I was greatly honored to have my poems read 
at the Y.M.H.A. Poetry Center in New York, with several 
of my translators reading and a number of poets in the 
audience. I owe a third trip to the United States, in 
November of 1969, to my two benefactors at the Universi- 
ty of Oklahoma, Lowell Dunham and Ivar Ivask, who in- 
vited me to give talks there and called together a group of 
scholars to comment on, and enrich, my work. Ivask made 
me a gift of a fish-shaped Finnish dagger—rather alien to the 
tradition of the old Palermo of my boyhood.
Looking back on this past decade, I seem to have been 
quite a wanderer. In 1963, thanks to Neil MacKay of the 
British Council in Buenos Aires, I was able to visit England 
and Scotland. There, too, again in my mother’s company, I 
made my pilgrimages: to London, so teeming with literary 
memories; to Lichfield and Dr. Johnson; to Manchester and 
De Quincey; to Rye and Henry James; to the Lake Coun- 
try; to Edinburgh. I visited my grandmother’s birthplace in 
Hanley, one of the Five Towns—Arnold Bennett country. 
Scotland and Yorkshire I think of as among the loveliest 
places on earth. Somewhere in the Scottish hills and glens I 
recaptured a strange sense of loneliness and bleakness that 
I had known before; it took me some time to trace this 
feeling back to the far-flung wastes of Patagonia. A few 
years later, this time in the company of María Esther 
Vázquez, I made another European trip. In England, we 
stayed with the late Herbert Read in his fine rambling 
182

An Autobiographical Essay
house out on the moors. He took us to Yorkminster, where 
he showed us some ancient Danish swords in the Viking 
Yorkshire room of the museum. I later wrote a sonnet to 
one of the swords, and just before his death Sir Herbert 
corrected and bettered my original title, suggesting, instead 
of “To a Sword in York,” “To a Sword in Yorkminster.” 
We later went to Stockholm, invited by my Swedish pub- 
lisher, Bonnier, and by the Argentine ambassador. Stock- 
holm and Copenhagen I count among the most unforgetta- 
ble cities I have seen, like San Francisco, New York, 
Edinburgh, Santiago de Compostela, and Geneva.
Early in 1969, invited by the Israeli government, I 
spent ten very exciting days in Tel Aviv and Jerusalem. I 
brought home with me the conviction of having been in the 
oldest and the youngest of nations, of having come from a 
very living, vigilant land back to a half-asleep nook of the 
world. Since my Genevan days, I had always been inter- 
ested in Jewish culture, thinking of it as an integral ele- 
ment of our so-called Western civilization, and during the 
Israeli-Arab war of a few years back I found myself taking 
immediate sides. While the outcome was still uncertain, I 
wrote a poem on the battle. A week after, I wrote another 
on the victory. Israel was, of course, still an armed camp at 
the time of my visit. There, along the shores of Galilee, I 
kept recalling these lines from Shakespeare:
Over whose acres walk’d those blessed feet,
Which, fourteen hundred years ago, were nail’d,
For our advantage, on the bitter cross.
Now, despite my years, I still think of the many stones I 
have left unturned, and of others I would like to turn 
again. I hope yet to see Mormon Utah, to which I was 
introduced as a boy by Mark Twain’s Roughing It and by 
the first book of the Sherlock Holmes saga, A Study in 
Scarlet. Another daydream of mine is a pilgrimage to 
Iceland, and another still to return again to Texas and to 
Scotland.
183

At seventy-one, I am still hard at work and brimming 
with plans. Last year I wrote a new book of poems, Elogio de 
la sombra (In Praise of Darkness). It was my first entirely 
new volume since 1960, and these were also my first 
poems since 1929 written with a book in mind. My main 
concern in this work, running through several of its pieces, 
is of an ethical nature, irrespective of any religious or 
antireligious bias. “Darkness” in the title stands for both 
blindness and death. To finish Elogio, I worked every 
morning, dictating at the National Library. By the time I 
ended, I had set up a comfortable routine—so comfortable 
that I kept it up and began writing tales. These, my first 
stories since 1953, I published this year. The collection is 
called El informe de Brodie (Doctor Brodie’s Report). It is 
a set of modest experiments in straightforward storytelling, 
and is the book I have often spoken about in the past five 
years. Recently, I completed the script of a film to be 
called Los otros (The Others). Its plot is my own; the 
writing was done together with Adolfo Bioy-Casares and the 
young Argentine director Hugo Santiago. My afternoons 
now are usually given over to a long-range and cherished 
project: for nearly the past three years, I have been lucky 
to have my own translator at my side, and together we are 
bringing out some ten or twelve volumes of my work in 
English, a language I am unworthy to handle, a language I 
often wish had been my birthright.
I intend now to begin a new book, a series of personal— 
not scholarly—essays on Dante, Ariosto, and medieval 
northern subjects. I want also to set down a book of 
informal, outspoken opinions, whims, reflections, and pri- 
vate heresies. After that, who knows? I still have a number 
of stories, heard or invented, that I want to tell. At present, 
I am finishing a long tale called “The Congress.” Despite 
its Kafkian title, I hope it will turn out more in the line of 
Chesterton. The setting is Argentine and Uruguayan. For 
twenty years, I have been boring my friends with the raw 
plot. Finally, I came to see that no further elaboration was 
needed. I have another project that has been pending for 
184
Jorge Luis Borges

An Autobiographical Essay
an even longer period of time—that of revising and perhaps 
rewriting my father’s novel The Caudillo, as he asked me to 
years ago. We had gone as far as discussing many of the 
problems; I like to think of the undertaking as a continued 
dialogue and a very real collaboration.
People have been unaccountably good to me. I have no 
enemies, and if certain persons have masqueraded as such, 
they’ve been far too good-natured to have ever pained me. 
Anytime I read something written against me, I not only 
share the sentiment but feel I could do the job far better 
myself. Perhaps I should advise would-be enemies to send 
me their grievances beforehand, with full assurance that 
they will receive my every aid and support. I have even 
secretly longed to write, under a pen name, a merciless 
tirade against myself. Ah, the unvarnished truths I harbor!
At my age, one should be aware of one’s limits, and this 
knowledge may make for happiness. When I was young, I 
thought of literature as a game of skillful and surprising 
variations; now that I have found my own voice, I feel that 
tinkering and tampering neither greatly improve nor great- 
ly spoil my drafts. This, of course, is a sin against one of 
the main tendencies of letters in this century—the vanity of 
overwriting—which led a man like Joyce into publishing 
expensive fragments, showily entitled “Work in Progress.” I 
suppose my best work is over. This gives me a certain quiet 
satisfaction and ease. And yet I do not feel I have written 
myself out. In a way, youthfulness seems closer to me 
today than when I was a young man. I no longer regard 
happiness as unattainable; once, long ago, I did. Now I 
know that it may occur at any moment but that it should 
never be sought after. As to failure or fame, they are quite 
irrelevant and I never bother about them. What I’m out for 
now is peace, the enjoyment of thinking and of friendship, 
and, though it may be too ambitious, a sense of loving and 
of being loved.
185


Commentaries
With Norman Thomas 
 
di Giovanni


Commentaries
The Aleph
What eternity is to time, the Aleph is to space. In eternity, all 
time—past, present, and future—coexists simultaneously. In the 
Aleph, the sum total of the spatial universe is to be found in a 
tiny shining sphere barely over an inch across. When I wrote 
my story, I recalled Wells’s dictum that in a tale of the fantastic, 
if the story is to be acceptable to the mind of the reader, only 
one fantastic element should be allowed at a time. For example, 
though Wells wrote a book about the invasion of Earth by 
Martians, and another book about a single invisible man in 
England, he was far too wise to attempt a novel about an 
invasion of our planet by an army of invisible men. Thinking 
of the Aleph as a thing of wonder, I placed it in as drab a 
setting as I could imagine—a small cellar in a nondescript 
house in an unfashionable quarter of Buenos Aires. In the world 
of the Arabian Nights, such things as magic lamps and rings 
are left lying about and nobody cares; in our skeptical world, 
we have to tidy up any alarming or out-of-the-way element. 
Thus, at the end of “The Aleph,” the house has to be pulled 
down and the shining sphere destroyed with it.
189

Once, in Madrid, a journalist asked me whether Buenos 
Aires actually possessed an Aleph. I nearly yielded to tempta- 
tion and said yes, but a friend broke in and pointed out that 
were such an object to exist it would not only be the most 
famous thing in the world but would renew our whole con- 
ception of time, astronomy, mathematics, and space. “Ah,” 
said the journalist, “so the entire thing is your own invention. 
I thought it was true because you gave the name of the street.” 
I did not dare tell him that the naming of streets is not much 
of a feat.
My chief problem in writing the story lay in what Walt 
Whitman had very successfully achieved—the setting down of 
a limited catalog of endless things. The task, as is evident, is 
impossible, for such chaotic enumeration can only be simulated, 
and every apparently haphazard element has to be linked to its 
neighbor either by secret association or by contrast.
“The Aleph” has been praised by readers for its variety of 
elements: the fantastic, the satiric, the autobiographical, and 
the pathetic. I wonder whether our modern worship of com- 
plexity is not wrong, however. I wonder whether a short story 
should be so ambitious. Critics, going even further, have de- 
tected Beatrice Portinari in Beatriz Viterbo, Dante in Daneri, 
and the descent into hell in the descent into the cellar. I am, 
of course, duly grateful for these unlooked-for gifts.
Beatriz Viterbo really existed and I was very much and 
hopelessly in love with her. I wrote my story after her death. 
Carlos Argentino Daneri is a friend of mine, still living, who 
to this day has never suspected he is in the story. The verses 
are a parody of his verse. Daneri’s speech on the other hand is 
not an exaggeration but a fair rendering. The Argentine Acad- 
emy of Letters is the habitat of such specimens.
Jorge Luis Borges
Streetcorner Man
As already stated as far back as 1935 in the foreword to Historia 
universal de la infamia, this story was written under the triple 
influence of Stevenson, G. K. Chesterton, and Josef von Stern- 
berg’s unforgettable gangster films. My aim was to recapture 
the atmosphere of the outer slums of Buenos Aires some fifty 
years ago. At the same time, I wanted the story to be vividly 
and persistently visual, and to unfold with a kind of pattern 
190

Commentaries
or symmetry. The characters appear on the scene like actors 
and make set speeches, deliberately unlike the unstudied and 
careless manner of everyday life. Francisco Real knocks twice 
at the same door: the first time to swagger in and challenge 
his man, the second time to die. Another example of this 
symmetry is the high window, out of which first goes the 
knife and later the body. All this is sheer choreography. The 
fact that this story was later made into a ballet, a movie, and 
a stage play corroborates this. But strangely enough, Argentine 
readers have always felt the story to be realistic. Some eager 
young men once asked me if I had actually witnessed the scene. 
I knew very well when I wrote the story that things could 
never have happened in that stagy and even operatic way, but 
I suppose I was indulging in a bit of wishful thinking. All 
Argentines are fond of an imaginary heroic and mythic past, 
especially as applied to hoodlums and pimps.
The voice used throughout the story is supposed to be oral, 
but the sentences are really those of a written work. They are 
unbroken and complete, while in real life Argentines rarely 
finish a sentence; the moment they feel the hearer has caught 
what they are aiming at, they just break off. The language of 
“Streetcorner Man” is partly a conventionalized slang, or dia- 
lect, of Buenos Aires called lunfardo. This language is primarily 
a device of the writers of sainetes and tango lyrics. It has, as to 
be expected, been canonized by several glossaries, by an Acad- 
emy of Lunfardo, and by the Argentine Academy of Letters. 
As a matter of fact, lunfardo is barely used by the people it is 
credited to. Once taxed by fellow journalists for his utter ignor- 
ance of lunfardo, Roberto Arlt, the novelist of Buenos Aires 
lowlife, said, “I’m afraid I’ve spent all my life in the outer 
slums among common people and toughs and so never had 
time to study such a thing.”
The “esquina rosada” of the Spanish title means pink, or rose- 
colored, corner. It refers to the painted walls of the Streetcorner 
almacenes, which a long time ago were both groceries and saloons, 
where men drank and played cards. These corners were often 
painted other vivid colors, such as green, purple, or blue, and 
stood out in an otherwise drab city. For me the esquina rosada 
symbolizes a particular kind of life. It has nothing whatever to 
do, as some adventurous translator has supposed, with the red 
lamp that hung outside Julia’s dance hall. Such an establishment 
would be called a “Farol Colorado,” which is close to the term
191

Jorge Luis Borges
“red-light district” In a way, the American “drugstore cowboy” 
would be something of a latter-day “hombre de la esquina 
rosada.”
The Approach to Al-Mu’tasim
The idea that a man may be many men is, of course, a literary 
commonplace. This is usually understood in an ethical way 
(William Wilson, Jekyll and Hyde, and so on) or in terms of 
heredity (Hawthorne, Zola). In “The Approach to al-Mu’tasim” 
the concept undergoes certain modifications. There, I think of 
men being incessantly changed by each man they talk to and 
perhaps by each book they read. Thus I arrived at the tale of a 
kind of saint who spreads circles of diminishing splendor all 
around him, and is finally discovered by somebody who divines 
him through these many far-flung echoes of his influence. Since 
this plot is something of an allegory, it led me quite naturally 
to an Eastern setting. I do my best to be indebted to Kipling; 
India, as we are aware, stands for almost countless multitudes.
I knew only too well that this delicate work lay far beyond 
my powers. I therefore plotted the piece as a literary hoax, 
rather after the example of Sartor Resartus. Years after the story 
was published, I found out that Henry James had attempted a 
similar scheme in his novel The Sacred Fount, and had failed 
through sheer inability to keep his characters distinguishable.
As to Farid ud-Din Attar, I am afraid my knowledge of his 
famous poem can be reduced to FitzGerald’s A bird’s-eye view 
of Faríd-Uddín Attar’s Bird-parliament, to Browne’s Literary His- 
tory of Persia, and to a few handbooks on Sufism. Silvina Ocam- 
po, by the way, composed a very fine poem based on Attar’s book.
The Circular Ruins
The ontological argument, the claim that Something or Some- 
one could be its own cause—its causa sui—as the Schoolmen and 
Spinoza have it, has always seemed to me a mere juggling of 
words, a violence done to language. In my opinion, a speech 
implies a speaker and a dream, a dreamer; this, of course, leads 
to the concept of an endless series of speakers and dreamers, an 
infinite regress, and may be what lies at the root of my story. 
192

Commentaries
Naturally, when I wrote it, I never thought of the story in these 
abstract terms. In a pair of sonnets on chess, written years 
afterward, I took up the same idea. The chessmen do not know 
they are guided by a player; the player does not know he is 
guided by a god; the god does not know what other gods are 
guiding him. Several years ago, during a one-day visit to Lub- 
bock, in the Texas panhandle, a girl asked me whether in writ- 
ing another poem, “The Golem,” I had been consciously re- 
writing “The Circular Ruins.” The answer was no, but I thanked 
her for revealing this unsuspected affinity to me. In fact, it 
amazed me to have traveled hundreds of miles to come upon 
this piece of news about myself out on the edge of the desert.
Readers have thought of “The Circular Ruins” as my best 
story. I can hardly share this view since I now think of fine 
writing, which this tale comes continually to the brink of, as a 
beginner’s mistake. One might argue, however, that if it is 
going to be done at all, this kind of story needs this kind of 
writing. This also accounts for the dim Eastern setting and for 
the fact that the scheme is somehow timeless. The title itself 
suggests the Pythagorean and Eastern idea of cyclical time.
Lewis Carroll gave me my epigraph, which may have been 
the story’s seed, but had I not often thought about life as a 
dream, that seed, known to millions of readers, might have 
fallen wide of the furrow.
When I wrote “The Circular Ruins” way back in 1940, the 
work carried me away as it had never done before and as it 
has never done since. The whole story is about a dream and, 
while writing it down, my everyday affairs—my job at the 
municipal library, going to the movies, dining with friends— 
were like a dream. For the space of that week, the one thing, 
real to me was the story.
Death and the Compass
Since 1923 I had been doing my best, and never quite succeed- 
ing, to be the poet of Buenos Aires. When, in 1942, I undertook 
a nightmare version of the city in “Death and the Compass,” 
my friends told me that at long last I had managed to evoke 
a sufficiently recognizable image of my home town. A few topo- 
graphical elucidations may perhaps be in order. The Hôtel du 
Nord stands for the Plaza Hotel. The estuary is the Río de la
193

Plata, called “the great lion-colored river” by Lugones, and, 
far more effectively, “the unmoving river” by Eduardo Mallea. 
The Rue de Toulon is the Paseo Colón, or rather, in terms of 
rowdiness, the old Paseo de Julio, today called Leandro Alem. 
Triste-le-Roy, a beautiful name invented by Amanda Molina 
Vedia, stands for the now demolished Hotel Las Delicias in 
Adrogué. (Amanda had painted a map of an imaginary island 
on the wall of her bedroom; on her map I discovered the name 
Triste-le-Roy.) In order to avoid any suspicion of realism, I 
used distorted names and placed the story in some cosmopolitan 
setting beyond any specific geography. The characters’ names 
further bear this out: Treviranus is German, Azevedo is Portu- 
guese and Jewish, Yarmolinsky is a Polish Jew, Finnegan is 
Irish, Lönnrot is Swedish.
Patterns in time and space are to be found throughout the 
story. A triangle is suggested but the solution is really based 
on a rhombus. This rhombus is picked up in the Carnival 
costumes of the seeming kidnappers and in the windows of 
Triste-le-Roy as well as in the Fourfold Name of God—the 
Tetragrammaton. A thread of red also runs through the story’s 
pages. There is the sunset on the rose-colored wall and, in the 
same scene, the blood splashed on the dead man’s face. Red is 
found in the detective’s and in the gunman’s names.
The killer and the slain, whose minds work in the same way, 
may be the same man. Lönnrot is not an unbelievable fool 
walking into his own death trap but, in a symbolic way, a 
man committing suicide. This is hinted at by the similarity of 
their names. The end syllable of “Lönnrot” means “red” in 
German, and “Red Scharlach” is also translatable, in German, 
as “Red Scarlet.”
No apology is needed for repeated mention of the Kabbalah, 
for it provides the reader and the all-too-subtle detective with a 
false track, and the story is, as most of the names imply, a 
Jewish one. The Kabbalah also provides an additional sense of 
mystery.
As in the case of most stories, “Death and the Compass” 
should stand or fall by its general atmosphere, not by its plot, 
which I suppose is now quite old-fashioned and therefore un- 
interesting. I have embedded many memories of Buenos Aires 
and its southern outskirts in this wild story. Triste-le-Roy itself 
is a heightened and distorted version of the roomy and pleasant 
Hotel Las Delicias, which still survives in so many memories. 
194
Jorge Luis Borges

Commentaries
I have written a longish elegy, entitled “Adrogué,” about the 
real hotel.
The straight-line labyrinth at the story’s close comes out of 
Zeno the Eleatic.
The Life of Tadeo Isidoro Cruz (1829-1874)
This tale is my Argentine version of the call of the wild. It 
is also a gloss on the gauchesco poem Martín Fierro, written in 
1872 by José Hernández. In the poem, Sergeant Cruz is a 
former desperado who, as often happens to his kind, becomes 
the leader of a posse and is sent out to hunt down the deserter 
and murderer Martín Fierro. Cruz witnesses this outlaw’s cour- 
age, goes over to his side, kills some of his own men, and 
returns to his old life. In this unexpected decision, I think of 
Cruz as being the most interesting and puzzling character in 
Hernández’ book. For all I know, I may be the only reader to 
have wondered at the strange behavior of a policeman who goes 
over to the enemy. As Martín Fierro is now a classic, all things 
in it seem to be taken for granted.
I suppose I was moved to write the story out of my personal 
bewilderment. A quite detailed account of Sergeant Cruz’s for- 
mer life is given in Hernández; these circumstances had to be 
changed so that the reader familiar with the poem would not 
realize until the very end that he was being told something he 
already knew. The name Cruz itself I buried under the longer 
Tadeo Isidoro; I also worked in actual historical episodes 
unconnected with Hernández, such as Mesa’s execution and 
Laprida’s thirty white men pitted against two hundred Indians. 
A number of incidental details came out of my own family 
history. Suárez, who routs the gauchos at the opening of the 
story, was my great-grandfather; the ranch where Cruz once 
worked belonged to another relative, Francisco Xavier Acevedo. 
It was Suárez, by the way, who ordered the drums to drown 
out Manuel Mesa’s last words. I have, however, left certain 
tracks and hints in my version in order to prevent the story 
from concluding on a mere trick. Reference to the poem is 
made as early as the second paragraph, and, at the end of the 
story, the obvious reason for my not describing the fight is that 
it is already very minutely set forth in Martín Fierro,
In the dramatic moment when Tadeo Isidoro Cruz finds out
195

Jorge Luis Borges
who he is and refuses to act against Martín Fierro, there may be 
something deeply and unconsciously Hispanic. I am reminded 
of that famous passage in Don Quixote when the knight urges 
the officers of the law to set the convicts free, saying to them, 
“Let each man tend to his own sins; there’s a God in heaven
who takes good care to punish  the wicked and to reward the
good, and an honest man should not go out of his way to be
another man’s jailer. . . .”
The Two Kings and Their Two Labyrinths
Several elements or personal whims may be found in this un- 
presuming fable. Firstly, its Eastern setting, its deliberate aim to 
be a page—overlooked by Lane or Burton—out of the Arabian 
Nights. Secondly, that obvious symbol of perplexity, the maze, 
given in the story two forms—that of the traditional labyrinth, 
and, even more sinister, that of the unbounded desert. After 
some twenty-five years, I am beginning to suspect that the king 
of Babylon, with his lust for winding ways and devious com- 
plexity, stands for civilization, while the Arabian king stands 
for unrelieved barbarism. For all I know, the first may be a 
porteño and his antagonist, a gaucho.
The Dead Man
A ten days’ stay on the Uruguay-Brazil border in 1934 seems 
to have impressed me far more than all the kingdoms of the 
world and the glory of them, since in my imagination I keep 
going back to that one not very notable experience. (At the 
time, I thought of it as boring, though on one of those days I 
did see a man shot down before my very eyes.) A likely expla- 
nation for this is that everything I then witnessed—the stone 
fences, the longhorn cattle, the horses’ silver trappings, the 
bearded gauchos, the hitching posts, the ostriches—was so prim- 
itive, and even barbarous, as to make it more a journey into 
the past than a journey through space.
“The Dead Man” should not be taken, as I sometimes fear it 
may be, as a deliberate allegory on human life, though, like 
poor Otálora, we are given all things only to have them 
196

Commentaries
snatched from us at the moment we die. I prefer the story to 
be read as a kind of adventure.
Several rash enthusiasts have fallen into the mistake of think- 
ing that “The Dead Man” might easily be worked into a film. 
They overlook the fact that Azevedo Bandeira, in a movie, 
would require psychological plausibility, while in a story he 
may be both accepted and yet not understandable. No real man, 
of course, would act the way he does.
The story has been criticized by some friends as being no 
more than a sketchy outline; my incapacity, or laziness, has 
led me to believe that such an outline is sufficient.
A few elements in the story may be worth pointing out. 
Here, as in other cases, I have begun with a long opening 
sentence. My feeling is that first sentences should be long in 
order to tear the reader out of his everyday life and firmly 
lodge him in an imaginary world. If an illustrious example be 
allowed me, Cervantes apparently felt the same way when he 
began his famous novel. As to the names, Otálora is an old 
family name of mine; so is Azevedo, but with a Spanish c 
instead of the Portuguese 0. Bandeira was the name of Enrique 
Amorim’s head gardener, and the word bandeira (flag) also sug- 
gests the Portuguese bandeirantes, or conquistadors. During that 
1934 trip, we actually spent one night at a ranch called El 
Suspiro. The present tense, used throughout the story, makes it 
perhaps more vivid. The gaucho laboriously picking out a 
milonga at the very end is my comment on the way country 
people really play the guitar, though I’m sure that in the film 
version he will be made to sound like Andrés Segovia.
The Other Death
All theologians have denied God one miracle—that of undoing 
the past. The eleventh-century churchman Pier Damiano, how- 
ever, grants Him that all but unimaginable power. This gave 
me the idea of writing a story about a scientist who, in some 
minor and unobtrusive way, attempts a similar feat. He hides 
two black balls in an upper drawer and three yellow ones in a 
lower drawer and, after years of hard work, finds that they 
have changed places. I was not long in perceiving that this tame 
miracle would never do, and that I would have to dream up 
something more dramatic. I thought of a common man coming
197

to such a wonder, unawares, at the very moment he dies. 
Aparicio Saravia’s revolution had caught my imagination from 
boyhood, and I saw a way of combining, in a setting of that 
backwoods civil war, the gaucho idea of courage as the one 
cardinal virtue and my metaphysical plan. And so my story, 
which was first titled “The Redemption,” was born.
In the story, for literary purposes, the miracle takes place 
over a span of some forty-odd years. Pedro Damián’s sin would 
be the more unbearable for him since, as the lone Argentine 
among Uruguayans, he would feel greater shame. Ultimately, 
Damián dies as he would have liked to die—struck down by a 
bullet in the chest while leading a charge. Had this actually 
happened, his fellow soldiers would hardly have remarked on 
such a detail. I introduced it into my story in order to make 
the whole atmosphere that much more visionary.
Emerson’s verses are mentioned at the outset for two main 
reasons: first, because I simply admire their beauty; second, so 
as to send the reader—if he goes back to them—off the track, 
since they strongly express the idea that the past is unchange- 
able.
A favorite trick of mine is to work into my fiction the names 
of real friends. In “The Other Death” we find Ulrike von 
Kühlmann, Patricio Gannon, and Emir Rodríguez Monegal.
Ibn Hakkan al-Bokhari, Dead in His Labyrinth
Before “Ibn Hakkan,” I had previously tried my hand at two 
detective stories, “The Garden of Branching Paths” (1941) and 
“Death and the Compass” (1942). The former won a second 
prize in Ellery Queen’s Mystery Magazine; the latter was flatly 
rejected. My interest in detective fiction is rooted in my reading 
of Edgar Allan Poe, Wilkie Collins, Robert Louis Stevenson’s 
The Wrecker, G. K. Chesterton, Eden Phillpotts, and, of course, 
Ellery Queen. In a world of shapeless psychological writing, I 
found in this particular form the classic virtues of a beginning, 
a middle, and an end—of something planned and executed. 
Bioy-Casares and I even went to the length of editing, in 
Buenos Aires, a successful collection of detective novels. The 
series was called “The Seventh Circle.” The amount of reading 
required in the selection of these books rid me, in time, of my 
198
Jorge Luis Borges

Commentaries
boyish craze for the general run of such games and puzzles. 
“Ibn Hakkan” turned out to be my swan song.
My first two exercises of 1941 and 1942 were, I think, fair 
attempts at Chestertonian storytelling. When I wrote “Ibn Hak- 
kan,” however, it became a cross between a permissible detec- 
tive story and a caricature of one. The more I worked on it, 
the more hopeless the plot seemed and the stronger my need 
to parody. What I ended up with I hope will be read for its 
humor. I certainly can’t expect anyone to take seriously or to 
look for symbols in such pictorial whims as a black slave, a 
lion in Cornwall, a red-haired king, and a scarlet maze so large 
that on first sight its outer ramparts appear to be a straight 
blank wall.
The pseudo-Arabian parable preached by the timorous Mr. 
Allaby from his pulpit was written before “Ibn Hakkan.” How 
it found its way into the story is now a mystery to me.
The Man on the Threshold
I have previously written of this story:
The sudden and recurring glimpse into a deep set of 
corridors and patios of a tenement house around the 
corner from Paraná Street, in Buenos Aires, gave me the 
tale entitled “The Man on the Threshold”; I placed it 
in India so as to make its unlikeliness less obvious.
Looking back on this statement, I seem to recall a rather dif- 
ferent starting point. One night in Salto, Uruguay, with Enri- 
que Amorim, for lack of anything better to do, we went around 
to the local slaughterhouse to watch the cattle being killed. 
Squatting on the threshold of the long, low adobe building was 
a battered and almost lifeless old man. Amorim asked him, 
“Are they killing?” The old man appeared to come to a brief 
and evil awakening, and answered back in a fierce whisper, 
“Yes, they’re killing! They’re killing!”
Somehow the idea—somehow the image—of an apparently 
helpless old man holding a secret power impressed itself on 
my imagination. I wove this image into the present story and, 
several years later, used it again—almost word for word—near 
the close of another story, “The South.” Of course, the same
199

linking of seeming helplessness and real power is to be found 
in the Arabian Nights and in the idea of old and wizened 
witches.
Students of Kipling will note that my Indian background is, 
in part, cribbed from him. Mention of Nikal Seyn comes from 
Kim. The madman counting on his fingers and mocking at the 
trees comes from the poem “Evarra and His Gods.” The young 
man crowned with flowers was suggested, I think, by From 
Sea to Sea.
I’m sorry to say that “The Man on the Threshold” is also a 
bit of a trick story and a game with time. What is told as 
having happened years and years earlier is actually taking place 
at that moment. The teller, of course, as he patiently spins his 
yam, is really hindering the officer from breaking in and stop- 
ping the trial and execution.
Jorge Luis Borges
The Challenge
I was lecturing during the dictatorship out in the western part 
of the Province of Buenos Aires, in the city of Chivilcoy, 
when I was told the story of Wenceslao Suárez, nicknamed the 
Manco, or One-Handed. After I published “The Challenge,” I 
received two letters bearing on the subject. (These letters are 
printed at the back of Evaristo Carriego.) One recounts Wences- 
lao’s story with certain variations in the place names and in 
the behavior of his foe. The other tells of a similar incident 
in Entre Ríos, where the opponents—an Argentine and an 
Uruguayan—end their fight exchanging knives as a token of 
friendship. Both letters corroborate rather than debunk the 
tradition.
I found in this story a key to much of what I had already 
heard, thought about, and invented in stories of my own about 
such disinterested duels. I think the reader will find in “The 
Challenge” a full explanation of my feeling for the subject 
of knives, knife fighters, courage, and so on, as it has con- 
cerned me over the past forty or forty-five years.
Of course, Wenceslao’s story may be found wanting in likeli- 
hood, but, as Boileau pointed out, “Reality stands in no need 
of being true to life.”
This piece, like many others of mine, is halfway between a 
real short story and an essay.
200

Commentaries
This tale, of course, is true. Frontier life has always attracted 
me, no doubt because some hundred years ago my grandparents 
lived among civilization’s outposts out on the edge of the 
Province of Buenos Aires. Colonel Borges, my grandfather, 
there held the command of the Northern and Western Frontier 
until he met his death in 1874. Additionally, I have always 
been interested in the strangeness of memory and in the fact 
that the past is somehow rescued, or saved for us, by it. De 
Quincey thought of the human brain as a palimpsest, wherein 
all our yesterdays, down to the minutest detail, survive; for 
their release, these yesterdays only await the proper, unsus- 
pected stimulus. Memory, not the captive, may very well be 
the real subject of the story.
The Captive
Borges and Myself
This all-too-famous sketch is my personal rendering of the old 
Jekyll-and-Hyde theme, save that in their case the opposition 
is between good and evil and in my version the opposites are 
the spectator and the spectacle. During extremes of happiness or 
unhappiness, I am apt to feel—in the space of a single, fleeting 
moment—that what I am undergoing is happening, independent 
of me, to somebody else. According to one of the Indian schools 
of philosophy, the ego is merely an onlooker who has identified 
himself with the man he is continually looking at. The fact 
that when I write I am stressing certain peculiarities of mine 
and omitting others has led me to think of Borges as a creature 
of fancy. This suspicion is strengthened by the existence of so 
many articles and studies that deal with him. A preoccupation 
with identity and sometimes its discord, duality, runs through 
much of my work—for example, in “The Theologians” and in 
“Tadeo Isidoro Cruz” and in the very title of my later poetry, 
The Self and the Other.
201

Jorge Luis Borges
The Maker
This story may be thought of as autobiographical—Homer as 
an exaltation of myself, his blindness as my blindness, his ac- 
ceptance of darkness as my acceptance. On the other hand, the 
departures from autobiography are striking. Blindness came to 
me as a slow twilight, not as a revelation; no Iliads and no 
Odysseys ever awaited me. When I first conceived this piece, 
I hesitated between Homer and Milton. Milton, however, is 
almost a contemporary, and also—as Dr. Johnson felt—a not 
very lovable figure. But Homer, as old as Western civilization 
itself, is a myth and so may quite easily be made into another 
myth. Eleven years after writing “The Maker,” I seem to have 
recast my fable—without being aware of it—into a more nar- 
rowly autobiographical poem called “In Praise of Darkness.” As 
for Milton, I have paid due tribute to him in a sonnet entitled 
“A Rose and Milton.”
An early translator was worried that there was no strict 
English equivalent for the words “El hacedor,” my Spanish 
title. I could only inform him that “hacedor” was my own 
translation of the English “maker,” as used by Dunbar in his 
“Lament.”
Ever since 1934, the writing of short prose pieces—fables, 
parables, brief narratives—has given me a certain mysterious 
satisfaction. I think of such pages as these as I think of coins— 
small material objects, hard and bright, tokens of something 
else.
The Intruder
In the fall of 1965, the Buenos Aires bibliophile Gustavo Fillol 
Day asked me for a short story to be published by him in one 
of those fine and secret editions meant for the happy few. 
Around that time I had been rereading Kipling’s Plain Tales 
from the Hills, and I told Fillol that I had a story in mind. The 
brevity and straightforwardness of the young Kipling tempted 
me, since I had always written very involved and many-faceted 
narratives. A few months later I was ready to get down to work, 
202

Commentaries
and at the beginning of 1966 I dictated “The Intruder” to 
my mother.
Without my suspecting it, the hint for this story—perhaps 
the best I have ever written—came out of a chance conversation 
with my friend don Nicolás Paredes sometime back in the late 
twenties. Commenting on the decadence of tango lyrics, which 
even then went in for “loud self-pity” among sentimental com- 
padritos betrayed by their wenches, Paredes remarked dryly, 
“Any man who thinks five minutes straight about a woman is no 
man—he’s a queer.” Love among such people was obviously ruled 
out; I knew that their real passion would be friendship. Out of 
this rather abstract set of ideas I evolved my story. I placed it 
in an almost nameless town to the south of Buenos Aires more 
than seventy years ago so that nobody could dispute the details. 
Really there are only two characters—the two brothers. Of 
them, we are allowed to hear only what the elder brother 
says; it is he who takes all the decisions, even the last one. I 
made them brothers for the sake of likelihood and, of course, 
to avoid unsavory implications.
I was stuck at the end of the story, unsure of the words 
Cristián would say. My mother, who from the outset thoroughly 
disliked the tale, at that point gave me the words I needed 
without a moment’s hesitation.
“The Intruder” was, by the way, the first of my new ven- 
tures into straightforward storytelling. From this beginning I 
went on to write many others, ultimately collecting them under 
the title El informe de Brodie (Doctor Brodie’s Report).
The Immortals
Blake wrote that were our senses closed—were we made blind, 
deaf, dumb, and so forth—we should see all things as they 
are: endless. “The Immortals” came out of that strange idea 
and also out of Rupert Brooke’s derivative line, “And see, no 
longer blinded by our eyes.” We acknowledge this first debt 
by calling one of the characters don Guillermo Blake.
Thrice over I attempted writing the story. First with Marta 
Mosquera Eastman and later with Alicia Jurado. They may still 
have copies of those early drafts. The story was to have been 
called “The Chosen One.” For some reason or other, each of 
these schemes was dropped. Then, in 1966, I took the story up
203

again with Bioy-Casares. By that time, Bioy and I had invented 
a new way of telling gruesome and uncanny tales. It lay in 
understating the grimness and essential horror while playing up 
certain humorous aspects—a kind of graft between Alfred Hitch- 
cock and the Marx Brothers. This not only made for more 
amusing and less pretentious writing, but at the same time 
underlined the horror. We developed the technique in our comic 
detective saga, Six Problems for don Isidro Parodi, and, more 
openly, in the first of the Two Memorable Fantasies, “The 
Witness.” In fact, some of the personages in “The Immortals” 
are taken from the Six Problems, and in the present story are 
fated to a terrible eternity. Another detail may be pointed out, 
the circumstance that all the characters—including the very 
Frankenstein of the story, the maker of monsters Dr. Nar- 
bondo—are also blatant fools and indulge in a silly jargon all 
their own.
The story deals in its own way with the problem of immor- 
tality. Since our only proof of personal death is statistical, and 
inasmuch as a new generation of deathless men may be already 
on its way, I have for years lived in fear of never dying. Such 
an idea as immortality would, of course, be unbearable. In 
“The Immortals” we are face to face with people who are only 
immortal and nothing else, and the prospect, I trust, is appalling. 
I think that this joint story (I can say this without undue vanity 
because I wrote it with someone else) is among my very best 
and that, despite its having been overlooked by Argentine critics, 
it may yet come into its own.
Jorge Luis Borges
The Meeting
I seem to be telling the same story over and over again. Obvi- 
ously, “The Meeting” is at heart the identical tale I have told 
in another new story of mine, “Juan Muraña.” It is also linked 
to a fairly recent sonnet called “Allusion to a Shadow of the 
Nineties,” which is about Muraña’s knife, and to a short prose 
poem, “The Dagger,” written I think in the late forties. Per- 
haps not so obvious is the fact that when I wrote these things 
I was quite unaware of repeating myself or of attempting vari- 
ations. Precisely what takes over my mind in these cases, I do 
not know.
Spinoza’s doctrine of things having a life of their own, or 
204

Commentaries
of wanting to persist in their own being, has struck me as par- 
ticularly true of those things, such as weapons, meant for quite 
specific ends. A dagger, for example, has to fulfill a destiny. 
In the story, the two knives have a will of their own, ruling 
the hapless young men who are supposed to be wielding them. 
Duncan and Uriarte are gentlemen, but the knives turn them 
into gauchos. In order to make this sufficiently clear, I have 
given Uriarte, who is a coward, the victory.
Back of all this lies my personal—or perhaps Argentine— 
obsession with knives. In the United States or in England, 
where men tend to square off with their fists, people think of 
fighting as something to be done bare-handed. In Western or 
gangster films, we often see men throw down their arms and 
resort to their fists. To me this seems highly unnatural and 
even unconvincing, since there is no earthly reason for a cow- 
boy or a gangster also to be something of a boxer. Among 
compadritos, if a man struck another he did it with the back of 
his hand, as a mere provocation, and then the real fighting 
began. To me there is real intimacy in the knife; in fact, in 
one of my poems, the last line runs: “and across my throat the 
intimate knife.” Firearms, of course, stand for marksmanship 
rather than courage. Fistfighting seems both harmless and un- 
dignified to an Argentine, while knife dueling has what Dr. 
Johnson said of the lives of sailors and seamen—“the dignity of 
danger.”
A few minor autobiographical elements have found their 
way into “The Meeting.” Álvaro Melián Lafinur was a child- 
hood idol of mine and really was my cousin. He wore a dagger 
and a cloak and used to play the guitar, singing the Uruguayan 
ballads of Elias Regules which I mention, Álvaro was a quite 
bad poet and, as to be expected, an academician. It is in this 
latter role that I introduced him into “The Aleph.”
Pedro Salvadores
I think the tale of Pedro Salvadores is summed up fully enough 
in its last paragraph. I might therefore take this opportunity to 
say something about the way it was written. At first, I played 
with the idea of attempting historical research, but I soon real- 
ized that for aesthetic purposes oral tradition is truer than mere 
facts. (The early version of Chevy Chase seems clumsier than
205

Jorge Luis Borges
the later.) I perhaps first heard this story from my grandfather 
when I was five or six. I set it down, in part, as my mother 
recalled it. I recently learned that the nineteenth-century novelist 
Eduardo Gutiérrez had already recorded the story—I think in 
a book called El puñal del tirano—and that the man’s real name 
was José María Salvadores. As to Unitarians and Federals, these 
words should not be taken at face value. The Unitarians, as 
Sarmiento and Echeverría well knew, represented civilization, 
while the Federals stood for the barbarism of caudillo clans. 
Honorably, my own forebears on both sides were Unitarians.
Our own time has furnished us with many destinies like that 
of Pedro Salvadores; Anne Frank’s is perhaps the best known 
of them.
Rosendo’s Tale
This story is, obviously, a sequel and an antidote to “Street- 
corner Man.” The earlier story was mistakenly read as realistic; 
the present one is a deliberate surmise as to how events might 
actually have happened on the night Francisco Real was mur- 
dered. When I wrote “Streetcorner Man,” I was—as I pointed 
out at the time—fully aware of its stagy unreality. As the years 
went by, however, and that story became embarrassingly popu- 
lar, I wanted people to understand that I was not quite the fool 
I was being admired for.
I had been rereading my Browning and knew from The 
Ring and the Book that a story could be told from different 
points of view. Rosendo Juárez, the seeming coward of the 
first version, might perhaps be allowed to have his own say. 
So, instead of the braggart of “Streetcorner Man,” we get a 
Shavian character who sees through the romantic nonsense and 
childish vanity of dueling, and finally attains manhood and 
sanity. In the first telling, Francisco Real is mortally wounded 
in the chest; sadly and realistically enough, he was really stabbed 
in the back while fornicating with La Lujanera in a ditch.
In the days when the story took place, toughs and killers 
were aided and abetted by the authorities, since most of them 
were official bodyguards of leading political figures. They were 
also used during elections to intimidate voters, knowing very 
well that because of police support they could act with im- 
punity. Seldom outlaws, they were simply strong-arm men. I 
206

Commentaries
recall an anecdote told me by a priest in Adrogué. He walked 
up to the polling booth during one election and was politely 
and firmly informed by the local Rosendo Juárez, “Father, you 
have already cast your vote.”
Incidentally, the reference to the young man dressed in black, 
who wrote Paredes’ letter for him, is to the poet Evaristo 
Carriego.
207


Bibliographical Note
The original titles and first magazine or newspaper appearances of the 
stories in this volume are as follows (place of publication, through- 
out, unless otherwise indicated, is Buenos Aires):
streetcorner man: “Hombre de la esquina rosada” (entitled “Hom- 
bres de las orillas” and signed “F. Bustos”), Crítica (September 16, 
1933).
the circular ruins: “Las ruinas circulares,” Sur (December 1940). 
death and the compass: “La muerte y la brújula,” Sur (May 
1942).
the life of tadeo isidoro cruz (1829-1874): “Biografía de Tadeo 
Isidoro Cruz (1829-1874),” Sur (December 1944). 
the aleph: “El Aleph,” Sur (September 1945). 
the two kings and their two labyrinths: “Los dos reyes y los 
dos laberintos” (entitled “Historia de los dos reyes y de los dos 
laberintos” and attributed, as an excerpt from The Land of Midian 
Revisited (1879), to R. F. Burton), Los Anales de Buenos Aires (May 
1946).
the dead man: “El muerto,” Sur (November 1946). 
the other death: “La otra muerte” (entitled “La redención”), 
La Nación (January 9, 1949).
ibn hakkan al-bokhari, dead in his labyrinth: “Abenjacán el 
Bojarí, muerto en su Laberinto,” Sur (August 1951).
the man on the threshold: “El hombre en el umbral,” La Nación 
(April 20, 1952).
209

the challenge: “El desafío,” La Nación (December 28, 1952). 
the captive: “El cautivo,” La Biblioteca (January-February-March 
1957).
borges and myself: “Borges y yo,” La Biblioteca (January-Febru- 
ary-March 1957). 
the maker: “El Hacedor,” La Biblioteca ([February] 1958). 
the meeting: “El encuentro,” La Prensa (October 5, 1969). 
pedro salvadores: “Pedro Salvadores” [in English translation], 
The New York Review of Books (New York: August 21, 1969).
rosendo’s tale: “Historia de Rosendo Juárez,” La Nación (Novem- 
ber 9, 1969).
“El acercamiento a Almotásim” (the approach to al-mu’tasim) 
did not appear in a magazine before its publication in Historia de la 
eternidad (Viau y Zona, 1936); “Los inmortales” (the immortals) 
did not appear before it was published in Crónicas de Bustos Domecq 
(Losada, 1967). The first appearance of “La intrusa (the intruder) 
was in an edition of fifty-two copies, printed by the Buenos Aires 
bibliophile Gustavo Fillol Day in April 1966 for private distribution 
among his and the author’s friends; it also appeared, in the same 
month, in the sixth impression of the third edition of El Aleph 
(Emecé, 1966).
“Hombre de la esquina rosada” was first collected in Historia uni- 
versal de la infamia (Tor, 1935). “Las ruinas circulares” was first 
reprinted in El jardín de senderos que se bifurcan (Sur, 1942); “La 
muerte y la brújula” in Ficciones (Sur, 1944); “Biografía de Tadeo 
Isidoro Cruz (1829-1874),” “El Aleph,” “El muerto,” and “La otra 
muerte” in the first edition of El Aleph (Losada, 1949); “Abenjacán 
el Bojarí, muerto en su laberinto,” “Los dos reyes y los dos laberin- 
tos,” and “El hombre en el umbral” in the second edition of El Aleph 
(Losada, 1952). “El desafío” (entitled “El culto del coraje”) was first 
collected in the second edition of Evaristo Carriego (Emecé, 1955), 
where it appeared in a somewhat different form as part of the chap- 
ter “Historia del tango.” “El cautivo,” “Borges y yo,” and “El hace- 
dor” were collected in El hacedor (Emecé, 1960); “Pedro Salvadores” 
in Elogio de la sombra (Emecé, 1969); “El encuentro” and “Historia 
de Rosendo Juárez” in El informe de Brodie (Emecé, 1970).
Jorge Luis Borges
210

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Jorge Luis Borges was born on August 24, 1899, in Buenos 
Aires. In 1955, with the overthrow of Perón, he was named 
Director of the Argentine National Library, and in the same 
year became professor of English and American literatures 
at the University of Buenos Aires. In 1961, he shared the 
International Publishers’ Prize with Samuel Beckett. He has 
made three trips to the United States—the latest, in 1969, to 
attend a conference devoted to his writings at the University 
of Oklahoma.
ABOUT THE TRANSLATOR
Norman Thomas di Giovanni was born in Newton, Massa- 
chusetts, in 1933, and was graduated from Antioch College 
in 1955. He met Borges in 1967 while the latter was at 
Harvard. In 1968, on Borges’ invitation, he went to live in 
Buenos Aires, where he works with the author in daily 
sessions. Together they are producing ten of Borges’ books 
in English versions. The first of these, The Book of Imagi- 
nary Beings, was published in 1969.

