THE CONGRESS


The Congress
by
Jorge Luis Borges
Translated by Norman Thomas di Giovanni 
in collaboration with the author
LONDON /  ENITHARMON PRESS / 1974

First published in 1974 by the enitharmon press,
22 Huntingdon Road, East Finchley, London N2 9DU
© 1971 by The New Yorker Magazine, Inc.
This story first appeared in the New Yorker
sbn 901111 41 4 (ordinary issue) 
sbn 901111 42 2 (special issue)
printed and made in Great Britain

. . . ils s’acheminèrent vers un château immense, au frontispice duquel on 
lisait: ‘Je n’appartiens à personne et j’appartiens à tout le monde. Vous 
y étiez avant que d’y entrer, et vous y serez encore quand vous en sortirez.’ 
—From Jacques le Fataliste et son Maître (1796), by Diderot.

buenos aires, 1955
Alejandro Ferri is my name. Martial echoes may be heard in it, but 
neither the metals of glory nor the great shadow of the Macedonian– 
the words belong to the poet of The Marble Pillars, who honored me 
with his friendship–has any kinship with the nearly anonymous man 
who strings together these lines on the upper floor of a hotel on Santia- 
go del Estero Street, on the south side of town, which is no longer the 
old Southside. Any day now, I’ll turn seventy-one or seventy-two; I am 
still teaching English to a handful of students. Out of indecision or 
carelessness, or for some other reason, I never married, and now I live 
alone. Loneliness does not worry me; life is difficult enough, putting up 
with yourself and with your own habits. I realize I am getting on in 
years. An unmistakable symptom of this is the fact that novelties– 
maybe because I feel they hold nothing essentially new and are really 
no more than timid variations–neither interest nor distract me. When 
I was a young man, I was fond of sunsets, the city’s sprawling slums, 
and of unhappiness; now I prefer mornings and downtown and peace. 
I no longer play at being Hamlet. I have become a member of the Con- 
servative Party and of a chess club, which I usually attend as an on- 
looker–sometimes an absentminded onlooker. Anyone who is curious 
may dig up from some out-of-the-way nook of the National Library, 
on Mexico Street, a copy of my Short Study of John Wilkins’ Analyti- 
cal Language, a work that sadly stands in need of a new edition, if 
only to correct or to lessen its many mistakes. The library’s new direc-
1

tor, I am told, is a literary man who dedicates himself to the study of 
ancient languages (as if modern ones were not sufficiently rudiment- 
ary) and to the demagogic exaltation of an imaginary Buenos Aires of 
knife fighters. I have never cared to meet him. I came to this city in 
1899, and only once did chance bring me face to face with a knife 
fighter or with an individual who had a reputation as such. Further on, 
should the occasion present itself, I shall relate the episode.
I have already said that I live alone. Several days ago, a fellow- 
roomer, who had heard me speak of Fermín Eguren, told me that he 
had died in Punta del Este.
The death of this man, who was certainly never a friend of mine, has 
unaccountably saddened me. I know that I am alone; I know that in 
the whole world I am the only keeper of that secret event–the Con- 
gress–whose memory I can no longer share. I am now the last member 
of that Congress. It is undeniable that all men are members of that 
Congress–that there is not a single being of earth who is not–but I 
know I am a member in a very different way. I know that I am, and 
that’s what sets me apart from my numberless colleagues, present and 
future. It is undeniable that on the seventh of February, 1904, we 
swore by what is most holy (is there anything holy on earth, or any- 
thing that is not?) never to reveal the history of the Congress, but it is 
no less undeniable that my now committing perjury is also part of the 
Congress. This last statement is sufficiently dim, but it may whet the 
curiosity of my eventual readers.
At any rate, the task I have taken upon myself is not an easy one. I 
have never before attempted the art of narration–not even in its epis- 
tolary form–and, what is doubtless even more important, the story 
itself is unbelievable. The pen of José Fernández Irala, the undeserved- 
ly forgotten author of The Marble Pillars, was the one destined for this 
work, but now it is too late. I shall not deliberately falsify the real 
facts, although I foresee that laziness and incompetence will more than 
once lead me into error.
Exact dates are of no account. Let it be recalled that I came from 
Santa Fe, my native province, in 1899. I have never gone back. I have
2

grown accustomed to Buenos Aires, a city I am not fond of, in the 
same way that a man grows accustomed to his own body or to an old 
ailment. Without much caring, I am aware that I am going to die soon; 
I must, consequently, control my digressive tendencies and get on with 
my story.
The years do not change our essential selves–if one has an essential 
self. The impulse that would one night lead me to the Congress of the 
World was the same that first brought me to the staff of Ultima Hora. 
To a poor boy from the provinces, becoming a newspaperman was a 
romantic fate, just as to a poor city boy the life of a gaucho or a farm- 
hand is romantic. I feel no shame at having once wanted to be a jour- 
nalist, an occupation that now seems trivial to me. I remember having 
heard my colleague Fernández Irala say that newspapermen wrote for 
oblivion but that his ambition was to write for time and for memory. 
He had already chiselled (the verb was then in common use) some of 
those perfect sonnets that were later to reappear, with one or two 
minor touches, in the pages of The Marble Pillars.
I cannot quite recall the first time I heard the Congress spoken of. 
Maybe it was on that same evening the cashier paid me my first 
month’s salary and, to celebrate this proof that Buenos Aires had 
taken me to its bosom, I suggested to Irala that we dine together. He 
excused himself, saying he could not miss the Congress. I understood 
at once that he was not referring to the rather pompous, domed build- 
ing at the foot of an avenue peopled by Spaniards but to something 
more secret and far more important. People spoke of the Congress, 
some with open scorn, others with lowered voices, still others with 
alarm or curiosity-all, I believe, without knowing anything about it. 
A few Saturdays later, Irala invited me to go along with him.
It must have been nine or ten o’clock at night. On our way, in a 
streetcar, he told me these preliminary meetings took place every 
Saturday and that don Alejandro Glencoe, the president of the Con- 
gress, perhaps struck by my name, had already signed his approval of 
my attendance. We went to the Gas-Lamp Coffee House. Some fifteen 
or twenty members of the Congress sat around a long table; I don’t 
know if there was a dais or if memory adds it. I immediately recog- 
nized the president, whom I had never seen before. Don Alejandro was
3

a gentleman, already well along in years, with a high forehead and 
thinning hair, gray eyes, and a graying reddish beard. I always saw him 
dressed in a dark frock coat, and he usually held his hands locked to- 
gether over the head of his cane. He was portly and tall. To his left sat 
a much younger man, also with red hair. Its violent color suggested 
fire, while the color of Mr. Glencoe’s beard suggested autumn leaves. 
To his right was a long-faced young man with an unusually low fore- 
head and dressed like a dandy. Everyone had ordered coffee, and 
several, absinthe. What first caught my attention was the presence of a 
woman–the only woman among so many men. At the other end of the 
table sat a boy of about ten, dressed in a sailor suit, who was not long 
in falling asleep. There were also a Protestant minister, two unmistak- 
able Jews, and a Negro, who, with a white silk handkerchief around 
his neck and very tight-fitting clothes, was dressed like a street-corner 
hoodlum. In front of the Negro and the boy were cups of chocolate. 
I do not remember any of the other people except for a Mr. Marcelo 
del Mazo, a man of great politeness and fine conversation, whom I 
never saw again. (I still have a faded, poorly done photograph of one 
of the gatherings, but I shall not publish it, since the dress, the long 
hair, and the mustaches of that period would make the whole thing 
look burlesque and even shabby.)
All groups tend to create their own dialects and rites; the Congress, 
which always had something dreamlike about it, seemed to want its 
members to discover–at leisure and for themselves–its real aim and 
even the names and surnames of its members. I was not long in realiz- 
ing that I was duty-bound not to ask questions, and I refrained even 
from asking any of Fernández Irala, who never told me a thing. I did 
not miss a single Saturday, but a good month or two went by before I 
reached this understanding. From the second meeting on, my neighbor 
was Donald Wren, an engineer on the Southern Railways, who was to 
give me English lessons.
Don Alejandro spoke very little. The rest did not address themselves 
directly to him, but I felt that their words were meant for him and that 
everyone was after his approval. One gesture of his slow hand was 
enough to change the topic of discussion. I came to find out, little by 
little, that the red-haired man to his left bore the strange name of
4

Twirl. I remember that fragile look of his, which, as though their 
stature made them dizzy and forced them to hunch forward, is charac- 
teristic of some very tall people. His hands, I recall, often played with 
a copper compass case, which from time to time he set on the table. 
At the end of 1914, he was killed as an infantryman in an Irish regi- 
ment. The person who always sat to the right, the young man with the 
low forehead, was Fermín Eguren, the president’s nephew.
Putting no faith in the methods of realism (a most artificial school 
if there ever was one), I shall declare right off what I learned only little 
by little. Beforehand, I want to remind the reader of my situation at the 
time. I was a poor boy from Casilda, a farmer’s son, who had come to 
the capital and suddenly found himself–this was the way I felt–in the 
intimate heart of Buenos Aires and perhaps (who knows?) of the whole 
world. After half a century, I still feel those first dazzling moments, 
which certainly were not to be the last.
Here are the facts. I shall tell them as briefly as I can. Don Alejandro 
Glencoe, the president, was an Uruguayan rancher and owner of a 
large spread of land bordering on Brazil. His father, a native off Aber- 
deen, had established himself on this continent around the middle of 
the last century. He brought with him some hundred books–the only 
books, I venture to say, that don Alejandro read in the course of his 
life. (I speak of these assorted books, which I have had in my hands, 
because in one of them lies the root of my story.) The elder Mr. Glen- 
coe, on dying, left a daughter and a son. The son was later to become 
our president; the daughter married an Eguren and was Fermín’s 
mother. Don Alejandro at one time aspired to the Uruguayan National 
Congress, but the political bosses barred his way. Rankled, he decided 
to found another Congress and on a vaster scale. He remembered 
having read in the volcanic pages of Carlyle the fate of Anacharsis 
Clootz, that worshipper of the goddess Reason who, at the bead of 
thirty-six foreigners, addressed a Paris assembly as ‘mankind’s spokes- 
man.’ Moved by this example, don Alejandro conceived the idea of 
calling together a Congress of the World that would represent all men 
of all nations. The center for the preliminary meetings was the Gas- 
Lamp Coffee House; the formal act of inauguration, which would take 
place within some four years, would be held at don Alejandro’s ranch.
5

Like so many Uruguayans, don Alejandro–who was no lover of Uru- 
guay’s now national hero, Artigas–was fond of Buenos Aires, but he 
nonetheless decided that the Congress must eventually meet in his 
own country. Oddly enough, the four-year planning period was carried 
out with a precision that was almost magical.
In the beginning, we were paid a considerable sum as a per diem, but 
the zeal that enflamed us prompted Fernández Irala–who was as poor 
as I was–to renounce his, and all the rest of us followed suit. This 
measure was healthy, since it served to separate the wheat from the 
chaff; the number of members was reduced, and only the faithful 
remained. The one paid position was that of the secretary, Nora 
Erfjord, who lacked other means of support and whose work at the 
same time was staggering. To set up a worldwide organization is no 
trifling enterprise. Letters came and went, and so did cables and tele- 
grams. Potential delegates wrote from Peru, Denmark, and India. A 
Bolivian wrote that his country’s lack of access to the sea should be a 
matter of prime consideration in our first meetings. Twirl, who had a 
farseeing mind, remarked that the Congress involved a problem of a 
philosophical nature. Planning an assembly to represent all men was 
like fixing the exact number of Platonic types–a puzzle that had taxed 
the imagination of thinkers for centuries. Twirl suggested that, without 
going farther afield, don Alejandro Glencoe might represent not only 
cattlemen but also Uruguayans, and also humanity’s great forerun- 
ners, and also men with red beards, and also those who are seated in 
armchairs. Nora Erfjord was Norwegian. Would she represent secre- 
taries, 
Norwegian 
womanhood, 
or–more 
obviously–all 
beautiful 
women? Would a single engineer be enough to represent all engineers 
–including those of New Zealand?
It was then, I believe, that Fermín broke in. ‘Ferri represents the 
gringos,’ he said in a flood of laughter.
Don Alejandro looked at him severely and, in an even voice, said, 
‘Mr. Ferri is representative of the immigrants whose labor is building 
up this country.’
Fermín Eguren never could bear the sight of me. He took pride in
6

an assortment of things: in being Uruguayan; in coming from old stock; 
in attracting women; in having chosen an expensive tailor; and, God 
knows why, in his Basque origin–a people who throughout history have 
done little else than milk cows.
An incident of the most trivial sort sealed our enmity. After one 
of the meetings, Eguren suggested that we pay a visit to one of the 
Junín Street brothels. The plan did not attract me, but, in order not to 
make myself the butt of his jokes, I accepted. We went with Fernández 
Irala. On leaving the establishment, we ran into a huge specimen of a 
man. Eguren, who may have been a bit drunk, gave him a shove. The 
stranger quickly barred our way and told us, ‘Whoever wants to leave 
is going to have to pass by this knife.’
I remember the glint of the blade in the darkness of the long en- 
tranceway. Eguren drew back, visibly afraid. I wasn’t too sure of my- 
self, but my hatred got the best of my fright. I reached into my armpit, 
as if to draw out a weapon, and said in a firm voice, ‘We’ll settle this 
out on the street.’
The stranger answered–with another voice now, ‘That’s the kind of 
man I like. I wanted to test you, friend.’ Then he began to laugh in a 
cordial way.
‘As to “friend,” ’ I answered him, ‘that’s what you think.’ The three 
of us made our way past him.
The man with the knife entered the brothel. I heard later that his 
name was Tapia, or Paredes, or something of the kind, and that he had 
a reputation for brawling. Out on the sidewalk, Irala, who had kept 
cool, slapped me on the back and said, impressively, ‘Among us three, 
we had a musketeer. Hail, d’Artagnan!’
Fermín Eguren never forgave me for having witnessed his backing 
down.
I feel that now, and only now, my story begins. The preceding pages 
have set down no more than the conditions that chance or fate re- 
quired so that the unbelievable event–perhaps the single event of my 
whole life–might take place. Don Alejandro Glencoe was always at 
the center of the Congress, but over a period of time we felt, not with-
7

out misgiving, that the real president was Twirl. This singular charac- 
ter, with the flaming mustache, fawned on Glencoe and even on Fer- 
mín Eguren–but in such an exaggerated way that those present would 
think he was actually mocking the two. By so doing, he never once 
compromised his integrity. Glencoe labored under the pride of his vast 
fortune; Twirl discovered that in order to get anything done it was 
enough to suggest that its cost might prove beyond the president’s 
means. It is my suspicion that at the outset the Congress had been 
nothing more than a haphazard sort of name. Twirl was continually 
proposing new areas of expansion, and don Alejandro always accep- 
ted. It was like being at the middle of a spreading circle, which grows 
ever larger and always farther away. Twirl said, for example, that the 
Congress could not get along without a reference library, and Nieren- 
stein, who worked in a bookshop, went about ordering us the atlases 
of Justus Perthes and several extensive encyclopedias–all the way from 
Pliny’s Natural History and Beauvais’s Speculum down to the pleasant 
mazes (I reread these words with Fernández Irala’s voice) of the illus- 
trious French Encyclopedists, of the Britannica, of Pierre Larousse, of 
Brockhaus, of Larsen, and of Montaner y Simón. I recall how I rever- 
ently fondled the silky volumes of a certain Chinese encyclopedia 
whose finely brushed characters seemed to me more mysterious than 
the spots on a leopard’s skin. As yet, I will say nothing of what lay in 
store for them and which certainly I do not regret.
Don Alejandro, maybe because we were the only ones who did not try 
to flatter him, had grown quite fond of Fernández Irala and me. He 
invited us to spend a few days at his ranch, La Caledonia, where he 
had a crew of stonemasons already at work.
At the end of a long trip upriver by steamer and a ferry crossing on 
a raft, we set foot one morning on the Uruguay shore. We then had to 
spend successive nights in run-down country saloons, while opening 
and shutting dozens of gateways all day along back roads in the Cu- 
chilla Negra. We made our way in a light carriage; the countryside 
seemed wider and lonelier to me than the small farm where I was born.
I still hold my two images of the ranch–the one I brought with me
8

and the one my eyes finally saw. Absurdly, I had imagined, as in a 
dream, an impossible combination of the flat plains of Santa Fe and of 
the rather gaudy Victorian Buenos Aires Waterworks. La Caledonia 
was a long adobe building with a thatched saddle roof and a brick- 
paved gallery. It appeared to be built for hardship and endurance. The 
rough walls were nearly a yard thick and the doors were narrow. 
Nobody had ever thought of planting a tree. The sun’s first and last 
rays beat down on the place. The corrals were of stone; the cattle were 
many, scrawny and long-horned; the horses’ switching tails reached the 
ground. For the first time in my life, I knew the taste of freshly slaugh- 
tered meat. Some sacks of sea biscuit were brought out; a few days 
later, the foreman told me he had never eaten bread in his life. Irala 
asked where the bathroom was, and, with a sweeping gesture, don 
Alejandro indicated the entire continent. It was a moonlit night; I 
went out to stretch my legs, and I surprised Irala being watched by an 
ostrich.
The heat, which the night had not dispelled, was unbearable, and 
everyone praised the coolness. The rooms were low-ceilinged and 
many, and seemed to me barely furnished; we were given one, facing 
south, in which there were two cots and a dresser with a silver wash- 
basin and pitcher. The floor was dirt.
The second day, I came across the library and the volumes of Car- 
lyle, and I found the pages dedicated to mankind’s spokesman, Ana- 
charsis Clootz, who had led me to that morning and to that loneliness. 
After breakfast, which was identical with dinner, don Alejandro 
showed us the building under construction. We rode three or four 
miles on horseback out in the wide open. Irala, whose horsemanship 
was shaky, had an accident; unsmiling, the foreman remarked, ‘You 
Argentines really know how to dismount.’
From way off, we could see the construction site. Some twenty men 
were at work building a kind of tumbledown amphitheatre. I recall a 
series of stages and ladders and stone tiers with stretches of sky show- 
ing between.
More than once, I tried to speak with the gauchos, but my efforts 
failed. In some way, they knew they were different. Among themselves, 
they used a spare, guttural Brazilianized Spanish. It was obvious that
9

both Indian and Negro blood ran in their veins. They were short and 
strong; at La Caledonia, I became a tall man–something that had 
never happened to me until then.
Almost all of them dressed with their legs wrapped in the chiripá, 
and a few wore the wide, baggy bombachas. They had little or nothing 
in common with the complaining heroes found in the books of Her- 
nández or of Rafael! Obligado. Under the stimulus of Saturday-night 
alcohol, they were easily moved to violence. There wasn’t a single 
woman around, and I never once heard a guitar.
I was more interested in the change that had come over don Alejan- 
dro than I was in these border-country men. In Buenos Aires, he was a 
pleasant, reserved gentleman; at La Caledonia, like his fathers before 
him, he became the stern chief of a clan. Sunday mornings, he read 
Holy Scripture to the hands, who did not understand a single word. 
One night, the foreman, a youngish man who had inherited the job 
from his father, reported to us that one of the day laborers and one of 
the regular help were having it out with knives. Don Alejandro got up, 
unruffled. When he came to the circle of onlookers, he drew out the 
weapon he always carried, handed it to the foreman (who appeared to 
me to cringe), and stepped between the knives. At once, I heard the 
order, ‘Drop those knives, boys.’ With the same calm voice, he added, 
‘Now shake hands and behave yourselves. I don’t want any brawling 
around here.’
The two men obeyed. The next day, I learned that don Alejandro 
had fired the foreman.
I felt the loneliness ringing me in, and I began fearing I’d never get 
back to Buenos Aires. I wonder whether Fernández Irala shared that 
fear. We talked a lot about Argentina and what we’d do when we 
returned. I missed the stone lions of a certain gateway on Jujuy Street, 
near the Plaza del Once, and the light of a particular old bar in some 
dim part of town, but not my familiar haunts. Always a good rider, I 
fell into the habit of going out on horseback and riding long distances. 
I still remember the particular piebald I used to saddle up myself. On 
some afternoon or on some night or other, I probably was in Brazil, 
since the border was nothing but a line traced out by widely spaced 
markers. Then, at the close of a day exactly like all the rest, don Ale-
10

jandro told us, ‘We’ll turn in early. Tomorrow we’ll be off while it’s 
still cool.’
Once down the river, I felt so happy that I was even able to think 
back to La Caledonia with affection.
We took up our Saturday meetings again. At the first one, Twirl asked 
for the floor. He said, with his usual flowers of rhetoric, that the 
library of the Congress of the World could not be limited to reference 
books alone, and that the classical works of all nations and all lan- 
guages were a veritable storehouse that we could not safely afford to 
ignore. The suggestion was approved on the spot; Fernández Irala and 
Dr. Ignacio Cruz, who was a teacher of Latin, accepted the job of 
selecting the appropriate texts. Twirl had already talked things over 
with Nierenstein.
In those days, there wasn’t a single Argentine whose utopia was not 
Paris. Perhaps the most enthusiastic of us was Fermín Eguren; next, 
for quite different reasons, came Fernández Irala. To the poet of The 
Marble Pillars, Paris was Verlaine and Leconte de Lisle, while to 
Eguren it was an improved version of Junín Street. I suspect that he 
had come to some understanding with Twirl. At a subsequent meeting, 
Twirl brought up the question of what language the members of the 
Congress would use, arguing the feasibility of sending delegates to 
London and Paris to gather information. Feigning impartiality, he first 
put up my name, and then, as an apparent afterthought, that of his 
friend Eguren. As always, don Alejandro agreed.
I think I have written that, in exchange for some lessons in Italian, 
Wren had initiated me into the study of the inexhaustible English lan- 
guage. As far as possible, we did away with grammar and with those 
exercises concocted for the beginner, and we found our way directly 
into poetry, whose forms demand brevity. My first contact with the 
language that was to fill out my life was Stevenson’s brave ‘Requiem.’ 
Then came the ballads that Percy revealed to the dignified eighteenth 
century. A short while before leaving for London, I was dazzled by 
Swinburne–an experience that made me begin to doubt (and to feel 
guilty about it) the eminence of Irala’s Alexandrines.
11

I reached London early in January, 1902; I remember the soft touch 
of falling snow, which I had never before seen and for which I was 
grateful. Luckily, Eguren and I had travelled separately. I roomed at 
a modest boarding house behind the British Museum, where mornings 
and afternoons I studied in the library in search of a language worthy 
of the Congress of the World. I did not overlook universal languages, 
investigating both Esperanto–which Lugones qualifies as ‘impartial, 
simple, and economical’–and Volapük, which, declining verbs and 
conjugating nouns, attempts to work out all linguistic possibilities. I 
also weighed the arguments in favor of and against the revival of Latin, 
a nostalgia for which has endured down through the centuries. I even 
dwelled on an examination of John Wilkins’ analytical language, in 
which the definition of each word is to be found in the letters that spell 
it out. It was beneath the high dome of the reading room that I first 
met Beatrice.
This is meant to be a general history of the Congress of the World, 
not of Alejandro Ferri, but the former takes in the latter, just as it 
takes in all other histories. Beatrice was tall, trim, with fine features 
and a head of red hair that might have reminded me–but never did–of 
the shady Twirl. She was not yet quite twenty. She had come down 
from one of the northern counties to study literature at the university. 
Her background, like mine, was humble. At that time, to be of Italian 
stock in Buenos Aires was still to be looked down on, but in London I 
found out that being Italian was to many people a romantic attribute. 
Within a few evenings, we were lovers; I asked her to marry me, but 
Beatrice Frost, like Nora Erfjord, was a follower of the faith preached 
by Ibsen, and she did not want to tie herself down to anyone. From 
her lips came the word I never dared speak. O nights, O darkness warm 
and shared, O love that flows in shadows like some secret river, O that 
instant of ecstasy when each is both, O that ecstasy’s purity and inno- 
cence, O the coupling in which we became lost so as then to lose our- 
selves in sleep, O the first light of dawn, and I watching her.
On the rough Brazil border, I had been plagued by homesickness; not 
so in London’s red labyrinth, which gave me so many things. Despite 
the pretexts I dreamed up to delay my departure, I had to return home 
at the end of the year. Beatrice and I celebrated Christmas together. I
12

assured her that don Alejandro would invite her to join the Congress; 
she answered, in an offhand way, that she had always wanted to visit 
the Southern Hemisphere, and that a cousin of hers, a dentist, had 
settled in Tasmania.
Beatrice did not want to come to the boat. Goodbyes, to her way of 
thinking, were too dramatic, were a senseless feast of unhappiness, and 
she detested dramatics. We parted in the library, where we had met the 
winter before. As a man, I’m a coward; to avoid the anguish of waiting 
for letters, I did not leave her my address.
Return trips are shorter, I have always noticed, but that crossing of the 
Atlantic, heavy with memories and anxieties, seemed unusually long. 
Nothing hurt me as much as thinking that, in a parallel with my life, 
Beatrice would go on living hers, minute by minute and night by night. 
I wrote a lengthy letter, destroying it as we left Montevideo. When I 
reached Argentina–it was on a Thursday–Irala was waiting for me at 
the dock. I went back to my old place on Chile Street; that day and the 
next he and I spent together talking and taking long walks. I wanted 
to recover Buenos Aires again. It was a relief to find out that Fermín 
Eguren was staying on in Paris; I knew the fact of my having come 
back before him would in some way make up for my long absence.
Irala was downcast. Fermín was squandering huge sums in Europe 
and had more than once disobeyed the order to return home. This was 
to have been foreseen. I was more disturbed by other news. Twirl, in 
spite of the opposition of Irala and Cruz, had invoked the Younger 
Pliny, according to whom there is no book so bad it does not contain 
some good, and had proposed the indiscriminate purchase of bound 
volumes of the daily press, of thirty-four hundred copies of Don 
Quixote in various editions, of the complete works of General Mitre, 
of Ph.D. theses, of old account books, of bulletins, and of theatre pro- 
grams. Everything gives witness, he had said. Nierenstein backed him; 
don Alejandro, ‘after three resounding Saturdays’ (as Irala put it), 
approved the motion. Nora Erfjord had resigned her position as 
secretary; it was taken over by a new member, Karlinski, who was a 
tool of Twirl’s. The bulky packages began piling up now, without files
13

or catalogues, in the back rooms and in the wine cellar of don Alejan- 
dro’s rambling old town house. Early in July, Irala spent a week back 
at La Caledonia, where the masons had broken off their work. The 
foreman, upon questioning, explained that that was what the boss had 
ordered, and that there would always be time enough tomorrow.
In London, I had drafted a report that there is now no point in going 
into. That Friday, I went to pay a visit to don Alejandro and to deliver 
a copy of what I had written. Fernández Irala came with me. It was 
early evening, and the cold south wind blew into the house. At the 
front gate, on Alsina Street, a delivery wagon, pulled by three horses, 
stood waiting. I remember that the deliverymen were weighed down 
under the loads they went about piling up in the last patio. Twirl was 
imperious, giving them orders. Also present, indoors, as if they had had 
an inkling of something, were Nora Erfjord and Nierenstein and Cruz 
and Donald Wren and a few other members of the Congress. Nora 
threw her arms around me and kissed me, and that embrace and that 
kiss made me remember others. The Negro, brimming over with good 
nature and happiness, kissed my hand.
In one of the rooms, the square trapdoor to the cellar was wide open; 
some masonry steps plunged down into darkness. Suddenly we heard 
footsteps. Before laying eyes on him, I knew it was don Alejandro. He 
came almost on the run.
His voice was different. It was not the voice of the deliberate gentle- 
man who presided over our Saturdays, nor that of the feudal land- 
owner who had put a stop to a knife duel and who preached the word 
of God to his gauchos–but it seemed more like this latter.
Without looking at anyone, he ordered, ‘Get everything out that’s 
packed away down there. I don’t want a single book left in that cellar.’ 
The work went on for nearly an hour. Outside, on the earth floor 
of the last patio, we made a pile that was taller than the tallest head. 
All of us marched back and forth; the only person who failed to move 
was don Alejandro.
Then came the order, ‘Now set fire to that heap.’
Twirl went pale. Nierenstein blurted, ‘How can the Congress of the 
World do without this valuable material I’ve collected with so much 
love?’
14

‘The Congress of the World?’ said don Alejandro. He laughed scorn- 
fully. I had never before heard him laugh.
There is a mysterious pleasure in destruction. The flames crackled 
brightly, and we all had to press back against the walls or move in- 
doors. Darkness, ashes, and an odor of burning were left behind in the 
patio. I remember some undamaged pages lying white against the 
ground. Nora Erfjord, who felt for don Alejandro that love which 
young women often feel for older men, said, without really understand- 
ing, ‘Don Alejandro knows what he’s doing.’
Irala, always true to literature, attempted an epigram. ‘Every few 
centuries,’ he said, ‘the Library of Alexandria must be burned down.’ 
Then the revelation was made to us.
‘It has taken me four years to understand what I am about to say,’ 
don Alejandro began. ‘My friends, the undertaking we have set for 
ourselves is so vast that it embraces–I now see–the whole world. Our 
Congress cannot be a group of charlatans deafening each other in the 
sheds of an out-of-the-way ranch. The Congress of the World began 
with the first moment of the world and it will go on when we are dust. 
There’s no place on earth where it does not exist. The Congress is the 
books we’ve burned. The Congress is Job on the ash heap and Christ 
on the Cross. The Congress is that worthless boy who squanders my 
substance on whores.’
I could not hold myself back. ‘Don Alejandro,’ I broke in, ‘I, too, 
am to blame. I had finished my report, which I now hand you, but I 
stayed on and on in England, throwing your money away on a wo- 
man.’
Don Alejandro went on. ‘I had already guessed as much, Ferri. The 
Congress is my cattle. The Congress is the cattle I have sold and the 
miles of land that are no longer mine.’
A horror-stricken voice was raised–Twirl’s. ‘You don’t mean to say 
you’ve sold La Caledonia?’
‘Yes,’ don Alejandro said calmly, ‘I’ve sold it. I haven’t a square 
foot of land to my name, but I do not regret it, because now I see things 
as they are. Perhaps we shall never meet again, for the Congress stands 
in no need of us. But this last night we will all go out together to see 
the true Congress.’
15

Drunk with victory, he overwhelmed us with his resolution and faith. 
No one–not for a single second–thought he was mad.
In the square, we climbed into an open carriage. I squeezed my- 
self onto the driver’s seat beside the coachman, and don Alejandro 
ordered, ‘Maestro, let’s have a turn around the city. Take us anywhere 
you like.’
The Negro, perched on the running board, never stopped smiling. 
I’ll never know whether or not he realized what was going on.
Words are symbols that assume a shared memory. The memory I now 
want to set down is mine alone; all those who share it have died. The 
mystics invoke a rose, a kiss, a bird that is all birds, a sun that is all the 
stars and the sun, a jug of wine, a garden, or the sexual act. Of these 
metaphors, none will serve me for that long, joyous night, which left 
us, tired out and happy, at the borders of dawn. We barely spoke while 
the wheels and the horses’ hooves clattered over the cobblestones. Be- 
fore daybreak, beside a dark, humble body of water that may have 
been the Maldonado or the Riachuelo, Nora Erfjord’s high voice sang 
the ballad of Sir Patrick Spens, and don Alejandro, in a low voice and 
out of tune, chimed in with a few verses. The English words did not 
bring me Beatrice’s image. At my back, Twirl muttered, ‘I wanted to 
do evil and I have done good.’
Something of what we glimpsed lives on–the reddish wall of the 
Recoleta cemetery, the yellow wall of a jail, a couple of men dancing 
together at a right-angled street corner, a church courtyard with black 
and white tiles and a grilled iron fence, a railway gate crossing, my 
house, a marketplace, the damp unfathomable night–but none of these 
fleeting things, which may have been others, now matter. What really 
matters is having felt that our plan, which more than once we made 
a joke of, really and secretly existed and was the world and ourselves. 
Down through the years, without much hope, I have sought the taste 
of that night; a few times I thought I had recaptured it in music, in 
love, in untrustworthy memories, but it has never come back to me 
except once in a dream. When we swore not to say a word to anyone, 
it was already Saturday morning.
16

I never saw any of them again, outside of Irala. He and I never spoke 
about the Congress; anything we might have said would have been a 
desecration. In 1914, don Alejandro Glencoe died and was buried in 
Montevideo. Irala had already passed away the year before.
Once, I ran across Nierenstein on Lima Street, and we pretended not 
to see each other.
17

the congress by Jorge Luis Borges has been printed for the 
Enitharmon Press by Daedalus Press; 
the edition is limited to 250 copies on Glastonbury Book Antique 
paper, and 50 copies on Glastonbury Coloured Antique Laid paper 
which have been signed by the author and translator.
This is number
Printed by Daedalus Press, Crown House, Stoke Ferry, Norfolk,
England

