


by jorge luis borges
Ficciones
Labyrinths
Dreamtigers
Other Inquisitions -
A Personal Anthology
The Book of Imaginary Beings
The Aleph and Other Stories -
Doctor Brodie’s Report
Selected Poems -
A Universal History of Infamy
In Praise of Darkness
Chronicles of Bustos Domecq
The Gold of the Tigers
The Book of Sand
Six Problems for Don Isidro Parodi


JORGE LUIS 
BORGES
A Book About Old-time Buenos Aires
Translated, with an Introduction and Notes, by 
NORMAN THOMAS DI GIOVANNI 
with the assistance of Susan Ashe
E. P. DUTTON, INC.
NEW YORK

Parts of this book first appeared in the following periodicals:
Bennington Review: “Preface to the First Edition,” “Palermo, Buenos Aires,” 
“A Life of Evaristo Carriego”
The American Poetry Review: “Inscriptions on Wagons”
The Antioch Review: “Carriego and His Awareness of the City’s Outskirts,” 
“Foreword 
to 
an 
Edition 
of 
the 
Complete 
Poems 
of 
Evaristo 
Carriego,” 
“Foreword to an Edition of the Selected Poems of Evaristo Carriego” (under the 
title “Three Views of Evaristo Carriego”)
The New Republic: “Stories of Horsemen”
The New Yorker: “The Dagger,” “The Challenge” (the chapter from “A His- 
tory of the Tango” here titled “The Cult of Courage”)
Translation: “Truco”
“Stories of Horsemen” has also been broadcast by the BBC, Radio .
The Introduction, under the title “On Evaristo Carriego,” first appeared in 
an extended form in Bennington Review.
English translations, Copyright © , , ,  by Emecé Editores,
S.A., and Norman Thomas di Giovanni
Introduction and Notes, Copyright © ,  
by Norman Thomas di Giovanni
All rights reserved. Printed in the U.S.A.
The original title of this book is Evaristo Carriego,
Copyright ©  by Emecé Editores, S.A., Buenos Aires
“Versos de Carriego” (Foreword to an Edition of the Selected Poems 
of Evaristo Carriego) Copyright ©  by Torres Agüero Editor,
Buenos Aires
Grateful 
acknowledgment 
is 
made 
to 
Seymour 
Lawrence/Delacorte 
Press, 
publishers of Jorge Luis Borges’ Selected Poems -, 
for permission to reprint “The Dagger,” Copyright © ,  
by Emecé Editores, S.A., and Norman Thomas di Giovanni.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted 
in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including 
photocopy, 
recording, 
or 
any 
information 
storage 
or 
retrieval 
system now known or to be invented, without permission in writing 
from the publisher, except by a reviewer who wishes to quote 
brief passages in connection with a review written for inclusion 
in a magazine, newspaper, or broadcast.
Published in the United States, , by
E. P. Dutton, Inc.,  Park Avenue, New York, N.Y. 
Library 
of 
Congress 
Cataloging 
in 
Publication 
Data 
Borges, Jorge Luis
Evaristo Carriego: a book about old-time Buenos Aires.
Includes bibliographical references and notes.
. Carriego, Evaristo, -—Criticism and interpretation.
. 
Buenos 
Aires 
(Argentina)—Socal 
life 
and 
customs. 
I. 
Title. 
PQ.CZ  
 
-
ISBN: --- cl; --- pa
Published 
simultaneously 
in 
Canada 
by 
Fitzhenry & Whiteside Limited, Toronto.
 
First Edition

To L.E., 
who justifies the world*


.  .  . a mode of truth; not of truth 
central and coherent, but of truth 
angular and splintered.
—de quincey, Collected Writings, XI, *


Contents
INTRODUCTION 

TRANSLATOR'S ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION 

I.    PALERMO, BUENOS AIRES 

II.    A LIFE OF EVARISTO CARRIEGO 

III.    HERETIC MASSES 

IV.    SONG OF THE NEIGHBORHOOD 

V.    POSSIBLE SUMMARY 

VI.   COMPLEMENTARY PAGES 

VII.   INSCRIPTIONS ON WAGONS 



VIII.     STORIES OF HORSEMEN 

IX.    THE DAGGER 

X.    FOREWORD TO AN EDITION OF THE COMPLETE 
POEMS OF EVARISTO CARRIEGO 

XI.    A HISTORY OF THE TANGO 

XII.    TWO LETTERS 

APPENDIXES
CARRIEGO AND HIS AWARENESS OF THE CITY’S 
OUTSKIRTS 

FOREWORD TO AN EDITION OF THE SELECTED 
POEMS OF EVARISTO CARRIEGO 

NOTES 

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE 



Introduction
I
Evaristo Carriego, a book conceived and written in the 
late twenties and first published in , is the earliest 
volume of Jorge Luis Borges’ prose that we have in 
English and the earliest that he still allows to remain 
in print in Spanish. But who was Evaristo Carriego? 
He was a minor Argentine poet who died at the age 
of twenty-nine in , the man who, in Borges’ 
words, “discovered the literary possibilities of the 
ragged and run-down outskirts of [Buenos Aires]— 
the Palermo of my boyhood.” The reader, however, 
should not be too concerned about this. Evaristo Carr- 
iego () is not very much about Evaristo Carriego 
(-); it is really about Borges himself and 
about old-time Buenos Aires. As such, it has the 
capacity to illuminate whole regions of the landscape 
of Borges’ subsequent writing as well as to provide 
startling insights into his later attitudes and ironic 
statements about the writing—most of it suppress- 
ed—that preceded Evaristo Carriego. This book is es-


sential to any reader already familiar with the major 
stories and essays, essential to anyone who wants to 
see painted in another corner of the still incomplete 
but masterly canvas of Borges’ whole work.
II
When Evaristo Carriego appeared, it was Borges’ sev- 
enth published book. Three poetry collections (gath- 
ering eighty-four poems) and three volumes of 
essays (gathering sixty-eight pieces) had come be- 
fore—all in a truly prolific seven-year span that is 
still more remarkable when we consider that numer- 
ous other pieces contributed to magazines and news- 
papers of the time were left uncollected. In his  
memoir, the “Autobiographical Essay” that Borges 
wrote for The Aleph and Other Stories, he dismisses the 
three prose volumes as “reckless compilations” and 
goes on to say that
In , that third book of essays won the Second 
Municipal Prize of three thousand pesos, which in 
those days was a lordly sum of money. I was, for 
one thing, to acquire with it a secondhand set of the 
Eleventh Edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica. For 
another, I was assured a year’s leisure and decided I 
would write a longish book on a wholly Argentine 
subject. My mother wanted me to write about any 
of three really worthwhile poets—Ascasubi, Alma- 
fuerte, or Lugones. I now wish I had. Instead, I 
chose to write about a nearly invisible popular poet, 
Evaristo Carriego.
How much of this statement is true? How much a 
deliberate false track—and if so, why? A recent bi-


ography of Borges, relying on memoir here rather 
than on first-hand investigation, leads to some flimsy 
 judgments. In “choosing Carriego as a fit subject 
for a major work,” the biographer writes, Borges 
“was quietly stressing his rebellion against family 
values,” thereby indicating “a decision to challenge 
established 
literary 
values.” 
But, 
so 
firmly 
launched on his career, with so much work behind 
him, surely Borges had long since left off rebelling 
against his family. The hard facts, I find, reward us 
with quite different and far richer conclusions.
Evaristo Carriego has two sets of roots, one visi- 
ble, one invisible. The book that gained that  
prize was the now suppressed essays El idioma de los 
argentinos, published the previous year. On the re- 
verse of the title page of the essay collection, the last 
entry in a list of other books by Borges reads, and I 
translate, “In progress: A Life of Evaristo Carriego.” 
Clearly, then, Evaristo Carriego was not the result of a 
last-minute decision foisted on Borges by the advent 
of an unexpected gift.
In an essay dated January , “The Extent of 
My Hope”—the title piece from the second of the 
suppressed collections of this period—Borges in- 
forms us in a flush of nationalistic fervor that a list 
of the truly Argentine writers of the first quarter of 
this century “must include the names of Evaristo 
Carriego, Macedonio Fernández, and Ricardo 
Güiraldes.” As if in pursuit of this notion, the same 
collection contains the piece “Carriego y el sentido 
del arrabal” (Carriego and His Awareness of the 
City’s Outskirts), whose half-dozen pages amount 
to no less than a trial balloon, a rehearsal, for the
. For the complete text, see Appendix I, pp. -.


book-length essay of . Both the shape and essence 
of the later book are here in embryo: an opening 
description of Palermo, a swipe at José Gabriel’s  
biography of Carriego, the gist of the critical judg- 
ments. Whole passages are even lifted from the  
essay and used almost verbatim in the  book. 
“Carriego y el sentido del arrabal” begins by 
affirming that Carriego’s poems “are the soul of the 
Argentine soul” and ends by announcing that “This 
all-too-brief discourse on Carriego has another side, 
and I must return to the subject one day simply to 
praise him.”
We can trace these roots back further still. In 
, in the foreword to his second book of poems, 
Luna de enfrente (Moon Across the Way), Borges 
writes that in two pieces “figures the name of Eva- 
risto Carriego, always as something of a minor deity 
of Palermo, for that is how I feel about him.” The 
latter of these two poems, “Versos de catorce” 
(Fourteeners), titled after its fourteen-syllable lines, 
tells us that “I felt that Palermo’s straight streets . . . 
spoke to me of Carriego. . . .”  The reference to 
Carriego in the other poem, “A la calle Serrano,” is 
slight, but because the link with him here lies in the 
whole poem it is more significant. As this poem was 
never reprinted in any Borges collection after its ap- 
pearance in the -copy first edition of Luna de en- 
frente, it is very little known. Calle Serrano is the 
name of the street in Palermo on which the Borges 
family had once lived. “Calle Serrano,” it begins, 
“you are no longer the same as at the time of the 
Centenary”—that is to say, no longer as it was fif-
. I am not unaware that it was included in a  anthology of vanguard 
verse.


teen years earlier, in , when Borges had lived 
there as a boy and Evaristo Carriego “never missed 
a Sunday at our house on his return from the race- 
track.” In the poems left by Carriego after his death 
is one called “El camino de nuestra casa,” which 
loosely translates as “On Our Street,” which is ex- 
actly the sense of Borges’ title. The subject and the 
elegiac tone of the two pieces are identical. “You are 
as familiar to us as a thing that once was ours and 
ours alone,” runs Carriego’s poem in the rather 
lovely lines that Borges later singled out in his book 
on Carriego. The holograph page reproduced in the 
first edition of Evaristo Carriego, it may be worth not- 
ing, is from this particular poem.
The invisible roots of Borges’ book on Carriego 
are biographical. Carriego, as well as having been a 
neighbor, had been a friend of Borges’ father. As a 
boy, Borges had listened to the poet recite from 
memory the -odd stanzas of Almafuerte’s “Mi- 
sionero.” Carriego had written prophetically, in 
verse, of the ten-year-old Borges in his mother’s 
album; an inscribed copy of Carriego’s poems had 
accompanied the Borges family to Europe in ; 
and Borges, as he tells us in his “Autobiographical 
Essay,” read and reread them in Geneva.
There is abundant evidence, then, that Borges 
had been under the spell of Carriego for years. When 
Borges began the Carriego book he was very nearly 
Carriego’s age at the time of his death. Both had 
been over the same ground with first books of verse 
about Buenos Aires—not the center of the city but its 
shabby outlying areas, principally the Palermo, 
where each had lived. Borges’ identification with 
Carriego was close, and the act of writing a book 
about him was an acknowledgment of this connec-


tion. “Truly I loved the man, on this side idolatry, as 
much as any.” That is Ben Jonson on Shakespeare, 
borrowed and condensed by Jorge Luis Borges; that 
is the last sentence and paragraph of Borges’  
book on Carriego. Nowhere else in the works of the 
reticent, reserved Borges—not even in his love 
poems—are such strong sentiments to be found. 
Borges did not write Evaristo Carriego by chance or 
whim, nor as an act of rebellion; he wrote the book 
out of inner necessity.
III
Evaristo Carriego was written with compelling honesty, 
too, a second reason why it cannot be lightly dis- 
missed as a failure—as it has been, on grounds that it 
is neither good biography nor good criticism. In 
common with all Borges books, Evaristo Carriego is 
highly personal and even idiosyncratic. As such, it 
must be judged on its own very clearly stated terms. 
It is not and never set out to be a conventional biog- 
raphy.
In the  “trial” essay, Borges takes a polem- 
ical stance when he claims that “in José Gabriel’s 
mythifying there is a pusillanimous and almost ef- 
feminate Carriego who is certainly not the man 
with the stinging tongue and the endless talker that I 
knew in my boyhood. . . .”  This position is taken up 
again, obliquely and subtly, in the  essay, in 
whose second chapter we read:
The events of [Carriego’s] life, while infinite and in-
. 
In his “Autobiographical Essay,” Borges used these same words by 
Ben Jonson to sum up his feelings about Macedonio Fernández.


calculable, are outwardly easy to record, and in his 
book of  Gabriel has helpfully listed them. Here 
we learn that Evaristo Carriego was born on May , 
, that he completed three years of high school, 
that he worked on the editorial staff of La Protesta, 
that he died on October , , and other detailed 
and unvisual information with which the author’s 
disjointed work—which should be to make such in- 
formation visual—liberally burdens the reader. I 
believe that a chronological account is inappropriate 
to Carriego, a man whose life was made up of walks 
and conversations. To reduce him to a list, to trace 
the order of his days, seems to me impossible; far 
better seek his eternity, his patterns. Only a timeless 
description . . . can bring him back to us.
. In , over forty years after these words were written, I was to learn 
how strongly Borges felt that a chronological account of his own life, 
one also made up of walks and conversations, was inappropriate or at 
least unsatisfying to him. Despite the acclaim that poured in from all 
sides following the publication of the “Autobiographical Essay” 
(called “Autobiographical Notes”) as a New Yorker Profile, Borges 
balked at the last moment and would not allow it to be translated into 
Spanish and published in La Nación, although we had already ar- 
ranged for its appearance there. Privately Borges confessed to me his 
misgivings about the piece, complaining that there were too many 
dates in it. The structuring of the essay, its straightforward chrono- 
logical form, and the researching of dates had been part of my spe- 
cial contribution to the writing of the work. Borges’ recent biographer, 
who thought highly enough of the piece to quote it whole and make his 
book a gloss on it, remarks that it was composed for an Argentine 
audience. On the contrary, it was conceived and written with the 
English-speaking reader in mind. I had wanted it to serve as a kind of 
introduction to Borges, in his own inimitable words, that would also 
serve as a frame for his writing at a time when more and more of it was 
being published in the United States and England. To achieve these 
ends, I felt—and still feel—that the essay had to be rooted in, and not 
outside, time.

It would have been pointless for Borges in  
to have gone over the same ground as Gabriel in .

To be of value, another book on Carriego had to be 
different from, even a reaction against, the previous 
one. If José Gabriel’s book could have all of the facts 
and none of the essence of Carriego, Borges would 
deliberately set out to write a book that, near 
enough, contained none of the facts and all of the es- 
sence. That second chapter, if I have managed to 
count correctly, provides us with seven dates. The 
first of these I supplied myself in the interests of the 
translation. Of the rest, two tell us the years cer- 
tain books appeared (they are not important); two, 
the years certain events took place (one of them is 
quite incidental); and two—the years Carriego was 
born and died—were, as we have just seen, supplied 
by Gabriel. We have a man’s whole life, then, with 
but a single vital date furnished us by his biographer. 
While this may appear nothing short of outrageous, 
I find it intriguing in its metaphysical implications, 
which, succinctly, are that
These patterns in Carriego’s life that I have de- 
scribed will, I know, bring him closer to us. They re- 
peat him over and over in us, as if Carriego went on 
living in our lives, as if for a few seconds each one of 
us were Carriego. I believe that this is literally the 
case, and that these fleeting moments of becoming 
him (not of mirroring him), which annihilate the 
supposed flow of time, are proof of eternity.
Does the book light up the eternity of Carriego?
. 
See p. . Fifty-two years after the publication of Evaristo Carriego, it 
makes better editorial sense to provide the date of the issue of Nosotros 
instead of its whole number, which Borges gave when, closer to that 
date, the reader did not require the orientation. I have done this in the 
opening of Chapter I as well.


That becomes less a question of the details of the phy- 
sical life than a critical examination of the creative 
life. In this respect, Borges’ judgments are basi- 
cally sound, and they are also quite simple: Car- 
riego wrote a handful of good poems, which are not 
the sentimental ones that have secured his popular 
fame. What is faulty in the criticism—in Chapter 
III, at least—is the perfunctory and limited nature of 
much of the analysis. Having chosen to discuss a cer- 
tain set of poems, Borges quite soon falls into ticking 
off a list, of dealing with the pieces by rote. But once 
he abandons this rigid scheme and ranges more 
widely and deeply, as he does in Chapter IV, his 
comment comes alive again and we are amply 
rewarded. In the “Autobiographical Essay” he ad- 
mits that “The more I wrote the less I cared about 
my hero” and also that “I became more and more 
interested in old-time Buenos Aires.” If we emend 
this to read “my hero’s poems,” there is an element 
of truth in it. From internal evidence I suspect that 
the strong opening chapter, on Palermo, was written 
last, after the biographical and critical sections had 
begun to pall and still had not yielded up pages 
enough to fill out a whole volume.
At any rate, the remark about his hero’s fate 
gives a nice insight into why Borges never wrote a 
novel and a truer reason than his frequently re- 
peated, self-deprecating claim of sheer laziness. Bor- 
ges was simply never able to sustain interest in a 
single person or set of persons for the span of time 
and space a novel requires. One has only to examine 
the pieces in A Universal History of Infamy to see this, 
or his perfect outline for a novel, the seven-page 
story called “The Dead Man.” Any man’s life, 
Borges holds in another story, “is made up essen-


tially of a single moment—the moment in which [he] 
finds out, once and for all, who he is.” That, of 
course, is the moment of his eternity; all the rest is 
mere data, or, put another way, as Borges very neat- 
ly does at the outset of Evaristo Carriego, “reality 
comes to us . . . not in the proliferation of facts but 
in the enduring nature of particular elements.”
The difference between this book’s projected 
title in  and its final title in  is telling. Evaristo 
Carriego should be taken neither as biography nor as 
literary criticism but as an exercise in belles lettres.
IV
It is unfortunate that by shrouding this work in mys- 
tery and belittling it Borges has paved the way for 
critics to misunderstand it. “Some books are to be 
tasted,” wrote Bacon, “others to be swallowed, and 
some few to be chewed and digested. . . .”  If the 
student of Borges’ work chews this one, if he or she 
reads it with diligence and attention, there is no end 
to the pleasure and profit that can be derived from it.
In Evaristo Carriego we find a very early use of the 
technique of random enumeration learned from 
Whitman, exercised throughout Borges’ work, and 
brought to perfection in a certain page of “The 
Aleph.” We find the first reference to his interest in 
the techniques of filmmaking, a last ultraist image, 
the inadvertent title of a story not to be written for 
another four years, the growing command of his 
wide-ranging reading habits which intelligently, in 
the span of a single paragraph, clarify a point with 
quotations from or references to Shaw, the Gnostics, 
Blake, Hernández, Almafuerte, and Quevedo. On


one page, speaking of Carriego’s fondness for tales of 
blood and thunder, Borges recounts an episode con- 
cerning the death of the outlaw Juan Moreira, 
“who went from the ardent games of the brothel to 
the bullets and bayonets of the police.” Immediately 
we recognize the germ here of the wonderful story 
“The Night of the Gifts,” which Borges did not put 
on paper for forty-five or so more years. On another 
page we read that Carriego “never exhausted the 
night,” and here we spot one of Borges’ favorite 
(and sometimes abused) rhetorical devices—the hyp- 
allage, the figure of speech that reverses the order of 
a customary proposition, or, as Borges himself once 
put it, the figure in which an epithet is defined by 
what surrounds it (Milton’s studious lamps, Lu- 
gones’ arid camels). Somewhere else, in reading 
how, as a boy, Carriego presented himself to the local 
political boss of Palermo—he “told Paredes he was 
Evaristo Carriego, from Honduras Street”—we can 
hear the way, in a later sketch by Borges, one Bill 
Harrigan introduces himself after he has gunned 
down his first Mexican: “Well, I’m Billy the Kid, 
from New York.” Or, in coming upon the words 
“penetrating revolvers,” we recognize another hyp- 
allage, one that Borges was to repeat almost exactly 
three or four years later in another part of A Universal 
History of Infamy. Or we stumble on an unusual and 
uncharacteristic blind spot, such as the notion that 
Kipling was of mixed English and Indian blood. I 
puzzle why Borges never set this right in the book’s 
second edition twenty-five years later, when he set 
one or two other matters straight. In  he reviewed 
Kipling’s autobiography, which surely made him see 
this error.
Evaristo Carriego also affords us an opportunity to


delve into that aspect of Borges’ prose of the twenties 
of which he has remarked, “I was doing my best to 
write Latin in Spanish. . . .” If a heavy reliance on 
Latin syntax is a particular mark of his early prose, 
then the book on Carriego certainly falls into the cat- 
egory of early prose. A look into this Latinate Span- 
ish will serve to illustrate one of the difficulties of 
translating Borges at the same time as it helps ac- 
count for the uneven quality of many of his transla- 
tions into English.
Take an example from Chapter II. Borges here 
lists a few of the elements that made up the pattern of 
Carriego’s daily life. The first of these elements is 
“los desabridos despertares caseros”—literally, “the in- 
sipid waking ups domestic.” There are no case 
endings here to guide us; we have only the required 
grammatical agreement of the two adjectives with 
the noun. Since “waking up” is in the plural, it ob- 
viously means waking up more than once, or wak- 
ing up every morning. But “caseros” is trying to 
function as an ablative, the case used to express the 
relation of separation. So this becomes “at home.” 
Roughly, then, we have “the insipid waking-up- 
every-morning at home.” When we wake up and 
where overlap enough to make one of them unnec- 
essary. Dealing next with the first adjective, “de- 
sabridos,” and amplifying a bit to express the plural of 
“waking up,” we refine further and come up with 
“the humdrum business of waking up in the morn- 
ing.” Now, while I feel I have achieved accuracy 
here—that is, got the meaning—there are any num- 
ber of ways of saying the same thing: “the pointless- 
ness of getting up in the morning,” “the daily 
drudgery of getting out of bed.” Accuracy alone 
does not make a translation good, but it is the start-


ing point of good translation. The problems pre- 
sented by Latin constructions in Borges’ writing 
baffle native Argentine readers as much as they do 
Borges’ translators, nor are academic credentials a 
guarantee of unraveling or understanding exactly all 
that Borges writes. A knowledge of Spanish, too, is 
only a starting point.
V
Evaristo Carriego has had two lives. There was the 
modest first edition of  pages of text, bound in pink 
wrappers, that corresponds to the first seven chapters 
of this edition. A quarter of a century later, in , 
came a new edition, filled out with a half-dozen 
miscellaneous pieces written in the early fifties (chap- 
ters VIII through XII here). For the most part, these 
round out the book in terms of old-time Buenos 
Aires and not of Carriego. Work of Borges’ rich ma- 
turity, they stand in little need of elucidation.
Two of them, however, are corrective, and as 
such they shed light on the key problem of why Bor- 
ges found it necessary to suppress so much of his 
early writing. The brief  foreword to an edition of 
Carriego’s poems contradicts nothing Borges wrote 
about Carriego in ; nor does the piece say any- 
thing about Carriego’s poetry. Three pages long, it is 
set out with tremendous reserve, and its perspective 
is one of great distance. Obviously, Borges has re- 
frained from a stated condemnation of the poems; 
one cannot very well damn the volume one has 
agreed to preface. The piece’s brilliance is in its spec- 
ulation about how Carriego became Carriego, but 
that brilliance resides in a display of Borges’ imagi-


native powers and may, really, have little to do with 
the factual truth about Carriego. By what they do 
not tell us, by what they hold back, these pages mark 
the end of Borges’ enthrallment to Carriego.
The long essay on the tango’s history is another 
matter. A complete rewriting of a piece published 
early in  and later collected in El idioma de los 
argentinos, its viewpoint and its conclusions are an 
about-face. The first essay is nationalistic to the point 
of xenophobia; the later work not only is universal 
but also berates much of the narrowmindedness of 
the earlier judgments. Comparison of these two 
pieces reveals the extent of Borges’ journey through 
the years from callowness to wisdom.
Publicly and privately, Borges has stated that he 
has kept his early work out of print because it was ei- 
ther badly written or of little value. While indeed 
some of it is ephemeral and some less strikingly com- 
posed, he himself has given the lie to this claim and 
at the same time paid tribute to the worth of much of 
this early writing by having recast or otherwise 
reused it. What Borges is really trying to suppress is 
content, not form; I refer to those expressions of 
virulent Argentineness that now embarrass him 
and that he has spent the intervening years living 
down. This, of course, is greatly to his credit al- 
though somewhat to our loss, for, in keeping to his 
course, Borges has thrown out contaminated and 
uncontaminated matter together.
And so with Carriego. Has Borges disowned 
him, too, along with the unacceptable nationalism 
because, on looking back, the two seemed part and 
parcel of each other? I think he has. I also think that 
it is a mistake to accept Borges’ dismissal of Carriego 
at face value and to regard it as the final word. Carr-


iego’s mark on Borges is indelible: the roots of such 
poems as “Empty Drawing Room,” “Plainness,” 
and many others are in Carriego; and, remarkably, 
a prime source for “The Aleph,” written in , 
surely lies in the Carriego sonnet “Como en los bue- 
nos tiempos.”
It would be unfortunate were readers to be 
discouraged from reading Evaristo Carriego because of 
the samples of it they have seen elsewhere in inco- 
herent translations. In the appendixes I have given 
two pieces—Borges’ first and his latest statements on 
Carriego. Written nearly half a century apart, they 
fill out the picture that this book offers.
Norman Thomas di Giovanni
Swimbridge, Devon 
April , 



Translator’s Acknowledgments
To the Guggenheim Foundation, which made me a 
Fellow some years ago, when the translation of this 
book was first undertaken. Their generosity gave me 
the time to delve unhurriedly into background 
sources.
To my invaluable friend Adalberto Makowski, 
who, in St. Andrews, Scotland, provided much guid- 
ance in the original draft.
To Walter Acosta and Elena Segade, who, from 
Bush House, in London, cheerfully unraveled prob- 
lems of River Plate slang.
To Cristina Hülskamp, who, in the unlikely set- 
ting of 9, Wilton Crescent, London, S.W., showed 
me the rudiments of the game of truco. I went to her 
with the pack of Spanish playing cards that Borges 
presented me with on my arrival in Buenos Aires 
back in .
To Borges, of course, a constant kindly presence 
in both my life and my work.
Most of all to Susan Ashe, whose name appears 
on the title page as a mark of her inestimable contri-


bution to this translation. She did not type the final 
draft (I do my own typing); she did not ransack the 
shelves of the London Library or of the St. Andrews 
University Library (I do my own investigating). 
She worked with me in shaping the final English 
text, bringing to bear on it a flair for linguistic preci- 
sion and a knowledge of Latin and other languages 
that make the task of reading Borges’ Spanish an 
even deeper pleasure. The formula dictates that I 
claim that while she provided much that is good in 
the translation I alone am responsible for the lapses. 
That would be patronizing and untrue. It is my trib- 
ute to her that I am able to say that she shares equal 
responsibility with me for both the good and the less 
good.
Borges would be amused and delighted to know 
that his book on old Buenos Aires, translated by an 
American working in Scotland and England, had 
the secret assistance—here made unsecret—of an 
Uruguayan Pole, various of his own countrymen 
and countrywomen from both bandas of the river, as 
well as an Indian-born Englishwoman. It is by now 
axiomatic that Borges is the most international of 
figures.
The translator’s notes are marked with an asterisk and can be 
found in the Notes section at the back of the book. All num- 
bered notes found at the bottom of the page are from the origin- 
al Spanish edition.




Preface to the Second Edition
For years I believed I had grown up in a suburb of 
Buenos Aires, a suburb of dangerous streets and 
showy sunsets. The truth is that I grew up in a gar- 
den, behind a fence of iron palings, and in a library 
of endless English books. The Palermo of the knife 
and guitar throve (I am told) just around the corner, 
but those who populated my days and gave a pleas- 
ant shiver to my nights were Stevenson’s blind 
buccaneer, dying under the horses’ hooves, and the 
traitor who left his friend behind on the moon, and 
the time traveler who brought back from the future a 
withered flower, and the genie imprisoned for centu- 
ries in a Solomonic jar, and the Veiled Prophet of 
Khurasan, who hid his leprosy behind silk and pre- 
cious stones.
What was going on, meanwhile, on the other 
side of the iron palings? What everyday lives were 
fulfilling their violent destinies only a few steps away 
from me in some unsavory saloon or ominous vacant 
lot? What was Palermo like then, and how beautiful 
would it really have been?


This book, which is less documentary than 
imaginative, tried to address itself to these ques- 
tions.
J.L.B.
Buenos Aires 
 January 


Preface to the First Edition
Evaristo Carriego’s name will, I feel sure, take its 
place in the ecclesia visibilis of Argentine letters, whose 
pious instruments—elocution lessons, anthologies, 
and histories of our literature—will include him for 
all time. I am also sure that he will take a place 
among the most true and exclusive ecclesia invisibilis, 
among the farflung congregation of the faithful, and 
that this more worthy membership will not owe itself 
to the plangent element in his work. These are the 
views that I have attempted to substantiate in this 
study.
I have also given consideration—perhaps with 
undue eagerness—to the daily realities that he strove 
to reflect. I have tried to work from facts and not 
conjecture. I accept the risk involved, suspecting that 
to mention Honduras Street and to sit back and 
watch the haphazard repercussions that name sets off 
is a less fallible method—and an easier one—than to 
define Honduras Street in lengthy detail. No one 
with an affection for Buenos Aires will grow impa-


tient with me for my extended treatment. For that 
reader, I have added the chapters of the supplement.
I have made use of Gabriel’s helpful book and of 
the studies by Melián Lafinur and Oyuela. I am also 
grateful to Julio Carriego, Félix Lima, Dr. Marce- 
lino del Mazo, José Olave, Nicolás Paredes, and 
Vicente Rossi.
J.L.B.
Buenos Aires



I.
Palermo, Buenos Aires
Confirmation of Palermo’s considerable age is owed 
to Paul Groussac, and it is recorded in a footnote on 
page  of the fourth volume of the Anales de la 
Biblioteca. The proofs, or instruments, were pub- 
lished only much later, in the July  issue of 
Nosotros. There we find mention of a Sicilian, one 
Domínguez (Domenico) de Palermo, from Italy, 
who added the name of his birthplace to his given 
name, perhaps so as to have at least one name that 
could not be turned into Spanish, “and he arrived in 
his twentieth year and entered into wedlock with a 
daughter of the garrison.” This Domínguez Paler- 
mo, purveyor of beef to the city between the years 
 and , owned a stockyard beside the Maldo- 
nado, where wild cattle were herded and slaugh- 
tered. These herds have long since been butchered 
and forgotten, but specific reference comes down to 
us of a “dappled mule grazing in the pastures of Pa- 
lermo, at the edge of this city.” I see the animal ab-


surdly clear and tiny in the far reaches of time, and I 
have no desire to add anything to it. Let this solitary 
mule suffice. The way reality comes to us—in a 
stream of flashes punctuated by ironies, surprises, 
and portents as strange as surprises—can be cap- 
tured only by a novel, which would be inappropriate 
here. Fortunately, reality comes to us not only in this 
rich way but also through memory, the essence of 
which lies not in the proliferation of facts but in the 
enduring nature of particular elements. This is the 
innate poetry of our ignorance, and I shall seek no 
other.
Within the confines of Palermo are the neat 
farm and the foul slaughterhouse, and at night an 
occasional Dutch smuggler would moor his craft 
along the riverbank out beyond the swaying bul- 
rushes. To recapture this almost static prehistory 
would be to weave a meaningless chronicle of infi- 
nitely small processes: the stages of the haphazard 
centuries-long encroachment of Buenos Aires upon 
Palermo, which at that time was little more than an 
ill-defined patch of marshy ground out in the hinter- 
land. The best approach, if we were to adopt the 
techniques of filmmaking, would be to present a con- 
tinuous flow of vanishing images: a mule train 
laden with wine casks, the less tame animals blink- 
ered; a long, flat stretch of water on which a few wil- 
low leaves float; a phantasmal wandering soul high 
on his horse, fording flooded streams; the open 
range, where absolutely nothing happens; the re- 
lentless hoofprints of a herd of cattle being driven to 
the Northside stockyards; a cowhand (silhouetted 
against the dawn) who dismounts from his spent 
horse to slit its broad throat; smoke from a fire


dispersing into the air. So it was until the arrival of 
 Juan Manuel de Rosas,* today the legendary father 
of Palermo and not the mere historical one, as was 
Groussac’s Domínguez-Domenico. Settlement by 
Rosas was not without effort. A villa mellowed by 
time out along the Barracas road was the custom of 
the well-to-do in those days. But Rosas wanted to 
build; he wanted a house of his very own, not one 
steeped in other people’s lives or even used by them. 
Thousands of cartloads of loam were hauled in from 
“the Rosas alfalfa fields” (later known as Belgrano) 
to level and enrich the clayey ground, until Paler- 
mo’s virgin soil and the unyielding land surrendered 
to his will.
Around  Palermo rose to become the head- 
quarters of the Republic, the dictator’s court, and a 
swear word in the mouths of Unitarians. I shall not 
recount this period of its history, so as not to tarnish 
the rest. Let me only mention “a white stuccoed 
house called his palace” (Hudson, Far Away and Long 
Ago, page ) and the orange groves and brick- 
walled pond with its iron paling, where the Re- 
storer’s boat bobbed excitedly on those voyages that 
were so skimpy that Schiaffino remarked that
Rowing in such shallow waters could not have 
afforded much pleasure, and so short a turn would 
have been akin to a pony ride. But Rosas sat at his 
ease; whenever he looked up he saw outlined against 
the sky the guards on duty around the fence, search- 
ing the horizon with the alert eye of a lapwing.
That court was already fraying at the edges: the


Hernández Regiment’s squat cantonment of raw 
adobe and the brawling, bawdy hovels of the half- 
breed camp followers, the Palermo Garrison. The 
neighborhood, as is obvious, had always been a 
stacked deck, a two-headed coin.
That brazen Palermo lasted for twelve years, in 
the hurly-burly of the demanding presence of a 
corpulent, fair-haired man who trotted up and down 
the spotless paths, dressed in blue uniform trousers 
with a red stripe, a crimson jacket, and a broad- 
brimmed hat, brandishing a long cane, an airy-light 
scepter. From Palermo late one afternoon this 
dreaded man led his army in what was little more 
than a rout, a battle lost in advance—the battle of 
Caseros. Into Palermo rode another Rosas, Justo 
 José de Urquiza, with the semblance of a wild bull 
and the crimson ribbon of the Mazorca around his 
ridiculous top hat and his magnificent general’s uni- 
form. He rode in, and, if Ascasubi’s pamphleteering 
is not mistaken,
en la entrada de Palermo 
ordenó poner colgados 
a dos hombres infelices, 
que después de afusilados 
los suspendió en los ombuses, 
hasta que de allí a pedazos 
se cayeron de podridos . . .
[he ordered to be hanged at the entrance of Palermo 
two wretched men who, after being shot, were 
strung from the ombus, until they rotted and fell 
away in pieces . . .]


Later, Ascasubi turns his attention to the dis- 
missed Entre Ríos troops of the Great Army:
Entre tanto en los barriales 
de Palermo amontonaos 
cuasi todos sin camisa, 
estaban sus Entre-rianos 
(como él dice) miserables, 
comiendo terneros flacos 
 y vendiendo las cacharpas . . .
[Meanwhile, clustered on the marshes of Palermo, 
shirtless almost to a man, were Urquiza’s Entre 
Ríos troops, scum (in his words) eating lean calves 
and selling off their equipment . . .]
Thousands of days no longer known to mem- 
ory, misty zones of time, waxed and waned, until, 
via a number of individual foundations—the Peni- 
tentiary, in ; the Northside Hospital, in ; 
the Rivadavia Hospital, in —we reach the Pa- 
lermo of the eve of the nineties, when the Carriego 
family settled there. It is this Palermo of  that I 
wish to write about. I shall tell all I know without res- 
ervation, without a single omission, for, like trans- 
gression, life conceals itself, and we have no way of 
knowing what the important moments are in God’s 
eyes. Besides, details are always poignant. I shall 
put down everything even at the risk of recording
. “[T]he pathetic, almost always, consists in the detail of little circum­
stances,” remarks Gibbon in one of the last footnotes of Chapter 50 of 
his Decline and Fall.


facts that, though well known, will all too soon dis- 
appear through oversight, mystery’s chief aspect 
and most distinctive feature.
Among the auctioneers’ flags out beyond the 
tracks of the branch line of the western railroad, 
which cut through the area known as Centro Améri- 
ca, the neighborhood slumbered not only over virgin 
land but also over the bodies of small farms that were 
being dismembered, brutally carved into lots that 
were later to be trampled by saloons, wood-and-coal 
yards, backyards, tenements, barbershops, and sta- 
bles. Here, suffocated by surrounding houses, is one 
of those gardens with barren palm trees among tools 
and implements—the run-down, mutilated relic of a 
great farm.
Palermo was heedless poverty itself. Fig trees 
cast shadows over walls; the little window balconies 
of ordinary people opened onto days that were all the
. 
I maintain—and I wish neither coyly to evade nor boldly to parade 
paradox—that only new countries have a past; that is to say, an auto- 
biographical memory, a living history. If time is a succession of 
events, we must admit that where more things are happening more 
time is passing, and so it is on this inconsequential side of the world 
that time is most profuse. The conquest and colonization of these 
domains—a handful of fear-ridden mud forts clinging to the coast and 
watching the curved horizon, the bow that shoots forth Indian raids— 
was so indecisive that, in , one of my grandfathers was to command 
the last major battle against the Indians, bringing the sixteenth- 
century conquest to a conclusion only after the middle of the nine- 
teenth century. Be that as it may, why resurrect the past? In Granada, 
in the shade of towers hundreds of years older than the fig trees, I did 
not feel the passage of time, but I have felt it in Buenos Aires on the 
corner of Pampa and Triunvirato, today an utterly featureless place 
of English-style roofs, three years ago a place of smoky brick kilns, and 
five years ago a jumble of small pastures. Time—a European senti- 
ment of a people with a long past, and their very justification and 
glory—moves more boldly in the New World. Young people, in spite 
of themselves, sense this. Over here we are contemporary with time, 
we are brothers of time.


same; the forlorn notes of the peanut vendor’s horn 
explored the twilight. Atop the humbleness of the 
houses it was not uncommon to see masonry urns, 
crowned aridly with cactus, a sinister plant which in 
the universal sleep of other plants seems to belong to 
a nightmare zone but which is really so tough, grow- 
ing in the least hospitable soil and in desert air, and is 
vaguely regarded as ornamental. There were also 
happy moments: the patio grapevine, the local 
tough’s strutting step, the rooftop balustrade with 
the sky showing through.
A streaked greenish horse and its Garibaldi did 
not always spoil the old city gates. (The malady is 
widespread: there is no square that does not have to 
put up with its bronze lout.) The Botanical Gardens, 
silent dockyard of trees and home of all Buenos 
Aires strolls, formed a corner with a shabby earth- 
paved square; not so the Zoological Gardens, which 
at the time was called “the wild beasts” and was far- 
ther north. Today (smelling of candy and tigers) it 
occupies the place where a hundred years earlier the 
Palermo Garrison teemed and brawled. Only a few 
streets—Serrano, Canning, Coronel— were grudg- 
ingly cobbled, and this surface was interspersed with 
smooth paving stones for flat-bedded wagons, im- 
pressive in procession, and for splendid open car- 
riages. A horse-drawn streetcar, the Number , an 
obliging vehicle that shares the founding of Palermo 
with the all-powerful earlier ghost of Rosas, jolted its 
way up Godoy Cruz Street. The driver’s cocked 
visor and milonga-playing trumpet* aroused the 
wonder and emulation of the whole neighborhood, 
but the conductor—that professional doubter of 
other people’s honesty—was a much-attacked in- 
stitution, and many a hoodlum tucked his ticket in


his fly, saying indignantly that if the conductor 
wanted to see it, all he had to do was take it out.
I seek nobler realities. Toward the boundary with 
Balvanera, to the east, were a number of large ram- 
bling houses, each with a string of patios one behind 
the other, yellow or brown houses with entrance- 
ways in the shape of an arch—an arch repeated 
mirrorlike in the next entranceway—and with a fine 
grillwork gate. When impatient October nights 
brought chairs and people out onto the sidewalks and 
the deep houses let themselves be looked into right to 
the back, where yellow lights burned in the patios, 
the street was intimate, informal, and the hollow 
houses were like a row of lanterns. I can best sum- 
mon up this feeling of unreality and serenity in a 
story, or symbol, that seems always to have been part 
of me. It is a fragment snatched from a tale that I 
once heard in a saloon and that was at the same time 
both trivial and involved. I reproduce it with some 
uncertainty. The hero of this reckless Odyssey was 
the classic gaucho on the run from the law, this time 
betrayed by a character who was a vindictive cripple 
but who had no equal with the guitar. The story, the 
bit of it I have salvaged, tells how the hero managed 
to escape from jail; how he was compelled to wreak 
his vengeance in the space of a single night; how he 
vainly searched for the traitor; how, as he roamed 
the moonlit streets, the exhausted wind brought him 
snatches of the guitar; how he followed this trail 
through the labyrinths and the shifting of the wind; 
how he came to the far-off doorway where the traitor 
was playing his guitar; how, elbowing his way 
through the onlookers, he lifted the cripple on his 
knife; how he walked away in a daze, leaving be-


hind, dead and silenced, both informer and telltale 
guitar.
On the west side of the neighborhood, Italian 
immigrant poverty lay exposed. The term las orillas, 
the city’s outskirts, fits uncannily that bare expanse 
where the land takes on the indeterminateness of the 
sea and seems to be what Shakespeare was referring 
to when he said, “The earth hath bubbles, as the 
water has. . . .’’To the west ran dirt alleys that grew 
progressively poorer in the direction of the setting 
sun. Here and there a railroad shed or a shallow pit 
where agave grew or an almost whispering breeze 
abruptly heralded the pampa. Or perhaps one of 
those small unplastered houses with a low grilled 
window—a yellow blind with a scene painted on it 
sometimes hung there—that, without any sign of 
human participation, the solitude of Buenos Aires 
seems to breed. Farther on was the Maldonado, a 
dried-out yellow ditch that stretched aimlessly from 
the Chacarita cemetery and that by a fearful miracle 
would go from a parched death to inordinate quan- 
tities of raging water, which rounded up the decay- 
ing hovels along its banks. About fifty or so years 
ago, beyond that uneven ditch, or death, heaven 
began—a heaven of whinnying and manes and lush 
grass, a horses’ heaven, the lazy happy hunting 
ground of retired police horses. Toward the Maldo- 
nado the native hooligans thinned out and Cala- 
brians took their place. Owing to their dangerously 
good memory for grievances and to their treacherous 
knife wounds delivered on long installments, they 
were people with whom nobody wanted to tangle. 
Here Palermo took on a melancholy air, for the 
Pacific railroad, which skirted the stream, gave off


that strange sadness of things large and enslaved, 
the gates of grade crossings as tall as the shafts of 
resting carts, straight embankments, and platforms. 
This side of Palermo ended in a border strip of 
chugging smoke and a shunting of clumsy freight 
cars. Beyond, the Maldonado widened and went on 
its stubborn course. It is now being imprisoned, and 
that almost endless lonely stretch which a short time 
ago was channeled underground, around the corner 
from the Paloma Café, where truco was played, will 
be replaced by an inane street of English-style roof 
tiles. Of the Maldonado all that will remain will be 
our memories of it, lofty and personal, and the best 
Argentine popular farce and the two tangos that 
bear the river’s name—an early one, which, being 
the stream’s contemporary, made no fuss about it, 
and was only for dancing and a chance to show 
off one’s best tango steps; the other, a plaintive bal- 
lad-tango in the later style of the Boca—and some 
photograph cropped so closely that it destroys the 
essence, the impression of space, therefore giving the 
river a mistaken other life in the minds of those who 
never knew it.
Now that I think about it, I do not believe that 
the Maldonado was any different from other very 
poor places, but the notion of its rabble having a ri- 
otous time in lewd brothels, in the shadow of flood 
and doom, prevailed in the popular imagination. 
Thus, in the skillful farce previously mentioned, the 
stream is not a handy backdrop but a living presence 
far more important than the characters, Nava the 
mulatto, the half-breed Indian girl Dominga, and El 
Títere. (The Alsina Bridge, with the as yet unhealed 
wounds of its recent knife-fighting past and its mem- 
ory of the great civil war of , has supplanted the


Maldonado in the mythology of Buenos Aires. As 
to the reality, it is well known that the lowliest neigh- 
borhoods are often the most pusillanimous and that 
a terrified respectability flourishes in them.) From 
the direction of the stream high dust storms sailed in 
and canopied the day; from there the wind came 
howling off the pampa, calling at all the south-facing 
doors and leaving thistle flowers in the entrance- 
ways; from there came the devastating clouds of 
locusts that people tried to scare away with shouts; 
from there came the solitude and the rain. That 
whole stretch had a taste of dust.
Toward the brown waters of the River Plate, 
toward the woodland, the neighborhood was harder. 
The first buildings in that area were the Northside 
slaughterhouses, which took up some eighteen 
square blocks between the yet-to-come Anchorena, 
Las Heras, Austria, and Beruti streets; today their 
only relic is the name La Tablada, the Stockyards, 
which I heard from the mouth of a wagon driver who 
was ignorant of the place’s former use. I have led the 
reader to imagine a vast open area covering many 
blocks, and although the corrals themselves disap- 
peared in the s, that image typifies the place, 
which was always taken up with large properties— 
the cemetery, the Rivadavia Hospital, the prison, 
the market, the municipal cattle pens, the present- 
day wool-scouring sheds, the brewery, and Hale’s 
orchards—all surrounded by the abject misery of 
downtrodden lives. Hale’s was famous for two rea- 
sons: for its pear trees, which nearby urchins looted 
in furtive raids, and for the ghost that haunted the
. Since these locusts carried the sign of the cross, the mark of their di- 
vine provenance, to destroy them was sacrilege.


Agüero Street side, its impossible head leaning 
against the crosspiece of a lamppost. For, added to 
the real dangers from arrogant knife-wielding hood- 
lums, there were the imaginary perils of popular leg- 
end; the “widow” and the outlandish “tin pig,” as 
sordid as the riverside itself, were the most feared 
creatures in this local religion. Up to that time, this 
part of the Northside had been a rubbish dump, so it 
is only natural that the remains of ghosts should 
gather in its air. There are poor street corners in 
Palermo today which have not tumbled down only 
because they are still being propped up by dead hood- 
lums.
Along Chavango Street (nowadays Las Heras) 
the last wayside bar was La Primera Luz, First 
Light, a name which, in spite of suggesting the habit 
of rising early, gives an impression—justly so—of 
dark streets brimming with nobody, and finally, after 
a tiring slog, the human light of a saloon. Between 
the dusky-pink walls of the Northside cemetery and 
the far end of the Penitentiary there began to ma- 
terialize from the dust a slumlike jumble of single- 
story, unplastered dwellings. Its nickname, Tierra del 
Fuego, was a byword. A shambles from the outset, 
street corners either menacing or deserted, furtive 
men signaling to each other in whistles and sud- 
denly disappearing into the darkness of back alleys— 
all these things spelled out the nature of the place. 
The neighborhood was a last outpost. Petty crimi- 
nals on horseback, petty criminals in soft hats pulled 
low over their eyes and in the kind of baggy trousers 
worn by gauchos, either by habit or by compulsion 
kept up a war of single combat with the police. The 
slum fighter’s blade, although not as long—it was the 
mark of a brave man to use a short knife—was more


finely tempered than government-issue sabers, since 
the state was likely to go in for high cost and poor 
quality. The short knife was wielded by an arm on 
the lookout for violence, one more skilled in the 
quick movements of a scuffle. Thanks only to its 
rhyme, a fragment of this verse has survived forty 
years of attrition:
Hágase a un lao, se lo ruego,
que soy de la Tierra ’el Juego.
[Move aside, please; I’m from Tierra del Fuego.]
This was not only the land of the knife fight but also 
the land of the guitar.
As I set down these facts retrieved from the 
past, I am haunted with seeming arbitrariness by 
that line of gratitude from “Home-Thoughts,” 
‘“Here and here did England help me. . . .’” 
Browning wrote it thinking about self-sacrifice on 
the high seas and about the tall ship, carved like a 
rook in a chess set, where Nelson fell. Quoted by 
me—along with a translation of the country’s name, 
because for Browning the name of England had the 
same immediacy—it stands as a symbol of lonely 
nights, of long ecstatic walks through the endless 
neighborhoods of Buenos Aires. The city has a 
depth, and never once, in disappointment or grief, 
did I abandon myself to its streets without receiving 
unsought consolation either from a sense of unreality 
or from a guitar played in the depths of a patio or
. A. Taullard, Nuestro antiguo Buenos Aires, p. .


from the touch of other people’s lives. “ ‘Here and 
here did England help me” ’—here and here did 
Buenos Aires come to my aid. This is one of my rea- 
sons for writing this first chapter.


A Life of Evaristo Carriego
II.
That one person should wish to arouse in another 
memories relating only to a third person is an ob- 
vious paradox. To pursue this paradox freely is the 
harmless intention of all biography. The fact of my 
having known Carriego does not, I contend—not in 
this particular case—modify the difficulty of this un- 
dertaking. I have in my possession memories of 
Carriego: memories of memories of other memories, 
whose slightest distortions, at the very outset, may 
have increased imperceptibly at each retelling. These 
memories preserve, I am sure, the particular flavor 
that I call Carriego and that allows us to pick out one 
face in a crowd. Be that as it may, such a store of in- 
consequential memories—his tone of voice, the way 
he walked, the way he idled, the expression in his 
eyes—is that part of my information about him 
which least lends itself to the pen. All this is conveyed 
only by the word “Carriego,” which requires that 
both the reader and I possess the very image that I 
wish to communicate. There is another paradox. I


have just said that to anyone acquainted with Eva- 
risto Carriego the mere mention of his name is 
enough to conjure him up; I now add that any de- 
scription of Carriego would satisfy them provided it 
did not grossly contradict the image they already had 
of him. I quote Giusti in the August  issue of 
Nosotros: “an emaciated poet with small searching 
eyes, always in black, who lived on the edge of 
town.” The hint of death, present in the words 
“always in black” and in the opening adjective, was 
also there in his lively face, through which the bone 
structure of the skull showed clearly. Life, desperate 
life, was in his eyes. Marcelo del Mazo, too, appro- 
priately recalled them in his funeral oration, speak- 
ing of “the unique expression in his eyes, which held 
so little light and yet were so alive.”
Carriego came from Paraná, in the province of 
Entre Ríos. His grandfather, Evaristo Carriego the 
lawyer, was the author of a stiffly bound volume with 
creamy paper that was rightly entitled Forgotten Pages 
(Santa Fe, ) and that the reader, if he is in the 
habit of browsing in the turgid purgatory of second- 
hand books on Lavalle Street, may at some point 
have held in his hands. Held and put down, since the 
book’s passion concerns minutiae. The book consists 
of a collection of pages given to taking sides on burn- 
ing issues in which everything from Latin tags to 
Macaulay or Plutarch according to Garnier is roped 
in to prove his point. His courage is in his spirit: 
when the Paraná legislature decided to erect a statue 
of Urquiza during Urquiza’s lifetime, the only mem- 
ber to protest, in a beautiful if useless speech, was 
Dr. Carriego. The elder Carriego is worthy of men- 
tion here not only for his possible polemical legacy 
but also for the literary tradition that his grandson


would later follow in sketching those first rather weak 
pages that are the basis of the strong ones.
Carriego was an Entrerriano of several gener- 
ations’ standing. The native Entre Ríos intonation, 
like the Uruguayan, combines beauty and savagery 
in the same way that a jaguar does. It is a pugnacious 
intonation whose symbol is the lance wielded by gau- 
cho militiamen during the civil wars. It is soft: a sul- 
try, yet deadly, and even unashamed softness typifies 
the most bellicose pages of Leguizamón, of Elias 
Regules, and of Silva Valdés. It is serious: the 
Uruguayan Republic, where the intonation I am 
talking about is more in evidence, has not produced 
a single humorous page or a single amusing one 
since the fourteen hundred epigrams written in a 
Spanish-colonial style by Acuña de Figueroa. When 
pressed into the service of versifying, the intonation 
swings between watercolor and felony, lending itself 
not to the resignation of a Martín Fierro but to the 
excitement of rum or politics, yet soft-voiced. The 
sense of trees and Indians lurking in the background, 
which is inherent in this, is too savage for us 
Argentines to understand. This seriousness seems to 
stem from a life harder than our own. Segundo 
Sombra, a Buenos Aires man, knew the wide-open 
spaces of the plains, the herding of cattle, and an oc- 
casional knife fight; had he been an Uruguayan, he 
would also have known the cavalry charges of the 
civil wars, the cruel herding of men, and smuggling. 
Through tradition, Carriego knew of the old way of 
life, and he blended it with the sullen ways of the 
early dwellers of the outer slums.
To the obvious reasons for his Argentineness—a 
provincial ancestry and the fact that he lived on the 
edge of Buenos Aires—we should add another para-


doxical reason: his trace of Italian blood, expressed 
in his mother’s family name, Giorello. I say this 
without wishing to offend: the Argentineness of the 
full-blooded native is inescapable, while that of the 
person of mixed origin is a decision, a conscious 
choice. The worship of all things English found in 
Rudyard Kipling, the “inspired Eurasian journal- 
ist”—is this not a further proof (if physiognomy 
were not enough) of his dusky blood?
Carriego used to boast, “Hating the Italians 
isn’t quite enough for me; I slander them,” but the 
gay abandon of the remark gives the lie to it. The 
true Argentine, secure in his austerity and in the fact 
of being in his own home, considers the newcomer 
Italian a junior. His very happiness is his blessing, 
his saving grace. It has often been remarked that the 
Italian can do anything in this country except be 
taken really seriously by those whom he has dis- 
placed. This tolerance, rooted as it is in concealed 
irony, is the sly revenge of this country’s native sons.
The Spaniards were another favorite butt of 
Carriego’s antipathy. The way the Spaniard was 
generally looked on—as the fanatic who has re- 
placed the Inquisition by the Dictionary of Galli- 
cisms, the servant in a forest of feather dusters*— 
was also Carriego’s view. I need hardly say that this 
wariness, or prejudice, did not prevent his having 
several Spanish friends, such as the lawyer Severiano 
Lorente, who seemed to have brought with him the 
indolent, generous Spanish attitude toward time (the 
ample time of the Arabs, who engendered The Thou- 
sand and One Nights) and who would linger until dawn 
in the Royal Keller, savoring his half bottle of wine.
Carriego felt an obligation to his run-down 
neighborhood, an obligation which the knavish fash-


ion of that day expressed in terms of bad temper 
but which Carriego was to regard as a strength. To 
be poor implies a closer contact with reality, a direct 
confrontation with the hard knocks of life, a 
knowledge that the rich seem to lack, as if every- 
thing came to them filtered. So indebted did Evaristo 
Carriego believe himself to be to his environment 
that on two separate occasions in his work he excuses 
himself for writing verses to a woman, as if to dwell 
upon the bitter lot of the poor of his neighborhood 
were the only legitimate use for his life.
The events of his life, while infinite and incal- 
culable, are outwardly easy to record, and in his 
book of  Gabriel has helpfully listed them. Here 
we learn that Evaristo Carriego was born on May , 
, that he completed three years of high school, 
that he worked on the editorial staff of La Protesta, 
that he died on October , , and other detailed 
and unvisual information with which the author’s 
disjointed work—which should be to make such in- 
formation visual—liberally burdens the reader. I 
believe that a chronological account is inappropriate 
to Carriego, a man whose life was made up of walks 
and conversations. To reduce him to a list, to trace 
the order of his days, seems to me impossible; far 
better seek his eternity, his patterns. Only a timeless 
description, lingering with love, can bring him back 
to us.
In a literary context, neither his praise nor his 
condemnation left any room for doubt. He could be 
extremely vicious, profaning the most respected 
names with that obvious perversity that is usually 
but a bow to the establishment itself, a loyal belief 
that the present company is faultless and could not 
be improved upon by the addition of anyone else.


The aesthetic capability of words was revealed to 
him, as to most Argentines, through the sorrows and 
joys of Almafuerte. This enthusiasm was later borne 
out by his friendship with Almafuerte. Don Quixote 
was Carriego’s preferred reading. As to Martín Fierro, 
he probably did as everyone else in those days—gave 
it a few avid, secret readings in his boyhood that led 
to an uncritical love of it. He was also fond of the 
maligned stories of outlaws and desperadoes pro- 
duced by Eduardo Gutiérrez, from the semifictional 
tale of Juan Moreira to the unalloyed real-life ac- 
count of Hormiga Negra, who hailed from San 
Nicolás (where the saying is, “¡del Arroyo y no me 
arrollo!”—“from the Drink and I don’t shrink!”). 
France, then the source of all that was fashionable, 
had made Carriego its spokeman for Georges d’Es- 
parbés, for one or two of Victor Hugo’s novels, and 
for those of Dumas. In addition, in his conversation 
Carriego admitted a taste for tales of blood and 
thunder. He was fond of repeating the stories of the 
death of the gaucho chief Ramírez in the cause of 
love—he had been speared from his horse and 
beheaded for defending his woman—and the death 
of Juan Moreira, who went from the ardent games of 
the brothel to the bullets and bayonets of the police. 
Nor did Carriego neglect the events of his own 
time—the stabbings at local dances or on street 
corners, tales of knife fights that imbue the teller with 
their own heroism. “His conversation,” Giusti was 
later to write, “evoked the patios of his neighbor- 
hood, its wailing street organs, its dances, its wakes, 
its toughs, its houses of ill fame, and its flesh 
destined for prison or hospital. We who were from 
the center of the city listened to him utterly enchant- 
ed, as if he were telling us tales of a far-off


country.” Carriego knew himself to be frail and 
mortal, but the endless pink-walled streets of Paler- 
mo kept him going.
He wrote little, which means that his drafts 
were oral. During his nightly walks through the 
streets, on streetcar platforms, while returning home 
late, he was always composing verses. The next 
day—usually after lunch, the hour of the day shot 
through with languor but free from care—he set 
them to paper. He never exhausted the night, nor 
did he ever indulge in the depressing ceremony of 
getting up early to write. Before submitting what he 
had written, he would try out its immediate effect by 
reading it aloud or reciting it to friends. One of these 
whose name invariably comes up is Carlos de 
Soussens.
“The night Soussens discovered me,” was one 
of the dates regularly cited in Carriego’s conversa- 
tion. He both liked and disliked Soussens for the 
same reasons. Carriego liked the fact that Soussens 
was French, a man associated with the prestige of 
Dumas père, Verlaine, and Napoleon; what troubled 
Carriego was that Soussens was not far from being 
an Italian, an immigrant, a man whose dead did not 
lie in America. Besides, the oscillating Soussens was 
more of a tentative Frenchman: he was, in his own 
evasive phrase—which Carriego quoted in a verse— 
“a gentleman from Fribourg,” a Frenchman who 
never quite managed to be French and never left off 
being Swiss. In theory, Carriego liked Soussens’ 
complete Bohemian freedom but was troubled—to 
the point of holding his friend up as a bad example— 
by Soussens’ complicated laziness, his excessive 
drinking, his habit of putting things off and of lying. 
These reservations indicate that the Evaristo Carr-


iego of honest Argentine tradition was the real one 
and not Carriego the night owl, who frequented the 
Café Los Inmortales.
But Carriego’s closest friend was Marcelo del 
Mazo, who felt for him that almost bewildered ad- 
miration that the man of instinct often inspires in 
the man of letters. Del Mazo, an unjustly forgotten 
author, practiced in his writing the same controlled 
politeness as in his daily dealings, and he treated his 
subjects with great delicacy and compassion. In  
del Mazo published Los vencidos (second series), a 
largely unknown book which contains pages that 
border on the outstanding, such as the diatribe 
against the elderly—less savage but better observed 
than Swift’s in his Travels into Several Remote Nations, 
III, —and another called “La última.” Other 
writers who were friends of Carriego were Jorge Bor- 
ges, Gustavo Caraballo, Félix Lima, Juan Más y Pi, 
Alvaro Melián Lafinur, Evar Méndez, Antonio 
Monteavaro, Florencio Sánchez, Emilio Suárez Ma- 
limano, and Soiza Reilly.
Let me go on to his neighborhood friendships, 
of which he had many. The most useful of them was 
the one with the local political boss Nicolás Paredes, 
who was then the chief of Palermo. Carriego had 
sought out this friendship as a boy of fourteen. 
Wanting to offer his loyalty to someone, he asked for 
the name of the ward boss, he was given it, he looked 
the man up, making his way through the burly 
bodyguards with their high-crowned hats, and told 
Paredes he was Evaristo Carriego, from Honduras 
Street. All this happened at the marketplace in 
Güemes Square; the boy stayed right there until day- 
break, rubbing shoulders with toughs and—as gin 
builds up confidence—men who had killed, calling


them by their first names. Elections at the time were 
settled by brute force, and, to apply this force, the 
north and south sides of Buenos Aires produced 
voters in direct proportion to their native-born pop- 
ulation and their poverty. This electoral system op- 
erated in the province as well. Political bosses of 
each ward went out where the party needed them, 
taking their henchmen with them. Eye and steel— 
crumpled bank notes and penetrating revolvers— 
cast their independent vote. Implementation of the 
Sáenz Peña Act,* in , broke up these private ar- 
mies. But the sleepless night I am talking about is 
still , and it is Paredes who lays down the law.
Paredes is the true Argentine in all his glory, in 
total possession of his own reality: the chest swollen 
with manliness; the masterful presence; the arrogant 
black mane of hair; the bushy moustache; the nor- 
mally deep voice which, when he is provoked, he 
purposely softens into a drawl; the deliberate stride; 
the use he makes of an anecdote that might flatter 
him, of strong language, of skillful card playing, of 
the knife and the guitar; the boundless self-assur- 
ance. He is a man who rode horseback as well, hav- 
ing grown up in an earlier Palermo than this one of 
carriages, in the Palermo of open space and farms. 
He is a man of Homeric barbecues and interminable 
sessions of dialogue improvised in song. Thirty 
years after that fateful night, Paredes was to address 
to me some stanzas from which I shall never forget 
this bolt from the blue, this declaration of friendship:
A usté, compañero Borges,
Lo saludo enteramente.
[You, friend Borges, I greet wholeheartedly.]


He is peerless with the knife, but any tough out to of- 
fend him has been kept in line by the imperious whip 
or his open hand and not knife to knife as an equal. 
Friends, like the dead and like cities, help make up a 
man, and there is a line in Carriego’s “El alma del 
suburbio” (Soul of the Slums), from the poem “El 
guapo” (The Tough)—“since he has already once 
made him sh . . . ake in his boots”—in which 
Paredes’ voice seems to rumble with that weary, 
almost bored, thunder of true Argentine abuse.
Through Nicolás Paredes, Evaristo Carriego 
got to know the knife fighters of the district, the 
cream of the spare-us-from-them ilk. For a time he 
kept up an unequal friendship with them, a ritual 
Argentine friendship, with barroom effusiveness and 
gaucho oaths of loyalty and “you know me, old 
buddy” and other such inanities. The ashes of 
these acquaintances are the few stanzas in lunfardo 
that Carriego failed to sign, two sets of which I have 
tracked down. One thanks Félix Lima for sending 
him his collection of chronicles, Con los nueve; the 
other, whose title may be a mimicry of the Dies Irae, 
is called “Día de bronca.” It was published in the 
police gazette L.C. under the pen name “The Bur- 
glar,” and I have included it in the supplement to 
this chapter.
Nothing is known of any love affair he may 
have had. His brothers recall a woman in mourning 
who used to wait for him on the sidewalk and who 
sent any passing boy to fetch him. Although his 
brothers ragged him, they never got her name out of 
him.
I arrive at the matter of his illness, which I re- 
gard as of paramount importance. It is the general 
belief that tuberculosis killed him. This opinion was


contradicted by his family, who were perhaps in- 
fluenced by two superstitions—one, that the disease 
is shameful; the other, that it is hereditary. Apart 
from his relatives, everyone contends that he died of 
consumption. Three considerations bear out the 
consensus of his friends: the inspired variety and 
liveliness of Carriego’s conversation, a gift possibly 
owed to a feverish condition; the constant, almost 
obsessive allusion in his work to red sputum; his 
compelling need for applause. He knew that he was 
pledged to death and that no other immortality was 
open to him than that of his writing; hence his impa- 
tience for glory. In the café, he forced his verses on 
his friends, he led the conversation toward subjects 
that touched on those he had written poems about, 
he damned with faint praise or with total condem- 
nation those colleagues of his who were dangerously 
gifted; as if absentmindedly, he would speak of “my 
talent.” In addition, he had made up or borrowed a 
sophism which predicted that the entire corpus of 
contemporary poetry was going to perish because of 
its rhetoric, except his own, which would survive as a 
document—as if a fondness for rhetoric were not one 
of the very hallmarks of the century. “He was per- 
fectly right to make it his business to draw attention 
to his work,” writes del Mazo. “Carriego realized 
that recognition is a very slow process and is attained 
in life only by a handful of old men, and, knowing 
that he was not going to produce a mass of books, he 
opened the minds of those around him to the beauty 
and gravity of his poetry.” This was not a sign of 
vanity; it was the mechanics of glory, it was a task 
of the same order as that of correcting proof sheets. 
The unrelenting premonition of death spurred him 
on. Carriego deeply desired others to give him their


time in the future, their affection after he was gone. 
In the course of this abstract dialogue with souls he 
came to ignore love and new friendships, limiting 
himself to being his own publicist and apostle.
Let me introduce a story here. An Italian 
woman fleeing from her husband’s blows, her face 
bloodied, burst into the patio of the Carriego family 
one evening. Carriego rushed out furiously into the 
street and delivered the few necessary strong 
remarks. The husband, a neighboring bartender, 
took them without answering, but he held a grudge. 
Knowing that fame, however embarrassing, is a 
thing of prime importance, Carriego published a 
highly censorious piece in Ultima Hora about the 
Italian’s brutality. Its results were immediate: the 
man, his brutish behavior publicly acknowledged, 
gave up the grudge amid everyone’s flattering 
smirks; the victimized woman went about smiling for 
days; and Honduras Street felt it had acquired more 
substance when it saw itself in print. A person thus 
able to detect the hidden appetite for fame in others 
surely suffered from it himself.
The desire to live on in the memory of others 
dominated him. When some epoch-making pen de- 
cided that Almafuerte, Lugones, and Enrique 
Banchs already made up the triumvirate—or should 
it be the tricorn or the trimester?—of Argentine po- 
etry, Carriego suggested in café circles the deposition 
of Lugones in order that the inclusion of himself 
should not disturb this threefold arrangement.
Variety became rarer; all his days became a sin- 
gle day. Until his death he lived at Number  
Honduras Street (today Number ). He never 
missed a Sunday at our house on his return from the 
racetrack. Thinking back on the patterns of his daily


life—the unpleasant business of walking up in the 
morning, the fun of romping about with the younger 
children, the large glass of Uruguayan cherry 
brandy or of orange liqueur in the nearby bar on the 
corner of Charcas and Malabia, long sessions 
downtown in the bar at Venezuela and Perú, 
friendly argument, Italian-style meals at La Corta- 
da, the solemn recitation of poems by Gutiérrez 
Nájera and Almafuerte, the customary manly visit 
to some house whose entranceway was as rosy pink as 
a girl, the plucking of a sprig of jasmine on passing 
by a wall, the habit and the love of night—I detect, in 
its very ordinariness, a feeling of intimacy and close- 
ness. Such activities are common to us all, are shared 
by us all. These patterns in Carriego’s life that I have 
described will, I know, bring him closer to us. They 
repeat him over and over in us, as if Carriego went 
on living in our lives, as if for a few seconds each one 
of us were Carriego. I believe that this is literally the 
case, and that these fleeting moments of becoming 
him (not of mirroring him), which annihilate the 
supposed flow of time, are proof of eternity.
To surmise an author’s predilections from his 
books seems an easy thing to do, especially if we for- 
get that he usually states not his own preferences but 
something of less moment, something he imagines 
is expected of him. Those adequate though hazy im- 
ages of the pampa from on horseback, which are al- 
ways in the background of Argentine consciousness, 
must also have been present in Carriego. He would 
have liked to have lived in these images. Other ran- 
dom images, however (at first by chance at home, 
later intentionally sought out, and finally clung to 
out of affection), were the ones that would preserve 
his memory: the patio, a place for serenity, a rose for


one’s days; a modest St. John’s Night bonfire, 
wallowing like a dog in the middle of the street; the 
wood-and-coal merchant’s sign, the compact heap of 
blackness, the stacks of wood; the iron door of a ten- 
ement house; the men lounging on street corners. 
These images acknowledge and allude to him. I hope 
Carriego understood it this way, happily and philo- 
sophically, on one of his last nighttime walks 
through the streets. I imagine that man is receptive 
to death and that its proximity often permeates him, 
now with repugnance and now with clarity, now 
with miraculous perception and farsightedness.


III.
Heretic Masses
Before we take up Carriego’s Misas herejes it may be 
worth stressing that every writer starts out with a 
naïvely physical idea of what art is. To him a book is 
not an expression or a chain of expressions but liter- 
ally a volume, a prism with six rectangular faces which 
is made up of thin sheets of paper and which must 
have a tide page, a half title, an epigraph in italics, a 
foreword in larger italics, a number of parts whose 
opening words are in small capitals, a table of con- 
tents, an ex libris with a small hourglass and a Latin 
motto, an errata slip, some blank leaves, a leaded 
colophon, and a printer’s device—items generally 
known to make up the art of writing. Some stylists 
(usually those of the inimitable past) offer as well a 
publisher’s foreword, a dubious portrait, a facsimile 
autograph, a variant text, a weighty critical ap- 
paratus, publisher’s advertisements, a list of works 
consulted, and some lacunae, but it should be under- 
stood that these are not for everyone. The confusion 
of Holland paper with style, of Shakespeare with 
 Jacobo Peuser (a Buenos Aires publisher), arises


from common indolence and persists—only slightly 
polished up—among rhetoricians, to whose simple 
acoustical souls a poem is a display case of stresses, 
rhyme schemes, elisions, diphthongs, and other 
linguistic fauna. I mention these trivia characteristic 
of all first books so as to underline the unusual vir- 
tues of the one I am about to discuss.
It would be foolish, however, to deny that Misas 
herejes is an apprentice book. In saying this, I am re- 
ferring not to any lack of skill but to two particular 
tendencies—the author’s almost voluptuous delight 
in certain words, usually words to do with radiance 
and authority, and his simple, ambitious determi- 
nation to define eternal facts for the nth time. There 
is no fledgling versifier who does not attempt to de- 
fine the night, a storm, carnal desire, the moon— 
things that stand in no need of definition since they 
already have a name or a representation known to us 
all. Carriego falls in with these two practices.
Neither can he be cleared of the accusation of 
imprecision. The discrepancy between the incoher- 
ent wordiness of compositions—or, rather, decom- 
positions—such as “Las últimas etapas” (The Last 
Stages) and the conciseness of later work such as “La 
canción del barrio” (Song of the Neighborhood), is 
so obvious that it should be neither overstressed nor 
overlooked. To associate that particular weakness of 
Carriego’s with Symbolism is deliberately to disre- 
gard the aims of Laforgue or Mallarmé. We need not 
go so far afield: the true father of this imprecision 
was the renowned Rubén Darío, a poet who in ex- 
change for importing certain goods from the French 
freely fitted out his verses from the Petit Larousse, 
doing so with such an utter disregard for scruples 
that the words “pantheism” and “Christianity”


were synonymous to him and that wanting to signify 
“boredom” he wrote “nirvana.” The amusing 
thing is that José Gabriel, the formulator of Symbo- 
list etiology, insists on finding symbols all through 
Misas herejes, and on page  of his book he treats his 
readers to this rather insoluble solution to the sonnet 
“El clavel” (The Carnation):
[Carriego] means to say that he tried to kiss a 
woman, and that she, unyielding, placed her hand 
between their mouths (and this does not become 
clear until after some considerable effort); but no, to 
say it in this way would be pedestrian, would not be 
poetic, so he calls her lips “carnation” and “red 
herald of amatory declarations,” and the woman’s 
act of refusal the execution of the carnation by “the 
guillotine of her noble fingers.”
So much for his explication. Here is the sonnet 
itself:
Fue al surgir de una duda insinuativa 
cuando hirió tu severa aristocracia, 
como un símbolo rojo de mi audacia, 
un clavel que tu mano no cultiva.
Hubo quizá una frase sugestiva 
o advirtió una intención tu perspicacia, 
pues tu serenidad llena de gracia 
fingió una rebelión despreciativa.
. 
I preserve these impertinences in order to punish myself for having 
written them. At the time, I thought Lugones’ poetry better than 
Darío’s. I also thought Quevedo’s better than Góngora’s ( foot- 
note).


Y asi, en tu vanidad, por la impaciente 
condena de tu orgullo intransigente, 
mi rojo heraldo de amatorios credos
mereció, por su símbolo atrevido, 
como un apóstol o como un bandido, 
la guillotina de tus nobles dedos.
[It was as a result of a creeping doubt that your stern 
nobility was wounded by that red symbol of my 
boldness, a carnation which your hand does not cul- 
tivate.
Perhaps there was a suggestive word, or your intui- 
tion sensed an intention, for your graceful serenity 
scornfully feigned rebellion.
And so, in your vanity, by the abrupt condemnation 
of your stiff pride, my red herald of amatory 
declarations—
by its daring symbolism—warranted, like an apostle 
or a thief, the guillotine of your noble fingers.]
The carnation is without a doubt a real one, an 
ordinary common flower crumpled by the girl, and 
the symbolism (the mere Gongorism) is that of the 
Spanish explicator, who turns the carnation into lips.
It cannot be denied that by far the greater part 
of Misas herejes has seriously inconvenienced the 
critics. How in the slums’ own poet is such innocu- 
ous lust to be explained? I think I can answer this 
scandalized question as follows: Evaristo Carriego’s 
tenets coincide with those of the slum neighborhood 
itself, not in the superficial sense of using it for subject 
matter, but in the genuine sense that this is the sort


of poetry the outer slums produce. Poor people relish 
this sorry rhetoric, a fondness they do not usually ex- 
tend to realistic descriptions of themselves. The 
paradox is as wondrous as it is unconscious: the fact 
that a writer is genuinely of the people is argued on 
the grounds of the only pages of that writer that com- 
mon people like. That liking is owed to an affinity: 
the wordiness, the string of abstractions, the mushi- 
ness are the marks of the poetry of the slums, which 
is uninfluenced by any local accent except the gau- 
chesco, and is closer to Joaquin Castellanos and 
Almafuerte than to tango lyrics. Memories of certain 
street corners and bars come to my aid here: the 
slums draw on arrabalero, a bogus version of the 
thieves’ argot, which is lunfardo, that is spoken 
downtown on Corrientes Avenue, but the high-flown 
abstraction is its own and is the material with which 
the popular ballad singer works. Let me sum up 
briefly. This erring portion of Misas herejes does not 
mention Palermo, but Palermo could have produced 
it. This din demonstrates it:
Y en el salmo moral, que sinfoniza 
un salvaje ciclón sobre la pauta, 
venga el robusto canto que presagie, 
con la alegre fiereza de una diana 
que recorriese como un verso altivo 
el soberbio delirio de la gama 
el futuro cercano de los triunfos, 
futuro precursor de las revanchas; 
el instante supremo en que se agita 
la visión terrenal de las canallas . . .
[And in the moral psalm, which a fierce cyclone 
symphonizes on the stave, let there come the robust


song that will foretell, with the sprightly violence of a 
bugle call that like a haughty verse runs up and 
down the delirium of the scale, the imminent future 
of the victories, a future foretelling revenge; the su- 
preme moment in which the earthly vision of the 
rabble is stirred up . . . ]
All of which adds up to a storm made into a psalm 
that is to contain a song that is to resemble a bugle 
call that is to resemble a verse, and the prediction of 
an immediately foretelling future entrusted to the 
song that is to resemble the bugle call that is to re- 
semble a verse. To prolong this quotation would be 
tantamount to bearing a grudge. Take my word for it 
that this rhapsody of a ballad singer drunk on 
hendecasyllables exceeds two hundred lines and that 
not one of its many stanzas can bewail a lack of 
storms, flags, condors, bloodstained bandages, and 
hammers. May any unpleasant memory of them be 
erased by the following ten-line stanzas, in which the 
passion is sufficiently detailed for us to consider 
them autobiographical and which lend themselves so 
well to a guitar accompaniment:
Que este verso, que has pedido, 
vaya hacia ti, como enviado 
de algún recuerdo volcado 
en una tierra de olvido . . . 
 para insinuarte al oído 
su agonía más secreta, 
cuando en tus noches, inquieta 
 por las memorias, tal vez, 
leas, siquiera una vez, 
las estrofas del poeta.
¿Yo . . . ? Vivo con la pasión


de aquel ensueño remoto, 
que he guardado como un voto, 
 ya viejo, del corazón.
Y sé en mi amarga obsesión 
que mi cabeza cansada 
caerá, recién, libertada 
de la prisión de ese ensueño 
¡cuando duerma el postrer sueño 
sobre la postrer almohada!
[May these lines, which you have asked for, go to 
you, as if sent by some memory washed up on the 
shores of oblivion, to whisper in your ear their most 
secret agony when at night, restless with memories, 
perhaps you will read, if only once, these stanzas of 
mine.
Me? I live with the passion of that dream of long 
ago, which I have kept like a promise, now grown 
old, of my heart. And I know in my bitter obsession 
that my weary head will only rest, freed from that 
imprisoning dream, when I sleep my last sleep on 
my last pillow!]
I now pass on to the realistic pieces that make 
up the section of Misas herejes called “El alma del 
suburbio,” in which at last we can hear Carriego’s 
true voice, so noticeably absent from the book’s 
weaker parts. I shall take them in order, intentionally 
omitting two—“De la aldea” (From the Village), a 
sketch of Andalusian inspiration and decidedly triv- 
ial; and “El guapo,” which I shall leave for a later 
and fuller discussion.
The first poem, “El alma del suburbio,” tells 
about an evening on a street corner. Carriego de- 
scribes a teeming street turned patio, the consolation


of simple things, which is the only possession of the 
poor: the useful magic of playing cards, human 
contact, the barrel organ with its habanera and its 
Italian, the drawled insolence of street cries, the 
endless argument that leads nowhere, the subjects of 
women and death. Nor did Carriego forget the 
tango, which was danced lewdly and raucously on 
the sidewalks as if straight from the whorehouses of 
 Junín Street, and which, like the knife fight, was the 
exclusive paradise of men:
En la calle, la buena gente derrocha
sus guarangos decires más lisonjeros,
porque al compás de un tango, que es La Morocha,
lucen ágiles cortes dos orilleros.
[People in the street are lavish with vulgar approval, 
for to the rhythm of the tango “La Morocha” two 
men from the outer slums are showing off suggestive 
dance steps.]
Next comes a poem of mysterious renown, “La 
viejecita” (The Old Woman). Highly praised 
when it was first published, this piece’s slight touch of
. A detailed history of the tango has already been written. Its author is 
Vicente Rossi; its title is Cosas de negros (), a work that is destined to 
become a classic of Argentine literature and that, by virtue of its sheer 
stylistic brilliance, will be found correct in all its judgments. To 
Rossi, the tango is Afro-Montevidean, from the docks, and in its roots 
has African features. To Laurentino Mejias (La policía por dentro, II, 
Barcelona, ) it is an Afro-Buenos Aires hybrid, originating in the 
monotonous candombes of the parishes of Concepcion and Monserrat 
and later hooliganized in the dives of Lorea, the Boca del Riachuelo, 
and Solis. It was also danced in the houses of ill fame of Temple Street, 
the smuggled-in barrel organ muffled by a mattress borrowed from 
one of the venal beds, and the weapons of those present hidden in the 
neighboring sewers against a possible police raid.


realism—nowadays scarcely perceptible—was only 
marginally stronger than that of other rhapsodies 
of the period. By the same facility with which they 
serve up praise, critics run the risk of becoming 
prophets. The superlatives attached to “La viejeci- 
ta” would later be merited by “El guapo”; the ac- 
claim that Ascasubi’s Los mellizos de la flor received in 
 is a perfect prophecy of Martín Fierro.
“Detrás del mostrador” (Behind the Bar) is 
about the contrast between the demanding, noisy life 
of drunkards and the beautiful, coarse woman 
walled off
detrás del mostrador, como una estatua
[behind the counter, like a statue] 
who, undaunted, drives their desire to a frenzy:
Y pasa sin dolor, así, inconsciente,
su vida material de carne esclava:
[And in this way, painlessly, unaware, she lives out
her life of flesh enslaved:]
the obscure tragedy of a soul that does not know of its 
own existence.
The following poem “El amasijo” (The Beat- 
ing), is the exact opposite of “El guapo.” In the for- 
mer, the seamier side of life is exposed with holy 
wrath: the hoodlum at home, the double misfortune 
of the woman, beaten and derided, and of the 
hoodlum persisting disgracefully and stubbornly in 
that poor vain manliness, tyranny:


Dejó de castigarla, por fin cansado 
de repetir el diario brutal ultraje 
que habrá de contar luego, felicitado, 
en la rueda insolente del compadraje. . . .
[He stopped beating her, tired in the end of repeat- 
ing the daily brutal outrage that he would later brag 
of, congratulated, among his gang of swaggering 
cronies. . . .]
The engaging subject of the next poem, “En el 
barrio” (In the Neighborhood), is the eternal one of 
the guitar and the ballads sung to it, uttered this time 
not in the usual conventional way but literally to ex- 
press an actual love. The action, or what lies behind 
the images, is unclear, but it is strong. From the in- 
nermost earthen patio, or red patio, the compelling 
milonga calls out with passionate rage
que escucha insensible la despreciativa 
moza, que no quiere salir de la pieza . . .
Sobre el rostro adusto tiene el guitarrero 
vigas cicatrices de cárdeno brillo 
en el pecho un hosco rencor pendenciero 
y en los negros ojos la luz del cuchillo.
Y no es para el otro su constante enojo.
A ese desgraciado que a golpes maneja 
le hace el mismo caso, por bruto y por flojo, 
que al pucho que olvida detrás de la oreja.
Pues tiene unas ganas su altivez airada 
de concluir con todas las habladurías.


¡Tan capaz se siente de hacer una hombrada 
de la que hable el barrio tres o cuatro días! . . .
[that the contemptuous girl listens to unmoved, not 
wanting to leave her room.
On his grim face the guitarist bears old scars with a 
livid sheen, in his breast a sullen, contentious ven- 
om, and in his black eyes the glint of a knife.
And his continued anger is not toward his rival. To 
that miserable creature, whom he can handle with 
his fists, he pays the same attention, whether rough 
or gentle, as to the cigarette end he has forgotten 
behind his ear.
In his irate arrogance he wants to be done with all 
the idle gossip. He feels quite competent to take a 
manly stand that will give the neighborhood some- 
thing to talk about for three or four days.]
This last stanza, the penultimate of the poem, is 
dramatic in tone; it seems to be spoken by the 
scarred man himself. The last line, too, is quite 
pointed—the few days’ hasty attention that the 
neighborhood, spoiled back then, gave a death, the 
passing glory of having slit someone’s throat.
Next comes “Residuo de fábrica” (Factory 
Waste), a compassionate account of suffering, in 
which perhaps the most important thing is the in- 
stinctive conversion of an illness into a defect, a 
fault.
Ha tosido de nuevo. El hermanito


que a veces en la pieza se distrae 
jugando, sin hablarle, se ha quedado 
de pronto serio, como si pensase . . .
Después se ha levantado, y bruscamente 
se ha ido, murmurando al alejarse, 
con algo de pesar y mucho de asco:
—Que la puerca otra vez escupe sangre . . .
[She has another coughing fit. Her little brother, 
who occasionally amuses himself in the room play- 
ing, without a word to her, suddenly becomes seri- 
ous, as if he were thinking . . .
Then he gets up and abruptly leaves, mumbling 
with a little sympathy and a lot of revulsion, “I hope 
the pig spits up blood again.”]
It seems to me that the emotional emphasis in the 
poem’s penultimate stanza is in the cruel detail 
“without a word to her.”
Now comes “La queja” (The Lament), which 
is a tedious anticipation of countless tedious tango 
lyrics, a life story of the splendor, the fading, the 
downfall, and the obscure end of a prostitute. The 
subject can be traced back to Horace—Lydia, the 
first of this endless sterile lineage, goes mad with 
burning solitude just as mares go mad (“matres 
equorum”), and in her long since deserted room 
“amat ianua limen,” the door hugs the threshold—and 
flows into Contursi, passing through Evaristo Car- 
riego, whose South American harlot’s progress, 
rounded off by tuberculosis, is of little importance in 
the sequence.
The next poem is “La guitarra” (The Guitar), 
an aberrant series of silly images unworthy of the au-


thor of “En el barrio.” The piece seems to scorn or 
to be unaware of the poetic effects that the instru- 
ment can inspire: the music generously given to the 
street, the happy melody that is sad to us because of 
the memory of an incident we associate with it, the 
friendships that a guitar fosters and crowns. I have 
seen two men make friends, their souls keeping pace 
as they played a gato* that reflected the joyous sound 
of their coming together.
The last of the poems is “Los perros del barrio” 
(The Neighborhood Dogs), which is a dull echo of 
Almafuerte, but which is based on real fact, since in 
their poverty these outlying slums always had dogs 
in plenty, either because of their usefulness as watch- 
dogs or out of curiosity about their habits, which is 
a pastime one never tires of, or out of negligence. 
Carriego unduly allegorizes this lawless beggarly 
pack, but at the same time he gives us a feeling of its 
warm gregarious life, its lowly appetites. I want to 
quote the line
cuando beben agua de luna en los charcos
[when they drink moon water in puddles]
and another,
aullando exorcismos contra la perrera,
[howling exorcisms against the dog pound,]
which tugs on one of my most vivid memories: the 
absurd affliction of that little inferno heralded by for- 
lorn barking and preceded—shordy before—by a 
dusty cloud of poor children who, with shouts and


stones, scare off another dusty cloud, of dogs, to save 
them from the dogcatcher.
What remains to be considered is “El guapo,” a 
paean with a famous dedication to another political 
tough of Alsina’s,* Saint Juan Moreira. It is a devout 
offering, whose power also resides in oblique refer- 
ences, as in the line
conquistó, a la larga, renombre de osado
[he won, in the end, a reputation for his daring]
implying that there had been many competitors for 
this reputation, and in this line of erotic power al- 
most suggestive of magic:
caprichos de hembra que tuvo la daga.
[a knife’s womanly capriciousness.]
In “El guapo” even the omissions are impor- 
tant. The tough was neither a holdup man nor bru- 
tally cruel, nor was he necessarily a bully; he was just 
as Carriego defined him, “a cultivator of courage.” 
At best a stoic, at worst he was an expert in making a 
big noise, a specialist in stepped-up intimidation, a 
veteran of winning without ever fighting. He was 
worthier by far than his present-day degenerate Ital- 
ian counterpart, a “cultivator of villainy,” a petty 
criminal pained by the shame of not being a pimp. 
Addicted to the intoxication of danger, a foregone 
winner by his presence alone—these, with no sug-
. Marred only in the last two lines by the arbitrary mention of the mus- 
keteer.


gestion of cowardice in the latter, were the tough. (If 
a community decides that courage is the principal 
virtue, the pretension to courage will be as prevalent 
as the pretension to beauty among women or to 
imagination among writers, but that selfsame ap- 
pearance of courage becomes an apprenticeship.)
I am talking about the old-time tough, a Buenos 
Aires character who appeals to me far more than that 
other more popular myth of Carriego’s (Gabriel, 
page ), “the back-street seamstress who came to 
grief” and her physical-emotional problems. His oc- 
cupation was that of either teamster, horsebreaker, 
or slaughterhouse worker; his education, any of the 
city’s street corners, particularly, on the Southside, 
the Alto (those within the bounds of Chile, Garay, 
Balcarce, and Chacabuco streets) and, on the North- 
side, Tierra del Fuego (those within the bounds of Las 
Heras, Arenales, Pueyrredón, and Coronel streets), 
and other neighborhoods, such as the Once, the 
Batería, and the old Stockyards. He was not always
. His name? I offer to legend this list, which I owe to the kind 
helpfulness of don José Olave. It covers the final two decades of the 
last century. It will always conjure up an adequate, if blurred, picture 
of knife-fighting half-breeds as lean and hard as cacti in the dusty outer 
slums.
parish of our lady of succour
Avelino Galeano (of the Provincial Guards Regiment). Alejo 
Albornoz (killed in a fight in Santa Fe Street by the hereinafter 
named). Pío Castro.
Footpads, hired toughs: Tomás Medrano, Manuel Flores.
parish of el pilar, antigua
Juan Muraña. Romualdo Suárez, alias “El Chileno.” To- 
más Real. Florentino Rodríguez. Juan Tink (of English origin, 
who ended up a police inspector in Avellaneda). Raimundo 
Renovales (slaughterhouse worker).
(continued)


a rebel: political parties hired the fear he generated 
and his skill with a knife, and at the same time they 
gave him their protection. The police, in those days, 
treated him with kid gloves. In any disturbance the 
tough never let himself be rounded up, but he 
gave—and kept—his word to turn himself in later 
on. The protective influence of the political party 
took the unpleasantness out of this ritual. Feared as 
he was, the tough never thought of giving up his way 
of life: a horse decked out in showy silver, a few pesos 
for the cockfights or cards—these were enough to 
brighten his Sundays. He did not have to be physi- 
cally strong; one of the toughs of the First Precinct, 
Shorty Flores, was a midget as skinny as a snake, a 
dead loss, but with a knife he was streaked lightning. 
The tough did not have to be a troublemaker; the 
renowned Juan Muraña was a reliable fighting ma- 
chine, a man with no other distinguishing features 
than the deadly certainty of his arm and an absolute 
incapacity for fear. The tough did not know when to 
make a move and with his eyes—slavish soul that he 
was—asked the permission of his boss of the mo- 
ment. Once he was involved in a fight, all his lunges
Footpads, hired toughs: Juan Ríos. Damasio Suárez, alias 
“Carnaza.”
parish of belgrano
Atanasio Peralta (killed fighting several opponents). Juan 
González. Eulogio Muraña, alias “Cuervito.”
Footpads: José Díaz. Junto González.
They never fought in gangs but always with a naked blade 
and alone.
The British contempt for the knife has become so wide- 
spread that I can rightly recall the commonly held idea that for 
the Argentine the only serious way of fighting, among men, was 
that carrying the risk of death. A punch was a mere prologue to 
the use of steel, an act of provocation.


were for the kill. He did not want to “feed the 
crows.” He spoke without fear or favor of the deaths 
he had notched up—or rather, that fate had accom- 
plished through him, for there are acts of such heavy 
responsibility (that of begetting a man or killing a 
man) that to feel remorse or to boast of them is folly. 
He died in old age with his constellation of deaths by 
then, no doubt, dim in his memory.


IV.
Song of the Neighborhood
Nineteen hundred and twelve. Out toward the many 
stock pens of Cerviño Street or toward the 
canebrakes and potholes of the Maldonado—an area 
reduced to galvanized-iron sheds, variously named 
dance halls, where the tango was all the rage at ten 
cents a dance, partner included—local toughs still 
tangled with each other, and now and then a man’s 
face got marked up or a dead hoodlum would be 
found at dawn, contemptuous, with a slashed belly; 
but for the most part Palermo conducted itself in a 
God-fearing manner, and it was a place of genteel 
poverty, like any other mixed community of immi- 
grants and native Argentines. By this time, the as- 
trological jubilation of the centenary of Argentine 
independence was already as dead as its miles and 
miles of blue bunting, as its successions of toasts, its 
gushing rockets, its municipal illuminations against 
the rust-colored sky of the Plaza de Mayo, and that 
other foretold illumination, Hailey’s comet, was an 
angel of air and fire to which the organ grinders sang 
the tango “Independencia.” Now sports were of


more interest than death, and boys neglected fencing 
with knives in favor of attending football matches, 
which in their lazy vernacular they rebaptized joba. 
Palermo joined the rush toward foolishness. Sinister 
Art Nouveau architecture sprouted like a swollen 
flower even as far out as the marshes. Noises were 
different too. The bell of the movie house—which 
by now had its double features of American West- 
erns and European love stories—mingled with the 
tired clatter of horse-drawn wagons and with the 
knife grinder’s whistle. With the exception of a few 
back alleys there were no unpaved streets. The pop- 
ulation had doubled. The  census recorded a 
total of , souls within the bounds of Las Heras 
and Palermo de San Benito; in  it would record 
,. The electric streetcar screeched around 
bored street corners. In the popular imagination, 
Cattaneo, the aviator, had displaced the outlaw 
Moreira. This almost invisible Palermo, fond of 
maté and of progress, is the one described in the se- 
ries of poems that Carriego called “La canción del 
barrio” (Song of the Neighborhood).
Carriego published “El alma del suburbio” in 
, and on his death in  he left the material for 
“La canción del barrio.” This latter title is better in 
its focus and truer to life than the former. Canción is 
more definite than alma, and suburbio is a term of 
wariness that has in it something of the anxiety of a 
man about to miss the last train. Nobody says, “I 
live in such-and-such a suburb”; everyone prefers to 
name his barrio, or neighborhood. This reference to 
the neighborhood is just as personal, helpful, and 
unifying in the parish of La Piedad as it is in 
Saavedra. The distinction is relevant. To define as- 
pects typical of this country by words relating to an


environment derives from a tendency of ours to drag 
along with us traces of barbarism. The countryman 
is defined by the pampa; the hoodlum, by certain 
sheds of old corrugated iron. An example of this may 
be found in a book by the journalist, or Basque 
artifact, J. M. Salaverría, which is mistaken right 
from its title—El poema de la pampa, Martín Fierro y el 
criollismo español (Martín Fierro, the Poem of the 
Pampa and Spanish Criollism). “Spanish criol- 
lism” is a trumped-up piece of nonsense intended to 
dumbfound the reader (in logic, a contradictio in 
adjecto); “poem of the pampa” is another, less delib- 
erate mistake. According to Ascasubi, “pampa” 
meant to the old-time country people the wilderness 
where the Indians marauded. One has only to look 
into Martín Fierro to see that it is the poem not of the 
pampa but of a man banished to the pampa, of a 
man rejected by the cattle-breeding civilization cen- 
tered in ranches that were like villages and in the 
more populated parts of the countryside. To Martín 
Fierro, who was the epitome of courage, it hurt to 
have to endure the solitude—in other words, the 
pampa.
Y en esa hora de la tarde 
en que tuito se adormece, 
que el mundo dentrar parece 
a vivir en pura calma, 
con las tristezas de su alma 
al pajonal enderiece.
. Today “pampa” is exclusively a literary term; used in the country, it 
would call attention to itself.


Es triste en medio del campo 
 pasarse noches enteras 
contemplando en sus carreras 
las estrellas que Dios cría, 
sin tener más compañía 
que su soledá y las fieras.
[And in that evening hour when everything grows 
drowsy, when the world appears to begin to live in 
complete calm, with a melancholy heart he goes 
straight for shelter in a growth of reeds.
It is sad in the middle of the plain to spend night 
after night contemplating in their course the stars 
that God has bred and to have no company but your 
solitude and wild animals.]
And these immortal stanzas, which are the most 
moving point in the story:
Cruz y Fierro de una estancia 
una tropilla se arriaron, 
 por delante se la echaron 
como criollos entendidos, 
 y pronto, sin ser sentidos, 
 por la frontera cruzaron.
Y cuando la habían pasao, 
una madrugada clara, 
le dijo Cruz que mirara 
las últimas poblaciones; 
 y a Fierro dos lagrimones 
le rodaron por la cara.
[From a ranch Cruz and Fierro rounded up a herd


of horses and, being practical gauchos, drove it be- 
fore them. Undetected, they soon crossed over the 
border.
After this was done, early one morning Cruz told 
Fierro to look back on the last settlements. Two big 
tears rolled down Fierro’s face.]
Another Salaverría*—whose name I do not 
wish to recall, since I admire the rest of his 
books—goes on and on about the “ballad singer of 
the pampa” who “in the shade of an ombu, in the 
endless calm of the desert, recites to the accompani- 
ment of his Spanish guitar the monotonous décimas of 
Martín Fierro.” But the writer himself is so 
monotonous, decimated, endless, Spanish, calm, 
deserted, and accompanied that he has not noticed 
that Martín Fierro is not written in décimas. The 
tendency to drag along with us traces of barbarism is 
fairly widespread. Santos Vega (whose entire legend, 
or so we gather from Lehmann-Nitsche’s four- 
hundred-page study, is that there is a Santos Vega 
legend) made up, or borrowed, the stanza that says:
Si este novillo me mata 
no me entierren en sagrao; 
enhénenme en campo verde 
donde me pise el ganao.
[If this bull kills me, don’t let them bury me in holy 
ground; bury me in the green fields, where the cattle 
can walk all over me.]
His quite obvious idea (“If I am so clumsy in my 
work, I’ll refuse to be buried in a cemetery”) has


been praised as the pantheistic declaration of a man 
who, after he dies, wants to be trodden on by cows.
The outer slums, too, suffer from an irritating 
misrepresentation. 
Arrabalero 
and 
the 
tango 
supposedly typify the slums. In the previous chap- 
ter I described how arrabalero is spoken downtown on 
Corrientes Avenue, and how the outpourings of a 
weekly magazine like El Cantaclaro—which prints 
the lyrics of hit tangos—of phonograph records, and
. 
To make of the cowhand an eternal traveler across the pampa is a 
piece of romantic nonsense; to assert—as our best writer of polemical 
prose, Vicente Rossi, does—that the gaucho is a “Charrúa warrior 
turned nomad” is merely to assert that unattached Charrúa Indians 
were called gauchos. This outdated use of a word explains very little. 
Ricardo Güiraldes, for his version of the cowhand as wanderer, had 
to resort to the occupation of drover. Groussac, in a lecture delivered 
in , speaks of the gaucho in retreat “toward the far south, in what 
is left of the pampa,” but it is common knowledge that no gauchos are 
left in the far south because there never were any there and that where 
they still exist is in the vicinity of settlements inhabited by native 
Argentines. Rather than in any racial aspect (a gaucho might be 
white, black, half Indian, mulatto, or half Indian and half mulatto), 
rather than in any linguistic aspect (the gaucho from Rio Grande 
speaks a Brazilian variety of Portuguese), and rather than in any geo- 
graphical aspect (vast areas of the provinces of Buenos Aires, Entre 
Ríos, Córdoba, and Santa Fe are now Italian), the gaucho’s distin- 
guishing feature resides in his expertise in an early form of cattle 
breeding.
It is also the fate of the urban hoodlum to be maligned. Only a 
hundred years ago, compadritos was the name given the poor of Buenos 
Aires who could not afford to live in the vicinity of the Plaza Mayor, a 
fact which led to their also being called orilleros, or dwellers of the out- 
skirts. They were literally the people. They had a half-acre plot and a 
house of their own beyond Tucumán or Chile Street or what was then 
Velarde Street and is now Libertad-Salta. The connotations attached 
to them were later supplanted by a single idea. Ascasubi, in the revi- 
sion of his Aniceto el Gallo, Number , was to write, “compadrito: a 
young bachelor, fond of dancing, of falling in love, and of song.” Our 
unacknowledged viceroy, the imperceptible Monner Sans, made him 
out to be a “bully, roisterer, and braggart,” asking, “Why is it that 
compadre always has a bad connotation to us?” He immediately made
(continued)


of the radio spread their stagy jargon to places like 
Avellaneda or Coghlan. Picking up this fashion is no 
easy matter. Each new tango written in the would-be 
popular idiom is a riddle, not to mention the be- 
wildering variants, corollaries, obscure patches, 
and reasoned disagreement of commentators. The 
obscurity is only logical. People have no need to add 
local color to themselves; the imitator argues other- 
wise, and in using local color he goes too far. Nor, as 
to music, is the tango the natural expression of the 
outlying neighborhoods, since it originated in broth- 
els. What is truly characteristic of the city’s outer 
edges is the milonga. The milonga, usually, is a long- 
drawn-out salutation, a courteous giving birth to 
flattering words, backed up by the grave rhythms of 
the guitar. Sometimes, in an unhurried fashion, it 
tells of deeds of blood, knife fights of long ago, kill- 
ings that follow a brave, soft-spoken challenge; at 
other times it takes up the theme of destiny. Its 
moods and stories are varied; what never varies is the
light of the query, writing, with enviable spelling, faultless wit, etc., 
“Find out for yourselves.” Segovia defines the compadre by insult: “a 
boastful, dishonest, aggressive, and treacherous person.” This is an 
exaggeration. Others confuse compadrito with guarango. They are wrong; 
the hoodlum need not be vulgar any more than a cowhand. The 
compadrito is, always, an urban proletarian with pretensions to a cer- 
tain refinement; his other attributes are his courage, which he makes a 
display of, his use or invention of coarse expressions, and his clumsy 
handling of refined words. In matters of clothing, he dressed in the 
ordinary style of the day, with the addition or accentuation of certain 
details. Back in the s he favored a soft black hat with a very tall 
crown that was worn cocked on one side, a double-breasted jacket, 
French-style trousers with a stripe down the side and slightly gathered 
in at the cuff, black buttoned or elastic-sided boots with tall heels; now 
() he prefers a soft gray hat worn way back on his head, a generous 
neckerchief, a pink or dark red shirt, an unbuttoned jacket, one finger 
or other stiff with rings, tight trousers, and black boots with a 
mirrorlike shine and light-colored uppers.
What the cockney is to London, the compadrito is to Argentine 
cities.


singer’s tone, a high-pitched nasal drawl with spurts 
of annoyance, never forced but somewhere between 
speaking and singing. The tango is subject to time, 
to the humiliations and adversities of time; the driv- 
ing force of the milonga is clearly timelessness. The 
milonga is one of the great conversational genres of 
Buenos Aires; truco is the other. I will go into truco 
in another chapter; let me only say here that among 
the poor “man brings cheer to man,” as Martín 
Fierro’s elder son discovered in prison. An anniver- 
sary, All Souls’ Day, one’s saint’s day, a national 
holiday, a christening, St. John’s Night, an illness, 
New Year’s Eve—all offer an occasion for socializ- 
ing. Death gives the wake, an opportunity for 
general conversation and a visit to the dead person, 
with the door open to everyone. So obvious is this 
sociability of poorer people that, to make fun of the 
recent vogue of holding so-called receptions, Dr. 
Evaristo Carriego wrote that they greatly resembled 
wakes. Slums are places of stinking water and back 
alleys, but they are also the sky-blue balustrade and 
jasmine spilling over a wall and a canary in a cage. 
“Considerate people,” housewives often say.
. And long before Martín Fierro’s son, the god Odin. One of the wise 
books of the Elder Edda (Hávamál, ) attributes to him the aphorism 
“ma r es manns gaman” which translates literally as “man is man’s joy.”
. It is in its outskirts that you find Buenos Aires’ unintentional beauty 
spots, which are also its only beauty spots—airy, floating Blanco 
Encalada Street; unfashionable street corners of Villa Crespo, San 
Cristobal Sur, and Barracas; the majestic poverty of the area around 
the Paternal freight yards and Puente Alsina. These tell a great deal 
more, I believe, than those places built expressly to beautify: the 
Costanera, the Bathing Beach, the Rose Garden; and the highly 
praised statue to Carlos Pellegrini, which, with its wallowing flag and 
tempestuous, chaotic pedestal, seems to have utilized the debris of a 
bathroom demolition; and Virasoro’s reticent little boxes, which, in 
order not to make a display of their individual bad taste, he hides in 
unadorned abstinence.


Carriego’s poor like to talk. Their poverty is not 
the hopeless or congenital one of the European poor 
(at least, not of the Europe of the Russian naturalistic 
novel) but rather the poverty that puts its trust in the 
lottery, in backroom politics, in personal connec- 
tions, in card games and their mysteries, in the 
modest possibilities of betting on a number, in rec- 
ommendations, or—lacking any other specific, lowly 
reason—in sheer hope. A poverty that takes comfort 
in hierarchies—the Requena family of Balvanera, 
the Luna family of San Cristóbal Norte—that are 
engaging by their very capacity to appeal to mystery 
and that are so well embodied in a certain highly dis- 
tinguished hoodlum of José Alvarez’s: “I was 
born in Maipú Street—are you with me?—in the 
house of the Garcías, and I’m used to rubbing shoul- 
ders with people and not with trash. All right, then. 
If you don’t know, I’m telling you. I was christened 
in La Merced, and my godfather was an Italian who 
ran the corner saloon and who died in the epidemic. 
 Just don’t forget that!”
It seems to me that the main drawback of “La 
canción del barrio” is its emphasis on what Shaw 
called “mere misfortune or mortality” (Man and Su- 
perman, page xxxiii). Its poems deal with adversities, 
and the only thing that makes them serious is cruel 
fate, which is no more understood by the writer than 
by the reader. Evil casts no shadow over them, we 
are not led to a contemplation of the origin of evil, 
which the Gnostics confronted head on by postula- 
ting a spectral, waning godhead, obliged to impro- 
vise this world with faulty material. What is missing 
is Blake’s view when he asks the tiger, “Did he who 
made the Lamb make thee?” Nor is the subject of 
these poems the man who transcends evil, the man


who in spite of having suffered wrongs—and having 
inflicted them—maintains the purity of his soul. 
What is missing is the stoic view of Hernández, of 
Almafuerte, of Shaw once again, and of Quevedo, 
who writes in the second book of his Castilian Muses:
Alma robusta, en penas se examina,
Y trabajos ansiosos y mortales 
Cargan, mas no derriban nobles cuellos.
[A robust soul is tested by suffering, and anguish 
and mortal cares weigh upon but do not bend a 
noble head.]
Nor does Carriego show interest in the sublimity of 
evil, or the dramatic passion of misfortune, or the 
way vicissitudes compel and in a sense inspire life. 
This is how Shakespeare saw it:
All strange and terrible events are welcome,
But comforts we despise; our size of sorrow, 
Proportion’d to our cause, must be as great 
As that which makes it.
Carriego appeals only to our compassion.
Here a point or two must be made. The general 
view, expressed both orally and in writing, is that 
this inspiring of pity is the strength and justification 
of Carriego’s work. I must disagree, even if I am 
alone in my opinion. A poetry that lives off domestic 
conflicts and indulges in petty tribulations, invent- 
ing or recording squabbles so that the reader should 
deplore them, seems to me a loss, a suicide. Its sub- 
ject is any wounded feeling, anything upsetting; its 
style is gossipy and full of the interjections, exag- 
geration, false commiseration, and premature sus-


picions that housewives trade in. One distorted view 
(which I have the decency not to understand) is that 
this exhibition of wretchedness indicates a generous 
nature. What it indicates, in fact, is a lack of taste. 
Pieces such as “Mamboretá” or “El nene está 
enfermo” (The Baby Is Sick) or “Hay que cuidarla 
mucho, hermana, mucho” (We’ve Got to Look 
After Her, Sister)—so overused for mindless an- 
thologies and for recitations—belong not to literature 
but to crime. They are a deliberate sentimental 
blackmail that can be reduced to this formula: “I 
present you with this bit of suffering; if you are not 
moved, you have no soul.” I quote the end of “El 
otoño, muchachos” (The Autumn, Lads):
¡Qué tristona 
anda, desde hace días, la vecina!
¿La tendrá asi algún nuevo desengaño?
Otoño melancólico y lluvioso,
¿qué dejarás, otoño, en casa este año?
¿qué hoja te llevarás? Tan silencioso 
llegas que nos das miedo.
Sí, anochece 
 y te sentimos, en la paz casera, 
entrar sin un rumor . . . ¡Cómo envejece 
nuestra tía soltera!
[How gloomy these past few days our neighbor is! Is 
she suffering some new disappointment? Sad and 
rainy autumn, what will you leave behind in our 
house this year? What leaf will you take away? You 
come so silently that you frighten us. Yes, the dark is 
falling, and we feel your presence in the peace of our 
home, entering without a sound! How old our spin- 
ster aunt is getting!]


This spinster aunt, engendered and foisted on 
us in the haste of the last line so that autumn can 
gorge itself on her, is a fair indication of the charity of 
these pages. Humanitarianism is always inhuman. 
A certain Russian film illustrates the iniquity of war 
by showing the wretched death agony of an old nag 
cut down by bullets—fired, of course, by those who 
made the film.
This reservation noted (its laudable purpose is 
to boost and firm up Carriego’s fame, proving that it 
stands in no need of such plaintive pages), I would 
like to point out at once the real strengths of his 
posthumous work. It has moments of tenderness, 
discoveries and perceptions of tenderness, as pre- 
cise as this one:
Y cuando no estén, ¿durante 
cuánto tiempo aún se oirá 
su voz querida en las casa 
desierta?
¿Cómo serán 
en el recuerdo las caras 
que ya no veremos más?
[And when they are gone, how much longer will 
their dear voice be heard in the empty house? How 
will their faces, which we will no longer see, look in 
our memory?]
Or this snatch of conversation with a street, this se- 
cret innocent possession:
Nos eres familiar como una cosa 
que fuese nuestra: solamente nuestra.


[You are as familiar to us as a thing that was ours 
and ours alone.]
Or as this stream, uttered in a single breath as if it
were one long word:
No. Te digo que no. Sé lo que digo: 
nunca más, nunca más tendremos novia, 
 y pasarán los años pero nunca 
más volveremos a querer a otra.
Ya lo ves. Y pensar que nos decías, 
afligida quizá de verte sola, 
que cuando te murieses 
ni te recordaríamos. ¡Qué tonta!
Sí. Pasarán los años, pero siempre 
como un recuerdo bueno, a toda hora 
estarás con nosotros.
Con nosotros . . . Porque eras cariñosa 
como nadie lo fue. Te lo decimos 
tarde, ¿no es cierto? Un poco tarde ahora 
que no nos puedes escuchar. Muchachas, 
como tú ha habido pocas.
No temas nada, te recordaremos, 
 y te recordaremos a ti sola: 
ninguna más, ninguna más. Ya nunca 
más volveremos a querer a otra.
[No. I mean no. I know what I’m talking about: 
never, never again will we fall in love, and years will 
pass but we shall never love again. You see it al- 
ready. And to think you said, afraid perhaps to 
find yourself alone, that when you die we wouldn’t 
even remember you. How silly! Oh yes, years will 
pass, but you will be with us always. With us. . . . Be- 
cause you were dearer than anyone else. We are


telling you this a bit late, aren’t we? A bit late now 
that you can’t hear us. There have been few girls 
like you. Don’t be afraid of anything, we will re- 
member you, and we shall remember only you: no 
other, no other. We shall never again love another.]
The repetition in this poem is similar to that of one 
by Enrique Banchs (“Balbuceo,” in El cascabel del 
halcón, ), which, line by line, is infinitely supe- 
rior. (“I could never tell you how much I love you: 
how much I love you is like a multitude of stars,” 
etc.) This seems false, however, while Carriego’s is 
genuine.
Carriego’s best poem, “Has vuelto” (You Are 
Back), is also from “La canción del barrio.”
Has vuelto, organillo. En la acera 
hay risas. Has vuelto llorón y cansado 
como antes.
El ciego te espera 
las más de las noches sentado 
a la puerta. Calla y escucha. Borrosas 
memorias de cosas lejanas 
evoca en silencio, de cosas 
de cuando sus ojos tenían mañanas, 
de cuando era joven . . . la novia . . . ¡quién sabe!
[You are back, organ grinder. On the sidewalk there 
are smiles. You are back, plaintive and weary as 
ever. The blind man waits for you, seated most 
nights by his door. In silence, he recalls faded mem- 
ories of distant things, things when his eyes beheld 
the morning, when he was young, his girl, who 
knows what!]
The line that gives life to the above is not the last


but the next to last, and I am inclined to believe that 
Evaristo Carriego placed it there to underplay the 
emphasis. One of his earliest poems, “El alma del 
suburbio,” had dealt with the same subject, and it is 
appropriate to compare the old solution there (a 
realistic picture built on detailed observation) with 
the clear, conclusive one in which all his favorite 
symbols are assembled—the back-street seamstress 
who came to grief, the neighborhood organ grinder, 
the tumbledown street corner, the blind man, and 
the moon:
Pianito que cruzas la calle cansado 
moliendo el eterno 
 familiar motivo que el año pasado 
 gemía a la luna de invierno: 
con tu voz gangosa dirás en la esquina 
la canción ingenua, la de siempre, acaso 
esa preferida de nuestra vecina 
la costurerita que dio aquel mal paso.
Y luego de un valse te irás como una 
tristeza que cruza la calle desierta, 
 y habrá quien se quede mirando la luna 
desde alguna puerta.
. . . Anoche, después que te fuiste, 
cuando todo el barrio volvía al sosiego 
—qué triste— 
lloraban los ojos del ciego.
[Little barrel organ, you cross the street wearily, 
grinding out the eternal familiar tune that last year 
you moaned to the winter moon: with your whiny 
voice you will sing on the street corner the simple 
song, the usual one, perhaps the favorite one of our 
neighbor, the seamstress who got into trouble. And


after a waltz you will move on like a sadness that 
crosses the empty street, and from some doorway or 
other someone will stay there gazing at the moon.
. . . Last night, after you had gone and all the 
neighborhood was still again—how sad it was—the 
eyes of the blind man wept.]
Tenderness is the achievement of long years. 
Another virtue of passing years, evident in this sec- 
ond book and neither hinted at nor apparent in Car- 
riego’s previous book, is a sense of humor. It is a 
quality indicative of a sensitive nature. The mean- 
spirited never engage in this wholesome, compas- 
sionate enjoyment of the weaknesses of others that is 
so essential to friendship. It is a quality that goes 
hand in hand with love. Soame Jenyns, an English 
writer of the eighteenth century, thought, in all rev- 
erence, that the allotment of happiness granted the 
blessed and the angels derived from an exquisite sense 
of the ridiculous.
I quote the following lines by Carriego as an ex- 
ample of a quiet sense of humor:
¿Y la viuda de la esquina?
La viuda muñó anteayer.
¡Bien decía la adivina, 
que cuando Dios determina 
 ya no hay nada más que hacer!
[And the widow next door? She died the day before 
yesterday. Ah, how right the fortune-teller was to 
say that when God makes up His mind nothing can 
be done about it!]
The mechanism of this bit of humor is twofold: first, 
putting into the mouth of a clairvoyant a rather


unclairvoyant moralism on the inscrutability of 
Providence; and second, the neighborhood’s fatal- 
istic respect, which acknowledges the incident with 
wisdom.
But the most consciously humorous poem left us 
by Carriego is “El casamiento” (The Wedding). It is 
also the most typical of Buenos Aires. “En el barrio” 
is an almost blatantly Entre Ríos bravura piece; 
“Has vuelto” is a single fragile moment, a flower of 
time, of a single evening. “El casamiento,” on the 
other hand, is as distinctively Buenos Aires as Asca- 
subi’s cielitos or the Argentine Faust or the humor of 
Macedonio Fernández or the lively, punchy open- 
ings of the tangos of Greco, Arolas, and Saborido. 
Carriego’s poem is a very skillful expression of the 
features found at any humble festivity. There is plen- 
ty of the kind of carping that goes on between neigh- 
borhood busybodies.
En la acera de enfrente varias chismosas 
que se encuentran al tanto de lo que pasa, 
aseguran que para ver ciertas cosas 
mucho mejor sería quedarse en casa.
Alejadas del cara de presidiario 
que sugiere torpezas, unas vecinas 
 pretenden que ese sucio vocabulario 
no debieran oírlo las chiquilinas.
Aunque—tai acontece—todo es posible, 
sacando consequencias poco oportunas, 
lamenta una insidiosa la incomprensible 
suerte que, por desgracia, tienen algunas.
Y no es el primer caso. . . . Si bien le extrāna 
que haya salido sonso . . . pues en enero


del año que trascurre, si no se engaña, 
dio que hablar con el hijo del carnicero.
[From the opposite sidewalk several gossiping 
women who always know what’s going on assure us 
that in order to see some things one is better off at 
home.
Out of earshot of the one who looks like a convict 
and who is suggesting smutty things, some of the 
neighbors claim that his dirty words should not be 
heard by young girls.
Although—as it happens—everything is possible, 
and, drawing unwholesome conclusions, one insidi- 
ous woman laments the incomprehensible luck that, 
unfortunately, some women have.
And this is not the first time. Though it’s surprising 
that he turned out to be such a fool, since only in 
 January of this year, as sure as not, she was the talk 
of the town for what went on between her and the 
butcher’s son.]
And there is the wounded pride before the fact, the 
almost desperate respectability.
El tío de la novia, que se ha creído 
obligado a fijarse si el baile toma 
buen carácter, afirma, medio ofendido, 
que no se admiten cortes, ni aun in broma.
—Que, la modestia a un lado, no se la pega 
ninguno de esos vivos . . . seguramente.
La casa será pobre, nadie lo niega: 
todo lo que se quiera, pero decente.—


[The bride’s uncle, who has taken it upon himself to 
see that the dancing stays proper, states, somewhat 
shocked, that suggestive steps are not allowed—even 
in fun.
“For, modesty apart, not that any of these louts 
would know what I’m talking about, this house may 
be poor—there’s no denying that—poor as any- 
thing, but respectable.”]
And there are the petty squabbles that are forever 
cropping up:
La polka de la silla dará motivo 
a serios incidentes, nada improbables: 
nunca falta un rechazo despreciativo 
que acarrea disgustos irremediables.
Ahora, casualmente, se ha levantado 
indignada la prima del guitarrero, 
 por el doble sentido, mal arreglado, 
del piropo guarango del compañero.
[As sure as anything, the broomstick polka will give 
rise to serious incidents. There is always one offen- 
sive refusal to set off a tiff that cannot be settled.
Now, for instance, indignant, the guitarist’s cousin 
has flounced off over the double meaning, carelessly 
phrased, of her partner’s vulgar compliment.]
And touching sincerity:
En el comedor, donde se bebe a gusto, 
casi lamenta el novio que no se pueda 
correr la de costumbre . . . pues, y esto es justo, 
la familia le pide que no se exceda.


[In the dining room, where everyone is having a 
drink, the groom half laments the fact that they can- 
not do as they normally do, since—and it’s only 
right—the family has asked him not to go too far.]
And there is the pacifying role of the tough, who is a 
friend of the family:
Como el guapo es amigo de evitar toda 
 provocación que aleje la concurrencia, 
ha ordenado que apenas les sirvan soda 
a los que ya borrachos buscan pendencia.
Y, previendo la bronca, después del gesto 
único en él, declara que aunque le cueste 
ir de nuevo a la cárcel, se halla dispuesto 
a darle un par de hachazos al que proteste.
[As the tough is anxious to avoid any altercation that 
could break up the party, he has given orders that 
only soda water be served to those, already drunk, 
who are spoiling for a fight.
Anticipating the fury that will arise from this act— 
the only thing he has done—he makes it known that 
even if it means going back to jail, he is ready to have 
it out with anyone who protests.]
The following poems from this book will also 
endure: “El velorio” (The Wake), written in the 
same style as “El casamiento”; “La lluvia en la casa 
vieja” (Rain in the Old House), a statement of the 
excitement caused by the elements, when rain fills 
the air in the same way as a cloud of smoke, and 
every house feels itself to be a fortress; and some of 
the personal sonnets in a conversational tone from


the cycle called “Íntimas” (Intimate Things). These 
are heavy with fate. They are of a serene nature, but 
their resignation, or reconciliation, is that which 
follows on sorrow. Here is a line from one of them, 
pure and magical:
cuando aún eras prima de la luna.
[when you were still a cousin to the moon.]
And there is also this rather revealing statement, 
which needs no further elucidation:
Anoche, terminada ya la cena 
 y mientras saboreaba el café amargo, 
me puse a meditar un rato largo: 
el alma como nunca de serena.
Bien lo sé que la copa no está llena 
de todo lo mejor y, sin embargo, 
 por pereza quizás, ni un solo cargo 
le hago a la suerte, que no ha sido buena . . .
Pero, como por una virtud rara 
no le muestro a la vida mala cara 
ni en las horas que son más fastidiosas,
nunca nadie podrá tener derecho 
a exigirme una mueca. ¡Tantas cosas 
se pueden ocultar bien en el pecho!
[Last night, dinner over and while I savored my cof- 
fee, I began to meditate at length, my soul serene as 
never before.
I know quite well that one’s cup is not full of all 
that’s best, and yet—perhaps out of laziness—I


bring not a single charge against my luck, which has 
not been good.
But, as by some strange power I do not put on a bad 
face even in the most troubled times,
never will anyone have the right to expect me to look 
downcast. So many things can be hidden in the 
heart!]
One final digression, which will not be a di- 
gression for long. Pleasant though they may be, the 
descriptions of daybreak, of the pampa, and of night- 
fall that appear in Estanislao del Campo’s Fausto are 
somewhat frustrating and inapt, a fault produced at 
the very outset of the story by a single reference to 
stage scenery. In Carriego, the unreality of the out- 
lying slums is more subtle. It derives from the un- 
planned, haphazard nature of the place, of the two- 
way pull of the plains, with their fields or ranches, 
and of streets with storied houses; of the tendency of 
the people who live there to think of themselves as 
men either of the country or of the city but never as 
men of the outer slums. It was out of this ambivalent 
material that Carriego created his work.


V.
Possible Summary
Evaristo Carriego, a boy from an Entre Ríos back- 
ground, brought up on the outskirts of the Northside 
of Buenos Aires, set himself the task of rendering that 
outlying suburb into poetry. In  he published 
Misas herejes, an unpretentious and accessible book 
that contains ten results of that deliberate aim to be 
local and twenty-seven uneven samples of verse 
writing. Some of these have a fine sense of the tragic 
(“Los lobos” [The Wolves]), while others show 
delicate feeling (“Tu secreto” [Your Secret], “En 
silencio” [In Silence]), but most of them are rather 
imperceptible. The poems of local observation are 
the ones that matter. They reflect the notion of 
courage and daring that the run-down edge of the 
city has of itself, and they were rightly enjoyed. 
Examples of that first type are “El alma del subur- 
bio,” “El guapo,” and “En el barrio.” Carriego es- 
tablished himself with these themes, but his need to 
move his readers led him into a maudlin socialist aes- 
thetic whose unwitting reductio ad absurdum would 
much later be taken up by the Boedo group. Exam-


ples of the second type—“Hay que cuidarla mucho, 
hermana, mucho,” “Lo que dicen los vecinos” 
(What the Neighbors Say), and “Mamboretá”—by 
appealing to women for their fame, have completely 
appropriated attention from the others. Later, he 
adopted a narrative style that had the additional ele- 
ment of humor, a quality so essential to a poet of 
Buenos Aires. Examples of this last style—Carriego’s 
best—are “El casamiento,” “El velorio,” and 
“Mientras el barrio duerme” (While the Neighbor- 
hood Sleeps). Also, in the course of time, he wrote a 
handful of personal pieces, such as “Murria” 
(Spleen), “Tu secreto,” and “De sobremesa” (After 
Dinner).
What will Carriego’s future be? There is no crit- 
ical posterity other than a posterity given to making 
definitive judgments, but to me the facts seem 
certain. I believe that some of his poems—perhaps 
“El casamiento,” “Has vuelto,” “El alma del 
suburbio,” “En el barrio”—will appeal to many 
generations of Argentines. I believe that Carriego 
was the first observer of our poorer neighborhoods 
and that this, in the history of Argentine poetry, is 
what matters. The first—in other words, the discov- 
erer, the inventor.
Truly I loved the man, on this side idolatry, as much 
as any.


VI. 
Complementary Pages
To Chapter II
Ten-line stanzas in lunfardo, published by Eva- 
risto Carriego in the police gazette L. C. (Thursday, 
September , ) under the pseudonym “The 
Burglar.”
Compadre: si no le he escrito 
 perdone . . . ¡Estoy reventao!
Ando con un entripao, 
que de continuar palpito 
que he de seguir derechito 
camino de Triunvirato; 
pues ya tengo para rato 
con esta suerte cochina:
Hoy se me espiantó la mina 
¡y si viera con qué gato!
Sí, hermano, como le digo:
¡viera qué gato ranero! 
mishio, roñoso, fulero 
mal lancero y peor amigo.


¡Si se me encoge el ombligo 
de pensar el trinquetazo 
que me han dm! El bacanazo 
no vale ni una escupida 
 y lo que es de ella, en la vida 
me soñé este chivatazo.
Yo los tengo junaos. ¡Viera 
lo que uno sabe de viejo!
No hay como correr parejo 
 para estar bien en carrera.
Lo engrupen con la manquera 
con que tal vez ni serán 
del pelotón, y se van 
en fija, de cualquier modo. 
Cuando uno se abre en el codo 
 ya no hay caso: ¡se la dan!
¡Pero tan luego a mi edá 
que me suceda esta cosa!
Si es p’abrirse la piojosa 
de la bronca que me da.
Porque es triste, a la verdá 
—el decirlo es necesario— 
que con el lindo prontuario 
que con tanto sacrificio 
he lograo en el servicio, 
me hayan agarrao de otario.
Bueno: ¿que ésta es quejumbrona 
 y escrita como sin gana?
Echele la culpa al rana 
que me espiantó la cartona. 
¡Tigrero de la madona, 
veremos cómo se hamaca, 
si es que el cuerpo no me saca


cuando me toque la mía.
Hasta luego.
—Todavía 
tengo que afilar la faca!
[Brother, I’m sorry for not having written. I’m 
burned up. There is an ache in my guts that, if it 
goes on, I guess will send me straight down the road 
to the grave. I’ve been having a run of bad luck for 
quite a while. Today my woman walked out on me, 
and you should see the creep she’s with now.
Yes, friend, as I say, you should see this creep— 
something out of the gutter, a no-good, a dud as a 
lover, and a worse friend. My belly button shrivels 
every time I think of the blow they gave me. A 
dandy like him I wouldn’t spit on, and as for her I 
never dreamed she would cheat on me like this.
I know them inside out. The things you learn with 
age! Nothing like running steady to stay in the race. 
They fool you with the pretense that they won’t 
make the finish line, but still they run to win. When 
they elbow you off the course, it’s all over—you’ve 
had it!
That this should happen to me—at my age! The 
rage this puts me in is enough to split my head. Be- 
cause the sad fact is—and I may as well admit it— 
that after all my hard work building up a lovely po- 
lice record I’ve been had for a stupid fool.
All right, do you think I’m whining here and writing 
this as if I don’t care? Lay the blame on the creep 
who made off with the silly girl. Damn the trouble- 
maker, we’ll see how he swaggers—if he doesn’t 
steer clear of me, that is—when my turn comes. So 
long. I’m off to sharpen my knife!]


TRUCO
To Chapter IV
Forty cards are going to stand in for life. In a 
player’s hands, a new pack makes a crisp sound, 
while an old one sticks clumsily: worthless bits of 
pasteboard that will come alive, the ace of espadas 
that will be as all-powerful as don Juan Manuel de 
Rosas, face cards with little round-bellied horses on 
which Velázquez modeled his. The dealer shuffles 
these little pictures. The whole thing is easy to de- 
scribe and even to do, but the magic and the cut-and- 
thrust of the game—of the playing itself—come out 
in the action. There are forty cards, and one times 
two times three times four and on up to times forty 
are the permutations that can be dealt. It is a figure 
precisely exact in its enormity, and it has an imme- 
diate predecessor and a unique successor, but it is 
never expressed. It is a remote, dizzying number 
that seems to dissolve the players into its hugeness. 
In this way, from the very outset, the game’s central 
mystery is adorned with another mystery: the fact 
that numbers exist. On the table—bare so that the 
cards can easily slide—a little pile of chickpeas waits 
to keep the score, they, too, part of the game’s arith- 
metic. The game begins; the players, turned sud- 
denly into Argentines of old, cast off their everyday 
selves. A different self, an almost ancestral and 
vernacular self, takes over the game. In one fell 
swoop the language changes. Tyrannical prohibi- 
tions, clever possibilities and impossibilities, are 
present in every word. To say “flor,” unless you have 
three cards of the same suit, is a criminal and pun- 
ishable act, but if somebody else has already said


“envido,” your “flor” is allowable. Once you have 
made your call you must stick to it; it is a commit- 
ment that evolves, phrase by phrase, in euphemisms. 
“Quiebro” means “quiero,” “envite” means “envido,” 
an “olorosa” or a “jardinera” mean “flor.” When a 
player has a bad hand he may boom out in the voice 
of a political boss any of these calls: “The game’s on, 
every word counts”: “falta envido” and “truco” or, if 
someone says “flor,” “¡contraflor al resto!” The enthu- 
siasm of the dialogue frequently becomes poetry. 
Truco has formulas to console the loser and verses of 
jubilation for the winner.
Truco is as evocative as an anniversary. Milon- 
gas performed around a campfire or in a saloon, the 
jollification at wakes, the threatening boasts of the 
followers of Roca or Tejedor, escapades in the 
brothels of Junín Street or in their progenitor on 
Temple Street are the human sources of the game. 
Truco is a good singer, especially when winning or 
pretending to be winning; it sings down at the far 
end of a street in the small hours from lighted 
barrooms.
In truco, lying is the custom. Its deception is not 
that of poker—mere impassiveness or unrespon- 
siveness to fluctuation while raising stakes every so 
many cards. The apparatus of truco is a lying voice, 
a face that is judged by its expression and that is on 
the defensive, and tricky and inconsequential 
phrases. Deceit is raised to an exponential power. A 
grumbling player who has thrown his cards down 
on the table could be hiding a good hand (simple 
ploy), or perhaps he is lying by telling the truth so 
that we disbelieve it (ploy squared). Leisurely in its 
pace and full of rambling conversation, the coolness 
of this Argentine game is part of its cunning. It is a


superimposition of masks, and its spirit is that of the 
street peddlers Moishe and Daniel who met in the 
heart of the vast Russian steppe.
“Where are you going, Daniel?” said the one.
“To Sebastopol,” said the other.
At that, Moishe stared at him and said firmly, 
“You are lying, Daniel. You say you’re going to 
Sebastopol to make me think you’re going to Nizhni 
Novgorod, when all along you really are going to 
Sebastopol. You’re a liar, Daniel!”
And now a word about the players. They seem 
to be lost in the clamor of Argentine conversation, 
trying to scare life off with raised voices. Forty 
cards—amulets of colored pasteboard, cheap my- 
thology, charms—are enough for the player to 
conjure away daily life. They try to forget the busy 
world. The pressing social reality in which we all find 
ourselves touches on the card game but goes no fur- 
ther; the bounds of its table is another country. Its 
inhabitants are the “envido” and the “quiero,” the 
“flor” across the table and the unexpectedness of its 
gift, the avid series of hands of each game, the seven 
of oros tinkling out hope, and the rest of the passion- 
ate lower cards of the pack. Truco players live this lit- 
tle world of hallucination. They keep it going with 
laconic native sayings, tending it like a fire. It is a 
narrow world, I am well aware—a phantom of local 
politics and cunning; a world, after all, invented by 
stockyard sorcerers and neighborhood necroman- 
cers—but not for that any less a substitute for the 
real world, which is less inventive and diabolical in 
its ambitions.
To write about a subject as local as that of truco 
and neither to stray from it nor to delve more deeply 
into it—the two may amount to the same thing, such


is their similarity—strikes me as a serious act of fri- 
volity. At this point I would like to get in a reflection 
on the limitations of truco. The various stages of its 
aggressive discourse, its sudden turning points, its 
flashes of intuition, and its intrigue cannot help but 
repeat themselves. They must, in the course of time, 
repeat themselves. For a regular player, what is 
truco but a habit? Just look at the repetitiveness of 
the game, at its fondness for set formulas. Every 
player, in truth, does no more than fall back into old 
games. His game is a repetition of past games—in 
other words, of moments of past lives. Generations 
of Argentines no longer here are, as it were, buried 
alive in the game. They—and this is no metaphor— 
are the game. Following this thought through, it 
transpires that time is an illusion. And so, from 
truco’s labyrinths of colored pasteboard, we ap- 
proach metaphysics, which is the sole justification 
and object of any study.


VII.
Inscriptions on Wagons
Imagine a horse-drawn wagon. Imagine a big wagon 
whose rear wheels, suggestive of reserve power, are 
taller than its front wheels and whose native-born 
teamster is as hefty as the wood-and-iron creation 
on which he rides, his lips pursed in absentminded 
whistling or, with paradoxically gentle commands, 
calling out to his team—a shaft pair and a trace horse 
out front (a jutting prow for those who need the 
comparison). Loaded or unloaded is all one, except 
that the pace of the wagon, returning empty, seems 
less tied to work and the driver’s seat more throne- 
like, as if the wagon still had about it something of 
the military character of chariots in the marauding 
empire of Attila. The street the wagon moves 
through may be Montes de Oca or Chile or Patricios 
or Rivera or Valentín Gómez, but Las Heras is best 
because of the variety of its traffic. There the 
plodding wagon is continually overtaken, but this 
very lagging becomes its triumph, as if the speed of 
other vehicles were the anxious scurrying of the 
slave, whereas the wagon’s slowness is a complete


possession of time, if not eternity. (Time is the native 
Argentine’s infinite, and only, capital. We can raise 
slowness to the level of immobility, the possession of 
space.) The wagon wends its way, a motto inscribed 
on its side. The authenticity of the city’s run-down 
outskirts demands this, and although these gratui- 
tous bits of expressiveness superimposed on the out- 
ward manifestations of physical force—dimension, 
capacity, actuality—confirm the charge of garru- 
lousness leveled at us by European lecturers, I can- 
not brush it aside, since it is the gist of this essay. The 
collection of this stable yard epigraphy, which I have 
been engaged in for some time, stems from long 
rambles and idleness that are more poetic than the 
actual inscriptions, which in these Italianized days 
are becoming few and far between. I do not mean to 
dump my whole hoard of penny pieces out on the 
table but to show just a few. My theme, obviously, is 
language. We know that those who codified this dis- 
cipline incorporated into it all the uses of words, 
even the lowliest and most ridiculous riddle, pun, 
acrostic, anagram, labyrinth, cubic labyrinth, or 
emblematic design. If this last, a symbolic figure and 
not a word, is acceptable, I maintain that the 
inclusion of legends from wagons cannot be faulted. 
They are a New World variant of the heraldic motto, 
the genre born of coats of arms. Besides, the inscrip- 
tions on wagons should take their place among other 
works of literature so that the reader will not be dis- 
appointed or expect to find wonders in my roundup. 
How can I lay claim to wonders here when they can- 
not be found even in the carefully planned antholo- 
gies of Menéndez y Pelayo or Palgrave?
A mistake easily made is that of taking as a gen- 
uine motto the name of the firm the wagon belongs


to. “Pride of the Bollini Estate,” an uninspired 
name in perfect bad taste, may be an example of this. 
“Mother of the Northside,” a wagon from out in 
Saavedra, certainly is. A charming name this latter, 
and it has two possible interpretations. The first, 
which is unlikely, sees no metaphor and imagines the 
wagon on its creative way, giving birth to a North- 
side that burgeons with houses, saloons, and hard- 
ware stores. The second, which the reader will have 
guessed, is that of nurturing. But names like this be- 
long to another and less homely literary genre—the 
one beloved of business establishments. This genre 
abounds in masterpieces of compression such as 
“The Colossus of Rhodes,” a tailor shop out in Villa 
Urquiza, or “The Dormitological,” a bedstead fac- 
tory in Belgrano. This category, however, is outside 
my sphere.
The genuine wagon inscription is not all that 
different. By tradition, it makes some simple state- 
ment—“The Flower of the Plaza Vértiz,” “The 
Victor”—rather as if it were tired of showing off. 
Others like this are “The Fish Hook,” “The Suit- 
case,” “The Big Stick.” The last is beginning to 
grow on me, but it pales when I remember another 
motto, also from Saavedra, that tells of extensive 
journeys like sea voyages, of practical experience 
among the byways of the pampa and soaring dust 
storms— “The Schooner.”
A distinct species of the genre is the inscription 
on the smaller wagons of door-to-door peddlers. The 
haggling and the daily chatter of women have 
diverted them from a preoccupation with feats of 
courage, and their gaudy signs tend toward obse- 
quious boasting or flirtation. “Easy Going,” “Long 
Live the One Who Looks After Me,” “The South-


side Basque,” “The Busy Bee,” “Tomorrow’s Little 
Milkman,” “The Good Looker,” “See You in the 
Morning,” “The Talcahuano Champ,” and “The 
Sun Shines for Everyone” are more or less good- 
humored examples. “What Your Eyes Have Done 
to Me” and “Where There’s Ash There Once Was 
Fire” show a more individualized passion. “He 
Who Envies Me Will Die of Despair” is bound to be 
of Spanish introduction. “Not in Any Hurry” is 
pure Argentine. The peevishness or the brusqueness 
of a short phrase is often mitigated not only by a light 
touch in the wording but by the addition of phrases. I 
have seen a greengrocer’s wagon which, as well as 
having the presumptuous name “The Neighbor- 
hood Favorite,” proclaimed in a smug couplet:
Yo lo digo y lo sostengo 
Que a nadie envidia le tengo.
[I say this loud and say it bold—I envy no one in the 
world.]

and annotated the picture of a couple locked together 
in a suggestive tango with the unambiguous caption 
“Straight to the Point.” Such pithy verbosity, such 
sententious frenzy, reminds me of the style of the fa- 
mous Danish statesman Polonius or of that real-life 
Polonius, the seventeenth-century Spanish writer 
Baltasar Gracián.
Let me go back to typical inscriptions. “The 
New Moon of Morón” is the motto on a high-sided 
wagon that has iron railings like a ship’s; I happened 
to observe it one damp night in the middle of the 
Buenos Aires Wholesale Market, with its twelve 
hooves and four wheels lording it over a lavish fer-

mentation of odors. “Lonesomeness” is the name 
of a wagon that I once saw in the south of the prov- 
ince of Buenos Aires and that speaks of remote 
stretches. The idea, again, is that of “The Schoo- 
ner” but more obvious. “What’s It to the Old 
Woman That Her Daughter Loves Me” is impos- 
sible to leave out, less for its nonexistent wit than for 
its pure barnyard touch. The same may be said of 
“Your Kisses Were for Me,” a line from a waltz, 
which, by being inscribed on a wagon, takes on a 
note of insolence. “What Are You Staring At, Mr. 
Green Eyes?” has something of the womanizer and 
the conceited about it. “I’m Proud,” lent dignity by 
the sun and the driver’s high seat, is far better than 
even the most effusive recrimination from a Boedo 
street corner. “Here Comes Spider” is a splendid 
announcement. “Pa la rubia, cuándo” (Blondes— 
When [Never]) is even more splendid, not only for 
its colloquial clipped ending in the first word and its 
unstated preference for brunettes but also for its 
ironic use of the adverb cuándo (when), which here 
stands for nunca (never). (I first came across this 
rejected “when” in a smutty milonga,* which I re- 
gret not being able to print under my breath or to 
tone down decently in Latin. Instead, let me give an 
example of a similar instance, from Mexico, recorded 
in Rubén Campos’ book El folklore y la música 
mexicana: “They will take from me, they say/the 
paths I roam along;/the paths may be taken away/ 
but my cherished haunts, cuándo.” “Cuándo, mi vida” 
[My Life—Never], was also the usual verbal sally of 
those who played at fencing when they parried the 
burned point of a stick or an opponent’s knife.) 
“The Branch Is in Blossom” is a message of un- 
clouded tranquillity and magic. “Not Much,” “You


Should Have Told Me,” and “Who Can Have 
Told” cannot be improved upon. They suggest 
drama, they are the stuff of daily life, they reflect 
fluctuations of emotion, and like life they are always 
there. Written down, they are gestures captured 
forever, a ceaseless affirmation. Their allusiveness is 
that of the slum dweller who cannot tell a story plain- 
ly or logically but delights in meaningful gaps, in 
generalizations, and in sidesteps that are as sinuous 
as a fancy tango figure. But the crowning glory, the 
dusky flower of this survey, is the mystifying inscrip- 
tion “The Doomed Man Does Not Weep,” which 
kept Xul-Solar and me disgracefully perplexed, al- 
though we were accustomed to penetrating the 
delicate secrets of Robert Browning, the airy in- 
tricacies of Mallarmé, and the merely heavy-handed 
ones of Góngora. “The Doomed Man Does Not 
Weep.” I offer the reader this dark carnation.
There is no basic literary atheism. I once be- 
lieved I disbelieved in literature, and now I have let 
myself be led astray by the temptation to collect 
these fragments of literature. I am justified for two 
reasons. One is the democratic superstition which 
takes it for granted that there is merit in any anony- 
mous work, as if all of us together knew what no one 
of us knows, as if the intellect were self-conscious and 
performed better unobserved. The other is the facil- 
ity of judging something short. We are loath to admit 
that our opinion of a line may not be final. Our faith 
is placed in lines rather than in chapters. Inevitable 
at this point is mention of Erasmus, that skeptic and 
seeker after axioms.
In due course these pages will begin to seem 
learned. I can provide no other reference to books


than a chance paragraph of a predecessor of mine in 
this regard. The lines belong to those lifeless drafts of 
classical verse now known as free. This is how I re- 
member them:
Los carros de costado sentencioso 
 franqueaban tu mañana 
 y eran en las esquinas tiernos los almacenes 
como esperando un ángel.
[Wagons with inscriptions on their sides confirmed 
the arrival of morning, and on the corners the 
saloons looked tender, as if awaiting an angel’s ap- 
pearance.]
I prefer those flowers of the stable yard, the in- 
scriptions on wagons.


VIII.
Stories of Horsemen
They are many and they may be countless. My first 
story is quite modest; those that follow will lend it 
greater depth.
A rancher from Uruguay had bought a country 
establishment (I am sure this is the word he used) 
in the province of Buenos Aires. From Paso de los 
Toros, in the middle of Uruguay, he brought a 
horsebreaker, a man who had his complete trust but 
was extremely shy. The rancher put the man up in 
an inn near the Once markets. Three days later, on 
going to see him, the rancher found his horseman 
brewing maté in his room on the upper floor. When 
asked what he thought of Buenos Aires, the man 
admitted that he had not once stuck his head out in 
the street.
The second story is not much different. In  
Aparicio Saravia staged an uprising in the Uru- 
guayan provinces; at a certain point of the cam- 
paign, it was feared that his men might break into 
Montevideo. My father, who happened to be there at 
the time, went to ask advice of a relative of his, the


historian Luis Melián Lafinur, only to be told that 
there was no danger “because the gaucho stands in 
fear of cities.” In fact, Saravia’s troops did change 
their route, and somewhat to his amazement my fa- 
ther found out that the study of history could be use- 
ful as well as pleasurable.
My third story also belongs to the oral tradition 
of my family. Toward the end of  forces of the 
Entre Ríos caudillo López Jordán, commanded by a 
gaucho who was called (because he had a bullet em- 
bedded in him) “El Chumbiao,” surrounded the 
city of Paraná. One night, catching the garrison off 
guard, the rebels broke through the defenses and 
rode right around the central square, whooping like 
Indians and hurling insults. Then, still shouting and 
whistling, they galloped off. To them war was not a 
systematic plan of action but a manly sport.
The fourth of these stories, and my last, comes 
from the pages of an excellent book, “L’Empire des 
Steppes (), by the Orientalist René Grousset. Two 
passages from the second chapter are particularly 
relevant. Here is the first:
Genghis Khan’s war against the Chin, begun in , 
was to last—with brief periods of truce—until his 
death (), only to be finished by his successor 
(). With their mobile cavalry, the Mongols could 
devastate the countryside and open settlements, 
but for a long time they knew nothing of the art of 
taking towns fortified by Chinese engineers. Be-
. Burton writes that the Bedouins, in Arab cities, cover their nostrils 
with a handkerchief or stop them up with cotton wool; Ammianus, 
that the Huns avoided houses as people ordinarily avoid graves. So, 
too, with the Saxons, who invaded England and for a century dared 
not dwell in the Roman cities they conquered. They let them fall to 
ruin and composed elegies lamenting those ruins.


sides, they fought in China as on the steppe, in a ser- 
ies of raids, after which they withdrew with their 
booty, leaving the Chinese behind them to reoccupy 
their towns, rebuild the ruins, repair the breaches in 
the walls, and reconstruct the fortifications, so that 
in the course of that war the Mongol generals found 
themselves obliged to reconquer the same places two 
or three times.
Here is the second passage:
The Mongols took Peking, massacred the whole 
population, looted the houses, and then set fire to 
them. The devastation lasted a month. Clearly, the 
nomads had no idea what to do with a great city or 
how to use it for the consolidation and expansion of 
their power. We have here a highly interesting case 
for specialists in human geography: the predicament 
of the peoples of the steppe when, without a period 
of transition, chance hands them old countries with 
an urban civilization. They burn and kill not out of 
sadism but because they find themselves out of their 
element find simply know no better.
I now give a story that till the authorities agree 
upon. During Genghis Khan’s last campaign, one of 
his generals remarked that his new Chinese subjects 
were of no use to him, since they were inept in war, 
and that, consequently, the wisest course was to ex- 
terminate them all, raze the cities, and turn the al- 
most boundless Middle Kingdom into one enormous 
pasture for the Mongol horses. In this way, at least, 
use could be made of the land, since nothing else was 
of any value. The Khan was about to follow this 
counsel when another adviser pointed out to him 
that it would be more advantageous to levy taxes on


the land and on goods. Civilization was saved, the 
Mongols grew old in the cities that they had once 
longed to destroy, and doubtless they ended up, in 
symmetrical gardens, appreciating the despised and 
peaceable arts of prosody and pottery.
Distant in time and space, the stories I have as- 
sembled are really one. The protagonist is eternal, 
and the wary ranch hand who spends three days be- 
hind a door that looks out into a backyard—although 
he has come down in life—is the same one who with 
two bows, a lasso made of horsehair, and a scimitar 
was poised to raze and obliterate the world’s most 
ancient kingdom under the hooves of his steppe 
pony. There is a pleasure in detecting beneath the 
masks of time the eternal species of horseman and 
city. This pleasure, in the case of these stories, may 
leave the Argentine with a melancholy aftertaste, 
since (through Hernández’s gaucho Martín Fierro 
or through the weight of our past) we identify with 
the horseman, who in the end is the loser. The 
centaurs defeated by the Lapiths; the death of the 
shepherd Abel at the hand of Cain, who was a 
farmer; the defeat of Napoleon’s cavalry by British 
infantry at Waterloo are all emblems and portents of 
such a destiny.
The horseman vanishing into the distance with 
a hint of defeat is, in our literature, the gaucho. And 
so we read in Martín Fierro:
Cruz y Fierro de una estancia
una tropilla se arriaron;
. It is well known that the gauchesco poets Hildalgo, Ascasubi, Estanis- 
lao del Campo, and Lussich abounded in humorous anecdotes about 
the horseman’s dialogue with the city.


 por delante se la echaron 
como criollos entendidos, 
 y pronto, sin ser sentidos, 
 por la frontera cruzaron.
Y cuando la habían pasao, 
una madrugada clara,
le dijo Cruz que mirara 
las últimas poblaciones; 
 y a Fierro dos lagrimones 
le rodaron por la cara.
Y siguiendo el fiel del rumbo 
se entraron en el desierto . . .
[From a ranch, Cruz and Fierro rounded up a herd 
of horses and, being practical gauchos, drove it be- 
fore them. Undetected, they soon crossed over the 
border.
After this was done, early one morning Cruz told 
Fierro to look back on the last settlements. Two big 
tears rolled down Fierro’s face.
Then, continuing on their course, the men set off 
into the wilderness . . .]
And in Lugones’ El Payador:
In the fading twilight, turning brown as a dove’s 
wing, we may have seen him vanish beyond the fa- 
miliar hillocks, trotting on his horse, slowly, so that 
no one would think him afraid, under his gloomy 
hat and the poncho that hung from his shoulders in 
the limp folds of a flag at half mast.


And in Don Segundo Sombra:
Still smaller now, my godfather’s silhouette ap- 
peared on the slope. My eyes concentrated on that 
tiny movement on the sleepy plain. He was about to 
reach the crest of the trail and vanish. He grew less 
and less, as if he were being whittled away from 
below. My gaze clung to the black speck of his hat, 
trying to preserve that last trace of him.
In the texts just quoted, space stands for time 
and history.
The figure of the man on the horse is, secretly, 
poignant. Under Attila, the “Scourge of God,” 
under Genghis Khan, and under Tamerlane the 
horseman tempestuously destroys and founds ex- 
tensive empires, but all he destroys and founds is 
illusory. His work, like him, is ephemeral. From the 
farmer comes the word “culture” and from cities the 
word “civilization,” but the horseman is a storm 
that fades away. In his book Die Germanen der Volker- 
wanderung (Stuttgart, ), Capelle remarks apro- 
pos of this that the Greeks, the Romans, and the 
Germans were agricultural peoples.


IX. 
The Dagger
To Margarita Bunge
A dagger rests in a drawer.
It was forged in Toledo at the end of the last cen- 
tury. Luis Melián Lafinur gave it to my father, who 
brought it from Uruguay. Evaristo Carriego once 
held it in his hand.
Whoever lays eyes on it has to pick up the dag- 
ger and toy with it, as if he had always been on the 
lookout for it. The hand is quick to grip the waiting 
hilt, and the powerful obeying blade slides in and out 
of the sheath with a click.
This is not what the dagger wants.
It is more than a structure of metal; men con- 
ceived it and shaped it with a single end in mind. It 
is, in some eternal way, the dagger that last night 
knifed a man in Tacuarembó and the daggers that 
rained on Caesar. It wants to kill, it wants to shed 
sudden blood.
In a drawer of my writing table, among draft 
pages and old letters, the dagger dreams over and 
over its simple tiger’s dream. On wielding it the


hand comes alive because the metal comes alive, 
sensing itself, each time handled, in touch with the 
killer for whom it was forged.
At times I am sorry for it. Such power and sin- 
gle-mindedness, so impassive or innocent its pride, 
and the years slip by, unheeding.


X.
Foreword of an Edition 
to the Complete Poems 
of Evaristo Carriego
Nowadays we all see Evaristo Carriego in relation to 
the ragged outskirts of Buenos Aires, and we tend to 
forget that Carriego (like his neighborhood tough, 
his back-street seamstress, and his Italian immi- 
grant) is a character out of Carriego, just as the Pa- 
lermo in which we imagine him is a projection and 
almost an illusion of his work. Oscar Wilde held that 
 Japan—that the images evoked by the word “Ja- 
pan”—was the invention of Hokusai. In the case of 
Evaristo Carriego, may we not suggest a reciprocal 
process: the shabby suburb of Palermo creates Carr- 
iego and is re-created by him. The actual Palermo, 
the Palermo of Trejo’s stage productions, and the 
milonga all influenced Carriego; Carriego puts over 
his view of Palermo; this view alters reality. (Later, 
reality will be altered still more by the tango and by 
popular theatrical pieces.)
How did it come to pass, how did that poor boy 
Carriego become what now he will be for all time? 
Carriego himself, if asked, perhaps could not tell 
us. With nothing more to recommend it than my in-


ability to imagine things differently, I offer this ex- 
planation:
One day in , in a house that still stands on 
Honduras Street, Evaristo Carriego regretfully and 
eagerly read the adventures of Charles de Baatz, lord 
of Artagnan. Eagerly, because Dumas offered Carr- 
iego what others are offered by Shakespeare or Bal- 
zac or Walt Whitman—a taste of the fullness of life. 
Regretfully, because Carriego was young, proud, 
shy, and poor, and he believed himself remote from 
life. Life was in France, he thought, in the sharp 
clash of steel or when Napoleon’s armies were 
inundating the earth, but my lot has fallen to the 
twentieth century—the too late twentieth cen- 
tury—and a shabby South American suburb. Carr- 
iego was in the midst of this brooding reflection 
when something happened. The laborious tuning of 
a guitar, the uneven row of low houses seen from his 
window, Juan Muraña touching the brim of his hat 
in reply to a greeting (the same Muraña who two 
nights earlier had slashed the face of Suárez the 
Chilean), the moon from the square of a patio, an 
old man with a fighting cock—something, anything. 
Something we cannot pinpoint, something whose 
meaning we know but not its shape, something com- 
monplace and hitherto unnoticed which revealed to 
Carriego that life (which offers itself wholly at 
every moment, anywhere, and not just in the works 
of Dumas) was there as well, in the despised present, 
in Palermo, in the year . “Come in,” said Her- 
aclitus to those who found him warming himself in 
the kitchen, “the gods are here as well.”
I have always suspected that any life, no matter 
how full or complex it may be, is made up essentially 
of a single moment—the moment in which a man


finds out, once and for all, who he is. From the in- 
stant of that indeterminable revelation which I have 
tried to intuit, Carriego becomes Carriego. He is al- 
ready the author of those verses which years later it 
will be allowed him to compose:
Le cruzan el rostro, de estigmas violentos, 
hondas cicatrices, y quizás le halaga 
llevar imborrables adornos sangrientos: 
caprichos de hembra que tuvo la daga.
[Deep scars, violent stigmas, mark his face, and per- 
haps he is proud to wear ineradicable gory adorn- 
ments: a knife’s womanly capriciousness.]
In the last line, almost miraculously, is an echo 
of the medieval conceit of the marriage of the warrior 
with his weapon, of that conceit which Detlev von 
Liliencron captured in other famous lines:
In die Friesen trug er sein Schwert Hilfnot, 
das hat ihn heute betrogen . . .
[He bore among the Frisians his sword Helpmeet, 
which today betrayed him . . .]
Buenos Aires 
November 


XI. 
A History of the Tango
Vicente Rossi, Carlos Vega, and Carlos Muzzio 
Sáenz Peña, painstaking researchers all, have each 
given a different version of the origins of the tango. I 
can state straightaway that I subscribe to every one 
of their conclusions—or, for that matter, to any 
other. From time to time films present us with their 
story of the development of the tango. According to 
this sentimental version, the tango seems to have 
been born on the outskirts of Buenos Aires, in tene- 
ments (in the Boca del Riachuelo, generally, by vir- 
tue of the photogenic qualities of that part of town). 
At the outset, the upper classes appear to have looked 
askance at the tango, but around , under the 
tutelage of Paris, these same people seem finally to 
have thrown open their doors to this interesting pro- 
duct of the slums. This Bildungsroman, this tale of rags 
to riches, is by now a sort of incontestable or ax- 
iomatic truth. My memories (and I am over fifty) 
and the research into oral tradition that I have un- 
dertaken by no means confirm this.
I have spoken to José Saborido, who wrote the


tangos “Felicia” and “La morocha,” to Ernesto 
Poncio, who wrote “Don Juan,” to the brothers of 
Vicente Greco, who wrote “La viruta” and “La 
tablada,” to Nicolás Paredes, the one-time political 
boss of Palermo, and to a few gaucho ballad singers 
of his acquaintance. Letting them speak, I carefully 
refrained from asking questions that led to expected 
answers. To my queries about the origin of the 
tango, I was given answers that differed widely as to 
locality and even country. Saborido, who was from 
Uruguay, favored Montevideo as the birthplace; 
Poncio, who was from Buenos Aires, opted for the 
Retiro, his own neighborhood; people from the 
Southside of Buenos Aires named Chile Street; peo- 
ple from the Northside, unsavory Temple Street or 
 Junín Street.
Despite the differences I have listed, and which it 
would be easy to enrich by questioning people from 
other Argentine cities such as La Plata or Rosario, 
my informants agreed about one essential fact: that 
the tango originated in brothels. (The same was true 
of the date of that origin: none of them put it earlier 
than  or later than .) This testimony is 
confirmed by the cost of the instruments that tangos 
were first played on—the piano, flute, violin, and 
only later the concertina. It is proof that the tango 
did not arise in the city’s shabby outskirts, where— 
as everyone knows—the six strings of a guitar had 
always been sufficient. There is no lack of further 
confirmation: the lasciviousness of the dance steps; 
the sexual connotations of certain titles (“El choclo” 
[The Corn Cob], “El fierrazo” [The Big Rod]); the 
fact, which as a boy I myself observed in Palermo 
and years later in Chacarita and Boedo, that it was 
danced on street corners by male couples, because


decent women would have no part of such a wanton 
dance. Evaristo Carriego described this in his Misas 
herejes:
En la calle, la buena gente derrocha 
sus guarangos decires más lisonjeros, 
porque al compás de un tango, que es “La 
Morocha,” 
lucen ágiles cortes dos orilleros.
[People in the street are lavish with vulgar approval, 
for to the rhythm of the tango “La morocha” two 
men from the outer slums are showing off suggestive 
dance steps.]
On another page, with a mass of poignant de- 
tail, Carriego describes a humble wedding celebra- 
tion. The groom’s brother is in jail; two young men 
are spoiling for a fight and the neighborhood tough 
has to use threats to keep the peace; there is suspi- 
cion, ill feeling, and horseplay, but
El tío de la novia, que se ha creído 
obligado a fijarse si el baile toma 
buen carácter, afirma, medio ofendido, 
que no se admiten cortes, ni aun en broma.
—Que, la modestia a un lado, no se la pega 
ninguno de esos vivos . . . seguramente.
La casa será pobre, nadie lo niega: 
todo lo que se quiera, pero decente.—
[The bride’s uncle, who has taken it upon himself to 
see that the dancing stays proper, states, somewhat 
shocked, that suggestive steps are not allowed—even 
in fun.


“For, modesty apart, not that any of these louts 
would know what I’m talking about, this house may 
be poor—there’s no denying that—poor as any- 
thing, but respectable.”]
This glimpse of the uncle’s momentary strict- 
ness, which the two stanzas capture, is typical of peo- 
ple’s first reaction to the tango—“that reptile from 
the brothel,” as Lugones was to define it with laconic 
contempt (El Payador, page ). It took a number of 
years for the Northside to introduce the tango—by 
then made respectable by Paris, of course—into its 
tenements, and I am not sure whether the introduc- 
tion has been a complete success. What was once or- 
giastic devilry is now just another way of walking.
VIOLENCE AND THE TANGO
The tango’s sexual nature has often been noted, but 
not so its violent side. Both, it is true, are modes or 
manifestations of the same impulse. In all the lan- 
guages I know the word “manly” connotes sexual 
potentiality and a potential to bellicosity, and the 
word virtus, Latin for “courage,” stems from vir, 
meaning “man.” In the same way, an Afghan in 
the novel Kim can state—as if the two acts were es- 
sentially one—“When I was fifteen, I had shot my 
man and begot my man.”
Merely to connect the tango with violence is not 
strong enough. I maintain that the tango and the 
milonga are a direct expression of something that 
poets have often tried to state in words: the belief that 
a fight may be a celebration. In Jordanes’ sixth-cen- 
tury History of the Goths, we read that Attila, before


his defeat at Chalons, addressed his armies, telling 
them that fortune had reserved for them “the joys of 
this battle” (certaminis hujus gaudía). The Iliad tells of 
the Achaeans, to whom war was sweeter than re- 
turning home in empty ships to their dearly loved 
native land, and relates how Paris, the son of Priam, 
ran swiftly to battle like a stallion that tosses its flow- 
ing mane in pursuit of mares. In the Old English 
epic Beowulf, the poet calls the battle a “sweorda 
gelac,” or “game of swords.” Scandinavian skalds of 
the eleventh century called it “the festivity of Vi- 
kings.” In the early part of the seventeenth century, 
Quevedo, in one of his jácaras, called a duel “a 
dance of swords,” which is very near the anonymous 
Anglo-Saxon’s “game of swords.” In his evocation 
of the battle of Waterloo, Victor Hugo said that the 
soldiers, realizing that they were going to die in that 
festivity (“Comprenant qu’ils allaient mourir dans cette 
fete”), stood erect amid the storm and hailed their 
god, the Emperor.
These examples, collected in the course of my 
random reading, could easily be multiplied. In the 
Chanson de Roland, perhaps, or in Ariosto’s vast poem 
similar passages could be found. Some of those 
recorded here—the one by Quevedo or the one 
about Attila, let us say—are undeniably effective. All 
of them, however, suffer from the original sin of liter- 
ariness: they are structures of words, constructs 
made up of symbols. “Dance of swords,” for exam- 
ple, invites us to link two dissimilar things—the 
dance and combat—in order that the former infuse 
the latter with joy. But “dance of swords” does not 
speak directly to our blood; it does not re-create this 
joy in us. Schopenhauer (Die Welt als Wille und Vor- 
stellung, I, ) has written that music is altogether


independent of the real world. Without the world, 
without a common stock of memories that can be 
evoked by language, there would certainly be no lit- 
erature, but music stands in no need of the world; 
music could still exist even if there were no world at 
all. Music is will and passion; the old tango, as mu- 
sic, immediately transmits this joy of battle that 
Greek and Germanic poets tried long ago to express 
in words. A few present-day composers strive for this 
heroic tone and sometimes achieve it in milongas 
about the Batería or the Barrio del Alto, but their 
labors—their deliberately old-fashioned lyrics and 
music—are exercises in nostalgia for what once was, 
laments for what will never be again. Even when 
their melody is gay, these milongas remain basically 
sad. They are to the lusty, innocent ones recorded in 
Rossi’s book what Don Segundo Sombra is to Martín 
Fierro or to Paulino Lucero.
We read in one of Oscar Wilde’s conversations 
that music reveals to each of us a personal past which 
until then we were unaware of, moving us to lament 
misfortunes we never suffered and to feel guilt for 
acts we never committed. For myself, I confess that I 
cannot hear “El Marne” or “Don Juan” without 
remembering exactly an apocryphal past, at one and 
the same time stoic and orgiastic, in which I have 
thrown down the challenge and, in silence, met my 
end in an obscure knife fight. Perhaps this is the 
tango’s mission: to give Argentines the conviction of 
having had a brave past, of having fulfilled the 
demands of bravery and honor.


THE CULT OF COURAGE
All over the Argentine runs a story that may belong 
to legend or to history or (which may be just another 
way of saying it belongs to legend) to both things at 
once, and that illustrates the cult of courage. Its best 
recorded versions are to be found in the unjustly for- 
gotten novels about outlaws and desperadoes writ- 
ten in the last century by Eduardo Gutiérrez; among 
its oral versions, the first one I heard came from a 
neighborhood of Buenos Aires bounded by a peni- 
tentiary, a river, and a cemetery, and nicknamed 
Tierra del Fuego. The hero of this version was Juan 
Muraña, a wagon driver and knife fighter to whom 
are attributed all the stories of daring that still sur- 
vive in what were once the outskirts of the city’s 
Northside. That first version was quite simple. A 
man from the Stockyards or from Barracas, knowing 
about Muraña’s reputation (but never having laid 
eyes on him), sets out all the way across town from 
the Southside to take him on. He picks the fight in a 
corner saloon, and the two move into the street to 
have it out. Each is wounded, but in the end Muraña 
slashes the other man’s face and tells him, “I’m let- 
ting you live so you’ll come back looking for me 
again.”
What impressed itself in my mind about the 
duel was that it had no ulterior motive. In conver- 
sation thereafter (my friends know this only too 
well), I grew fond of retelling the anecdote. Around 
 I wrote it down, giving it the deliberately laconic 
title “Men Fought.” Years later, this same anecdote 
helped me work out a lucky story—though hardly a 
good one—called “Streetcorner Man.” Then, in 
, Adolfo Bioy-Casares and I made use of it again


to plot a film script that the producers turned down 
and that would have been called On the Outer Edge. It 
was about hard-bitten men like Muraña who lived 
on the outskirts of Buenos Aires before the turn of 
the century. I thought, after such extensive labors, 
that I had said farewell to the story of the disinter- 
ested duel. Then, this year, out in Chivilcoy, I came 
across a far better version. I hope this is the true one, 
although since fate seems to take pleasure in a 
thing’s happening many times over, both may very 
well be authentic. Two quite bad stories and a script 
that I still think of as good came out of the poorer 
first version; out of the second, which is complete 
and perfect, nothing can come. Without working in 
metaphors or details of local color, I shall tell it now 
as it was told to me. The story took place to the west, 
in the district of Chivilcoy, sometime back in the 
s.
The hero’s name is Wenceslao Suárez. He 
earns his wages braiding ropes and making harnes- 
ses, and lives in a small adobe hut. Forty or fifty 
years old, he’s a man who has won a reputation for 
courage, and it is quite likely (given the facts of the 
story) that he has a killing or two to his credit. But 
these killings, because they were in fair fights, neither 
trouble his conscience nor tarnish his good name. 
One evening, something out of the ordinary happens 
in the routine life of this man: at a crossroads sa- 
loon, he is told that a letter has come for him. Don 
Wenceslao does not know how to read; the saloon 
keeper puzzles out word by word an epistle cer- 
tainly not written by the man who sent it. In the 
name of certain friends, who value dexterity and true 
composure, an unknown correspondent sends his 
compliments to don Wenceslao, whose renown has


crossed over the Arroyo del Medio into the Province 
of Santa Fe, and extends him the hospitality of his 
humble home in a town of the said province. 
Wenceslao Suárez dictates a reply to the saloon 
keeper. Thanking the other man for his expression of 
friendship, and explaining that he dare not leave his 
mother—who is well along in years—alone, he in- 
vites the other man to his own place in Chivilcoy, 
where a barbecue and a bottle or so of wine may be 
looked forward to. The months drag by, and one day 
a man riding a horse harnessed and saddled in a style 
unknown in the area inquires at the saloon for the 
way to Suárez’s house. Suárez, who has come to the 
saloon to buy meat, overhears the question and tells 
the man who he is. The stranger reminds him of the 
letters they exchanged some time back. Suárez shows 
his pleasure that the other man has gone to the trou- 
ble of making the journey; then the two of them go 
off into a nearby field and Suárez prepares the 
barbecue. They eat and drink and talk at length. 
About what? I suspect about subjects involving blood 
and cruelty—but with each man on his guard, wary.
They have eaten, and the oppressive afternoon 
heat weighs over the land when the stranger invites 
don Wenceslao to join in a bit of harmless knife play. 
To say no would dishonor the host. They fence, and 
at first they only play at fighting, but it’s not long be- 
fore Wenceslao feels that the stranger is out to kill 
him. Realizing at last what lay behind the ceremo- 
nious letter, Wenceslao regrets having eaten and 
drunk so much. He knows he will tire before the 
other man, on whom he has a good nine or ten years. 
Out of scorn or politeness, the stranger offers him a 
short rest. Don Wenceslao agrees and, as soon as 
they take up their dueling again, he allows the other


man to wound him on the left hand, in which he 
holds his rolled poncho. The knife slices through his 
wrist, the hand dangles loose. Suárez, springing 
back, lays the bleeding hand on the ground, clamps 
it down under his boot, tears it off, feints a thrust at 
the amazed stranger’s chest, then rips open his belly 
with a solid stab. So the story ends, except that, ac- 
cording to one teller, the man from Santa Fe is left 
lifeless, while to another (who withholds from him 
the dignity of death) he rides back to his own prov- 
ince. In this latter version, Suárez gives him first aid 
with the rum remaining from their lunch.
In this feat of Manco (One Hand) Wenceslao— 
as Suárez is now known to fame—certain touches of 
mildness or politeness (his trade as harness and rope 
maker, his qualms about leaving his mother alone, 
the exchange of flowery letters, the two men’s lei- 
surely conversation, the lunch) happily tone down 
and make the barbarous tale more effective. These 
touches lend it an epic and even chivalrous quality 
that we hardly find, for example—unless we have 
made up our minds to do so—in the drunken brawls 
of Martín Fierro or in the closely related but poorer 
story of Juan Muraña and the man from the South- 
side. A trait common to the two may, perhaps, be 
significant. In both of them, the challenger is de-
. Montaigne (Essays, I, ) says that this manner of fighting with cloak 
and dagger is very old, and quotes Caesar’s finding, “Sinistras sagis 
involvunt, gladiosque distringunt”—“They wrapped their cloaks around 
their left arms and drew their swords” (Civil War, I, ). Lugones, in 
El Payador (), quotes these verses from a sixteenth-century romance 
of Bernardo del Carpio:
Revolviendo el manto al brazo, 
la espada fuera a sacar.
[Wrapping the cape around his arm, he drew his sword.]


feated. This may be due to the mere and unfortun- 
ate necessity for the local champion to triumph, but 
also (and this is preferable) to a tacit disapproval of 
aggression, or (which would be best of all) to the dark 
and tragic suspicion that man is the worker of his 
own downfall, like Ulysses in Canto XXVI of the In- 
ferno. Emerson, who praised in Plutarch’s Lives “a 
Stoicism not of the schools but of the blood,” would 
have liked this story.
What we have, then, is men who led extremely 
elementary lives, gauchos and others from along 
the banks of the River Plate and the Paraná, forging, 
without realizing it, a religion that had its mythology 
and its martyrs—the hard and blind religion of cour- 
age, of being ready to kill and to die. This cult is as 
old as the world, but it was rediscovered and lived in 
the American republics by herders, stockyard work- 
ers, drovers, outlaws, and pimps. Its music was in 
the estilos,* the milongas, and the early tangos. I have 
said that this was an age-old cult. In a thirteenth- 
century saga, we read:
“Tell me, what do you believe in?” said the earl.
“I believe in my own strength,” said Sigmund.
Wenceslao Suárez and his nameless antagonist, 
and many others whom myth has forgotten or has 
absorbed in these two, doubtless held this manly 
faith, and in all likelihood it was no mere form of 
vanity but rather an awareness that God may be 
found in any man.


A PARTIAL MYSTERY
Once we concede the tango’s compensatory func- 
tion, a small mystery remains. The independence of 
South America was, to a large extent, an Argentine 
affair. Men from the Argentine fought in battles all 
over the continent—in Maipú in Ayacucho, in 
 Junín. Then came the civil wars, the war with Bra- 
zil, the uprisings against Rosas and Urquiza, the war 
with Paraguay, and the frontier wars with the Indi- 
ans. Our military past is abundant, but the fact is 
that the Argentine, while he considers himself brave, 
identifies not with that past (in spite of the promi- 
nence given the study of history in our schools) but 
with the vast generic figures of the Gaucho and the 
Hoodlum. If I am not mistaken, this paradoxical 
idiosyncrasy can be explained. The Argentine finds 
his symbol in the gaucho, and not in the soldier, be- 
cause the courage with which oral tradition invests 
the gaucho is not in the service of a cause but is pure. 
The gaucho and the hoodlum are looked upon as 
rebels; Argentines, in contrast to North Americans 
and nearly all Europeans, do not identify with the 
state. This may be accounted for by the generally 
accepted fact that the state is an unimaginable ab- 
straction. The truth is that the Argentine is an in- 
dividual, not a citizen. To him, an aphorism like 
Hegel’s “The State is the reality of an ethical Idea” 
seems a sinister joke. Films dreamed up in 
Hollywood repeatedly hold up to us the case of a 
man (usually a newspaper reporter) who befriends a 
criminal in order, ultimately, to turn him in to the
. The state is impersonal; the Argentine thinks only in terms of personal 
relationships. For this reason, to him stealing public money is not a 
crime. I am stating a fact, not justifying or condoning it.


police. The Argentine, to whom friendship is a pas- 
sion and the police a Mafia, feels that that “hero” is 
an incomprehensible scoundrel. He feels with Don 
Quixote that “each man should tend to his own 
sins” and that “an honest man should not go out of 
his way to be another man’s jailer” (Don Quixote, 
I, ). Often when faced with the empty symmetries 
of Spanish style, I thought that we differed hopelessly 
from Spain; these two quotations from Don Quixote 
were enough to convince me of my mistake. They 
are the quiet, secret sign of an affinity. One night in 
Argentine literature deeply confirms this—that night 
when a rural police sergeant called out that he would 
not be party to the crime of killing a brave man, and 
began fighting against his own men, shoulder to 
shoulder with the deserter Martín Fierro.
THE LYRICS
Uneven in quality, since, as everybody knows, they 
come from a thousand heterogenous pens, tango 
lyrics—whether the product of inspiration or indus- 
try—make up, after half a century, an almost in- 
extricable corpus poeticum, which the historians of 
Argentine literature will read or at least defend. The 
popular, so long as people have stopped under- 
standing it, so long as it has been aged by the years, 
manages to arouse the nostalgic veneration of schol- 
ars and gives rise to polemics and glossaries. It is not 
unlikely that by about  the suspicion or the cer- 
tainty may arise that the true poetry of our time will 
be found not in such Argentine classics as Banchs’ 
Urna or Mastronardi’s Luz de provincia but in the 
unpolished human pieces collected in a magazine


like El alma que canta, which publishes hit songs. 
Guilty of negligence, I have neither bought nor stud- 
ied this chaotic repository, but I am not unaware of 
its variety and the growing bounds of its subject mat- 
ter. The first tangos had no lyrics, or, if they did, the 
lyrics were improvised and obscene. Some dealt with 
rustic life (“I am the loyal woman / of the Buenos 
Aires gaucho”), because their composers sought 
popular subjects, and low life and the slums were 
not poetic material—not then. Other tangos, like the 
related milonga, were lighthearted bits of boasting 
(“When I tango I’m so sharp / that, turning a dou- 
ble whisk, / word reaches the Northside / if I am 
dancing on the South”). Later on, this genre, like 
certain French naturalistic novels or certain engrav- 
ings by Hogarth, chronicled the seamy side of life 
(“Next you became the mistress / of an old pharma- 
cist / and the police chief’s son / cleaned you out”). 
After that came the deplorable conversion of down- 
and-out or rough neighborhoods to respectability 
(“Puente Alsina, / where have all your hooligans 
gone?” or “Where are those men and women, / the 
red neckerchiefs and tall-crowned hats that Requena 
used to know? / Where is my Villa Crespo of yes- 
teryear? / The Jews moved in, and Triumvirato is 
no more”). From early on, the woes of secret or sen-
. 
Yo soy del barrio del Alto,
soy del barrio del Retiro.
Yo soy aquel que no miro 
con quien tengo que pelear, 
 y a quien en milonguear, 
ninguno se puso a tiro.
[I come from the Barrio del Alto, I come from around the Retiro. 
I am a man who does not think twice about whom I have to fight, 
a man who can dance a milonga that nobody else can come near.]


timental love affairs kept many a pen busy (“Re- 
member when you were with me / and you put on a 
hat / and that leather belt / I pinched from another 
tramp?”). Loneliness, as in the blues and in Spanish 
literature, was a favorite theme (“The evening 
was sad, / my darling, / when you abandoned me”). 
Tangos of recrimination, tangos of hatred, tangos 
full of mockery or bitterness were written; today they 
defy transcription or even memory. In some, 
perhaps a bit more kindly, the revenge took the form 
of a pardon and delighted in magnanimous gestures 
(“Just come in now that you are back / and don’t be 
afraid of the beating”). All the hustle and bustle of 
the city began making its way into the tango; low life 
and the slums were not its only subjects, and I can 
remember pieces—was it back in the twenties?—that 
were called “El Rosedal” (The Rose Garden) and 
“Mis noches del Colón” (My Nights at the Opera).
At the opening of his satires, Juvenal wrote 
memorably that everything which moved man—his 
wishes, fears, wrath, pleasures of the flesh, intrigues, 
joys—would be the subject of his book; with excus- 
able license we could apply his famous “quidquid 
agunt homines” to the sum of tango lyrics. We could 
also say that they make up a vast random comédie 
humaine of Buenos Aires life. At the end of the eigh- 
teenth century, the German philologist Wolf argued 
that before it became an epic the Iliad was a series of 
songs and rhapsodies; this, perhaps, leaves way for 
the prophecy that—with time—tango lyrics will 
make up a long civic poem or will suggest to some 
ambitious person the writing of such a poem. Several 
years ago, together with Silvina Bullrich, I compiled 
a first anthology of the hoodlum. In the preface, I 
wrote that


The hoodlum was the common man of the city and 
of its straggling outskirts, just as the gaucho was of 
the plains and hills. Venerated archetypes of the lat- 
ter are Martín Fierro and Juan Moreira and Segun- 
do Ramírez Sombra; of the former there is still no 
ineluctable symbol, although hundreds of tangos 
and popular theatrical pieces foreshadow one . . . .  
May this book serve as a stimulus to someone to 
write that hypothetical poem which will do for the 
hoodlum what Martín Fierro did for the gaucho. May 
that poem, like Hernández’s, be less attentive to 
details than to the core of the matter, less accurate 
about speech and fashion than about the shape of a 
man’s life.
It was Andrew Fletcher, the seventeenth-centu- 
ry Scottish political figure, who remarked that “if a 
man were permitted to make all the ballads, he need 
not care who should make the laws of a nation.” This 
observation suggests that popular, or traditional, po- 
etry can influence sentiments and shape behavior. If 
we apply this thesis to the Argentine tango, we would 
find in it a mirror of our daily lives and at the same 
time a mentor or model whose influence is certainly 
malignant. The early milonga and tango may have 
been foolish, even harebrained, but they were bold 
and gay. The later tango is like a resentful person 
who indulges in loud self-pity while shamelessly re- 
joicing at the misfortunes of others.
Back in  I remember blaming the Italians 
(particularly the Genoese from the Boca) for the 
denigration of the tango. In this myth, or fantasy, of 
our “native” tango perverted by “gringos,” I now 
see a clear symptom of certain nationalistic heresies 
that later swept the world—under the impetus of the 
Italians, of course. It was not the concertina, which


some time ago I dubbed cowardly, or the busy 
songwriters of a seaside slum that made the tango 
what it is but the whole country. Besides, the old 
“natives” who fathered the tango were named 
Bevilacqua, Greco, or de Bassi.
There are those who may wish to object to my 
defamation of the present-day tango on the grounds 
that the transition from boldness or swagger to self- 
pity is not necessarily regrettable and may even be a 
sign of maturity. My imagined adversaries may go 
on to say that the simple, brash Ascasubi is to the 
doleful Hernández what the first tango is to the lat- 
est and that no one—except, perhaps, Jorge Luis 
Borges—ever dared infer from this lessening of joy 
that Martín Fierro is inferior to Paulino Lucero. The an- 
swer is easy. It is not just a question of the tango’s 
hedonism but of its moral tone. In the everyday 
tango of Buenos Aires, in the tango of family 
reunions and respectable tearooms, there is a streak 
of vulgarity, an unwholesomeness of which the tango 
of the knife and the brothel never even dreamed.
Musically, the tango may not be important; its 
only importance is what we attribute to it. This is not 
unjust, but it applies equally to everything under the 
sun—to our own death, for example, or to the 
woman who rejects us. The tango can be argued 
about, and we do argue about it, but like all that is 
genuine it contains a secret. Dictionaries of music 
give a short, adequate definition, which meets with 
general approval. This definition is both elementary 
and straightforward, but a French or Spanish com- 
poser who—correctly following such a definition— 
pieces together a “tango” finds to his astonishment 
that he has constructed something that Argentine 
ears do not recognize, that our memories do not


cherish, and that our bodies reject. It might be said 
that without Buenos Aires evenings and nights no 
tango can be made, and that the platonic idea of the 
tango—its form universal (that form which “La 
tablada” and “El choclo” barely spell out)—awaits 
us Argentines in heaven, and that this thriving spe- 
cies, however humble, has its place in the world.


XII. 
Two Letters
The publication of one of the chapters of “A History 
of the Tango” brought the author the following let- 
ters, which now enrich this book:
Concepción del Uruguay 
Entre Ríos 
 January , 
Mr. Jorge Luis Borges
I have read “The Challenge” [“The Cult of 
Courage”] in La Nación of December .
In view of the interest you have shown in deeds 
of the kind that you describe, I believe you will be 
pleased to hear a story which used to be told by my 
father, who died many years ago, and which he 
claimed he witnessed personally.
The place—the San José meat-salting plant in 
Puerto Ruiz, near Gualeguay, which was operated 
by the firm of Laurencena, Parachú, and Marcó.
The time—around the s.


Among the personnel of the salting plant, who 
were almost all Basques, was a Negro named Fustel, 
whose fame for his skill with a knife had gone beyond 
the borders of the province, as you will see.
One day a rider arrived in Puerto Ruiz grandly 
dressed in the fashion of that day: a black woolen 
chiripa, fringed leggings, a silk handkerchief around 
his neck, a belt covered with silver coins; on a good 
horse smartly decked out: bit, breastband, stirrups, 
and bridle worked with silver and gold, and a match- 
ing knife.
He introduced himself, saying he came from the 
Fray Bentos salting plant, where he had heard about 
Fustel, and, considering himself fairly tough, he 
wanted a try against this other man.
It was easy to put the two in touch, and, there 
being no motive of any kind for ill-will, the duel was 
fixed for an appointed day and hour in that same 
place.
In the middle of a big circle formed by all the 
personnel of the salting plant and by others in the vi- 
cinity, the fight started and both men showed ad- 
mirable skill.
After a long time, the Negro Fustel managed to 
reach his opponent’s forehead with the tip of his 
knife, opening a wound which, although small, 
began to bleed a lot.
Seeing he was wounded, the stranger threw 
down his knife, and, extending a hand to his oppo- 
nent, he said, “You’re the better man, friend.”
They became very good friends, and, on part- 
ing, they exchanged knives as a token of friendship.
It occurs to me that with your prestigious pen, 
this event, which I believe is true (my father never 
lied), might be useful to you in rewriting your film


script, changing its title from “On the Outer Edge” 
to “A Gaucho’s Chivalry” or something of the kind.
Respectfully yours, 
[signed]
Ernesto T. Marcó
Chivilcoy 
Buenos Aires 
December , 
Mr. Jorge Luis Borges 
c/o La Nación
Dear Sir:
Re: Comments on “The Challenge” (Decem- 
ber , ).
My aim in writing this is not to correct but to 
provide information, inasmuch as only a few details 
of the incident differ, while the essential facts remain 
the same.
On frequent occasions I heard the story of the 
duel that serves as the basis for “The Challenge,” 
appearing in today’s Nación, from my father, who at 
the time lived on a farm he owned near Doña 
Hipólita’s Saloon, in a field next to which the terrible 
duel took place between Wenceslao and the gaucho 
from Azul—the visitor himself told Wenceslao that 
he was from Azul, whither word of the former’s 
reputation had reached—who had come to challenge 
the other’s standing.
The two rivals ate beside a haystack, very likely 
sizing each other up, and when their spirits had 
risen the southerner extended an invitation to a bit of


harmless knife play, which our man at once ac- 
cepted.
Quick on his feet, the man from Azul kept out 
of reach of his rival’s knife, prolonging the fight to 
Wenceslao’s disadvantage. From the top of the 
haystack a man who worked for Doña Hipólita, 
who had closed up her saloon in view of the turn of 
events, fearfully witnessed the ups and downs of the 
fight. Determined to settle it one way or the other, 
Wenceslao lowered his guard, offering his left arm, 
which was protected by the poncho that was wrapped 
around it. The man from Azul struck like lightning 
with a terrific chopping blow that landed on his op- 
ponent’s wrist just as the tip of Wenceslao’s knife 
reached his eye. A wild scream rent the silence of the 
pampa, and the man from Azul took to his heels and 
sought refuge behind the heavy saloon door. Mean- 
while, Wenceslao stepped on his left hand, which 
hung from a piece of skin, and with a single cut sev- 
ered it from his arm, stuck the stump in the breast of 
his shirt, and ran after the fugitive, roaring like a lion 
and calling out for the other man to come out and 
finish the fight.
From that day on, Wenceslao was known as 
Manco (One Hand) Wenceslao. He lived off his 
trade as a harness and rope maker. He never started 
a fight. His presence in any saloon secured the peace, 
since his stern warning, spoken calmly in his manly 
voice, was enough to discourage anybody who was 
spoiling for a fight. In a poor place like that he was a 
gentleman. His humble life had meaning. His 
pride tolerated neither insult nor slight, and his deep 
knowledge of human weakness made him doubt the 
impartiality of the justice of that day, which is why 
he grew accustomed to dispensing justice himself.


Therein lay his error with regard to his own self- 
preservation.
A kick in the behind by an Italian obliged him 
to retaliate, and that was the start of his undoing. A 
large posse corraled him in a saloon where he had 
gone in search of vice. The knife fight, of  against , 
was going Wenceslao’s way when a point-blank shot 
laid out forever the hero of the th precinct.
The rest of your account is accurate. He lived in 
a shack with his mother. The neighbors, among 
them my father, helped him build it. He never 
robbed.
May I take this opportunity to extend my heart- 
felt admiration to the talented author.
[signed]
 Juan B. Lauhirat



Appendixes 
Carriego and His Awareness 
of the City’s Outskirts
On a street in Palermo whose name I do wish to re- 
call—Honduras Street—there lived during the im- 
portant Centenary years a consumptive Entrerri- 
ano, almost a genius, who observed the neighbor- 
hood with an immortalizing look. That Palermo of 
yesterday was somewhat different from the Palermo 
of today. There were hardly any two-story houses 
then, and behind the brick-paved entranceways and 
the even line of rooftop balustrades the patios were 
brimming with sky, with grapevines, and with girls. 
There were vacant lots that welcomed the sky, and in 
the evenings the moon seemed more alone, and light 
together with an odor of strong rum emanated from 
the back rooms of shops. In that yesterday the neigh- 
borhood was violent; it took pride in the fact that it 
was called Tierra del Fuego, and the legendary crim- 
son of Palermo de San Benito still lived in the knives 
of unsavory characters. There were hoodlums in


those days, foul-mouthed men who passed the time 
behind a whistle or a cigarette and whose distinctive 
features were a thick head of hair worn swept back, a 
silk neckerchief, high-heeled boots, a swaggering 
walk, and an aggressive stare. It was the classic era of 
street-corner gangs and troublemakers. Bravery, or 
a pretense of bravery, was in the air, and No Moreira 
(who hailed from Matanzas, on the western outskirts 
of the city, and was elevated by Eduardo Gutiérrez to 
semidivinity) was still the champ Luis Angel 
Firpo, whom the louts idolized. Evaristo Carriego, 
the Entrerriano I mentioned at the beginning of this 
piece, observed these things for all time and gave 
voice to them in poems that are the soul of the Ar- 
gentine soul.
So true is this that the words “outskirts” and 
“Carriego” are today synonyms of a single vision— 
one brought to perfection by death and veneration, 
since the demise of the person who gave rise to that 
vision gives him poignancy at the same time as it 
links his vision indissolubly to the past. His modest 
twenty-nine years and his early death lend prestige to 
that shabby setting which was the background of his 
work. He himself has been invested with a tameness, 
and so in José Gabriel’s mythifying there is a pusil- 
lanimous and almost effeminate Carriego who is 
certainly not the man with the stinging tongue and 
the endless talker that I knew in my boyhood on his 
Sunday visits to my home.
His poems have been judged by everyone. 
Nevertheless, I want to point out that, in spite of a 
good deal of obvious and clumsy sentimentality, they 
have touches of tenderness, glimpses and perceptions 
of tenderness, as true as this one:


Y cuando no estén, ¿durante 
cuánto tiempo aún se oirá 
su voz querida en la casa 
desierta?
¿Como serán 
en el recuerdo las caras 
que ya no veremos más?
[And when they are gone, how much longer will 
their dear voices be heard in the empty house? How 
will their faces, which we will no longer see, look in 
our memory?]
I want also to give wholehearted praise to his 
characterization of the organ grinder, in a piece 
which Oyuela considers his best and which in my 
opinion is perfect.
El ciego te espera 
las más de las noches sentado 
a la puerta. Calla y escucha. Borrosas 
memorias de cosas lejanas 
evoca en silencio, de cosas 
de cuando sus ojos tenían mañanas 
de cuando era joven . . . la novia . . . ¡quién sabe!
[The blind man waits for you, seated most nights by 
his door. In silence, he recalls faded memories of dis- 
tant things, things when his eyes beheld the morn- 
ing, when he was young, his girl, who knows what!]
The soul of these lines is not in the final verse; it 
is in the next to last, and I suspect that Carriego put 
it there so as not to lay emphasis on it. In another, 
earlier poem called “El alma del suburbio,” he had


already sketched the same subject, and it is worth 
comparing that first treatment (a realistic picture 
made up of minute observations) with the later seri- 
ous, compassionate festivity in which he gathers the 
favorite symbols of his art—the back-street seam- 
stress who came to grief, the moon, and the blind 
man.
They are melancholy symbols all, depressing 
and cheerless. It is the custom today to suppose that 
apathy and loud self-pity are the hallmarks of those 
who live on the city’s outskirts. I think otherwise. A 
tug or two of the concertina fail to convince me, as 
do the vulgar woes of mawkish petty criminals or 
more or less repentant prostitutes. The present-day 
tango, concocted of picturesqueness and labored 
lunfardo jargon, is one thing; and the old tangos, 
made of blatant impudence, shamelessness, and joy- 
ous courage, are another. They were the hoodlum’s 
true voice; the latter tangos (both music and lyrics) 
are the invention of those who disbelieve in the 
hoodlum’s bravery, of those who explain and set you 
right about it. The first tangos—“El caburé,” “El 
cuzquito,” “El flete,” “El apache argentino,” “Una 
noche de garufa,” and “Hotel Victoria”—still tes- 
tify to the rollicking courage of the outer slums. 
Words and music went together. Of the tango “Don 
 Juan,” about the neighborhood tough, I recall these 
boastful bad lines:
En el tango soy tan taura 
que cuando hago un doble corte 
corre la voz por el Norte 
si es que me encuentro en el Sur.
[When I tango I’m so sharp that, turning a double


whisk, word reaches the Northside if I’m dancing on
the South.]
But all that is old, and in the outer slums today 
we are only out for misfortune. Obviously, Carriego 
is somewhat responsible for our gloomy impressions. 
More than anyone, he has dulled the bright colors of 
the city’s outer edge; he holds the innocent blame for 
the fact that, in the tango now, the wenches one and 
all go to the hospital and the hoodlums are ruined by 
morphine. In this sense, his work is the antithesis of 
that of Alvarez, who was an Entrerriano and, like 
Carriego, made himself into a man of Buenos 
Aires. We must confess, however, that Alvarez’s 
vision has little or no lyric importance, while Carr- 
iego’s is captivating. He has filled our eyes with 
compassion, and it is obvious that compassion needs 
faults and weaknesses so that it can console itself af- 
terward. This is why we must forgive him that none 
of the girls in his book get betrothed. If he arranged 
it that way, it was in order to love them better and to 
expose their hearts, made pitiful by sorrow.
This all-too-brief discourse on Carriego has an- 
other side, and I must return to the subject one day 
simply to praise him. I suspect that Carriego is now 
in heaven (in some Palermitano heaven, doubtless 
the same one to which the old city gates were taken) 
and that the Jew Heinrich Heine will have paid him 
a visit and by now the two will be close friends.



Foreword to an Edition 
of the Selected Poems of 
Evaristo Carriego
Two cities, Paraná and Buenos Aires, and two dates, 
 and , define in time and space the short span 
of Evaristo Carriego’s life. Directly descended from 
old Entre Ríos stock and feeling a nostalgia for the 
brave past of his forebears, he sought a kind of 
compensation in the romantic novels of Dumas, in 
the legend of Napoleon, and in the idolatrous wor- 
ship of the gaucho. In this way, partly pour épater les 
bourgeois, partly under the spell of the Podestá broth- 
ers and of Eduardo Gutiérrez, he dedicated one of 
his poems to the memory of San Juan Moreira. The 
details of Carriego’s life can be summed up in a few 
words. He worked on a newspaper, he mixed in lit- 
erary circles, and, like his whole generation, he got 
drunk on Almafuerte, Darío, and Jaimes Freyre. As 
a boy, I heard Carriego recite from memory the -
. Martín Fierro had not yet been canonized by Leopoldo Lugones.


odd stanzas of Almafuerte’s Misionero, and after all 
these years I can still hear the passion in his voice. I 
know little of his political opinions; it is not unlikely 
that he was vaguely and loftily an anarchist. Like all 
cultured South Americans of the beginning of the 
century, he was—or he felt he was—a sort of 
honorary Frenchman, and around  he set out to 
acquire a first-hand knowledge of the language of 
Hugo, another of his idols. Carriego read and reread 
Don Quixote, and it is perhaps indicative of his taste 
that he preferred Herrera y Reissig to Lugones. The 
names so far listed may well exhaust the catalog of 
his modest but not negligible reading. He wrote con- 
tinuously, driven by the sweet fever of tuberculosis. 
Aside from a few pilgrimages to Almafuerte’s house 
in La Plata, he made no other journeys than those 
that history and historical novels can bestow on a 
mind. He died at twenty-nine, at the same age and 
of the same illness as John Keats.* Both hungered 
after fame, a legitimate passion at that time, which 
was still a stranger to the evil arts of publicity.
Esteban Echeverría was the first observer of the 
Argentine pampa; similarly, Carriego was the first 
observer of the outskirts of Buenos Aires. He could 
not have done his work without the wide freedom of 
vocabulary, subject matter, and metrics that mod- 
ernism bestowed on the literatures of the Spanish 
language, on this or the other side of the ocean, but 
the modernism that inspired him also harmed him. 
A good half of Misas herejes is made up of unconscious 
parodies of Darío and Herrera. Despite these poems 
and the sundry defects of the rest, the discovery—let 
us call it that—of the literary possibilities of the run- 
down and ragged outskirts of Buenos Aires is Carr- 
iego’s main significance.


To do this work really well, it would have been 
better had Carriego been either a man of letters, sen- 
sitive to the shades of meaning or to the connota- 
tions of words, or an uneducated man who was 
closer to the humble characters from whom he drew 
his subject matter. Unfortunately, he was neither. 
Bits of his reading of Dumas and the luxuriant vo- 
cabulary of modernism came between him and 
Palermo, and so it was inevitable that he would 
compare his knife fighter with D’Artagnan. In two 
or three pieces from El alma del suburbio he touched on 
the epic and in others, on social protest; in the poems 
of “La canción del barrio” he went from the “cos- 
mic holy rabble” to the respectable middle class. His 
most famous if not his best pieces belong to this se- 
cond and final stage. It was by this path that he ar- 
rived at what it would not be unjust to call the poetry 
of everyday misfortunes; of sickness; of disappoint- 
ments; of time, which wears us down and crushes 
our spirit; of family life; of tenderness; of habit; and 
almost of gossip. It is interesting that the tango 
followed the same evolution.
In Carriego, we can see the fate of the forerun- 
ner. Work that seemed unusual to his contempora- 
ries today runs the risk of appearing trivial. Fifty 
years after his death, Carriego belongs less to poetry 
than to the history of poetry.
His was the early death that seems part of the 
destiny of a romantic poet. I have asked myself more 
than once what he would have written if he had lived 
longer. One exceptional poem, “El casamiento,” 
may foreshadow a turn toward humor. This, of 
course, is a guess; what is undeniable is that Carrie- 
go influenced—and goes on influencing—the course 
of Argentine literature and that some of his poems


will become part of that anthology toward which all 
writing aspires. To the characters in his work—the 
local tough, the seamstress who got into trouble, the 
blind man, and the organ grinder—we must add an- 
other, the consumptive youth, dressed in black, who 
used to saunter among the single-story houses of Pa- 
lermo, trying out a line or stopping now and again 
to look at something he was soon to leave behind.
Postscript, —Poetry works with the past. 
The Palermo of Misas herejes was that of Carriego’s 
boyhood, and I never knew that Palermo. Poetry 
demands the nostalgia, the patina—albeit slight—of 
time. We see this process in gauchesco literature as 
well. Ricardo Güiraldes celebrated what once ex- 
isted, what might have existed—his Don Segundo— 
not what existed at the time he wrote his elegy.


Notes
Page . 
Page .
Page .
The dedication. This was added in the second 
edition.
The epigraph. It is given here exactly as it ap- 
pears in De Quincey. Borges, however, has 
quoted it as “a mode of truth, not of truth 
coherent 
and 
central, 
but 
angular 
and 
splintered.”
 Juan Manuel de Rosas. After six years (-) of 
fruitless military effort to incorporate the 
outlying provinces of the old Viceroyalty of the 
Río de la Plata—Uruguay, Paraguay, and 
Bolivia—the provinces of modern-day Argen- 
tina determined to declare their own indepen- 
dence from Spain. But as the jealousies and 
antagonisms deepened between liberal Buenos 
Aires intellectuals and the people of the in- 
terior, the search for a viable form of govern- 
ment became more and more elusive. The 
delegates of the  Tucumán Congress, who 
signed the independence act, appointed an in- 
terim supreme dictator while they went about 
looking for a king. The supreme dictator ruled


until . Meanwhile, the power of local 
bosses, the caudillos, who held sway over their 
bands of gaucho cavalry (montoneras), had so 
increased that it soon became apparent that 
they would oppose king, dictator, or president. 
When, in , Congress drafted a highly cen- 
tralist constitution, the provincial caudillos op- 
posed it. The next fifteen years were fraught 
with disunity, chaos, and civil war. In this 
period, the two great factions rose: the
Unitarians (unitarios), who favored a centralist 
government under Buenos Aires leadership; 
and the Federalists (federales), who demanded 
local autonomy and at the same time recogni- 
tion by Buenos Aires of their rights in the na- 
tional partnership. While the Unitarians, who 
included a large part of the wealthy and 
cultured families of Buenos Aires, were clear in 
their stand, the Federalists were split between 
mutually suspicious provincial caudillos and 
the Buenos Aires party. Federalism, for each of 
these factions, proved to hold different mean- 
ings, and by the end of Rosas’s reign it was lit- 
tle more than a cover for the self-serving sec- 
tionalism of the capital and the ranchers of 
Buenos Aires province.
Out of this upheaval of the s, in the 
search for a man strong enough to crush all op- 
position, came Juan Manuel de Rosas. Born 
in  to a fading Buenos Aires family, he 
grew up on the pampa on his father’s ranch, of 
which he became manager at the age of six- 
teen. Competent, strict but just with his 
gauchos, by the age of twenty-five Rosas was a 
large landowner and cattle breeder, and by 
 a powerful caudillo. With his small army, 
dressed by him in red (which became the color 
of the Federalists), he began intervening in 
politics; in , marched on Buenos Aires 
to put down an uprising, and in the outcome


he was installed as governor. As a result of in- 
tense political intrigue, Rosas had become the 
chosen instrument of a powerful group of land- 
owners in the Province of Buenos Aires who 
were convinced that their well-being would be 
ensured if control of the province and domina- 
tion of the nation’s major port were vested in 
their own number. Rosas’s immediate policy 
was the punishment of his enemies and the de- 
mand of total submission to the Federalist par- 
ty. The purge of Unitarian army chiefs began; 
some were shot, others jailed, and the display 
of 
red 
ribbons 
oh 
all 
persons 
became 
obligatory. His term up in , Rosas refused 
re-election when the legislature would not ex- 
tend his dictatorial powers, and for the next 
three years he dedicated himself to extending 
the borders of the province into Indian ter- 
ritory to the south and west of Buenos Aires. 
During this expedition, , hostiles were 
killed. Meanwhile, in the capital, Rosas’s wife 
(according to certain sources) worked hard for 
his return; in an effort to stage an uprising, she 
founded a terrorist organization known as the 
mazorca.
Three weak governors floundered in 
power, until at last the legislative council 
begged Rosas to return. He did—on his own 
terms: “total power . . . for as long as he 
thinks necessary.” Installed again in , for 
the next seventeen years Rosas ruled the coun- 
try with an iron hand. The terror spread, and 
the dictator was proclaimed “Restorer of the 
Laws.” In the streets, the watchmen called out 
the hours with the chant, “Long live the 
Federation! Death to the savage Unitarians!” 
This was repeated in the press, from the 
pulpit, and in the schools. Of this terror, an 
American resident reported: “I have seen 
guards at mid-day enter the houses of citizens


and either destroy or bear off the fur- 
niture . . . , turning the families into the 
streets, and committing other acts of violence 
too horrible to mention.’’ In the marketplace, 
he continued, “Rosas hung the bodies of his 
many victims; sometimes decorating them in 
mockery, with ribands of the Unitarian blue 
and even attaching to the corpses, labels, on 
which were inscribed the revolting words ‘Beef 
with the hide.’ ” Ironically, though Rosas 
never took a grander title than Governor of 
Buenos Aires, his rule was far more centralist 
than the Unitarians had ever dreamed. In his 
foreign policy, Rosas engaged the country in a 
war with Bolivia (-); intervened in the 
affairs of Uruguay throughout the s and 
s; got himself into a costly war with France 
(-); and suffered a blockade at the hands 
of an Anglo-French force (-). Finally, by 
, he had lost his support. A rival caudillo, 
 Justo José de Urquiza, with Brazilian and 
Uruguayan aid, marched upon Buenos Aires 
and defeated Rosas’s Federalists at Monte 
Caseros on February . Resigning as gover- 
nor, the dictator fled and was carried into exile 
aboard a British warship. He settled on a small 
farm in Southhampton, where he died in ; 
his 
remains 
have 
never 
been 
repatri- 
ated.—Reprinted, with changes, from Selected 
Poems by Jorge Luis Borges, ed. Norman 
Thomas di Giovanni (New York: Delacorte 
Press/Seymour Lawrence, ), pp. -, 
by permission of the author.
Page .    Milonga. The milonga is a forerunner of the 
tango dating from the s. Possibly it was in- 
vented as a parody of Negro dances. As a 
musical composition it is lively and bold. It is 
the form used by improvisors (payadores) in 
their singing contests and the form which has


Page . 
Page .
Page . 
Page .
Page . 
Page .
Page . 
Page .
inspired Borges to write numerous lyrics. The 
first milongas were danced.
Servants in a forest of feather dusters. Reference to 
the fact that the Spaniard performed menial 
tasks, working as domestic servants, cleaners, 
waiters, and so forth.
Sáenz Peña Act. Election reform laws that in- 
cluded honest registration of voters, com- 
pulsory voting, the use of secret ballots, and so 
on. It served, among other things, to bring 
large numbers of voters to the polls.
Gato. Quick and lively, the gato is an old Argen- 
tine dance that was very popular in the last 
century.
Alsina. Adolfo Alsina (-) was an ardent 
partisan of autonomy for the Province of 
Buenos Aires, of which he was made governor 
in ; he also served as vice-president of the 
Republic in .
Another 
Salaverría. 
The 
reference 
is 
to 
Unamuno.
A smutty milonga. The words Borges has in 
mind are “Escaparás de mis bolas, pero de mi pija, 
cuándo.” (You may escape from my balls, but 
from my prick—never.)
Estilo. Usually played on the guitar, the estilo is 
a characteristic musical composition of the 
River Plate region. One of its favored subjects 
is love. It is rhythmically slow and somewhat 
emotional in nature.
John Keats. In fact, Keats (-) was 
twenty-six when he died.



Bibliographical Note
Certain of the parts of this volume made their first 
appearances in Spanish in the following newspapers 
or magazines (place of publication, throughout, 
unless otherwise indicated, is Buenos Aires):
CHAPTER VI
[carriego’s verses]: “Día de bronca” (signed 
with the pseudonym “El Barretero”), L[adrón]. 
C[onocido]. (September , ).
truco: “El truco,” La Prensa (January , 
).
CHAPTER VII
inscriptions on wagons: “Las inscripciones de 
carro” (entitled “Séneca en las orillas”), Síntesis 
(December ).


CHAPTER VIII
stories of horsemen: “Historias de jinetes,” 
Comentario (January-February-March ).
CHAPTER IX
the dagger: “El puñal,” Marcha (Montevideo, 
 June , ).
CHAPTER XI
the cult of courage: “El culto del coraje” (in 
a somewhat different form and entitled “El desafío” 
[The Challenge]), La Nación (December , ).
APPENDIX I
carriego 
and 
his 
awareness 
of 
the 
city's
outskirts: “Carriego y el sentido del arrabal,” La 
Prensa (April , ).
“El truco” was first collected in El idioma de los 
argentinos (M. Gleizer, ); the rest of chapters 
I-VII, in the first edition of Evaristo Carriego (M. 
Gleizer, ). Printing of this first edition was com- 
pleted on September , .
Chapter X, the “Foreward to an Edition of the 
Complete Poems of Evaristo Carriego” (“Prólogo a 
una edición de las poesías completas de Evaristo 
Carriego”), first served as an introduction to Carr- 
iego’s Poesías (Renacimiento, ) and was previ- 
ously collected in Otras inquisiciones - under 
the title “Nota sobre Carriego” (A Footnote on Carr-


iego). The rest of chapters VIII-XII were first 
collected in the second edition of Evaristo Carriego 
(Emecé, ).
“Carriego y el sentido del arrabal” was first 
collected in El tamaño de mi esperanza (Proa, ).
The “Foreword to an Edition of the Selected 
Poems of Evaristo Carriego” first served as an in- 
troduction to Versos de Carriego (Eudeba, ); it has 
also been collected in Prólogos; con un prólogo de prólogos 
(Torres Agüero, ).


