


Copyright © 2024 by Rebecca B. Boyle
All rights reserved.
Published in the United States by Random House, an imprint and division of Penguin
Random House LLC, New York.
Random House and the House colophon are registered trademarks of Penguin Random
House LLC.
library of congress cataloging-in-publication data
Names: Boyle, Rebecca (Rebecca B.), author.
Title: Our moon : how Earth’s celestial companion transformed the planet, guided
evolution, and made us who we are / Rebecca Boyle.
Description: First edition. | New York : Random House, 2024 | Includes bibliographical
references and index.
Identifiers: lccn 2023011947 (print) | lccn 2023011948 (ebook) | isbn
9780593129722 (hardcover) | isbn 9780593129739 (ebook)
Subjects: lcsh: Moon—Popular works. | Moon—History—Popular works. | Moon—
Social aspects—Popular works. | Moon—Religious aspects—Popular works. | Moon—
Philosophy—Popular works.
Classification: lcc qb58l.9 .b695 2023 (print) | lcc qb581.9 (ebook) | ddc 523.3—
dc23/eng/20231026
lc record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/​2023011947
lc ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/​2023011948
Ebook ISBN 9780593129739
randomhousebooks.com
Book design by Simon M. Sullivan, adapted for ebook
Cover design: Lucas Heinrich
Cover illustration: Credo quia Absurdum
ep_prh_6.2_145871955_c0_r0

Contents
introduction
PART I: HOW THE MOON WAS MADE
chapter one
A World Apart
chapter two
The Creation
chapter three
The Biographer of Earth
PART II: HOW THE MOON MADE US
chapter four
The Moon and the Origin of Species
chapter five
The Beginning of Time
chapter six
Early Civilization and the Compass of Time
chapter seven
The Ornament of the Sky

chapter eight
The Voyage of Discovery Begins with the Moon
PART III: HOW WE MADE THE MOON
chapter nine
The Moon in Our Eyes
chapter ten
Journeys of the Mind
chapter eleven
The Eagle and the Reliquary
chapter twelve
Our Eighth Continent
acknowledgments
selected bibliography
notes
index

INTRODUCTION
The wonder of everyone is vanquished by the last star, the one most
familiar to the Earth, and devised by nature to serve as a remedy for
the shadows of darkness—The Moon.
—Pliny the Elder, Natural History
The Moon was the key.
Lieutenant Colonel David Shoup, a red-cheeked, thirty-nine-year-old
marine, worried about the Moon as his boat sped through the black Pacific
night. The Moon was not visible yet; at last quarter, waning away, it would
rise over the ocean at midnight. But even an unseen Moon exerts a powerful
influence on Earth.
Shoup knew the marines’ boats needed at least four feet of water to float
over the coral reef of the Tarawa Atoll, a hollow triangle of an island in the
South Pacific Ocean. Today, Tarawa is the capital of the nation of Kiribati,
but on November 20, 1943, it was step one in the Allies’ plan to defeat the
Empire of Japan. The capture of the tiny island and its airstrip depended on
the tide, which depended on the Moon.
Allied battle planners scheduled their invasion for the morning of
November 20, when they expected the high tide to crest over the reef
surrounding Tarawa. Without satellite measurements, planners could only
guess how much the tide would swell that day. They checked the lunar cycle
against century-old tide charts from the Pacific, which was all they had,
supplementing these with more recent data from places as distant as Australia
and Chile. Planners estimated high tide would reach five feet by 11:15 a.m.—
high enough for the ships with room to spare. But to Shoup, this depth was
still too close for comfort.

“We’ll either have to wade in with machine guns maybe shooting at us,” he
told Life correspondent Robert Sherrod, who was embedded with the troops,
“or the [amphibious tractors] will have to run a shuttle service between the
beach and the end of the shelf. We have got to calculate high tide pretty
closely for the Higgins boats to make it.”[1]
—
As the commanders fretted in the hours before sunrise, my grandfather
Private First Class John J. Corcoran bent to his task on Nanomea Island, five
hundred miles southeast. He was a small but important part of the largest
armada in the Pacific Theater during World War II.
Jack, like so many young Americans in the middle of the war, enlisted
eagerly and was ready to fight, newly equipped with a rifle, a bayonet, and a
Marine Corps paycheck. He earned $6.40 per month and gained the skills to
outfit airplanes with bombs.
In September 1943, at seventeen, instead of moving away to college, Jack
boarded the transport ship Puebla and sailed west from San Diego, across the
deep and beguiling Pacific, whose waters were nothing like the gray Atlantic
he knew so well. By November 1943, he had gone farther from home than
anyone he had ever known, including his Irish immigrant parents.
—
The troops that amassed to take Tarawa vastly outnumbered the Japanese
force that attacked Pearl Harbor, as well as the Allied force that had spent a
sweltering, muddy six months securing the island of Guadalcanal. The
Marine Corps heading for the atoll supplied cover for the Allies’ ships, and
General Julian Smith promised the Navy would deliver “the greatest
concentration of aerial bombardment and naval gunfire in the history of
warfare.”[2] My grandfather contributed to the nine hundred tons of ordnance
the Allies would drop during the Battle of Tarawa, clearing the field for the
invasion.

Despite all this, the fight for Tarawa would end in the worst casualties in
such a short battle in the history of the Marine Corps. Of the 5,000 men who
stormed the beach, 1,115 were killed and nearly 2,300 were wounded in just
seventy-six hours of fighting.
The tide did not rise to five feet on the morning of November 20. It barely
rose at all, and the transport ships couldn’t get past the reef, just as Shoup had
feared. At 6:48 a.m. local time, Smith and an admiral radioed a pilot
observing from a float plane and asked, “Is reef covered with water?”
“Negative,” came the reply. Instead, the marines had to clamber out of their
beached boats and wade across six hundred yards of water to shore, lifting
their rifles over their heads. Facing relentless fire from Japanese forces,
hundreds of marines were shot and some drowned in the high water
surrounding the reef. It would be decades before anyone understood why the
blood-dimmed tide didn’t rise that day.
—
I grew up hearing only a couple of stories from my grandfather’s service in
World War II; like many veterans, he didn’t like to talk about it. Through the
National Archives, I learned that his unit, Marine Aircraft Group-31, island-
hopped behind the men on the front lines, moving to conquered lands one at a
time to set up bombing runs for the next phase of battle in the Pacific.
Through my mom, I learned that Jack wasn’t able to fall asleep in his tent-
covered foxholes, and that he prayed the rosary despite his terror on island
after island. A devout Catholic, he taught the words to his fellow marines.
Hail Mary, full of grace, he repeated, trying to drown out cries of “Americans
will die!” in accented English. Stories of these Japanese threats sailing like
ghosts on the night wind chilled me to the bone when I was a kid. I wish I had
asked more about them. And I wish I got to tell Jack, before he died in 2010,
that he had the Moon to blame for the marines’ losses at Tarawa.

Every day, on every coastline on Earth, the tide changes the threshold where
the land meets the sea. Boats in a harbor rise and fall against their docks as
the day wears on. Beaches widen and narrow, and kelp, shells, or other ocean
dregs left by receding tidewaters dry in the sand, far from lapping waves.
The tide ebbs and flows because of the Moon’s gravity and, to a lesser
extent, the Sun’s. As the Moon moves around Earth, the two bodies tug on
each other. The side of Earth that is closest to the Moon feels the tug a little
more strongly, and the Moon pulls water toward itself, creating two bulges[*1]
in the world’s oceans. The bulges create the high tide, which originates in the
ocean and progresses toward the coasts. Twice a month, the Sun adds some
tidal heft, as well. When it is lined up with the Moon, causing either a full
Moon or an invisible new Moon, the Sun’s gravity amplifies the bulging
effect. This forms what are known as spring tides, and these bring higher high
tides and lower low tides.
Seven days later, when the Moon is not lined up with the Sun but set apart
at a ninety-degree angle, it looks half full.[3] We call this first quarter or last
quarter. The Sun’s gravity has less of an impact on the tides and produces
what is called a neap tide. The high and low tides are less extreme at this
point in the month.
Earth’s geography also plays a role in how the water comes in. The
continents change the tide’s flow, and the depth of a shoreline changes how
quickly the tide will rise or how slowly it will fall. And the Moon’s location in
orbit around Earth changes its gravitational pull, too. The Moon, like all
celestial bodies, does not travel in a circle but in an ellipse, something that, as
we’ll see later, we learned from a seventeenth-century German astronomer
obsessed with the Moon. The point on its orbit where it is most distant from
Earth is known as apogee, and the point where it is closest is known as
perigee. Three or four times a year the perigee coincides with a full Moon,
which astrologers in the first part of the twenty-first century c.e. dubbed a
“supermoon.” The closer Moon yields exceptionally high and low tides. The
more distant, apogee Moon—call it a micromoon—is slightly smaller in the
night sky and has a weaker pull. But even a faraway Moon exerts a powerful
influence over Earth.

—
The marines planned their invasion during a neap tide and couldn’t
understand why the tide not only failed to rise enough but did not rise at all,
for almost two days. The “dodging tide,” as war chroniclers later called it, lay
low over the Tarawa reef because the Moon was at apogee, its pull weak
because it was so far from Earth. November 20 was one of only two days in
1943 to experience an apogean neap tide. Before the satellite era, and
certainly before the marines captured the island and measured its geography,
there was no way for American military planners to have known how
dramatically this lunar alignment would affect the tides in Tarawa.
—
Despite the carnage, marines kept coming ashore, and the bombs kept
falling. After three days of fighting, the waters finally returned and the
marines took the atoll, but the devastation was complete. Americans back
home were outraged, wondering how capturing such a tiny island could have
led to such casualties.
—
My grandfather’s unit arrived at Tarawa on New Year’s Eve 1943. By then,
the Allies controlled the island and the Navy Seabees had cleared the beaches
of the bodies and the palm trees. Private First Class Corcoran continued his
work, equipping planes with bombs for the next stage of the multipart Pacific
plan. The Moon was four days old when he arrived at the battered atoll. It
hung in the evening sky like a scimitar, like a scythe, like the horns of a bull.
It was small enough that you could easily miss it, until it snuck up on you.
After Tarawa’s bloodbath, the Allies would pay more attention to the
Moon’s influence. It played a seminal role in the long months leading up to

the invasion of Normandy and the liberation of France. The French
Resistance relied on full Moons to safely drop spies and supplies by
parachute, and the Allies knew they would need a full Moon’s high tide and
its glittering light to land their ships on the shores of mainland Europe and
wrest it from the grip of Nazi Germany. In 1943, as Allied planners
deliberated on the right port, the hopes of the French waxed and waned with
every twenty-eight-day cycle that passed.
Finally, the Allies decided to invade at Normandy, on the northern coast of
France, because it was close to the British coast but less obvious than Calais,
a larger port city. Normandy had both a small port and a small airfield, which
the Allies figured they could capture on the first day.[4]
—
First the Allies would cross the English Channel at night. Paratroopers
would glide across, using only moonlight as a guide, aiming to capture two
bridges. Then the heavy planes would take off. Commanders wanted about
forty minutes of morning light to bomb the coast, just like at Tarawa, before
the land invasion began. The ground assault troops would sail in on a low but
quickly rising morning tide.[5]
On the Calvados coast of Normandy, the English Channel can rise by an
astonishing nineteen feet from low to high tide. As at Tarawa, the change in
the tidal zone is caused by the Moon’s interaction with the shore’s geography.
Steep shores like those in Normandy can increase an intertidal zone by many
times the height predicted by the rise and fall of water.[*2]
The dramatic change in tide means the water flows in fast—on D-Day, it
rose at a rate of a foot every fifteen minutes. The Allies figured about half an
hour at low tide was enough for the first wave of forces to clear the beaches of
mines, triangular wooden obstacles, and human-sized iron barriers installed
by Nazi troops. If the tide then came in quickly, it would float Allied forces
over the sands and into France as the invasion progressed.
In Normandy, a low tide near sunrise only occurs during either a new
Moon or a full Moon. The airborne divisions needed the light of the full

Moon to fly by, so it was settled: The Moon was the key once more. Winston
Churchill recalled in his memoirs that the Allies pinpointed June 5, 6, and 7
for the invasion. “Only on three days in each lunar month were all the desired
conditions fulfilled,” he wrote. “If the weather were not propitious on any of
those three days, the whole operation would have to be postponed at least a
fortnight—indeed, a whole month if we waited for the Moon.”[6]
—
The forecast for June 5 was poor and Supreme Commander Dwight  D.
Eisenhower postponed D-Day by a day. The forecast was clear the next
morning, and D-Day was a go for June 6. A full Moon rose on the evening of
June 5 an hour and a half before sunset, reaching its highest point by 11:30
p.m. Greenwich Mean Time. At midnight, June 6, 1944 c.e., paratroopers
from the 82nd and 101st Airborne divisions began dropping from the sky
over France. Brigadier General James Gavin, from the 82nd Airborne,
recalled that he could see clearly by the light of the Moon. “The roads and the
small clusters of houses in the Normandy villages stood out sharply in the
moonlight,” he recalled.[7] The paratroopers took over two bridges to block
Nazi tanks, and in the fields below, Resistance fighters bicycled by moonlight
to cut off railroad tracks, subterranean telephone lines, and aerial power lines.
Normandy was isolated on all sides. The first waves of troops crashed onto
the beach at 6:30 a.m., under a morning summer Sun and a setting Moon.
The fighting lasted all day and the Allies suffered huge losses, especially at
Omaha Beach. But by nightfall, the German forces were in retreat. After D-
Day, the Allies liberated Paris and marched eastward to Berlin through the
fall and winter, surviving the Germans’ last-ditch offensive in the Battle of the
Bulge. Germany surrendered on May 8, 1945.
My grandfather was in Havelock, North Carolina, that spring preparing for
a land invasion of his own. The worst-case scenario, an invasion of Japan,
required the marines to remain battle ready. Jack Corcoran was in training
camp when the Nazis surrendered and he was still there in August 1945,
when the United States dropped two atomic bombs on the cities of Hiroshima

and Nagasaki. The Empire of Japan surrendered, and two months later Jack
Corcoran was honorably discharged.
He went home to New Jersey. He married my grandmother, Helen, had six
children and ten grandchildren, and retired after a long career as an
accountant. Jack took me to the ocean every time I visited him in  Toms
River. I would stand in the sand of Seaside Heights with my brother and wait,
watching, as the tide rolled in to reach me.
These tides and these battles are just one part of the story of our Moon and
ourselves. The Moon’s role in the second great war is just a microcosm of the
journey we have taken with it since our species emerged.
The Moon has shaped our rulers, and their conquests, since civilization’s
earliest days, but its power over us is far more ancient than even our conflicts.
Its influence goes back to the sulfurous origins of this planet and everything
that crawls, flaps, swims, or strains skyward on its surface. The Moon guides
all of us from its vaulted position above us. But it’s not apart from us, not
least because it is actually a part of Earth. It was sheared from Earth when the
planet was still freshly baked. And its elliptical orbit does not technically
circle Earth, at least not in the way you might think. Instead, Earth and the
Moon orbit each other, pivoting around a combined center of gravity that
guides them both and that shapes their shared history.
Today, the Moon directs migrations, reproduction, the movements of the
leaves of plants, and possibly the very blood in your veins. The Moon
conducts the symphony of life on Earth, from the people who wage war on
one another to the coral polyps that built the reefs of Tarawa. It has guided
evolution since the moment of life’s first stirrings, which occurred either
inside deep ocean vents or in warm little pools at the water’s edge, both of
which derive nutrients through the Moon’s tide.
The Moon makes Earth unique, certainly in our solar system and possibly
in the broader cosmos. It made us who we are, in ways that scientists are just
beginning to understand, from our physiology to our psychology. It taught us

how to tell time, which we used to impose order on the world. The Moon
inspired the human projects of religion, philosophy, science, and discovery.
This book is the story of our journey with the Moon in three parts: how
the Moon was made, how the Moon made us, and how we made the Moon in
our image. This is not solely an astronomy book, and it is not an Apollo book,
though astronomy and the Apollo missions are both inseparable from
humanity’s journey with the Moon. This is a book about time, life on Earth,
human civilization, our place in the universe, and how the Moon has made all
of it possible. I hope this book changes your understanding of all these things.
And I hope it changes the way you see the Moon, this partner world that has
always been with you, and which I hope you notice anew the next time you go
outside at night.
Skip Notes
*1 Gravity causes the bulge nearest the Moon. Forces including gravity and the centrifugal force form a
bulge on the side farthest from the Moon, too, making two bulges. This equates to two high and two
low tides a day, nearly everywhere on Earth as it spins (there are a few exceptions that experience one
tidal cycle, like in the Gulf of Mexico, because sometimes Earth’s continents get in the way). The time
between low and high tide at a given location is six hours and twelve minutes.
*2 Two millennia earlier, another military leader named Julius Caesar—“the noblest man that ever
lived in the tide of times,” as Shakespeare called him—would learn about extreme Channel tides the
hard way when his first attempt to invade Britain failed.

PART I
HOW THE MOON WAS
MADE

The Moon is different.
It is like nowhere on Earth, which is a watery bubble improbably bursting
with life in a universe of emptiness. The Moon is barren and has been
throughout the four-and-a-half-billion-year eternity of its companionship with
this planet. The Moon is silent. It plays host to no cricket chorus, coyote calls,
or night wind sailing through pines. It is dry, at least on the outside. There are
no waves lapping on shores, no soft rains, no snow. It is a crater-pocked
wasteland that smells of doused firecrackers. The Moon is scorching hot
during its long day, and freezing cold during its long night.
The lunar landscape is grayscale, but flecked with shades of tan, chocolate,
beach sand, chalk, gold, spicy-mustard ochre, and, in the words of Apollo 11
astronaut Michael Collins, a “cheery rose” hue.[1]
Sunlight on the airless Moon plays tricks on human eyesight, warping a
moonwalker’s sense of crater depths and hillside angles, making tiny slopes
look like vertiginous peaks. All is monotony. There is no blue, and there is no
green. No sunlight scatters through a watery atmosphere. No lichens splotch
the Moon’s rocks. No bacteria grow in its dirt to help plants flourish.
Certainly, there are no birds overhead, ants underfoot, or any other kind of
animal anywhere. On the Moon there is nothing and no one. Until the Apollo
landings, no creatures ever looked up at the Moon’s black sky and wondered
about their place in it all. No one ever stared up at the crescent Earth and
thought about visiting. There is no culture, except the one we brought.

The Moon says nothing for itself, but it says plenty about us. We project
our dreams and our fervor onto its mottled surface and it serves as a mirror,
both figuratively and literally. It reflects sunlight and even Earth’s own light,
ashen earthshine, back to us. We can see this phenomenon when the Moon is
a crescent, and yet its full disk is just barely perceptible. The Moon is Earth
in inverse, a desolate rock whose scars whisper of our world’s violent past and
underscore its riotous gardens of color and life. The Moon contains only what
we imagine it to contain. It harbors only what we berth in its seas.
—
Since the beginning of time, the Moon has controlled life on Earth and
shepherded the human mind through a spectacular journey of thought,
wonder, power, knowledge, and myth. But this frenzied, multifarious, Earthly
history disguises the truth of the Moon. As vivid and lively as our history with
it has been, the Moon itself is quiet, barren, and still.
This was not always the case: When the Moon was young, it was livid with
energy and heat, a magnetic field, oceans of lava, and maybe an active crust
like the one that warps and wrinkles the face of our world. But no one was
around for this lively phase. The only Moon we have ever known is the
spectral one in our sky, the two-dimensional one, the cold and silent one.
Nothing happens there, except the occasional arrival of an asteroid or the
briefly violent puff of a crashed or landed spacecraft. Nothing looks up,
nothing breathes, nothing hopes.
When Apollo 11 astronaut Buzz Aldrin walked on the Moon in 1969, he
described his surroundings as “magnificent desolation,” an interpretation that
has yet to be bested.[2] It’s difficult to liken the Moon to anywhere familiar,
because anywhere familiar is a place on Earth.
Even from orbit, Earth looks and feels like home. Astronauts report that
staring down on our planet is one of the most exhilarating things about being
in space. We belong here. Earth’s razor-thin atmosphere, cloud tendrils,
green-carpeted continents, and deep ocean blues beckon us. Not so for the
Moon, according to Collins, who orbited it alone in his spacecraft but did not

walk on it. There is no comfort to the “withered, sun-seared peach pit out my
window,” he wrote in his memoir, Carrying the Fire.[3] “Its invitation is
monotonous and meant for geologists only.”
Humans are sensory beings, and the Moon is a place devoid of any
familiar sensory experience. If you were to visit, you might experience
conflicting feelings of deprivation and overwhelm. Every time you went
outside—in a spacesuit, of course—and every time you went back indoors
and took off your gear, the Moon would bowl you over. You would feel
lonely, hot, freezing, terrified, ecstatic, superhuman, and tiny, in a matter of
moments or maybe all at once. Its topography, its innards, its atmosphere—
everything about the Moon is different.
—
Apollo 11 moonwalkers Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin were the first
human beings to experience selenic discomfort. Moon dust covered their
spacesuits and boots, and it soon covered much of the inside of their Eagle
lander, too. The pair were so annoyed by it that they slept in their helmets to
avoid breathing in Moon all night. On later missions, astronauts noticed the
dust scratched their sun visors and damaged the seals on the rock boxes they
toted home. Moon dust caused a form of hay fever, making astronauts’ eyes
watery and itchy and their throats scratchy and sore. Unlike Earth dust, which
is mostly made of organic material, Moon dust is all pulverized rock—and no
water or wind exists to soften the dust grains’ edges. It was like breathing in
sandpaper.
But the astronauts were lucky that this was nothing more than a nuisance.
NASA scientists had warned the astronauts that Moon dust might be reactive
in oxygen. Aldrin and Armstrong were told to be cautious about their
contingency sample, a small scoop of Moon that Armstrong tucked into his
pocket moments after stepping out of the Eagle. After coming back inside,
Aldrin and Armstrong watched the dust carefully as the Eagle cabin
pressurized. If anything started to smolder, they were supposed to open the
hatch and throw it out. But both men were completely coated in it.

“The stuff seemed to stick to things and stay there,” Aldrin said.[4] “There
was no hope of getting that off.” If anything was going to ignite, it would be
their suits.
The dust turned out not to be reactive in oxygen, but it did smell that way.
The Moon has an acrid aroma, like fireworks that have just gone off. That is
how Aldrin described the scent in the capsule after he and Armstrong came
back inside from their brief sojourn and took off their helmets. Armstrong
described it as “the smell of wet ashes,” like a campsite at bedtime after
you’ve doused the fire.[5] Apollo 17 astronaut Harrison “Jack” Schmitt has
called it the smell of gunpowder.[6]
The Moon is constantly bombarded by sunlight and radiation from other
stars and cosmic sources, and it’s pummeled by asteroids in a process called
“gardening.” All this action tears apart atoms in the “regolith,” the technical
term for Moon dust. Lunar regolith is about 43 percent oxygen, so most of
the atoms being shattered are oxygen atoms. The same is true of gunpowder.
When it ignites, chemicals in the gunpowder release copious oxygen, further
fueling the blast. What the astronauts smelled was the lingering aftermath of
atoms being torn apart by tiny invisible bullets of radiation.
This is still a matter of scientific debate in part because the Moon rocks
don’t have a smell anymore. When a scientist opens a bag with a Moon rock
today, no matter how carefully it was chipped and packed up for distribution
by NASA’s Lunar Sample Laboratory, there is no scent of the unknown. No
one can say for sure why the smell fades once the rocks are exposed to
humans, and to Earth.
—
On the Moon, after you got used to the smell of constant fireworks, you
would notice the unceasing dryness. The Moon is a parched place, and you
would dearly miss the omnipresence of water to which you have been
accustomed your entire waking life. It would tease you every time you saw
Earth. However familiar and beloved our continents and their mountains,

Earth’s land does not dominate the planet’s features; from a distance, the
water is what stands out, a blue beacon of serenity and warmth.
For most of human history, people believed that the Moon had oceans,
too. Astronomers through the centuries believed the Moon’s dark spots were
actually lunar seas. Moon-fixated scientists in the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries believed this so fully that the list of features on its face are all
named as oceans, lakes, and bays. The Sea of Tranquility, where Apollo 11
landed, was a real sea in the mind of Moon mapper Giovanni Battista
Riccioli, the Jesuit priest who gave us the Moon’s modern nomenclature in
1651. Collectively, the dark spots are called maria, from the Latin for “seas.”
In reality, as the Apollo Moon rocks taught us, the seas are vast plains of
cooled lava.
While you would experience the Moon as a chalky, dry sea of emptiness,
it does have water. Depending on what scientific instruments you believe, it
has a whole lot. The trouble is that the water is locked up in the regolith as
hydrated minerals, or may exist as ice that has been buried forever in craters
that never see the light of day. Liquid water cannot exist on the Moon. With
no atmosphere to keep water liquid, it would evaporate instantly, and its
hydrogen would fly off into space. Any future Moon visitors hoping to access
lunar water will have to be really talented chemists, skilled at liberating water
from stone.
One reason so few places on Earth resemble the Moon is because of all the
water on this planet. Earth’s water softens and demolishes rock. Combined
with wind, water is a destroyer of worlds. Entire mountain ranges rise and fall
through the work of water. It also erases craters. Though the timing and
duration of the beating are still up for debate, we know Earth was bombarded
by asteroids long ago, and yet there are no battle scars to show for it. But the
Moon, free of water and wind, preserves a record of its primordial
pummeling. These craters play all sorts of tricks on the human mind.
In 2019, China landed a small robot called Chang’e 4 on the Moon’s far
side, the first time such a feat had ever been achieved. A few months after the
landing, a Chinese scientist named Long Xiao shared a video of Chang’e 4’s
approach to the lunar surface. It was like watching an animation of a fractal.

Each crater grew bigger and bigger in the lander’s field of view, and then
smaller craters resolved within the big craters, and those smaller craters also
grew bigger until more tiny craters appeared within them, and on and on. In
time, a visitor to the Moon would come to recognize the particular shapes and
bowls of these craters, in the way I recognize my favorite mountains. But you
would still have a hard time getting around because of them, and not just
because the craters are tripping hazards. It would be hard to get around
because your mind would have a hard time interpreting what your eyes saw.
The Moon’s craters cast weird shadows, warping the landscape like a
funhouse mirror. The extreme contrast between the darkness of space and the
bright white of the Moon plays tricks on astronaut minds. During Apollo 12,
Charles “Pete” Conrad and Alan Bean noted that the craters all seemed the
same color, especially up close.
“The colors were deceptive. I can recall on the first EVA [moonwalk]
looking at the materials around the LM [lunar module] and referring to them
probably as gray-brown or gray-white,” recalled Bean, who became a painter
after leaving NASA in an effort to convey what he saw. “On the second EVA,
in the very same places, although I wasn’t really aware of it at the time, I
referred to them as being light brown. I kept thinking that all the rocks had a
light tan coating, whereas the first day I thought they had a light gray coating.
My impression now is that the interior of all these rocks would be dark gray
basalt, despite their very minor differences in texture, shape, etc. Also, both
times we came into the LM our suits looked the same gray color. I saw only
dark gray, never any of the browns that I’d seen outside.”
The light fooled the astronauts in other ways. The Apollo missions landed
when the Sun was low in the lunar sky, which helped the astronauts see crater
shadows more starkly. Conrad and Bean landed near the “terminator,” the
line where lunar day turns to night. It was barely after sunrise, Moon time,
and the Sun was only about five degrees above the horizon. Raise your fist,
punch it toward the horizon—the Sun was about as high off the ground as
your knuckles when the Apollo 12 astronauts set down.
Bean and Conrad touched down only 538 feet from a small lander called
Surveyor 3, which had alighted on the Moon in 1968. This close landing was

intentional, because scientists on Earth wanted to find out how the harsh lunar
environment had treated the earlier spacecraft. The astronauts went to check
it out, but they were worried the craters on the way were too treacherous.
“We may have a little trouble getting to Blocky Crater. I’m not sure
whether it is an optical illusion or what, but the wall that the Surveyor is on
looks a lot steeper than 14 [degrees],” Bean radioed Houston.
At one point the two moonwalkers tried to get a better sense of the
dimensions. Conrad grabbed a grapefruit-sized rock and rolled it downhill.
Later, commanders in Houston asked Conrad to climb into a crater (also
confusingly called Surveyor) to collect some bedrock. “It’s awfully steep,”
Conrad replied, declining the request. “I’ll get you some bedrock from on the
rim here.”
Surveyor Crater, a 650-foot-wide impact basin, has a twenty-one-degree
slope, a nice and easy downhill walk. The shadows had made the descent look
more dangerous than it actually was.[7]
—
Even outside the steep craters, the Moon’s surface undulates like the oceans
for which its lava plains are named. In fact, it might be experiencing waves.
Eons after it cooled into a solid orb, the Moon still undergoes some geologic
activity.
Bean and Conrad left behind a seismographic measuring station, as did
their successors on Apollo 14, 15, and 16. These instruments detect seismic
activity deep within the Moon. Geologist Jack Schmitt, on his moonwalks
during Apollo 17, noticed lunar geology that provided further evidence of
seismic activity. On December 13, 1972, he and Gene Cernan parked their
Moon buggy in a valley named Taurus-Littrow, within the Moon’s Sea of
Serenity. They were exploring a gray hill called the North Massif.
Schmitt noticed it first. “Hey, look at how that scarp goes up the side
there,” he said. “There’s a distinct change in texture.”
“Okay. Oh, man; yeah, I can see what you’re talking about now. It looks
like the scarp overlays the North Massif, doesn’t it?” Cernan said.

“Yeah,” Schmitt said. To Houston, he narrated the sight: “The appearance
you have of the scarp–North Massif contact is one of the scarp being
smoother-textured, less cratered, and certainly less lineated. And I wouldn’t
be a bit surprised if it’s, as Gene says, younger.”[8]
He meant that the scarp had formed after the mountain. Something had
shifted the Moon’s surface. He was right. In a study in 2019, scientists
connected shake data from the Apollo seismic stations with updated lunar
landscape imagery for the first time, and showed the Moon is geologically
active today.[9] The Moon calves boulders. It forms rock piles. It experiences
landslides that form escarpments like Lee-Lincoln, which appear like a
shrugging shoulder. The Moon has fault lines, which experience regular
moonquakes that are energetic enough to rattle an astronaut—or a future
habitat.
The Moon has no mobile crust, unlike Earth. Its internal tremors are the
result of tidal action between the Moon and Earth, and a vestige of its
primordial heat. As the Moon cools—still, today, four and a half billion years
after its formation—it contracts. Its crust wrinkles and collapses like a grape
turning into a raisin.
These quakes appear to be fairly common. The four Apollo seismic
stations counted twelve thousand seismic events, including twenty-eight
shallow quakes, between 1969 and 1977.[10] The shallower quakes are similar
to the types of tremors we feel on Earth. Spread out over eight years, that’s
still a quake every few days. Every few Earth days, that is. A day on the
Moon is quite a different thing.
—
A “day” on the Moon, meaning one full rotation and one revolution around
Earth, takes twenty-seven Earth days, seven hours, forty-three minutes, and
twelve seconds. We call this a sidereal month, for the time it takes the Moon
to orbit once around Earth and return to the same spot relative to the stars.
But because the Earth-Moon system is rotating around the Sun, it actually
takes a little longer for the Sun to return to the same place in the Moon’s sky.

The synodic month corresponds to one complete cycle of phases visible from
Earth. From the point of view of the Moon, the synodic month marks the
time between successive sunrises[*] in the same spot on the Moon. No matter
where you stand, this takes twenty-nine and a half Earth days.
Put another way, if you were standing on the Moon, it would take a full
Earth month for the Sun to rise, set, and rise again. This also means daylight
lasts for two weeks—and so does the night. You would need special
equipment to survive this. Even some of the most sophisticated spacecraft we
can build succumb to the frigid darkness of the lunar night, when the
temperature drops to 300 degrees below zero Fahrenheit. During the daytime,
the Moon is a scorcher: The average daytime high temperature at the equator
is 246 degrees Fahrenheit.[11] Within some deep craters, a few of which
harbor the ice you might need for survival, the Sun never shines at all.
During Apollo 11, Armstrong and Aldrin had a hard time sleeping in their
lander. The dust was annoying, but when they donned their Moon suits to
escape it, they shivered with cold. The air-conditioning system in the suits
was meant to keep them comfortable during the hot lunar day—inside the
lander, it left them frigid. Anyone who ever visits again will need a life-
support system that allows them to survive the extreme temperatures on the
Moon.
The good news is you wouldn’t mind walking around in what is essentially
a wearable house. The Moon’s gravity is one-sixth of Earth’s, which
effectively means everything feels lighter. You would weigh just 16.6 percent
of what you weigh on Earth, so a spacesuit wouldn’t be a burden. You might
still have a hard time standing up, however; many of the Apollo astronauts
fell flat on their faces after stepping onto the Moon’s surface.
Modern studies show why this happened, and that it might be more than a
trick of the light that fooled Bean and Conrad. In a 2014 study in Toronto,
Canada, volunteers spun around on a giant rotating arm to simulate different
gravity forces.[12] As they whirled and tried not to vomit, the volunteers were
shown the letter p. They apparently read the letter as a p or a d, depending on
which way they thought was up. They weren’t tilted in their centrifuge; it was
the gravity change that confused them. It turns out humans need to feel about

15 percent of Earth’s gravitational force to sense which way is up. The
Moon’s gravity is just a smidge higher than this, at about 16.6 percent of
Earth’s. The low gravity and resulting disorientation might explain why it’s so
hard to walk on the Moon.
—
To make matters worse, time seems to stop up there. It proceeds according
to the rhythm of your heart, and maybe the beeping of your spacesuit’s life-
support system, but if you could just stand there for an hour or two in silence,
you would notice nothing about the passage of time. There are no long
shadows cast by the noonday Sun. There are no changes in the angle of the
light or the speed of the wind. Although you wouldn’t consciously notice time
passing, your body would feel it.
Typically, you don’t notice time the way you notice scent or touch, but
time perception is a sense all the same, and it pulsates through every cell in
your body, and every cell in everything else that lives. Every form of life that
we know displays some kind of time-dependent activity. This circadian clock
is wound by the dependable cycle between light and dark—with some special
lunar exceptions—because that has been the length of Earth’s day for about
as long as there has been multicellular life. When the light lasts for two weeks
without end, the circadian clock becomes frazzled, at best.
Some elements of time on the Moon are more familiar. The Moon
experiences solstices and equinoxes just like Earth does, but only at the
Moon’s poles is there anything resembling a season. The Moon is tilted on its
axis by only 1.5 degrees, compared with Earth’s 23.4 degrees, which is what
gives us our four seasons. Temperatures do rise and fall seasonally at the
Moon’s north and south poles, where the angle of the Sun is always extreme.
Though it is tilted only very slightly on its spin axis, the Moon is inclined
relative to the Sun and the plane where the planets are found. When the Sun
is above the Moon’s equator, it’s summer in the Moon’s northern hemisphere,
just like it is on Earth. When the Sun is below the Moon’s equator, the
northern hemisphere is in winter. The Moon also experiences the solstice,

when the Sun appears to stand still and reverse its direction. Civilizations
around Earth learned to measure these solar events and use them to mark
time. Maybe future Moon settlers will erect solstice calendars, or build Earth
phase calendars like some Neolithic humans once built Moon phase calendars
to use the Moon as a guide.
In the lunar southern hemisphere “winter,” more of the Moon’s south pole
is frigid enough to contain ice, which can be composed of water or even
carbon dioxide (what we know as dry ice). As the Moon approaches its own
equinox, some of that water is released into orbit.
—
Though the Moon has a version of a water cycle, there is no softly falling
rain or snow. The sound of a thunderstorm might be one of the Earthly
experiences you’d miss the most. There is no sound at all. The Moon is as
quiet as quiet gets. You would hear yourself in your spacesuit, and yourself
alone. Even if you tried making a racket, like clanging a piece of aluminum
against your spacecraft, you wouldn’t hear a thing. The Moon has no
atmosphere to speak of, only an ephemeral “exosphere” consisting of some
charged molecules and hovering dust. It is too thin for sound to carry.
Every Apollo mission both landed and launched its moonwalkers using
rockets on the lander. The act of arriving on and blasting off the Moon kicked
up enormous clouds of dust. Bean, on Apollo 12, is one of the reasons we
know this. When he approached the earlier lander known as Surveyor, he
noticed it had turned brown in its two years on the lunar surface. This
happened because of radiation from the Sun and cosmic sources. But the
Apollo 12 lunar module, named Intrepid, had sandblasted the Surveyor when
it touched down just a few hundred feet away. Some of the brown was
scoured away, like someone had scrubbed Surveyor with steel wool. Phil
Metzger, a planetary physicist at the University of Central Florida, found that
each landing blew lunar soil around, accelerating it between 400 meters per
second and 3 kilometers per second.[13] That last number is important: 2.4
kilometers per second is lunar escape velocity. That’s how fast something has

to move to escape the gravity of the Moon and fly away. That means every
Apollo mission kicked up enough dust, and pushed it around quickly enough,
to send it into orbit. Some of that dust is still circling the Moon. Some of it is
circling the Sun. And some may have even sprinkled back onto Earth, from
whence it came, four and a half billion years ago.
—
The last and maybe most pervasive sensation you would notice on the Moon
is an ethereal one. How many times in your life have you felt a sort of sixth
sense? It is indefinable but unmistakable; you just know when the car in the
lane next to you is about to merge, you can feel the presence of an animal
behind you or a bird above you, you sense when you are not the only person
in a quiet library.
This feeling is not one you would experience on the Moon. The feeling,
instead, is a profound awareness that there is nothing, and there is no one.
Everyone who has ever existed is up above, on Earth. Every being that ever
lived and died and breathed and loved is distant from the Moon, instead
sailing above you, appearing to go around you just like the Sun and the stars.
Collins, on Apollo 11, was the first to experience this displacement. As he
sailed around the far side of the Moon, out of touch with Aldrin, Armstrong,
and Earth, he experienced a deep sense of solitude. “I am alone now, truly
alone, and absolutely isolated from any known life. I am it. If a count were
taken, the score would be three billion plus two over on the other side of the
Moon, and one plus God only knows what on this side,” he wrote. “I feel this
powerfully—not as fear or loneliness—but as awareness, anticipation,
satisfaction, confidence, almost exultation. I like the feeling.”[14]
The Moon does not have humanlike feelings, but if a world can be
described as lonely, the Moon would be. It is certainly empty, destined to face
forever the world it came from and the world that, maybe because of the
Moon, was blessed with air and water and life. The Moon will accompany us
forever, but it will be lonely forever, if we treat it right.

Skip Notes
* As you may have guessed, the English word “month” comes from the Moon. It derives from the Old
English word mōnath, which has Germanic origin, and has many cognates in Dutch (maand), German
(Monat), Latin (mensis), even Greek (μήν or mḗn).

May the gods who dwell in heaven and the netherworld constantly
praise the temple of Sin, the father, their creator.
—The Nabonidus cylinder of Abu Habba (Sippar), col. ii.26–43a
In the beginning, all was chaos. Before the skies were named, before Earth
existed, there was nothing but water, swirling around in a void without form.
But then something happened. The waters divided. The roiling mix separated
into fresh water, embodied by the short-tempered god Apsu, and salty water,
embodied by the goddess Tiamat. After their sacred marriage, Tiamat gave
birth to all the other gods of creation.
The younger gods were loud and obnoxious, and they kept Apsu awake, so
he decided to destroy them. Tiamat would have none of this and alerted her
older son, Enki, the god of wisdom. So Enki killed Apsu, and built a home
from his remains. In a great battle that followed, Tiamat herself was torn in
half, and one half became the heavens, while the other part became Earth.[1]
This story comes from the Sumerian Seven Tablets of Creation, one of
humanity’s oldest origin stories, fragments of which are found on tablets from
Ur, an ancient city whose ruins are located in modern Iraq. But it shares many
parallels with the utterly violent, riotous mess that was the birth of the solar
system and the formation of the Moon and its Earth. The scientific version
goes like this:

In the beginning, about 4.6 billion years ago, all was chaos within a cloud
of gas left over from a previous generation of stars. There was nothing but
molecules of dust and gas, swirling around in the void. The star stuff drew
closer together, and then something happened. The material started to
collapse under its own gravity. The Sun ignited. Let there be light, a later
creation tale says. Winds howled outward from the infant Sun, much more
powerfully than the charged particles that stream through the solar wind now,
and the gales pushed the remaining dust and gas around. The roiling mix
eventually separated into clumps, which grew into larger piles, and eventually
became the planets.
There were more than the eight we have today. Some of the Sun’s original
planets were probably consigned to oblivion. Gravitational interactions caused
planets and planetesimals (planet embryos, basically) to knock into one
another like billiard balls, and some likely exited the solar system, doomed to
silently sail among the stars. We’ll never know how many suffered this fate.
But we do know that one of these primeval planets was completely
obliterated. One of them, born in the same band of star stuff as Mercury,
Venus, Earth, and Mars, is a world no more. It was probably about the size of
Mars, roughly 45 percent the mass of today’s Earth. Its name was Theia, after
the Greek goddess who was the mother of Selene, the Moon. Theia was
destroyed like Apsu and Tiamat. And Earth and the Moon made their home
in its remains.
—
Until Apollo astronauts landed on the Moon, dotted it with scientific
instruments, and brought bits of it back home, we didn’t know about Theia.
We had no Earthly idea how the Moon got here, just a series of educated
guesses. The Apollo missions totally rewrote the story of the Moon’s origins.
At the same time, Earth scientists began rewriting the story of Earth’s own
formation and singular geologic history, and they began to realize that the
Moon has much to tell about Earth, too.  The Moon’s story is the shared
history of our home planet, after all. And the Apollo rocks are still providing

new clues. The Moon visits provided so much new material, and so many
unexpected questions, that they have forced scientists to completely reimagine
the making of the solar system more than once. Just as the Moon reflects
Earth’s light, its primary role in modern science is to tell our story back to us.
The story is more than a scientific curiosity. The Moon’s origins can shed
light on how we all got here, and maybe even why.
Wouldn’t it be wonderful to know? Why us, why here? Why not
everywhere?
There are other rocky planets, but none are like Earth. Mars is also a
slowly spinning terrestrial world, tilted on its side almost exactly as much as
Earth is. But it lost its water and its atmosphere. And it has no Moon, just
dinky captured asteroids. Venus is a faster-spinning rocky world with a dense
atmosphere, but its cloak of clouds grew too thick over time, and choked the
planet to death. If Venus ever had water, it’s gone now. Mercury, too close to
the Sun, somehow still harbors tiny amounts of water in the dark shadows of
its deepest craters. But it is blasted by solar rays. Neither Venus nor Mercury
has moons.
Why do we? What was it about Theia, the original Earth, and their mutual
destruction that would give rise to this planet? Why did we end up with a
huge Moon, one-fourth of Earth’s own heft? What happened in that cataclysm
that resulted in a paired system of worlds, one dry and completely dead, and
one drenched in water and life?
—
The Moon’s apparent size compared to the Sun, and the fact that we have
solar eclipses, led many ancient humans to think the Moon was placed in the
sky alongside the Sun for a reason. The Navajo people of the American
Southwest believe, like so many cultures, that both were created at the same
time, and for similar purposes: one to light the day, one to light the night.
Many religions through the ages thought the same thing. People also came to
assume the Moon was given to us as a timepiece. Plato even asserted that the

succession of days and nights, lit by the Sun and Moon, taught us how to
count—and how to think.
Over time, the notion that the Moon was purposefully and wonderfully
made morphed into a scientific theory. Philosophers and scientists reasoned
that the Moon was made along with Earth, forged from the same primordial
matter that makes up the Sun and other planets. The Moon must have formed
at the same time and in the same place as Earth, and stayed here owing to
Earth and the Moon’s mutual attraction. Scientists promoted some version of
this until the turn of the twentieth century c.e., when a pioneering astronomer
named George Howard Darwin came up with an alternative explanation.
George—son of the famous biologist Charles and his wife, Emma—began
his theory by thinking about the tide. His dad had written that the Moon’s
control of the tides may have been responsible for the origin of life, bubbling
up in “some warm tidal pool.” But George wondered whether the tide had
anything to do with the existence of the Moon itself. Thanks to the work of
earlier scientists, he knew that Earth’s rotation is slowing down, ever so
slightly, through tidal interactions with the Moon. The slowdown of Earth’s
daily spin means Earth is losing angular momentum.[2] Angular momentum is
always conserved, meaning it can only be gained or lost if something else gets
involved. George Darwin understood that this conservation of angular
momentum means that, as Earth slows, the Moon is moving away. If it’s
receding all the time, then it would have been a lot closer in past epochs.
Darwin ran some calculations and found that in the not too distant past,
Earth and its Moon would have been practically touching, and Earth’s day
would have been four hours long. Somehow, the Moon was being flung away.
In 1899, he proposed a tale of fission formation: The Moon calved like a
glacier, breaking off from Earth into something apart. He reckoned the Moon
was probably shorn from somewhere in the Pacific Ocean, which is why that
ocean is so deep.[3]
This is not what happened, but George deserves credit for coming up with
the basic outline of an idea now found to be true: The Moon was not formed
separately, nor was it baked alongside Earth in some strange process of twin
genesis. The Moon came from Earth and shares its history.

The factual basis for George Darwin’s story comes from the Apollo
missions. It comes from a few pebbles Neil Armstrong grabbed in his first
moments on the Moon. It comes from later, more famous Apollo rocks. And
it is still being unraveled through especially beautiful, oddly alien rocks, like
the pearlescent, green-freckled specimen designated troctolite 76535.
Many Moon rocks are white and gray chunks of something called
anorthosite, a strange and low-density type of material that forms when
minerals crystallize within molten rock. They are among the first samples
Neil Armstrong gathered, and because they were so unusual, Apollo missions
kept going back for more. These glittering Moon bits are special in part
because they are so pure. Their refinement, especially compared to average
Earth rocks, surprised geologists in the 1970s. A typical rock on Earth comes
in one of three flavors: igneous, which forms when molten rock cools;
sedimentary, which is deposited by water and wind over eons; and
metamorphic, which is the other two rocks transformed in the crucible of the
ages. All of these rocks can contain multitudes of minerals. But Moon
anorthosite does not. It’s made almost entirely of a mineral called feldspar.
As rocks go, this stuff is a dime a dozen, both figuratively and literally.
Feldspar is so common on Earth that it is frequently used in kitchen cleaning
powder because it is crumbly and low density. On the Moon, these properties
make it special. The anorthosite rocks coat the surface of the Moon because
they floated there. They bobbed in a sea of melted Moon like an iceberg in
Earth’s oceans. Heavier stuff sank within the oozing magma and formed the
Moon’s core, while the anorthosite crystals floated to the top, forming a thin
crust like the skin on a day-old pudding cup. As the freshly baked Moon
cooled, the rocks were locked in place, only to be liberated later during
asteroid strikes.
In order for this material to separate from the rest of the Moon, for
anorthosite to make a white, Moon-ish pure crust, it needed an ocean to float
in. It needed an entire Moon’s worth of rock ocean. And a magma ocean
spanning the entire Moon could only form through some incomprehensible
violence: like a meeting with Theia.

—
The story of Theia is unique in the solar system, so far as we can tell. It
begins 4.35 billion years ago, give or take a couple hundred million Earth
years. And it doesn’t begin with Earth, not really. It begins with Earth 1.0.
If you were able to visit this alien world, you would recognize nothing.
Earth 1.0 spun like a dervish, rotating through one day and night every few
hours. The infant planet’s steaming rock was constantly buffeted by high
winds. There was land, sort of, and maybe some water. The night sky would
look different, with constellations in slightly altered arrangements, but you
would notice the Milky Way stretching overhead, and Jupiter shining in the
southern sky. And you would see a glittering orb above: A few days before
the collision, Theia would have been the same size in primordial Earth’s sky
as the Moon is in ours.
The collision was inevitable, fixed by fate and gravity. Earth 1.0 orbited
the Sun from a distance of about ninety-three million miles, roughly the
neighborhood where it is now. Theia was close to the Sun, too, right in the so-
called Goldilocks zone, where conditions are not too hot, not too cold, but
just right for water to remain liquid. But this neighborhood was not wide
enough for two rocky worlds.
Objects that formed around the infant Sun were zipping about much faster
back then. As the moment of impact approached, Theia sped toward Earth
1.0 somewhere between the ludicrous speeds of 20,000 miles per hour and
8,900 miles per hour. At the slow end, that is about four times faster than a
bullet fired from a .30-caliber hunting rifle. This analogy is imperfect for an
entire planet, but a discussion of speed is at best an academic way to convey
the scale of the calamity.
—
If you can see outside right now, you can try to picture what would have
happened when the world ended. Look around. Is there a skyscraper in your
line of sight, or a neighbor’s house, maybe a tree? Find the sky. Is it blue?

Maybe you see a jet contrail, or even an airplane streaking by, its tail shining
in the sun. Now imagine: Here comes Theia. First the airplane vanishes, then
the contrail. The tree and the buildings burst into flames as an angry red
mountain—no, an upside-down world—descends, closing off the heavens
from east to west. The Sun still shines, so you can see fine detail in the
upside-down world as it approaches. There are rivulets of lava and craggy
peaks shadowing deep valleys.
Then the entire horizon dims to a livid red glow as Earth 1.0 begins to
moan and tremble, shockwaves rattling through its crust and deep into its
mantle. Theia’s gravity pulls on Earth 1.0 and Earth 1.0’s gravity pulls on
Theia until the sky closes off for good, as the crust of each planet meets the
other. Devastating seismic waves ripple down through the mantle of Earth 1.0
and Theia, and both planets splatter apart.
—
Two years after the final Apollo missions, selenographers held a conference
and finally published a comprehensive theory for this story. A Harvard
professor named Reginald Daly had proposed a giant-impact theory in 1946,
[4] but the idea didn’t gain much traction until Apollo astronauts hauled down
all that anorthosite to show that the Moon was, indeed, once liquid magma.
The Caltech planetologist Dave Stevenson was an undergraduate at Cornell
University during the conference, in 1974, and the idea stuck in his mind. A
decade later, he attended the Conference on the Origin of the Moon in Kona,
Hawaii, and by then he and the majority of selenographers thought they had
solved the mystery of the Moon’s origins.
“Without colluding, many of us arrived at this meeting saying, ‘Hey, this is
the right story: a giant impact.’ From a physics standpoint, it looked attractive.
It’s a trivial calculation,” Stevenson told me. Two worlds smashed, utterly
ruined each other, and their remnants eventually calmed and cooled into the
two new worlds we have now. It made a lot of sense. But rocks are not simple
things. The story of Theia and Earth 1.0 is complicated. Even as they built
the theory, some geochemists were unsatisfied. From the earliest days of the

giant-impact hypothesis, the story of the rocks and the narrative brought to
life by physics have not quite matched.
—
In the beginning, when all was chaos, rocky worlds were forming and
colliding and vaporizing one another continually.
The basic outlines of this primeval pandemonium come down to us from
the great German philosopher Immanuel Kant. In Kant’s metaphysics, reason
is the source of morality, and in his astrophysics, chaos is the source of
creation. In 1754, the Royal Academy of Sciences at Berlin awarded him a
prize for a treatise called Examination of the Question Whether the Earth Has
Undergone an Alteration of Its Axial Rotation, in which he wondered whether
any outside forces had ever acted upon the spinning Earth. He considered the
tides, and argued that the movement of water would act to slow down Earth’s
rotation. Eventually, Kant reasoned, Earth’s rotation would slow down so
much that its spin would match the rate at which the Moon goes around it.
This would result in Earth always showing the same face to the Moon—just
as the Moon always shows the same face to us. He was right, though the
mathematics underlying this idea would not be explained until George
Darwin. A year after his Moon essay, Kant advanced a new theory of how not
just the Moon but the entire solar system came to be, in his treatise titled
Universal Natural History and Theory of the Heavens, or an Essay on the
Constitution and Mechanical Origin of the Whole Universe, Treated According
to Newton’s Principles. The philosopher wrote at roughly the same time as
Pierre-Simon Laplace in France and William Herschel in England, and all
three posed slightly different variations on the same theme. But Kant’s version
of our collective origin story is the closest to the truth.
He argued that the primitive chaos divided itself into isolated masses—
like fresh and salty water, like Apsu and Tiamat. He imagined a great number
of particles swimming around a center of gravity. “This body at the middle
point…is the sun, although at this time it does not yet immediately have that

flaming glow, which breaks out on its surface when its development is fully
complete,” he wrote.[5]
—
Kant’s “nebular hypothesis” is basically correct: The Sun and planets arose
from a chaotic swirl of dust and gas that slowly collapsed and grew through
the forces of gravity.
Since Apollo, scientists have advanced a few versions of this story’s
particulars. Today, many scientists think the solar system arose from a sort of
cosmic curdling in a process called the streaming instability. Gas and dust
drifted around the Sun like snow around a tree, concentrating in certain areas
—controlled by things like pressure and temperature—and then collapsed
and condensed into small, compact objects. These dust bunnies eventually
grew into protoplanets a few kilometers across, which amassed more material
over time. Some scientists now think that after the first dust bunnies formed,
they quickly accumulated more pebbles and dust that swirled around them
and very rapidly mushroomed into the planets we now know.
This was a violent time. The dust bunnies and other planetary crumbs
collided, melted, recombined, and gradually formed larger balls. Eventually
these grew big enough to clear their neighborhoods, meaning they consumed
all nearby crumbs, or their gravity swept the crumbs far away, toward the
eventual realm of asteroids and comets. As the infant planets got bigger, their
insides heated up, which allowed the metals in their rocks to flow and
differentiate into lighter and heavier elements.
Some of these infant worlds stopped growing after a short while, and
became the rocky planets Earth, Mars, Mercury, and Venus. Others
continued hoovering material until they metamorphosed into the humongous
gas giants Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune. Larger crumb piles orbiting
those planets grew into the gas giants’ suites of moons.
A great cosmic sorting thus took place. The material that made the planets
drifted and settled according to its location around the Sun. This location is
reflected in the planets’ chemistry.

Everything in the visible universe is made from atoms, which contain a
nucleus of neutrons and protons and an outer shell of electrons. But atoms of
the same element can come in different sizes. Sometimes an atom can tack on
a spare neutron, making it heavier, in a manner of speaking. It is still the
same element, because it has the same number of protons, but it has a greater
mass. An atom with a spare or a scant neutron is called an isotope. Scientists
can count the number of isotope variants in an object and find out about its
nature based on those numbers. An object with a higher proportion of heavy
atoms is more radioactive. For the people who study chemical properties, an
object’s ratio of heavy to light isotopes can reveal information about its
nature, and even how it was formed. In planetary science, an isotope is a bit
like a person’s accent, giving away its origins.
Closer to the Sun, where it’s warmer, the molecules of lighter elements
were more likely to heat up and escape during the formation of the solar
system. Farther away, where things are colder, rocks were able to keep more
of their water and other lighter substances. This simple chemistry partially
explains why the planets are all so different. Mars is so chemically distinct
from Earth that you can identify Martian meteorites just by looking at their
oxygen isotopes, for example.
When Apollo astronauts brought the Moon rocks home, we discovered
that the Moon was also different from Earth. Those pure white anorthosite
crystals were distinct, for one thing. And Moon rocks seemed to have
different numbers of oxygen, titanium, and other elements’ isotopes. Based on
these chemical accents, scientists who favored the giant-impact theory
believed the Moon was made from the remains of the impactor. It was Theia
reborn.
It was a nice theory. According to these scientists, the Moon came from
the poor obliterated world that collided with Earth 1.0 early in the solar
system’s history. The name Theia, mother of the Moon, was a perfect fit. The
notion came to be called the giant-impact hypothesis. It explains many
peculiarities of the Earth-Moon system, from its angular momentum to the
sizes of the two worlds.

But modern scientific techniques would begin to cast doubt on the story’s
simple outlines.
In 2001, Swiss researchers remeasured the Moon rock called troctolite
76535 and thirty other lunar samples using sophisticated equipment that sifts
through isotopes.[6] They found that the rocks’ oxygen isotopes were
indistinguishable from those of Earth rocks. In the years since, geochemists
around the world have taken a crack at a whole host of other elements and
obscure metals. Titanium, chromium, rubidium, potassium, tungsten, and
other materials all look pretty much the same, whether the rocks are from
Earth or the Moon. When scientists measure these elements, they usually look
for isotopes that have extra neutrons, the ones that are slightly radioactive.
These isotopes can be used as a clock. This is the principle behind
radiocarbon dating, which archaeologists commonly use to find out how old
something was when it died.[*1]
During reexamination of Apollo samples, isotopes of tungsten looked
particularly strange. Tungsten-182 is a daughter[*2] of an element called
hafnium-182. That means tungsten-182 acts like a clock, just like carbon-14,
albeit for much, much older things; this clock allows scientists to determine
when a planet formed. But the ratios of tungsten and hafnium are essentially
the same in Moon rocks and Earth rocks. Very unlikely coincidences would
be required for the rocks that make up our planet and our Moon to have
formed from the very same stuff at the very same time.
From the point of view of Theia, this does not make much sense. If Mars
is so obviously different from Earth, if it has a distinct chemical accent, then
Theia should, too. Planets contain the fingerprints of their birthplace, and
Theia was born far from Earth. A Theia with an accent identical to Earth’s
would be a monumental coincidence. But Theia is a ghost, so we cannot
interrogate its rocks.
—
Given all these chemical similarities, some scientists began to wonder if
Theia never existed. Some wondered whether the early Earth’s environment

might have been more crowded. All other mooned planets have more than
one, after all, and some even have rings. Why should we assume Earth has
always had just the one satellite? One theory suggests that Earth’s Moon is
not the original Moon, but a compendium of at least a dozen individual
worlds. During Earth’s youth, while the incandescent planet cooled amid a
hellscape of rocks and Promethean fire, errant rocks smaller than Theia could
have shorn away bits of the planet. These projectiles would have knocked off
enough rock to form tiny wisps of Earth rings, which would combine over
time, something we know occurs inside the rings of Saturn. Those ring-forged
moonlets would eventually coalesce, forming the Moon we know today.
Though the theory is compelling, simulations still can’t explain how the
many moonlets could have combined into such a huge secondary world.
What’s more, the physics that describes Earth, the Moon, their rotation
speeds, their distances, and many more characteristics can only be explained
by another rocky world smashing into Earth 1.0. Physics insists that Theia
must have been real.
And yet a Moon and an Earth with essentially identical chemistry must
have formed from the same material, which no one can explain. So scientists
have been trying to reconcile the messages from the Moon rocks with the
requirements of physics—the need for an impactor of a certain size, traveling
at a specific speed. Sarah Stewart, a planetary scientist at the University of
California, Davis, is leading the charge. She and her colleagues have come up
with several ways to imagine, and then simulate in computer code, the most
horrendous and most consequential day in the history of this planet: the day
Theia came to Earth.
Stewart is a MacArthur “Genius” grantee, a computer modeling expert
focused on colliding worlds, and the type of magnetic personality who
enraptures people with discussions of seemingly boring topics—like isotopes.
When I met her at a conference of lunar and planetary scientists, she was
wearing a chalk-white pantsuit and matching white cape, adorned with a
glittering enamel brooch depicting the full Moon. Her lab is equipped with
custom-built cannons that smash small rocks together at ludicrous speeds,
simulating the dreadful conditions that result from clashes of planets and

asteroids. Her computer simulations can mimic the world-rending collision of
Theia and Earth 1.0, and the clouds of crumbs that eventually became
planetesimals and planets.
In 2012, Stewart and a colleague named Matija Ćuk proposed a new story
of the Moon’s formation.[7] Their computer simulations suggested that when
Theia collided with Earth 1.0, our natal planet rotated through one day every
two to three hours. The violent, head-on smashup sheared away a huge
portion of Earth, obliterated most of Theia, and mixed the remnants
sufficiently enough to build an Earth and a Moon from basically the same
ingredients. Their cores would be different, with the Moon incorporating
Theia’s innards and Earth keeping its own. But the rocks that we can study—
the rocks that floated to their surfaces and were excavated by other asteroids
—those rocks would look identical. This version had problems, too, however.
Earth is not a whirling dervish now. As Immanuel Kant and George Darwin
knew, it is slowing down thanks to interactions with the Moon. The Apollo
astronauts left scientific instruments on the Moon that let us record the rate at
which this slowdown is occurring. According to the rate of change, not
enough time has passed to slow Earth from a three-hour day to our current
twenty-four-hour rhythm. Something else would have had to transfer some of
the angular momentum away from Earth. There are calculations involving the
Sun that can account for this change, but it’s not really enough, so the story of
the Moon’s formation was not quite complete. Competing computer models
churned out variations on this theme for several years, and it was into this
melee that Stewart and her student Simon Lock waded in 2018, updated code
in hand.
“Everyone was still stuck in this idea that you form this planet and this
disk. Maybe it was a different impact, you produce more vapor, but the
fundamental structure is the same. What we found is that’s not true,” says
Lock, who is now a planetary scientist at the University of Bristol in England.
Something else happened instead.
The day Theia came down to Earth 1.0, Theia did not just shear away part
of our world. Both worlds were completely torn apart. The devastation was
complete, and in its aftermath, there was no ring. There were no naked planet

cores floating in space. There was no planet and no moon. Instead, both Earth
1.0 and Theia were blasted apart into a superheated cloud of dust. Their
vaporized remains swirled into a fast-spinning, bagel-shaped bulging disk, a
short-lived structure previously untheorized in planetary science. The
Promethean hellscape of this structure defies our previous understanding. The
cloud spun so quickly that its outer edge reached a point called the corotation
limit, which essentially means it went into orbit. The thing is too big and
diffuse to rotate like a normal planet; instead, at the outer edge of the cloud,
the vaporized rock spun so fast that it took on a new structure, with the disk
circling a hot inner region. But the disk is not separated from the central
region like Saturn’s rings, or like anything else any scientist had ever
imagined. Every region of the cloud formed molten-rock raindrops, which
Stewart and Lock initially called a continuous mantle-atmosphere-disk
structure—a MAD structure. Earth 2.0 and the Moon cooled and coalesced
in this cloud, like eggs poached in a pot of boiling water. The seed of the
eventual Moon would have formed within just a year, and the two bodies
would have remained in hell-cloud form for just a century before settling into
the paired worlds we recognize today, according to Lock.
Stewart and Lock decided this unusual planetary nest needed a new name,
so they dubbed it a synestia. It’s derived from the Greek goddess Hestia,
champion of the hearth and home, and the Greek prefix syn-, which means
“together.” Our home, together.
The particulars are still debated in planetary science conferences, but most
scientists agree that the Moon probably formed fast. In a 2022 supercomputer
simulation, Theia and Earth 1.0 collided at twenty thousand miles per hour,
and the wrecked planets launched a piece of themselves into orbit. The Moon
formed within mere hours of the impact, according to this theory.[8]
To understand the fine details of how the Moon and Earth came to be,
scientists will need fresh samples from the Moon. Meanwhile, theorists will
keep trying to understand the Hadean conditions from which our Earth and
our Moon were born. Their work may describe more than the birth story of
the Moon.

We still haven’t nailed down the particulars of Kant’s solar system origin
story. None of the current planetary formation and accretion theories truly
capture the solar system we see. This is true for planets in other solar
systems, too. No single idea can explain the huge variety of worlds we know
exist, nor the variety of places they are found.
Planets seem to coalesce very quickly, both in our solar system and around
distant stars. This suggests they don’t often form through a core-accretion
process, because many eons are required to mash crumbs together into
something the size of a world. Jupiter, for instance, contains the vast majority
of the material left over from the birth of the Sun. The planet has a huge
core, according to measurements from the Juno spacecraft, which began
orbiting the gas giant in 2016. Building Jupiter’s huge core would take a long
time—too long, according to the best simulations of this process. The
material around the infant Sun would have disappeared in less time than
would be required to bake such a humongous world. What’s more, Jupiter is
in a weird location. In most other star systems, giant planets like Jupiter form
in the outer reaches, and might later migrate inward. But Jupiter, which is
more than twice as massive as the rest of the planets combined, is somehow
mixed in among all of them and is the closest to the Sun of any gas giant.
Other models also fail to explain the panoply of planets we know are out
there. The curdling mechanism of streaming instability would be able to
produce worlds only in certain locations around a star. But they are found
here, there, and everywhere. Some planets orbit their hosts in a couple of
Earth days, and other star systems are home to far-flung, frigid worlds that
make Jupiter’s orbit seem snug. None of our theories quite add up to the
universe we can see through our telescopes, both nearby and unimaginably far
away.
There are some observational and mathematical reasons for this lack of
understanding. Telescopes just can’t make out objects that fall in the spectrum
between specks of dust and protoplanets the size of the Moon. To understand
why, we have to wade into the laws of optics.
—

Everything you see represents just a tiny sliver of the electromagnetic
spectrum. Most of the universe is hidden from view, even the normal stuff,
not just the mysterious dark matter no one yet understands. The right
telescopes are technologically capable of seeing most of the light we cannot,
but Earth gets in the way. Its atmosphere absorbs infrared, ultraviolet, X-ray,
and gamma-ray radiation, which is part of the reason we can live here without
being fried or having our DNA ripped apart. The atmosphere also blocks
some visible light, which is why the Hubble Space Telescope, the James
Webb Space Telescope, and other observatories are orbiting above us. In very
high and dry places, like the mountaintops of Hawaiian volcanoes and the
Andes Mountains in Chile, large radio telescopes can pick up long
wavelengths of the electromagnetic spectrum. When I visited the Atacama
Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA), medics gave me an oxygen
tank, which the engineers wore in backpacks. The lack of atmosphere so
helpful to astronomy can wreak havoc on your brain and body.
Radio telescopes can sense information from almost any source,[*3] from
the Sun to cold, dark objects that emit no visible light. The signals that let you
make a call on your smartphone are a billion billion times more powerful than
these faint cosmic emanations.
Because radio telescopes detect long wavelengths of the electromagnetic
spectrum, their light-collecting surfaces have to be quite large. Modern radio
telescopes cheat this law by combining several different dish antennas and
synchronizing their data using a supercomputer. ALMA, perched at sixteen
thousand feet above sea level in Chile’s vast Atacama Desert, uses fifty-four
such dishes to “see” objects from millimeter-sized and centimeter-sized dust,
up to small, cold pebbles.
But even with ALMA’s keen vision, there is no way to make out a
kilometer-sized embryonic world, at least not yet. To see something a
kilometer across, you would need a kilometer-sized radio telescope array.
There is one under construction in South Africa, but even the Square
Kilometre Array may not be able to see a planet in the process of growing
from a crumb to a world. There may be some stages of the process we will

never observe. The upshot is that nobody really knows what the middle phase
of a planet’s development looks like.
Mathematically, computer simulations have a hard time separating the
motions of gas from the motions of dust inside baby star systems. Most
simulations assume the material all moves together in lockstep, but maybe it
doesn’t. Maybe gas swirls around the dust grains, pushing the dust together
the way water shoves flood debris into eddies and pools. “Most models
haven’t actually calculated this collisional mixing,” said Sarah Stewart.
Enter the synestia.
Maybe, warm clouds that form in titanic collisions like the one that forged
Earth 2.0 and the Moon are responsible for this missing link in planetary
formation. As hot vapor in a synestia cools and contracts, it provides an
inward flow of collapsing gas. The dense clouds of planet crumbs are
protected from stellar winds long enough to form larger clumps, and
eventually the parent bodies of planets.
“They act like a security blanket, or a shield to protect them from
turbulence in the surrounding nebula,” Stewart said. This cosmic cuddling
could also help explain why objects that form together look so similar.
It’s possible that a synestia is just a phase of a planet’s life, like its birth
and its inevitable destruction. Maybe all of the planets started out as a
synestia. Every planet that is violently whacked by another world forms a
synestia, according to Stewart, and we know there was a lot of knocking
around long ago. These hellish structures might be common, especially in the
early years of a star’s natal cloud.
If this is true, the story of the Moon’s formation is much more than the
story of our silvery sister. The origin of the Moon is the story of creation writ
large. Maybe the Moon’s birth story can tell us about the genesis of not just
Earth, but all possible worlds. We don’t know yet. But the Moon still guides
these questions, for this planet and all others.

We know that the obliteration of Theia led to the Moon and Earth, but
minor bombardments by space rocks were common and lasted for eons after
Theia’s remnants were remade into Earth and the Moon. Mercury, Venus, the
Moon, and Mars were all pounded by uncountable asteroids for ages. Just
look at their cratered, dimpled faces, which have remained unchanged for
billions of years and still show the scars of this primeval pummeling. Only
Earth has no evidence of this cataclysmic history. That is not because Earth
escaped the drubbing. It is because Earth’s crust is alive with the action of
plate tectonics.
Look at a globe, or even a flat map of the world. The puzzle-piece shapes
of Earth’s continents, especially South America and Africa, are immediately
obvious. Just slide South America over to the east, and Brazil’s right shoulder
nestles right under Africa’s left. Brazil’s beaches neatly meet Ivory Coast,
Ghana, Togo, Benin, and Nigeria.
Explorers dating to the sixteenth century noticed these shapes, and
suggested that the continents were originally whole and later somehow torn
apart. The earliest example of this notion probably comes from Abraham
Ortelius, the Flemish mapmaker who published the first modern atlas in
1570. Many other geologists and explorers repeated this theory in the
intervening centuries, even proposing (accurately) supercontinents that broke
up sometime in the past. But no one could explain how the continents
separated.
To some scientists, the idea finally started making more sense after George
Darwin proposed lunar fission. Based on his theory, many scientists in the
late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries speculated that Earth’s features
reorganized after the calamitous calving event, with the puzzle pieces of
Earth’s continents a direct result of the Moon’s departure. Around the turn of
the twentieth century, people put forth several scenarios. Geophysicist
Osmond Fisher argued that the deep Pacific Ocean was a scar left by the
Moon’s absence. Astronomer William Pickering argued in 1907 that when
the Moon flew away, Earth’s crust slumped into the depression it left behind;
this tore Africa from South America and ripped open the Atlantic Ocean.
Geologist Frank Taylor thought the Moon was captured, not calved, and that

the continents shifted over time because of the tidal interactions that resulted
from the gravitational relationship between the Moon and Earth.
The man who finally explained this continental puzzle also tried to
understand the face of the Moon.
—
In the spring of 1916, Alfred Wegener, a German astronomer and
atmospheric physicist, was thirty-five and home on two weeks’ leave from
service as an infantry captain on the western front of World War I. On the
afternoon of April 3, 1916, a fireball streaked across the skies northwest of
Marburg, where, in peacetime, Wegener taught meteorology at the university.
Captivated, he spent his two weeks’ R & R traipsing through west-central
Germany and interviewing witnesses. Alfred and his wife, Else, knocked on
doors in the small hamlet of Treysa, which he determined was the closest
town to where the space rock would have landed. Eventually, in January
1917, the meteorite was recovered, only a few hundred yards from where
Wegener calculated it would land.
Wegener’s interest in the meteorite fueled his interest in the Moon’s own
apparent craters. By Wegener’s time, people were still not sure how the
Moon’s surface came to be so dimpled. Scientists debated several ideas, like a
so-called bubble hypothesis in which the Moon’s surface erupted like a
multitude of boils; volcanism, a theory favored by Immanuel Kant and the
pioneering naturalist Alexander von Humboldt, which assumed the craters
were ancient caldera; and even ice ages, in which the craters were all ancient
glacial moraines. Many people favored a Darwinian tidal model, in which the
Moon’s interior was rent by violent tidal pressures[*4] in the days before it
became locked with one face to Earth. With each rising tide, cracks in the
Moon would leak molten material, which would congeal and form a solid
circular ridge.
All of these were wrong. And in the fall of 1918, now home from the war,
Wegener set out to prove it.

As historian Mott Greene describes him, Wegener knew more about
selenography than most geologists, and knew more about geology than any
selenographer.[9] Like Johannes Kepler, he stood above the field of research
that he’d carefully surveyed, and incorporated other scientists’ findings into
his own new, unorthodox theories. Wegener owned a copy of Kepler’s
fictional lunar opus, called Somnium, and carefully annotated the sections
where his fellow German astronomer had described craters as the result of
impacts. In a series of experiments performed in 1919 and 1920, he would
pile cement powder on a table, sprinkle it with water, and let it set into
concrete. Then he would dump more loose cement powder on top, and toss a
tablespoon of additional cement powder on that. The result was a tiny crater.
Again and again, he made and photographed cement-powder craters of
different sizes, noticing that some formed central peaks and some did not,
depending on the amount of impactor material.[*5] He compared photographs
of his mini craters to real Moon photographs, which appeared increasingly
detailed through the most recent telescopes. And he realized he was onto
something. “Typical lunar craters are best explained as impact craters,” he
wrote in a 1921 report.[10]
Wegener was correct about lunar craters, and was mostly correct about the
forces of plate tectonics. Rejecting all of his predecessors’ ideas about Earth’s
movable face, he began circulating a hypothesis that Earth’s continents drift
around on their own accord. He argued that Earth’s crust floats on top of its
interior—just like Neil Armstrong’s anorthosite rocks originally floated on a
hot Moon, though Wegener didn’t know about that. Wegener suggested that
this happened through tidal forces resulting from the gravitational pull of the
Moon. He also proposed that Earth’s equatorial bulge forced the continents to
drift away from the poles. His nemesis, British geophysicist Harold Jeffreys,
demonstrated that these forces were inadequate, and Wegener’s ideas
languished until sonar developed for submarines during World War II helped
scientists discover the phenomenon of seafloor spreading. This is the
mechanism that actually explains continental drift—though good luck finding
a geophysicist who can tell you simply why that happens, or why there are
plates in the first place. As Earth’s crustal plates converge and slide under one

another, magma rises between the fractures in their meeting grounds (mid-
ocean ridges) and forms fresh seafloor.
Wegener would not live to see his theory of plate tectonics accepted by the
world’s scientists. But his theory of lunar craters met with a much more
receptive audience. After Wegener, most scientists believed, rightly, that the
Moon’s surface looks like a pizza because it has been walloped by asteroids,
then and now and forever.
—
The mother of all collisions, the Theia impact, changed the course of our
planet’s history. The collision remixed the very materials that make up Earth.
Theia may be a ghost, but it is not gone.
Theia may have added a veneer to Earth’s mantle, endowing it with an
extra load of elements, like gold, palladium, and platinum, and other
materials. These would typically bond to iron and sink to the core, but they
are found throughout Earth’s mantle and crust, suggesting they were added
after Earth was made. And new research suggests that Theia remnants may be
even more prominent than scattered precious metals.
To understand how this could work, we need to go back to Wegener’s
continental plates and the realization that Earth’s crust is a changeling.
As Earth 2.0 and the newly formed Moon began to take shape, in the
centuries after the synestia, the two worlds followed the law of entropy and
began cooling off. They remained entirely molten for a half billion years or
so, which we know because of Neil Armstrong’s floating anorthosite rocks. In
Earth’s early days, heavy elements like iron and nickel separated from lighter
ones and sank through the molten mantle, forming Earth’s dense core. Today,
the mantle is hot and soft, but not quite molten. Earth’s outer mantle behaves
more like road tar or candle wax than a river of lava or a chunk of stone. But
the candle-wax mantle is not uniform. Within it are two continent-sized blobs
of rock that seem to be denser and chemically different from the rest of
Earth’s interior. These blobs, thousands of miles wide and as much as six
hundred miles deep, stretch from the core-mantle boundary, bracketing

Earth’s core like a pair of earmuffs. One sits under Africa and one sits under
the Pacific.
Geologists have debated the nature of these odd magma structures, which
are known as large low-shear-velocity provinces, for years. Some people
aren’t convinced the blobs even exist. Evidence for these masses comes from
seismic waves, of the kind that ripple through the planet during an
earthquake. The earthquake waves slow down abruptly when they reach the
blobs, which suggests they are made of different material than the rest of the
mantle. Some geologists think these are slab graveyards—the remains of
previous continental plates, subducted eons ago as Earth recycled itself. But
other geologists have traced magma plumes from the blobs all the way up to
the islands of Samoa and Iceland. Lava on those islands contains isotopes of
elements that must have formed during the first hundred million years of
Earth’s history—potentially too early to be recycled pieces of tectonic plates.
Some people have wondered, mostly in hallways at scientific meetings,
whether the blobs came from somewhere else entirely.
In 2021, a geodynamics graduate student named Qian Yuan suggested that
they are from Theia.[11] According to this model, after the collision, Theia’s
core would have merged with Earth’s—either inside the synestia or as the
naked cores coalesced—and pieces of Theia’s mantle, if it were denser than
Earth’s, would have remained distinct inside Earth’s innards, like clumps in
undermixed pancake batter.
To test this idea, scientists could go back to the isotopes and look for
similarities between the Samoa and Iceland rocks as well as rocks from the
Moon’s own mantle. But none of the Apollo samples captured the Moon’s
interior. The astronauts dug up what they could, but they mostly sampled the
rocks that had floated—the anorthosites—and rocks that had been liberated
in near-side asteroid strikes, just as Wegener predicted.
To get to the Moon’s deepest heart, you would need to sample the largest
impact basin on its surface. And that is on the far side, near its south pole,
where no human has walked yet. In 2019, a zippy Chinese rover called Yutu-
2, “Jade Rabbit,” landed on the eastern floor of a crater in the Moon’s
gigantic far-side scar, called the South Pole–Aitken Basin. It captured some

of the first hard evidence of the far side’s strange geology. Yutu-2 deployed
lunar-penetrating radar to peer inside the Moon, and found that the soil is
thicker than scientists expected. The regolith goes about 130 feet deep before
there’s any sign of lava beds, or maria; scientists expected about one-fourth of
that. The basalt surface has been buried by regolith, gardened through the
eons by a constant asteroid pummeling.
The rover’s findings marked the first time humans have been able to study
one of the Moon’s most mysterious characteristics: the distinct difference
between its near side and its far side.[12]
Until scientists saw the photos from early Soviet spacecraft and from
Apollo 8, no one had any reason to think the hemispheres of the Moon would
appear different from each other. But the surface of the Moon’s far side is
totally unlike the side we see from Earth.[*6]
—
In the first few years after Apollo, some people thought Earth acted as a
shield, safeguarding the side of the Moon that faces us and leaving the far
side exposed to whatever the solar system might throw at it. But most
scientists now think the horrific circumstances of Earth and the Moon’s
mutual formation led to the discrepancy between the near side and far side.
Once the Moon and Earth had cooled into separate bodies, perhaps when
their synestia calmed down, the Moon quickly assumed a tidally locked
position.
“Tidal locking” is a boring term for the graceful way the Moon maintains
the same face toward us. The Moon actually does rotate, but its spin is equal
to the time it takes for the Moon to circle Earth. So it appears to be locked in
place.
Because the Moon’s far side was more distant from Earth from the
beginning, the theory goes, it cooled faster, forming a thicker crust. The
boiling Earth, radiating warmth at more than 2,500 degrees Celsius, kept the
Moon’s near side warm. This produced a temperature gradient on the Moon,
forming a crust atop a fluffy interior like a soufflé.

Aluminum and calcium would have condensed first on the cold side of the
Moon. Thousands or even millions of years later, these elements eventually
coalesced with silicates and oxygen in the Moon’s mantle, forming
anorthosite, those chalky white rocks that characterize the Apollo haul. But
the superheated near side formed a thinner crust. Over time, meteorite
impacts would release vast flows of basalt from that thin crust, like driving a
fork through a chocolate lava cake. The maria resulted from these flows.
Heat from the Moon’s innards also played a role. The near side is full of
KREEP rocks, an acronym for potassium (symbol K) enriched with rare
earth elements, like erbium, europium, and other weird ones, and finally
combined with phosphorus (symbol P). KREEP material has a lower melting
point. It may have been the last stuff on the Moon to solidify, after the
synestia turned to clumps, the Moon-wide ocean of lava froze over, the
anorthosite rocks were locked into the white crust, and the Moon finally
settled into the pearlescent orb it is today.
—
But nobody really knows why the faces of the Moon are so distinct. No
theory can explain it with the certainty of Wegener’s craters or the giant
impact.
Though Jack Schmitt tried valiantly to get NASA to land Apollo 17 on the
Moon’s far side, all six landings happened on its near side. Each landing site
was a little different, but rocks from every single one included similar
material. This is a troubling fact. The Apollo samples only reflect the
locations where we touched down, not the whole Moon. They give us a
history of a particular place, which, by extension, suggests that they can’t offer
us the history of the entire Moon or the entire Earth—neither version 1.0 nor
2.0. And that means the stories we have told based on those rocks are all
incomplete.
The inconstant Moon, spectral symbol of impermanence, is still forcing us
to reckon with our own lack of understanding. To unravel its entire history,
we will need to go back to its surface and restore more pieces of it to the

planet from which it came. To unravel Earth’s history with the Moon we need
to go back in time.
Skip Notes
*1 Scientists study an isotope called carbon-14, which has two extra neutrons in its nucleus. All living
things absorb normal carbon-12 and unstable carbon-14, and this absorption stops when the organism
dies. The carbon-14 then decays, with a so-called half-life of 5,700 years, but the carbon-12 remains
constant. The less C-14 something has, the older it must be.
*2 Radioactive decay occurs when an unstable isotope, also called a nuclide, emits spare electrons and
changes into a different element. The original isotope is called a parent, and the version that forms
during radioactive decay is called the daughter. The daughter might be stable, or it might also decay,
but on a different timescale from the parent.
*3 This is why many astronomers favor building a radio telescope array on the Moon’s far side, where it
would be uncontaminated by the deafening roar from Earth.
*4 Tidal pressure is responsible for volcanism on Jupiter’s moon Io, but this wasn’t known until 1979,
when astronomer Linda Morabito studied Voyager flyby images of Io and spotted a volcanic plume
streaming into space.
*5 You can try this at home. Clean off a kitchen counter and take out the bag of all-purpose flour you
probably have tucked in the pantry. Dump out about a cup, covering an area about six square inches.
Using a teaspoon, scoop a little more flour out of the bag, packing it tightly into the spoon. Then,
holding your arm about six inches above the floured counter, flip over the teaspoon, dropping a floury
meteorite onto your pretend regolith. Watch what happens. Is there a central peak inside your new
crater? How tall is the crater ring, and how wide? How far do the wisps of flour radiate from the point
of impact? Try changing the crater’s characteristics by making a thicker surface, or by adding more or
less flour to your meteorite. It’s okay if your kitchen gets messy. It’s science.
*6 The far side is not its dark side, though this is so commonly misstated. As Kant said, the Moon
always shows the same face to Earth because it is tidally locked to our world. But the far side is
illuminated by the Sun just like the rest of the Moon. It’s invisible to us, but it’s certainly not night all
the time.

When ancient thinkers considered the creation of Earth, they thought of it
as the creation of everything there could possibly be. To them, there was no
universe beyond the borders of the world. No one knew what the planets—
the “five pacers” in ancient China,[1] “the wanderers” in ancient Greece—
were like. No one had any inkling that these were entire worlds distinct from
this one. With a few exceptions, before the age of telescopes most people
could not see galaxies, which meant nobody knew what a galaxy was.
Certainly no one knew about the supermassive black holes at the centers of
the galaxies, nor the invisible cosmic glue known as dark matter that holds
galaxy groups together. Earth plays the starring role in all the oldest creation
tales. Everything else in the heavens took a supporting role.
Early stories cast the Moon and the stars as helpers on a greater quest. To
Plato, the Moon’s orbit was made for marking time as a way to comprehend
eternity. “For this reason there came into being night and the day….” Plato
writes in Timaeus; “the month, complete when the Moon has been round her
orbit and caught up with the Sun again; the year, complete when the Sun has
been round his orbit.”[2] The Sumerian Seven Tablets of Creation also
describe the Moon as time’s marker and the Sun’s fellow; the Sumerian Moon
God was the father of the Sun God. In the Book of Genesis, the Moon is

created at the same time as the Sun as the “second light,” the one that
illuminates the night.
The scientific story of the creation of Earth is not altogether different, but
the Moon plays a more vital role. Forged alongside Earth in the searing hot
synestia, the Moon is more sibling than subordinate. Theia is really the
mother of both Earth and the Moon. And our silvery sister is still a part of us,
Earth’s biographer, its first chronicler, and its most thorough accountant.
There is no story about Earth that can exclude its influence, and there is no
story about the Moon that does not tell us something about Earth.
Since the beginning of evolutionary time, the Moon has sculpted life on
this planet. The Moon stabilizes Earth’s tilt toward the Sun, making the Moon
the captain of our seasons. The consistency of this tilt over millennia
stabilizes our climate in turn. Life in all its endless forms, from corals to
plants to humans, responds to the Moon’s cues. Oxygen exhaled by these
breathing organisms streams out of our planet’s atmosphere, flies with the
solar wind, and pools on the Moon as proof that we are here.
The Moon’s unusually large size and its distance from Earth mean that
Earth and the Moon are a system, working together. The Moon is not just a
small satellite orbiting a larger world; in fact, the Moon doesn’t technically
rotate around Earth’s center of gravity. Rather, both Earth and the Moon
orbit around their shared barycenter. This is a bland term for a lovely
concept: The barycenter represents the nexus of the pair’s relationship. Earth
and the Moon orbit their shared center of gravity. The barycenter is found not
at Earth’s core, but at an average of three thousand miles from its center. This
nexus is why the tide bulges both on the side nearest to the Moon and on the
side opposite it. Gravity pulls Earth and Moon together, but they are also
pushed apart by the centrifugal force as they orbit their shared barycenter.
The Moon’s tug on Earth pulls water toward itself, and the centrifugal force
also pulls water in the opposite direction, creating two bulges, and two high
and low tides each day as Earth rotates.
All of these relationships are more than just a sign of kinship. The Moon
may be necessary for all the things that make Earth unique, especially its
defining characteristic: us.

Earth spins on its axis; tilts on its axis with respect to its orbital path; and
points in a different direction over time. Every one of these traits is
influenced by the Moon, and every one of them changes Earth and everything
on it.
First there is night and day, which we have because Earth spins around as
though it’s mounted on an invisible spindle that runs from south to north. The
equator sits perpendicular to that spindle, circling Earth’s middle. Plato
figured this out twenty-three centuries ago: “The Earth, our foster mother,
winding as she does about the axis of the universe, [the creator] devised to be
the guardian and maker of night and day, and first and oldest of the gods born
within the heaven,” he writes in Timaeus.[3]
Any classroom globe will show you the poles and the equator. If you don’t
have a globe around, you can make a model yourself.[*1]
We all know the day lasts twenty-four hours—at least right now—because
this is how long it takes for a given spot on Earth to rotate under the Sun. But
Earth also experiences a lunar day, or the “tidal day,” which is the time it
takes a specific spot on Earth to complete one rotation under the Moon. A
lunar day is fifty minutes longer than a solar day, because the Moon is
revolving around Earth in the same direction that Earth is rotating. It takes a
given location on Earth almost an hour a day to catch up to the Moon.
As Earth spins, some of its energy is transferred, via friction in the oceans,
to the tidal bulges. And because it is spinning faster than the Moon orbits,
Earth forces the high tide to occur ahead of where the Moon is located in the
sky, instead of directly beneath it.
The bulges therefore sit slightly ahead of the Moon. And through complex
interactions involving gravity and other forces, this sloshing water transfers
energy to the Moon, pushing it into a higher orbit. The upshot is twofold: The
Moon is moving away, and the rate of Earth’s spin is slowing down, just as
George Darwin figured out. This happens slowly, just 1.8 milliseconds every
century, but over geologic time that adds up to a lot. The Moon has changed
the length of our day by twelve hours since primitive life emerged on Earth.

Fossil corals show that in the Silurian period about 430 million years ago,
when the first bony fish evolved, Earth rotated on its axis every twenty-one
hours, for a twenty-one-hour day. That means the planet spun 420 times for
every revolution around the Sun. By the Devonian period between 419 and
359 million years ago—the time when fish developed lungs and learned to
walk on land—the day was a couple hours longer. In another 200 million
years, a day will last twenty-five hours, more like a day on Mars, and a solar
year will last only 350 days.
—
The Moon shapes the length of our days, and it plays a major role in what
they feel like outside. Its gravity helps safeguard our tilted planet against
climate chaos.
When the tumultuous early nebula organized into the Sun and planets,
most objects settled along a flat plane with the Sun at the center. This
invisible plane is called the ecliptic. The planets go around the Sun on the
ecliptic plane as if they were tracing the grooves on a vinyl record.
Sometimes you can see this phenomenon with the naked eye. At certain times
of year, on a clear night, you can spot Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn
arranged in a diagonal line. Occasionally, when you’re lucky—or unlucky,
depending on which astrology you believe, and whose history you are
reading[*2] —the planets even appear to huddle close.
Earth is tilted with respect to this invisible plane, however, by about 23.4
degrees. As any elementary school student learns, this essential feature of our
world gives us the seasons. Pick up a pencil and grasp it like you’re about to
write your name. The barrel of your pencil rests between your thumb and
forefinger, and as the tip touches the surface, the North Pole is tilted, just like
Earth.
In the Northern Hemisphere, winter arrives when the northern half of
Earth is tilted away from the Sun, which appears weaker and lower in the sky.
When it’s winter in the North, the Southern Hemisphere is pointed closer to
the Sun and it’s summer down there. And the reverse is true: In northern

spring, Earth’s journey around the Sun tips the northern half closer to our
star, and things in North America and Europe warm up.
Most of the planets are tilted on their axes, some by a tad and some by a
lot. Venus is tilted by 3 degrees and doesn’t really have seasons; it also spins
backward. Uranus is knocked practically sideways, with a tilt of 97.7 degrees.
Mars is tilted by about 25 degrees. Although Mars is a lot like Earth—similar
axial tilt, a day (called a sol) that’s just thirty-nine minutes longer than ours—
it doesn’t have much in the way of moons. Its twin satellites Phobos and
Deimos may be captured asteroids, or may have been born of Mars the way
the Moon was from Earth, but whatever their origin, they’re dinky little spuds
that play no major role in Mars’s story. And the lack of a massive moon may
be one reason Mars has such an intense climate.
In the past ten to twenty million years, with Jupiter and Saturn exerting
their influence and no big moon to offer stability, the Martian axis has
wobbled wildly between fourteen degrees and forty-eight degrees. When it’s
tilted more deeply, Mars’s carbon dioxide polar ice caps point nearer to the
Sun and can completely melt or sublime, turning directly from ice into vapor.
This injects more carbon dioxide into the Martian atmosphere, causing
extreme climate shifts.
Earth’s axis wobbles, too, but not by very much. It remains remarkably
stable over millions of years because the Moon safeguards it. During the past
ten million years, Earth’s axial tilt has shifted by only two degrees.
In 1993, Jacques Laskar and his colleagues at the Paris Observatory found
that without the Moon, gravitational interference from Jupiter would push
Earth around like a playground bully.[4] Earth’s axis would tilt somewhere
between zero degrees—ramrod straight—and a vertiginous eighty-five
degrees. In such a scenario, during one millennium, Earth’s poles would point
almost directly at the Sun, and the equator would be frigid; then a couple
million years later, everything would reverse. Imagine the snowy Antarctic at
today’s equator, and the tropics perpendicular to the Sun, frigid and dark.
Such a wild wobble would make it hard for any life to survive for very long,
especially large, land-dwelling, insatiable creatures like humans.

Astrobiologists have reexamined Laskar’s claim in the years since, and
some have argued that Earth would wobble between ten and fifty degrees, not
quite as extreme a difference as Laskar predicted but one that’s still horrifying
to imagine. Past climates can provide a glimpse of what those changes would
look like and how dramatically they could affect Earth. While Earth’s tilt is
not thought to be solely responsible for the rise and fall of ice ages, the
changing angle and intensity of sunlight can trigger feedbacks that contribute
to those global temperature shifts—and that’s with just a tiny change in angle.
One example is an interglacial cold period known as the Younger Dryas.
When it came to a close about 11,500 years ago, global temperatures shot up
—in Greenland, temperatures climbed by as much as eighteen degrees
Fahrenheit in just a few decades, according to ice-core studies. Not long after
the warm-up, humans living in the Fertile Crescent started to stay put rather
than travel in hunting bands, and began to create civilization. What ended the
Younger Dryas cold period is still disputed, but some paleoclimatologists
think rapidly melting ice sheets shifted heat circulation in the oceans,
especially the North Atlantic. The tilting of Earth’s poles toward the Sun
could have played a role in melting all that ice. What’s clear is that the
changes in Earth’s climate would certainly have been more extreme if the
Moon were not here to stabilize it. Today Earth is tilted at 23.4 degrees, but
the Moon is making this angle shallower. Earth will reach its minimum tilt of
22.1 degrees about 9,800 years from now.
—
Though the Moon smooths out Earth’s tilt over time, it does make our planet
wobble on its axis, just a bit. This happens because of tidal forces caused by
the Moon and the Sun.
The first person to figure this out was a Greek astronomer named
Hipparchus of Nicaea. As a boy in what is now northwestern Turkey, he
compiled records of local weather, and in adulthood he studied eclipses to
measure the distance between Earth and the Moon. He came quite close to
the real distance, a remarkable feat for someone living between 190 and 120

b.c.e.[*3] Hipparchus is credited with inventing trigonometry, and his ideas
were incorporated into the astrolabe, which was used around the world for
more than seventeen centuries to calculate astronomical positions.
Hipparchus’s original works were lost to time; we only know of his work
through later astronomers, most notably Ptolemy. But in 2022, scholars
studying an ancient Greek palimpsest, a parchment that had been erased and
reused, found a paragraph of his original star catalog covered up by a
Christian codex.[5] It shows part of Hipparchus’s attempt to map the entire
night sky. He was the first to unify the vast astronomical heritage of the
earliest Mesopotamian astronomers with later geometrical models, developed
by his Greek forebears. Before Hipparchus, Western classical antiquity had
two main types of skywatchers: the superstitious, Moon-tracking Babylonians
and the cerebral, perfection-obsessed Greeks. The cosmos was like a pile of
blank puzzle pieces with no images on them to help anyone figure out how
they fit together.
Hipparchus took the puzzle pieces—the Greek idea of moving spheres and
perfect realms—and painted them with the stars of Babylon. Scholars think
he was the first to define stars’ positions in the sky using two coordinates,
similar to latitude and longitude, so they could be located apart from
describing their position relative to constellations. His famous celestial
catalog, completed around 129 b.c.e., used Greek knowledge of the motions
of the stars, planets, Sun, and Moon to figure out where these objects were
located and where they would be in the future. He then compared his own
observations of their locations with the centuries-long records of
Mesopotamian sky priests. And he realized that the stars as he observed them
had shifted from earlier Babylonian measurements. The backdrop of stars was
changing not because the stars themselves had moved over the ages, but
because Earth was moving beneath them. This motion, now called precession,
occurs because Earth wobbles on its rotation axis like a spinning top.[*4]
To understand why this matters, we have to talk about the year.
Earth spins 365 times before it comes back to the same position relative to
the Sun, which makes a tropical year. Westerners mark the beginning of this
journey on January 1, but the tropical year technically stretches from equinox

to equinox, the days twice a year when Earth’s axis is tilted neither toward nor
away from the Sun, resulting in day and night of nearly equal length.
Astronomers—and everyone on Earth before the modern era—also measure
the “sidereal” year, which marks the time it takes for certain stars to return to
the exact same spot in the sky.
Because the Moon makes Earth’s axis wobble, those certain stars actually
do not return to the exact same spot over the centuries. Earth’s axis over time
points a slightly different direction in space. Eventually, even a trusty guide
star like the North Star will seem to move out of place. Right now the North
Star, a celestial point that appears to stay fixed throughout the year and thus
helps with navigation, is the star we call Polaris. But during the Younger
Dryas, humans in the Northern Hemisphere saw a different lodestar. And in
another twelve thousand years or so, our North Star will be Vega instead.
Other stars seem to move even more rapidly. And that means the sky looks
subtly different at the same time each year. Over centuries, the night sky can
look quite different. This was a problem for ancient astronomers through the
ages, who used the first visibility of stars, or the location of certain stars
compared to the Sun and Moon, in order to mark events during the year. The
first dawn sighting of the bright star Sirius, for instance, marked the start of
the ancient Egyptian calendar year, because in 3000 b.c.e., Sirius rose at
dawn in early July, when the Nile begins its annual flood. How does a
civilization tell time over long periods when the timekeeping system itself is
always changing?
—
What’s more, the Sun’s course across the sky is also out of sync with the
Moon’s. A lunar month represents the time it takes the Moon to return to the
same alignment of Earth, Sun, and Moon, a lineup called syzygy. This lasts
29.53 days. The lunar month begins on the day of the new Moon, when it is
invisible. The Romans called this day the “Calends,” the word that gives us
our modern “calendar.” The eighth day falls at first quarter, a waxing half-

Moon. The fifteenth day, which the Romans called the “Ides,” is the day of
the full Moon, and so on.
After twelve of these cycles, the Moon returns to the same location in the
sky, hanging just about where it did on the first cycle. That adds up to twelve
months in a lunar year, what’s called a synodic year. But there are only 354
days in this year. If you are sitting on Earth, 365 days will go by before the
Sun returns to the same place in the sky. This eleven-day gap poses a
problem; after just three years, the lunar months are out of sync with the Sun
by about a month.
Calendar makers figured out many creative ways to synchronize these two
types of time.
The Maya civilization, who lived in what is now parts of Mexico and
Central America, had one of the most complex solutions. They created three
separate, interlocking calendars: Their Tzolk’in calendar runs 260 days and
combines a cycle of thirteen numbers matched with 20 named days. The
Haab’ runs 365 days, counting eighteen months of 20 days apiece, and one 5-
day intercalary month. Finally, their Long Count calendar keeps track of the
years, including the time that has passed since the mythical starting date of
the Maya creation, August 11, 3114 b.c.e. The Moon, captain of time on this
planet, gave us the notion of calendars; it also means each of them is flawed,
because its presence interferes so thoroughly with our planet.
—
The wobble of Earth’s axis interferes with more than our timekeeping
systems. While the Moon stabilizes the axis to keep Earth’s climate temperate
over millennia, even a subtle wobble can cause dramatic climate changes on
shorter timescales. First, it helps to understand something that bedeviled the
marines at Tarawa: Neither Earth nor the Moon orbits in a circular path, but
rather in an ellipse. They each have points where they are closest to and
farthest from the bodies they orbit. The Moon was at apogee, its most distant
point from Earth, on Tarawa’s D-day. Every year, Earth also travels to its
nearest and farthest spots around the Sun, called perihelion and aphelion. But

Jupiter and Saturn stretch Earth’s orbit so that it is sometimes almost circular
and sometimes quite elliptical. Right now, Earth’s orbit is near its most
circular trajectory and due to become more oblong, on a cycle that spans
about one hundred thousand years.
The Moon is not powerful enough to change the shape of Earth’s orbit. But
it does change the season when Earth experiences perihelion and aphelion. In
the 2020s, Earth is at its closest point to the Sun in January every year, but
ten thousand years ago, perihelion occurred in the Northern Hemisphere’s
summer. Rains deluged the Sahara during this time, known as the African
Humid Period. The end of the rains shifted migration patterns in northern
Africa, planting the first seeds of civilization.
—
The Earth-Moon system’s orbital oddities—Earth’s tilted axis, the
precession of the equinoxes, and Earth’s elliptical orbit—add up to a
difference in the amount of sunlight that pours onto our planet through time.
These changes are known as the Milankovitch cycles, for the Serbian scientist
Milutin Milanković, who laid them all out a century ago. They contribute to
cyclical periods of change in our planet’s climate (and are a favorite
contrivance of people who pretend humans are not causing global warming).
What matters most in these cycles is the Moon. It is so big relative to
Earth, and it bears so much of the angular momentum of the Earth-Moon
system, that it safeguards us from chaos. And it is just the right size to be of
help and not harm. If the Moon were just 10 percent larger, the Moon itself
would cause Earth’s axis to become unstable.[6] If Theia and Earth 1.0 had
been remade into a slightly bigger Moon and a slightly littler Earth, we
probably wouldn’t be here.
All this particularity has led more than a few scientists to speculate on the
“anthropic principle,” the notion that the universe is observable because it is
organized in such a way that we arose and are still safely here to observe it.
There are plenty of planets and plenty of moons out there, but only systems
that are just right would give rise to creatures that can observe reality. Since

we exist and are observers of the universe, then Earth must have those just-
right properties, even if those properties are apparently rare. Only half of the
Sun-type stars we’ve found so far could even host a planet of roughly Earth’s
mass within this “just right” so-called Goldilocks zone, where water can
remain liquid, and so far, we have not found life on any of them.
—
The Moon’s gravitational pull might explain another strange facet of our
planet: our magnetic field.
As the Moon orbits in its elliptical path, its tug on Earth waxes and wanes
with time. Just as the Moon controls the ocean tide, it pulls and stretches
Earth’s mantle, which encases the planet’s liquid outer core like an egg white
surrounding an iron yolk. Rocks feel solid, but they contain slight
imperfections and cracks, which can lend them elastic tendencies. When a
rock is under some sort of external stress, like heat, water, or a tidal pull, the
rock can slightly deform. Changes in a rock’s shape are captured in a
measurement called strain, which can tell scientists about a rock’s strength
and stiffness. In a study in 2019, German researchers using a seismic
monitoring station in Chile observed seismic waves, akin to earthquake
waves, move through the rocks in time with the lunar tide’s rhythm.[7] The
half-day oscillations corresponded to 12.42 and 12.56 hours. The 12.42-hour
period precisely matches the lunar tide, while the longer oscillation matches
the Moon’s elliptical orbit. The same phenomenon that stranded the marines
at Tarawa is visible in Earth’s rocks.
The Earth-Moon-Sun rotational tidal engine pumps more than 3,700
billion watts of power into Earth. Some of that is lost in the atmosphere,
some dissipates in the deep ocean, and some dissipates in the tides, helping to
fling away the Moon. But some of that energy is unaccounted for.
Geophysicists have claimed the excess energy may be continuously injected
into Earth’s outer core, feeding the mysterious magnetic dynamo that creates
Earth’s magnetic force field. If you’re lucky you can even see it, on clear
nights at extreme latitudes. Earth’s magnetic shield produces the spectral

electric-green ribbons of the aurora borealis and aurora australis. Birds can
see it, too. Any compass can feel it. The magnetic field surrounds the planet
and flows around it in the solar wind, like a curtain flapping in a breeze. The
field emanates from Earth’s outer core, which swirls around like liquid,
generating an electric current. Heat rising from hot radioactive rocks and the
planet’s own rotation both serve to warm and stir the molten iron. (The Moon
controls that rotation, too, don’t forget.) But these forces are still not enough
to keep Earth’s core piping hot.
Earth is constantly losing heat into space, as is the Moon. But the inner
core is still a scorching 10,800 degrees Fahrenheit, as hot as the surface of
the Sun. The core-mantle boundary is about 6,900 degrees Fahrenheit (4,100
degrees Kelvin). Scientists have long held it must be cooling very slowly from
within, but in 2016, geophysicists argued that instead, Earth maintains the
heat left over from the day Theia and Earth 1.0 coalesced into the Moon and
Earth 2.0.[8] Today’s warmth is a lingering gift of radioactive isotopes and the
Moon. The Moon’s tidal action stirs the core and mantle as well as the seas,
and may provide the power required to keep Earth’s interior sizzling.
The Moon may have shaped Earth’s magnetic field from the moment of its
creation. Even if the remains of Theia are not interred within Earth today, the
doomed world would have reshuffled Earth 1.0’s mantle, which might have
altered its convection process, which drives Alfred Wegener’s plate tectonics.
Maybe, some geophysicists think, the Moon and its singularly violent creation
gave us the uniquely active, churning, rocky, force-field-protected world we
have today. Maybe Wegener’s ideas about plate tectonics were Moon-related
after all.
The swiftly rotating, tilted world we all inhabit has been remade countless
times. Through the action of plate tectonics, Earth has erased prior iterations
of itself. But we can look to the Moon to understand what early Earth, and
the rest of the solar system, might have been like before these
transformations. The Moon records an ancient battering that it must have

shared with Earth, and in telling that story, it offers us a biography of the
entire solar system. Understanding the nature of the early Moon has major
ramifications for some of the biggest questions in science: What was early
Earth like? What about the other rocky planets? How did life arise on Earth,
and when?
The Apollo missions brought us a new understanding of not only the Moon
and Earth’s shared creation story but also what happened afterward. As
scientists studied isotopes of Moon rocks, they noticed that the Moon’s
surface had heated up catastrophically, practically melting the entire thing,
about 3.9 billion years ago. That’s half a billion years after the Moon was
made. Based largely on these rock signatures, scientists came to believe that
500 million years after the synestia formed Earth and the Moon, the Moon
was blasted within an inch of its life by a hard rain of asteroids the size of
cities. They would have liquefied the Moon—and, because it was right next
door, Earth as well. In 1973, planetary scientist Fouad Tera and his
colleagues termed this epochal bombardment a “terminal lunar cataclysm,”
which also became known as the Late Heavy Bombardment.
“It must in any event have been quite a show from the Earth,” they wrote,
“assuming you had a really good bunker to watch from.”[9]
The story of the bombardment made a lot of sense. Thanks to Wegener,
scientists knew the Moon was often pelted with asteroids. They also knew
that some of the molecular signatures in the Apollo rocks can only be made
in the most horrifying conditions imaginable, as if the Moon’s entire mantle
had been liquefied and rolled inside out. The Moon had, indisputably,
suffered some kind of calamity.
Earth, being larger than the Moon, would have borne the brunt of this
beating. For a half century, scientists believed this late bombardment kept our
planet molten and sterile for its first billion years, give or take a few hundred
million. Not until 3.8 billion years ago, when the assault ceased, could life
have taken hold. We can’t see the scars of this drubbing because of plate
tectonics, but that doesn’t mean it didn’t happen. The question since the
Apollo missions has been when it happened, and for how long.

But then, in 2009, things changed. A new satellite called the Lunar
Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) arrived at the Moon and started taking
detailed photos of the Moon’s mottled face. On March 17, 2013, NASA
scientists who study the satellite’s images saw a bright flash in Mare Imbrium,
the “Sea of Rains,” one of the Moon’s largest basins. After the flash, LRO
spotted a brand-new, sixty-foot-wide impact crater. Emerson Speyerer and
his colleagues at Arizona State University teamed up to start looking for more
of these new impact basins, and compared fifteen thousand images from the
LRO at different times, but with the same lunar areas in the frame.[10] The
before-and-after imagery showed 222 new craters and more than 47,000 new
splotches, which occur when a meteorite impact forms a crater and splats
Moon dust around, just like Wegener’s cement powder. Not only did the
NASA probe find that the Moon’s craters are newer than anyone thought, but
also that Mare Imbrium, one of the most iconic of these, might be much
bigger than anyone thought.
The LRO camera teams found rays of debris extending out from Mare
Imbrium and scattered all over nearby basins. This was a troubling sign. It
suggests that whatever whacked into the Moon and formed Imbrium probably
scattered Moon bits throughout nearby impact areas. It means we can’t say for
sure where any lunar rock originates, and in what cataclysm it was brought to
the Moon’s surface.
The implications are huge. The Apollo samples, priceless Moon bits
locked in NASA’s lunar sample clean room, might all be biased toward one
singularly horrific impact. Mare Imbrium might be fooling us. One of the
trickiest samples is troctolite 76535, the oldest and most interesting piece of
the Moon brought home to Earth.
During Apollo 17, Jack Schmitt picked up troctolite 76535 in a region
called the Sculptured Hills, which geologists thought would contain rocks
from the Sea of Serenity. But there’s a chance it contains rocks from the
Mare Imbrium impact instead, or maybe even the impact that excavated the
solar system’s biggest crater, the Moon’s South Pole–Aitken Basin. Troctolite
76535 is now one of the most controversial rocks to come home from the
Moon. Its chemical makeup shows that it must have been formed at great

depth, when the Moon was warm. It must also be about 4.25 billion years old,
which means it is a chunk of the primordial Moon. And the newest studies of
this rock show that only a truly terrific collision could have mined it from the
Moon’s belly. Whatever troctolite 76535’s provenance, there’s a distinct
possibility that many of the Apollo samples were liberated from the Moon’s
innards after one or two huge, singularly destructive impacts. The Moon may
not have suffered an unusually late asteroid blitz at all. And that would mean
Earth didn’t, either.
Today, the story of the Late Heavy Bombardment is in question, with
many planetary scientists wondering whether it ever happened. If it didn’t, if
early Earth was warm and calm and Edenic, then there’s no reason for life to
have waited a billion years to take hold. Maybe life showed up right away, and
simply stayed boring for longer than we thought before evolving into ferns
and dinosaurs and us. Or perhaps the young Sun played some role in life’s
earliest days. The Moon might be able to answer that question, too.
The Sun’s rate of rotation during that first boring billion years of Earth’s
existence would have affected the timing and frequency of solar outbursts,
like flares and coronal mass ejections, clouds of radiation the Sun flings
toward the planets at random. These emanations could have influenced the
evolution of life. Perhaps they introduced a spark of radiation into Darwin’s
warm little pools, or ripped and knitted together the proteins that eventually
built DNA, or sterilized any early attempt at cell building or replication.
Understanding the Sun’s spin history is hugely important for understanding
the origins of life on Earth. Lunar dust contains a record of that history.
If the baby Sun rotated slower than comparable baby stars, its leisurely
pace and placid energy could have helped early life limp along. But if the
baby Sun was a super-spinner like most of its brethren, it would have erupted
in solar flares ten times a day, scorching Earth and even whisking away its
atmosphere. Moon dust contains evidence for the former theory. Elements
like sodium and potassium are less abundant on the Moon than on Earth, and
it turns out that a slow-spinning baby Sun would have rotated at just the right
speed to shear away the missing amount of the Moon’s material, according to

research from 2019.[11] The young Sun was a slow spinner, Earth was big
enough for its gravity to hold on to its material, and now here we are.
One controversial Apollo 14 sample, a rock nicknamed “Big Bertha,”
contains chemical signatures that look more Earthly than lunar. Does the
Moon harbor bits of Earth, blasted from our planet—by some titanic impact,
such as the one that killed off most dinosaurs, or some other collision that has
been lost to tectonics and time? Scientists have found dozens of Moon rocks
that returned home to Earth as meteorites, which landed in Antarctica, in the
Sahara, and in other austere locations. It would not be terribly surprising to
find similar Earth meteorites scattered on the Moon. Even if Big Bertha is not
from Earth and is instead a chunk of the Moon, it still tells us something
interesting, much like the now-controversial Late Heavy Bombardment. The
Moon rocks are not monolithic. They have plenty of new secrets to tell.
Big Bertha may or may not be from our planet, but scientists agree that the
Moon is host to another Earthly souvenir: oxygen. This element of breath
pools on the Moon for the same reason that we have full Moons, new Moons,
and eclipses: because Earth, the Moon, and the Sun occasionally line up.
Arguably the clearest proof of life, oxygen is a volatile element and the
most important component of the air we breathe. It is heavy, as gases go, and
it can stay in the atmosphere for a while rather than escaping to space the way
hydrogen does. Oxygen is highly reactive, which you know if you’ve ever lit a
campfire. It reacts with methane, other atmospheric gases, and minerals
inside Earth’s rocks. Left to its own devices, Earth would suck oxygen out of
the atmosphere and bury it in the planet’s crust and eventually its mantle,
where it would remain, forever. The fact that it does not do this, and that
Earth’s air is made of so much oxygen, is an everlasting gift of plant life.
Plants respire, consuming carbon dioxide and pumping oxygen into our
atmosphere, which is about one-fifth oxygen in total. The solar wind—that
quirk of our modern rotating star—strips some of it away. When the Moon
and Earth are lined up, which happens about five days per month, the Sun

blows atoms out of our atmosphere and carries them all the way to the Moon,
where most of the oxygen is locked in the regolith and some remains in the
Moon’s aura, its tenuous exosphere.
Oxygen holds an important lesson for us as our search for signs of life on
other planets becomes increasingly sophisticated. Powerful telescopes may be
able to spot it in the aura of distant exomoons, hinting at life on other planets
around other stars.
Astronomers are still not certain they’ve really seen an exomoon, which is
just to say a moon that orbits a planet that is not in this solar system.
Extrasolar planets are abundant, which is one of those bits of information,
now common knowledge, that was unthinkable not so long ago. The Kepler
Space Telescope, named for Johannes Kepler, found worlds aplenty when it
stared at a small patch of sky between 2009 and 2018. The telescope’s
namesake could never have imagined it, but astronomers now think
practically every star in the sky harbors planets.
If exoplanets are plentiful, and moons in this solar system are plentiful,
then it’s not a giant leap to imagine that exomoons are plentiful, too. In 2018,
astronomers announced the first possible evidence of such a moon, orbiting
around an exoplanet called Kepler 1625-b. David Kipping and Alex Teachey
of Columbia University in New York used the Hubble Space Telescope to
scrutinize the star Kepler 1625; the planet Kepler 1625-b; and the putative
moon, whose existence wasn’t certain enough to earn an Earth-given name.
Orbital dynamics suggest that the planet is gigantic, several times the mass of
Jupiter, and its moon is somewhere around the size of Neptune.[12] The
exosystem is in one sense a supersized version of the Earth-Moon system.
Since Kipping and Teachey’s announcement—which they stopped short of
calling a discovery—many astronomers have turned their own attention
toward other exoplanets. As of this writing, no one has definitively confirmed
an exomoon. But eventually, exomoons will likely be as commonly known
and as unremarkable as the panoply of planets, scattered like dust motes
throughout the cold and empty cosmos. Their presence will be mind-
expanding, in the way that the moons of Jupiter were four hundred years ago,
in the way the Apollo missions were in the 1960s, and in the way exoplanets

were in the early 2010s. If there are any other worlds like this one, with
continent-spanning gardens and life-filled oceans and thinking creatures that
can reflect on it all, we may find that those worlds have their own biographers
traveling alongside them, influencing them from their beginnings.
While the most notable relics of Apollo—the Moon rocks—are now back
down on Earth, the astronauts left a few important things behind. Along with
an American flag, a plaque, their footprints, and some trash, Neil Armstrong
and Buzz Aldrin left behind a couple of science experiments. One of these
was a two-foot-wide panel bedecked with one hundred mirrors, designed to
return any light in exactly the direction from which it came.
Every other Apollo experiment eventually faded into history, from the
original rock samples to the seismometers that measure moonquakes and
other geologic activity. But fifty years after the mirrors were delivered, the
retroreflector experiment is still going strong. Telescopes in Texas and France
continue to use the retroreflectors every day. A telescope on the Calern
Plateau in the south of France has been staring at them for a half century.
The telescope’s 1.5-meter mirror also contains a laser, which bombards the
Moon with ten pulses of photons per second. Only a few will make the trip,
and even fewer of those will come all the way home. The round-trip journey
takes about 2.4 seconds, and in the echo of light that returns, astronomers can
discern the distance between the Moon and Earth to within a few millimeters.
Though this seems incredibly precise, it’s somewhat less so than scientists
would like, total accuracy being limited by Earth’s atmospheric interference.
This is how astronomers learned that the Moon is spiraling away from
Earth at a rate of about 3.8 centimeters, or 1.5 inches, per year. The change
in the rate of this separation is roughly equivalent to the rate at which your
fingernails grow. About six hundred million years from now, the Moon will
be so distant that it will no longer eclipse the Sun.
About two billion years from now, when humans will likely no longer
exist, the Moon will be too far away to stabilize Earth’s tilt. Earth’s axis will

tip toward the Sun, and the unstable hellworld Laskar predicted will come to
pass. Earth’s climate will experience regular, possibly violent, shifts. Its tides
will falter, and so will its rock tides—the Moon-related stress and strain in the
planet’s very innards. If life in any form is still here, the slow retreat of the
Moon will very likely pose an existential threat.
—
But for now, at least, the Moon will continue to guide our lives. Theia made
the Moon and its companion, and may have left parts of itself buried within
our world. The Moon’s motherworld may also have donated to us its nitrogen
and more crucially its carbon, the element that enables our existence. After
the Moon and Earth coalesced, lunar tides had a profound effect on our
planet’s geologic and evolutionary history. Extreme Moon-driven tides mixed
the primitive oceans like a ladle stirring a pot full of soup, dredging nutrients
from the bottom to support the food chain on which our primeval ancestors
depended. Without the tides and their effect on ocean currents, nutrients
might have remained on the seafloor, never to be used by the vast chain of
marine life. Half of the energy required for ocean mixing is provided by the
dissipation of tides on the ocean floor.[13] After the first organisms arose, the
Moon probably kept time for the symphony of life, and it still may play a role
in our own fertility, physiology, and behavior, in ways that surprise many
modern scientists and in ways they do not fully understand.
Large-scale phenomena like the tides are obvious, especially to humans
who think in pictures and stories on a scale familiar to us—changing
seashores, a stranded invading military force. But the barely discernible
phenomena at play between Earth and the Moon may be just as vital to life’s
rhythms, and may have been so from the very beginning. We would not be
here without the Moon.
Skip Notes
*1 Go get a pencil, a piece of paper, and a pair of scissors. Draw a circle on the paper, cut it out as best
you can, and find its center. Stick the pencil through the center. Now you have a disk of paper impaled

with a pencil. The paper represents Earth’s equator, and the pencil is the axis. It’s more fun if you
pretend the eraser is the North Pole. Twist the pencil between your fingers to spin between night and
day, and remember that the Moon is responsible for the rate of its spin.
*2 In May 1059 b.c.e., the southern sky held a supremely rare sight: Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter,
and Saturn, all grouped together within about seven degrees of sky. For comparison, your fist held out
at arm’s length covers about ten degrees of sky. It would have been a spectacular sight, viewed from
anywhere on Earth. In ancient China, it would have been drenched with significance.
The five pacers, or wu bu (五步), were also known as the “Minister-Regulators” of the Supernal Lord,
Shangdi. He was the supreme deity during the reign of the Shang, and he controlled the harvest, the
weather, and victory in battle.
In May 1059 b.c.e., his pacers were flying in the beak of Vermilion Bird, the constellation that
represents the southern sky. It is a fiery red bird, the Phoenix in Western lore, and one of the four
major Chinese mythological symbols. The Vermilion Bird also represented the fortunes of the Zhou
dynasty. The pacers in that constellation, coupled with a blood-red eclipsed Moon almost exactly
seven years earlier, seemed to the vassal king Wen of Zhou like a clear mandate to seize power. He
built a new calendar and inaugurated it in 1058 b.c.e.: the First Year of the Receipt of Heaven’s
Mandate.
The Mandate held that rebellion against an unjust ruler is not only a right, but consecrated by heaven
itself. The Mandate guided Chinese politics for the next three millennia.
*3 Hipparchus measured solar eclipses and Earth’s shadow during a lunar eclipse, using trigonometry to
calculate that the average distance between Earth and the Moon was sixty-three times the radius of
Earth. It’s actually sixty Earth radii, or roughly 238,000 miles. Not bad.
*4 The pencil-and-paper trick can show you (roughly) what axial precession looks like. Grab the pencil
and draw a circle, watching as the North Pole–eraser traces out the path. If you could trace your circle
over the course of 26,000 years, this demonstration of Earth’s axial change would be more accurate,
but fortunately for both of us you don’t have to do that to understand the point. Earth’s axis completes
one full rotation, one circle, every 25,772 years.

PART II
HOW THE MOON
MADE US

Nature proceeds little by little from things lifeless to animal life in such a
way that it is impossible to determine the exact line of demarcation.
—Aristotle, History of Animals, book 8, part 1
A few hundred million years after the synestia, after Earth and the Moon
coalesced in their natal cloud, after they became spherical and mostly solid
worlds, they started to become fully themselves. The process of becoming a
planet turns out to be surprisingly quick, especially on geologic timescales.
Even during Earth’s Hadean eon, four billion years ago, the planet looked a
lot like home. Earth had oceans and landmasses, maybe even continents.
Earth had clouds and rain made of water, some probably delivered by comets
and some left over from the planet’s birth inside Immanuel Kant’s spinning
protoplanetary disk.
The opaline Moon, just eighty-three thousand miles away, appeared nearly
three times larger in the sky than it does now. Earth’s rotation took only
twelve hours, meaning a six-hour night and day and tides that rolled in at a
frenetic pace. But otherwise, Earth then and Earth now looked much the
same. Imagine: You walk toward the sea, on a shoreline made of freshly
baked rock—there is no sand yet, because there is no life, much less life as

complex as the seashells that form most white sand. It is hot. Really hot. No
ozone protects you from the Sun’s radiation; instead it pours through the
sulfurous atmosphere, which stinks of rotten eggs. Foamy waves roll in and
you look down, noticing a gap in the rocks where a tide pool has formed. It’s
full of turbid brownish fluid. You dip in a finger and taste it. It tastes like soy
sauce—that rounded, bitter, earthy, sour umami tang. This is the flavor of
amino acids, like lysine, glycine, and glutamate. We now know that these
compounds, the so-called building blocks of life, are present throughout the
solar system, even permeating the tails of icy comets. But as far as we can
tell, only once have they been pressed into service as life’s raw materials.
The full story of life’s origin is as murky as the brackish water in which it
probably occurred, but what is increasingly clear is the Moon’s vital role.
—
In the vast, roiling oceans of primitive Earth, delicate chains of amino acids
would be unlikely to connect in order to form life or to survive very long once
they did—either in the stygian depths or on beaches. Tide pools gave them
safe haven, however. As the Moon circled overhead, our soy-sauce pool filled
up with warm, salty water, then dried out as the tide ebbed. It filled again as
more water rolled in, and the cycle repeated. A cycle of hydration and
dehydration produced larger and more complex molecules in a process called
polymerization. Factories use the same basic phenomenon to make plastic.
Life may have begun in the deep, along a gash in Earth’s crust where
chemicals bubbled up into the superheated water, only to be sloshed to the
surface by the Moon’s pull. Or life may have begun in the shallows, eons
before our backboned relatives learned to walk there. Since at least the days
of Charles Darwin, many have reckoned that the first living things sparked
into being in the liminal world of tidal pools.[*1] After the first amino acid
chains folded themselves into complex proteins (give or take a couple
hundred million years), life oozed out of the muck. The first cells learned to
make copies of themselves, and their copies made more copies. Just as those
primitive forms began to replicate, the Moon yanked them out to sea and

swirled them around in a cocktail of silt and nutrients. After life diversified
into endless forms of bacteria, plants, and animals, the tides ensured that
nothing remained at rest, constantly flowing, sinking, rising, mixing, evolving.
Ours is a singular history. As far as we know, no other planet has ever given
rise to the circus of eating, sleeping, breathing, and procreating life-forms
that populate this one and endow it with air and oil, not to mention a global
society that uses those things as an engine.
Life may have arisen early in the planet’s history, soon after the simmering
Earth and its incandescent, molten Moon cooled off. But it was agonizingly
boring for the vast majority of the existence of the Earth-Moon system. The
microbes that burst forth in Earth’s oceans stayed there for an eternity,
making copies of themselves but otherwise doing mostly nothing. Land-based
life evolved in just the most recent 10 percent of Earth’s existence.
Only once in the long, violent, phantasmagorical history of life did
vertebrate animals leave the water to live on land. They did go back—our
backboned relatives moved back to the water to evolve more complex forms,
[1] and much later, mammals went back, too, transforming from diminutive
creatures that look like dogs but are more closely related to hippos into
charismatic dolphins and gargantuan whales. But as far as we know, fish only
left the water once, to evolve into every vertebrate that has ever walked on
Earth, from dinosaurs to elephants to us. Those fish probably came in with
the tide, meaning that it was the Moon that dragged our piscine progenitors
ashore.
—
Complex life was still fairly new when this happened back in the Devonian
period, which stretched between 419 and 359 million years ago. This sounds
like a distant epoch, but in the timescales of Earth and the Moon, it is a
moment ago. More than 4 billion years had elapsed since the synestia and the
Hadean eon.

Back then, when the day lasted only twenty-one hours,[2] the Moon
loomed 5 percent larger in the sky, and its nearness produced sizable tides,
much more extreme than those that wash across the world now.
Plants, maybe beached by tidewaters, finally began to colonize the land.
The first trees and forests sprouted during the Devonian, also called the Age
of Fishes. Although simple animals like comb jellies had been around for
about 140 million years, new forms of fish were just beginning to emerge as
the oceans churned out a kaleidoscopic array of new life. Some of these
forms even began breathing the air.
Today’s fish breathe by inhaling water and exchanging oxygen and carbon
dioxide through filaments in their gills. You and I inhale air and exchange
oxygen and carbon dioxide using alveoli in our lungs. But most modern fish
have a version of lungs as well as gills. The lung-like organ is called a swim
bladder, which acts like oxygen-filled ballast to keep the animal from sinking
or floating up too far. Some fish, like the aptly named lungfish, can also use
these organs to breathe air.
That these air-filled organs exist in all kinds of fish is evidence that lungs
evolved long ago. They must have evolved before our early ancestors cleaved
into two distinct groups of fishes, which happened some 443 to 420 million
years ago. Lungs are one of the oldest tools in evolution’s kit. But why would
they have evolved at all, when marine animals can get the oxygen they need
from the water?
During low tide, shallow pools at the tidal zone would get warmer and lose
oxygen. A fish that was stranded by the tide’s ebb would die within a few
minutes if it couldn’t make it back to the water. “In such an environment it
might make sense for the fishes to evolve air-breathing organs,” Per Ahlberg,
a paleontologist at Uppsala University in Sweden and a leading figure in
tetrapod evolution research, told me. If the ancestors of our inner fish could
not yet walk, maybe they could at least breathe a little air and live to pass on
their genes.
Sometime in the Devonian, these primitive lunged fish went two separate
ways. These two main groups define the beginnings of Earth’s animal
kingdom. One group became the ray-finned fish, the ancestors of most

familiar fish species, from goldfish to seahorses to salmon. The other group
were the lobe-finned fish, which became the ancestors of every other
backboned animal on this planet.
A few million years after lungs evolved, some lucky lobe-finned fish—fat,
torpedo-shaped, probably greenish gray to better hide in the kelpy shallows—
began to evolve another new trick. When the tide went out, the water level
changed by as much as fifty feet. These fish would get stuck in shallow tide
pools, but they found a way to escape.
As the water receded under the Moon’s pull, ray-finned fish would flop on
the drying sand, their gills flaring hopelessly. The fatter, larger, lobe-finned
fish that dined on them would be unrecognizable in your family tree, but they
are a key part of your lineage. Their fleshy front fins were sturdy enough to
bear their weight. Inside them were bones resembling a humerus, an ulna, and
a radius: the bones that make up your arms. And these armlike bones were
attached to the body through a single joint on each side, the way your
shoulders connect your humerus to your torso. With these advanced fins, our
corpulent ancestors could move with purpose even without water to swim in.
They could heave themselves across the sand, shimmy toward another
shallow, silty refuge, and head back to the water. By breathing the air and
moving their limbs, they would not be left to suffocate or starve until the
Moon dragged the water back across the shore to set them free. Evolution
favored the forms that could cover more ground: Flatter, stubbier, more
evenly shaped fins could help a fish propel itself along the bottom of a shallow
shoreline. Imagine walking in sand with shoes on versus walking barefoot—
it’s all in the traction. Over eons, the fins morphed into fleshy lobes that
helped our distant relatives lift their heads and crawl. The Moon guided the
strongest creatures to the shoreline, where they transmogrified into a dazzling
array of shapes and sizes. The cradle of vertebrate diversity was the tidal
zone.[3] And the strongest stayed in that area, too. The smallest, most delicate
among the ray-finned fish moved away from land and toward the safety of the
deep sea, where they were out of reach of their lobe-finned predators, and
where the Moon had a harder time controlling their fates.

After many generations the fleshy lobe-finned fish developed random
changes that helped them walk faster, and the cycle repeated: The Moon
pulled the tide away; the fish, out of water, walked.
After a few hundred million more spins around the Sun, bipedal mammals
descended from these fish chipped some of their bones out of rock exposed
on Canada’s frigid Ellesmere Island, near the Arctic Circle. The humans
named one of these fish Tiktaalik and saw, in its fossilized remains, echoes of
themselves and a link to our aquatic history. Tiktaalik, the first fish with a
neck and a primitive wrist, likely had both lungs and gills. Fish like Tiktaalik
and their relatives ushered in the tetrapods, the first four-legged beasts to
walk on land. The descendants of the first fortunate walking fish, stranded by
the tides, became the common ancestors of the dinosaurs, and the birds, and
the reptiles, and the mammals, and me, and you.
—
Though the role of the Moon in sculpting evolution makes intuitive sense,
paleontologists didn’t have good evidence for this relationship until very
recently. In 2014, an Oxford astrophysicist named Steven Balbus analyzed the
influence of the tides on the lives of Devonian fishes. Using lunar recession
rates, he calculated that four hundred million years ago—just as tetrapods
were emerging from the seas to walk on land—the Moon was about 5 percent
closer to Earth.[4] Spring tides were stronger thanks to the closer Moon’s
greater pull, and would have repeatedly beached fish swimming in the
intertidal zone. Such stranding events would have been even more likely in
places where Earth’s wrinkled surface features, like the shape of the coastline
or the depth of the water, conspired to cause more extreme tides. The same
coastal particularities shaped the dodging tide at Tarawa.
Hannah Byrne, an Irish oceanography graduate student, was captivated by
the idea that the tide could have served as the tipping point that pushed our
fish relations to walk. Byrne patiently walked me through her supercomputer
simulations of tidal physics, which turns out to be much more complicated

than water advancing and retreating. “It’s all lies, what you have been told,”
she said, only half joking.
Water is the most powerfully erosive force on this planet, and, over time,
tides weather continents. They sculpt continental shelves and build beaches.
They change the shape of ocean basins, which can produce an effect known
as resonance. Let’s revisit the mechanism of the tide. As Earth spins, the
Moon’s gravity tugs on it, pulling the waters toward the Moon (and, because
of centrifugal forces, also raising the waters on the side opposite the Moon).
Earth’s oceans experience two bulges daily. Most shores experience two high
and two low tides a day, about 12.4 hours apart.[*2] As all this water is
sloshing around, waves are also moving, pushed by wind and the tide itself. A
body of water can become tidally resonant, or synced up to the tide, when its
dimensions match either one-fourth or one-half the length of the tidal wave.
Put another way, this happens when the amount of time it takes a tidal bulge
to travel into the basin is the same as the time between those high and low
tides. When this takes place, the energy from the Moon’s gravity matches the
geography beneath the water. This alignment, like the Sun-Moon-Earth
lineup of a full Moon, amplifies tidal energy even more and makes for
extreme tidal shifts. Think of a person on a swing, rising and falling to the
same height with every sweep of their legs. Now imagine someone else
providing a push on their upswing. The swinger will go higher and faster next
time. In a tidally resonant basin, Earth’s landscape gives the ocean tide an
extra push, causing a dramatic increase at high tide and a dramatic decrease
at low tide. This is why northern Atlantic latitudes experience such dramatic
tides, like in the Bay of Fundy, which separates Canada’s New Brunswick and
Nova Scotia provinces and touches the northeastern tip of Maine. The water
there falls forty-three feet from high to low tide. As we’ve seen, a similar
high-tide amplifier happens on the Normandy coast of France, and proved
pivotal during World War II.
—

The upshot of all this physics is that vast amounts of water are moving
around on the surface of Earth all the time, in a regular cadence. A constantly
changing water level means a constantly changing water temperature, salinity,
and chemical mix, not to mention a changing shoreline as tidal flats are
continually exposed and flooded. This flux has tremendous power over life.
Byrne wanted to know whether the tide’s power could push and pull life to
shore.
She first met Balbus at a talk in 2014 while she was studying the tide’s
effect on nutrients and temperature on Pacific reefs. After hearing his
presentation, she switched her research to tide models, aiming to develop a
quantifiable way to study his theory that the Moon influenced tetrapod
evolution.
Working with Balbus and others, Byrne found that 425 million years ago,
when air-breathing lungs began to evolve, the landmass that is now found in
South China had the highest tides in the world. Later, in the Devonian period,
this is also where fish learned to walk on land. These tremendous tidal
changes provided an ideal environment for life in the water to move onto
land.[5]
According to Byrne’s research, these tides were so extreme because
Pangea had not yet formed. Pangea was one of Earth’s ancient
supercontinents, a compendium of all of Earth’s landmass smooshed together
in one single structure, a now-accepted geologic truth that was first proposed
by Alfred Wegener. Earth still had multiple ocean basins, increasing the
number of spots where extreme tides could take place. At narrow points, tides
on the proto-Pangea’s shores would have been colossal, Byrne said. Byrne
studied another major landmass where tetrapods are thought to have
originated, part of an ancient supercontinent called Laurussia. This landmass
is now found across central Europe, from the mountains of western Spain to
the rocky outcrops of England’s Northumberland. In the South China region
and in the Laurussian, the shapes of ancestral ocean inlets, the tides from the
Moon, and the geography formed the perfect conditions for beached fish to
begin walking.

As these unfathomably ancient oceans began to close up, the
supercontinent Pangea began coalescing. The crusts of these oceans have
mostly been destroyed, but the aftermath of their demise is still visible. The
closure of an Atlantic ancestor called the Rheic Ocean created the largest
mountain-forming event in the Paleozoic. We call the result the Appalachian
Mountains.
—
Byrne used geologic evidence to develop ancient bathymetry, reconstructing
the depth of the proto-Pangeaic continental shelves to find out how high the
water would rise. In some areas, the tidal zone would only have been
inundated in superhigh high tides, opposite the effect at Tarawa. The
landmasses that hosted these ultra-high-tide zones are found in what is now
China, northeastern Canada, the United States, Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia,
and Iran.
Byrne’s paleotidal data matches the fossil record remarkably well. The
fishy forms emerging from their eons of stony sleep in these extreme tidal
zones all reflect a transitional period between lobe-finned fish and true land
walkers. “Something special was happening here,” Byrne told me. The
creatures that began dominating Earth late in the Age of Fishes were
becoming land walkers and air breathers, just as we are.
All those life-forms, and all life everywhere on Earth, evolved according to
a daily cycle between day and night. The Moon’s inconstant light plays a key
role in that cycle, and scientists have only recently begun to understand how.
Most life is diurnal, meaning it lives out its days and nights according to
the spin of Earth toward and away from the Sun. The scientists who study
biological rhythms and how they synchronize with this day-night cycle are
called chronobiologists. Their primary focus is the circadian rhythm—from
the Latin for “around the day.” Every cell in your body has a molecular clock
that sets the pace of your existence, from your metabolism to your breath to

when you feel tired. A variation of this clock exists in every cell in every
kingdom of life. For most creatures—fish, trees, frogs, you, me—the light of
the Sun sets this internal clock. And our bodies don’t just respond to the dawn
or the dusk; the internal clock lets life anticipate these changes and adjust
accordingly.
Our clocks can be set to a different phase, but it takes some time, and it
generally requires a lot of sunlight in the morning and a lot of darkness at
night. Anyone who’s ever had jet lag has experienced the circadian clock
going out of phase. Chronobiologists study how cells tell time, how organisms
learn to live in time, and how our modern life—from long-distance travel to
artificial night lighting to poor diet choices—can interfere with all these
signals and disturb the clock.
But chronobiologists have recently begun to examine a different kind of
rhythm. There is more than one light in the sky, and more than one way to set
our internal clock. Life has a circalunar clock as well. And scientists think it
might be very common in the animal kingdom, because it was first found in
marine animals, the ancestors of us all.
—
Telling time by sunlight and moonlight is rather like telling time both by the
watch and by the calendar. The two are useful in different ways, as prehistoric
humans would eventually figure out. The Sun provides a daily and a seasonal
cue, and the Moon provides a monthly cue, both from its light and from its
interaction with Earth’s magnetic field and gravitation. When an organism
uses both, it can sync up its rhythms, like its reproductive cycle, to the season,
day, and even hour. This is true not just for animals but also for the leaf
movements of plants. On Earth, on the International Space Station, and in
constant darkness, plant leaf movements change in keeping with the rhythm
of the Sun and Moon.[6]
It didn’t take long for humans in antiquity to make this connection between
life and the cycles of the Moon. Aristotle references the edible eggs of sea
urchins in a text called On the Parts of Animals, written in 350  b.c.e. He

recognized that the size of sea urchin eggs varied over the lunar month.
“Though the ova are to be found in these animals even directly they are born,
yet they acquire a greater size than usual at the time of full moon; not, as
some think, because [sea-urchins] eat more at that season, but because the
nights are then warmer, owing to the moonlight,” he wrote.[7]
He was wrong about the temperatures, but he was right about the urchins
responding to the moonlight. And sea urchins are far from alone. In the
Arctic winter, when the Sun does not rise above the horizon and yet the full
Moon is visible for four or more days, zooplankton sink and rise to the ocean
surface en masse according to its light. Countless other marine species, from
fish to corals, sync their mating, feeding, and spawning schedules with the
phases of the Moon.
—
On reefs around the world, from the Great Barrier Reef to the middle of the
Red Sea, corals time their mating dance according to the full Moon’s
appearance.[8] Only after the full Moon has shone upon them will they release
their pearlescent sperm and eggs, in a midnight phantasmagoria that biologist
Oren Levy describes as “the greatest orgy on Earth.”
Levy is an Israeli coral researcher who grows corals in tanks in his lab at
Bar-Ilan University to study their spawning behavior and how it changes in
response to light pollution, which interferes with the Moon’s beacon. When
he is not raising corals by hand, Levy snorkels to a reef in the Red Sea, near
the Israeli resort town of Eilat on the Israel-Jordan border. It is the world’s
northernmost tropical reef, and corals there have been exposed to
development, pollution, and artificial light for millennia. And yet they still use
the Moon as their guide.
“We are talking about an organism that doesn’t have any eyes. And it can
still synchronize this behavior to the Moon’s cycles,” he told me.
The corals, which are tiny animals, produce parcels that wait like deliveries
on a doorstep, near the threshold where their tiny bodies meet the sea. Then
in an instant, in one of the most stunningly synchronous events on this planet,

every coral releases its sperm and eggs. All at once, a pink blizzard of
uncountable seeds floats up toward the light of the Moon. Many seeds will
end their journeys as food for fish and other larger animals. But some coral
sperm and eggs will combine, producing new coral larvae, which will bob
with the tide until they can find a hard surface to anchor on and build a new
city.
The seas’ temperature, wind, and sunlight intensity set the month of
spawning. But the Moon and its light set the day and the hour. Corals must
release their packets at the same time to have any chance of forming new
corals. This Moon-mediated mating dance may be more important than ever
as corals worldwide succumb to mass bleaching events and other ravages of a
changing climate. New generations of corals will need the Moon to colonize
the reefs built by their ancestors. The next time you walk outside under a full
Moon, witnessing the milky glow it casts over the trees and the grass and the
buildings, think about what is happening, that very night, within this planet’s
oceans. How many organisms are being born, guided by the light of the silver
pendulum in the sky.
For many organisms the Moon is a vital “zeitgeber” (a word borrowed
from German because there was no English equivalent that means something
like “time giver”) just as much as the Sun is. But only very recently have
chronobiologists started to unravel how this works. The ability to tell time by
the Moon has genetic underpinnings, which probably date to the origin of
genes, which is to say the origin of life.
In 2013, chronobiologists found in a marine worm and a sea louse the first
evidence for a genetic “Moon clock” as distinct from a circadian clock.[9] The
speckled sea louse, Eurydice pulchra, is a tiny crustacean one-third of an inch
across and in the same taxon as crabs and lobsters. It lives in the intertidal
zone and burrows into the sand when the tide goes out, turning itself black for
protection against the Sun. It does this using chromatophores, a special type
of cell that contains color; the same cells allow cephalopods like octopuses to
produce camouflage. The sea lice can sense light, including the spectral
illumination provided by the Moon, just as readily as your eyes can. The lice
are known to have two types of internal schedules, one governed by the Sun

and one that is apparently linked to the tide. But until recently, scientists were
unsure whether the tidal clock was derived from the circadian clock—simply
by  cutting it in half, for instance, with a tidal timekeeper that runs every
12.4 hours. But it turns out the lice have a distinct tidal clock, which runs
separately from any Sun-derived rhythm. It is far more complex than simply
slicing the day in two.
Scientists in the United Kingdom collected lice from their home beach on
a Welsh island, and measured their activity in a tank where they were exposed
to either constant darkness or constant light. The researchers then focused on
knocking out or suppressing genes known to play a role in the circadian
rhythm. The creatures still swam every 12.4 hours, for several days in a row.
Suppressing the circadian rhythm did not shut off the lunar rhythm, showing
it is an independent system. In the next few years, marine biologists found
similar molecular tidal clocks in animals like oysters, curly crustaceans called
comma shrimp, and a mangrove cricket.
Using new sequencing techniques, biologists like Kristin Tessmar-Raible
are beginning to understand how animals are pulling this off. Tessmar-Raible
studies a marine bristle worm, Platynereis dumerilii, which might have one of
the most advanced lunar clocks studied so far. The worms follow the Sun for
their feeding rhythms, emerging at night to eat. But their spawning cycle
follows the Moon alone. The worms use two methods to modulate this lunar
clock. They have light-sensitive neurons in their brains, as well as a set of
clock genes, related to the same genes found in vertebrates, including you.
But the worms’ genetic clock also runs on Moon time.
“When we make an appointment, we don’t tell someone just what time it
is; we also, hopefully, give them the date. We intermingle two timing systems,
and that is basically what these organisms are also doing,” Tessmar-Raible
told me. “There is no voodoo behind it. We have an inner circadian clock.
Why shouldn’t animals, or other organisms, also have a calendar system?”
Early in her career, Tessmar-Raible read about previous German biologists
who studied these biological rhythms and recalls being shocked that anyone
could detect a lunar cadence to an animal’s daily life, and moreover, that it
could be controlled in a lab. Then she attended a marine ecology conference

and mentioned it to some marine biologists who just looked at her, she
recalled. “They were like, ‘Yes, of course. You don’t know about the famous
coral example? This happens everywhere.’ ”
Ancient people knew it, too, though for different reasons. Aristotle knew
the sea urchins would swell with the Moon because fishermen had learned
that mussels, urchins, and some crustaceans are larger—and worth more
money—when their gonads are swollen, ready for reproduction. If you cut
open a fresh-caught crab, its reproductive organs will be larger or smaller
depending on the Moon’s phase.
The animals have their own practical reasons for this calendar keeping. A
marine gnat called Clunio marinus lives along the Atlantic coast of Europe,
where scientists have studied its chronobiology for many years. The gnats
mate like other insects, with males fertilizing eggs the females laid previously.
Because the gnats must wait for an extremely low tide to keep their eggs safe,
they evolved the ability to notice the Moon’s phases so they could predict
when the tide would flow and ebb. Females will lay their eggs in the lowest
levels of the intertidal zone when the tide is at its feeblest, during new Moon
or full Moon. Corals do this, too. Levy and his colleagues found that corals
have light-sensing neurons that allow them to perceive moonlight on the
water. They even have genes that activate in sync with the Moon’s cycles of
waxing and waning.
—
The Moon’s rhythms also play a major role in daily life on land. Animal and
plant kingdoms are chockablock with organisms that live by the light of the
Moon. Owls become chattier under a full Moon, and some white owls hunt
more successfully during that phase, as the Moon-illuminated white plumage
of a descending barn owl apparently terrifies its prey into stillness just long
enough to be caught.[10]
Antlion larvae, called doodlebugs because of the swirly patterns they leave
in the soil, hunt by digging funnel-shaped traps for insect prey. The
doodlebugs rebuild their funnels every day, and they are larger around the full

Moon and during the new Moon. In experiments that kept antlions in the dark
with no natural moonlight to guide them, their trap building still followed the
lunar cycle for a while before it was lost, suggesting the creatures need their
cycles set by the Moon’s light.
The same may even be true for another kingdom of life: plants.
A Scottish scientist named Peter Barlow spent much of his career studying
leaf movement patterns in greenhouses, on the International Space Station, in
total darkness, and in other unpleasant situations. He studied the movements
of the stems of peppermint seedlings and found that the leaves are
significantly affected by the Moon’s gravitational force, not just its light. The
plants know that the Moon cycles above.
In 2008, Barlow showed for the first time that leaf movements of baby
bean sprouts were correlated to the oscillating lunar tide.[11] In the morning,
say, the bean sprouts’ leaves might point straight up; at night, they may lie
horizontally. Barlow showed a relationship between bean sprout leaf
movements, the 24-hour cycle between night and day, and a 6.2-hour tidal
cycle. This is no black magic, as Barlow himself wrote; rather, the plants and
the Moon must be in some form of continual communion, with the plants
responding to the rate of gravitational change as the Moon swings around the
planet.
After that discovery, Barlow dedicated himself to studying the multitude
of ways in which the Moon affects plant life. He found a tide-related variation
in the rate at which plants elongate their roots, correlating to about 24.8 hours
—two full tidal cycles. He found a daily variation in tree-stem diameter and
in electrical potential. The latter is related to a plant’s ability to make food
from sunlight, and Barlow showed that the variation correlates to the lunar
tide—suggesting a tidal force at work within the wood of trees.
Barlow ultimately extended his experiments to space. In research
published in 2015, Barlow and his colleagues found seedlings of thale cress,
science’s model plant organism, responded to lunar gravity’s tidal forces even
while growing on the International Space Station.[12] The ISS orbits Earth
about every 90 minutes, which would correspond to feeling two high and low
Moon tides every hour and a half. In one experiment, astronauts grew the

plants in normal light, and found their leaf movements changed every 45 and
90 minutes. In a second experimental setup, the astronauts kept the plants in
darkness, attempting to eliminate any light-related circadian signal. The
plants still moved every 45, 90, and 135 minutes—like clockwork. They
followed the rhythm of the Moon’s tide even while they grew off this planet,
implying that they can sense the Moon’s presence. What this means for
growing plants on the Moon itself, perhaps in future settlements, is less clear.
—
Lumbering, shouldered fish; moonstruck corals; speckled sea lice; even
peppermint leaves have evolved to live under the influence of the ever-
changing Moon, their evolution shaped by the swell of the tides and the light
in the sky. But the sublunary influence does not end with them. The presence
of a circalunar clock across so many species shows that their clocks probably
evolved before walking fish, before the conquest of land by both animals and
plants. Moon watching may be one of the oldest tools in evolution’s kit.
In our walk through time, we have observed the Theia impact, the resulting
synestia, Earth’s Hadean eon, and a sunny afternoon in the Devonian. Now
fast-forward to a Tuesday four hundred million years after that. We are still
near Earth’s equator. It’s sunny and warm, and the glaciers have begun to
retreat. It is three hundred thousand years in our past.
By this date, Homo sapiens, a primate that favored walking on two of its
available limbs, had emerged from the Pleistocene grasslands of equatorial
Africa. This newly evolved, highly capable animal lived in groups and worked
together, and made note of the Moon’s rhythms. Like our fish relatives before
us, ancient humans knew the tide would change the appearance of shorelines
throughout the day. They knew this would help them hunt, and they learned
their quarry’s habits long before Aristotle ever wrote a word about a sea
urchin. Early human beings figured out that the Moon and its tides would help
them travel across seas to distant shores.

A few artifacts remain from the oldest known human settlements, scattered
throughout Africa, Indonesia, and Europe. In many of the totems and
talismans, early humans apparently began to bring the Moon down to Earth,
etching it in bone and stone and painting its phases on the walls of decorated
caves.
During the Apollo program in the early 1960s, a journalist named
Alexander Marshack went looking for the earliest representations of the
Moon, trying to understand how human culture had culminated in the Moon
shot. He dug through dusty filing cabinets in stale archaeological archives that
were filled with bones and rocks etched by prehistoric people. The task was
monumental and he could not figure out how to begin, so one day, sifting
through collections at the French Museum of National Antiquities in Saint-
Germain-en-Laye, Marshack decided to limit himself to just one cabinet.
He walked to the first cabinet in the main exhibit room and opened the
drawer. The cabinet’s upper left corner began in the Aurignacian period,
representing a culture that arose in Europe some thirty-two thousand years
ago, and the lower right corner culminated in the Magdalenian period, ending
around twelve thousand years ago. “It was a fair  sampling, then, of man’s
markings across nearly 20,000 years,” Marshack wrote in his book The Roots
of Civilization. He started in the upper left corner, gently lifting bone shards
and rocks. He soon palmed a small, smooth ovoid segment of antler. It had
been found in the Dordogne region of France, at a prehistoric settlement
called Abri Blanchard, in 1912.
Marshack had picked up a jeweler’s loupe for $1.50, and he donned it
now, squinting at the bone. Its main face was pocked in a pattern of pits,
some of them arced like a comma or an apostrophe and some of them
circular. The pits traced a long and winding pattern around the surface, like a
meandering stream or a coiled snake. Marshack turned the bone shard in his
hand. He realized some of the commas arced from right to left, others from
left to right, and realized they were sequential. He saw the phases of the
Moon.
“I had lived with the waxing and waning Moon in thought so long, had
been watching the phases in the sky,” he wrote, “that I now felt at home with

this odd, serpentine figure.”[13]
He assumed the bone was a form of lunar notation, beginning around the
new Moon, when the first crescent would reappear. To Marshack, its purpose
was unmistakable: It was an easy-to-carry calendar, a way of keeping time on
the road as hunters followed herds of bison, mammoths, or deer. It was
carved thirty-two thousand years ago.
The Blanchard bone remains controversial, in part because Marshack, as
he readily admitted, made so many assumptions in his analysis. What’s more,
the comma marks are imperfect owing to the rough tools of the time and to
the likelihood that the bone carver missed a few Moons during cloudy nights.
But Marshack went on to find scores of other so-called lunar calendars and to
publish several volumes of academic papers and books on the astronomical
thinking of early humans.
For Marshack, the idea of a lunar record-keeping system was more than an
anthropological marvel. It became the basis for a much broader argument
about the cognitive abilities of prehistoric humans and their hominid kin.
Humans of the Ice Age were much more advanced than scientists had
thought, he argued. Comma-shaped bone etchings and cave wall stonework
not only represented the Moon and its cycles but also showed that the Moon
had enabled ancient humanity to understand time. Keeping track of time’s
passage allowed people to connect the cycles of the natural world to the
cycles of their lives.
Cave art found throughout the Dordogne region of France punctuates this
point. The Venus of Laussel, a carving in relief, is thought to represent a
connection between human fertility and the lunar cycle. The figure, carved
around twenty-seven thousand years ago, depicts a voluptuous woman with
long hair. Her left hand rests on her abdomen and her right arm is raised,
clutching a bison horn that has been etched with thirteen notches. Her face
appears to be turned toward the horn. The horn could represent the number
of sidereal months, or lunar cycles, in a solar year—which happens to be
approximately the same number of menstrual cycles in a solar year.
The rise and fall of chemicals in a human woman’s body that dictate
whether she will become pregnant is still poorly understood, especially

relative to other biochemical processes. This is despite a half century of
research by the fertility-industrial complex. The Moon may have guided this
cycle, especially long, long ago, when our apelike ancestors began living in
communal groups and following game. What the Moon does to us today, in
an era of pervasive and pernicious artificial light at night, is less clear. But
even the most up-to-date evidence suggests the process of making new
humans is not divorced from the Moon’s power.
—
To start, the average menstrual cycle, meaning the time between the first
days of two consecutive menstrual periods, is 28 days long.[*3] The length
between consecutive appearances of the full Moon is 29.5 days. And this
synchronicity is not even limited to us. Orangutans and gorillas also follow a
28-to-30-day cycle in which the production of estrogen, variations in body
temperature, and the timing of ovulation change according to the same cycle
as the Moon.
Though the mechanism is not yet understood, this connection is probably
not a coincidence. Imagine a clan of primitive Homo sapiens living in caves
and rudimentary shelters on the savanna. The females, especially those
nursing their babies, would stay close to home and forage for nuts and berries
nearby. The males would leave for days at a time to hunt. During the full
Moon, the open country is bright for many hours after the Sun sets—a good
time to travel, or to hunt nocturnal prey. “Our prehistoric ancestors needed all
the light-time they could get,” Anthony Aveni, professor emeritus of
anthropology and astronomy at Colgate University and one of the founders of
the field of archaeoastronomy, told me.
During the new Moon, on the other hand, nights are prohibitively dark, so
the men may have stayed home and, maybe, in bed with the women. Women
who were ovulating during the new Moon phase would therefore be more
likely to become pregnant. Over evolutionary time, our bodily pacemakers
may have indeed synchronized with the Moon’s cycle, but modern research
has only just begun to clarify how.

—
In 2020, Charlotte Helfrich-Förster and her colleagues at the Julius-
Maximilians-Universität Würzburg in Germany examined long-term records
from twenty-two women who tracked their menstrual cycles over time, up to
thirty-two years. She told me she expected to find a weak correlation with the
Moon’s cycle, if any, but she found the opposite. The lunar cycle strongly
influenced the onset of menses, with several women beginning their monthly
periods at the time of the full Moon. This means that for some women, their
most fertile times, near ovulation, would be two weeks later, when the Moon
is new and dark. There was also a peak during the new Moon.
Two participants often reported brief menstrual cycles several days shy of
the twenty-nine-day lunar period. But shortly before they became pregnant,
the women’s cycles lengthened to match the Moon’s.[14] Helfrich-Förster said
she cannot yet explain why, but it seems possible that synchrony with the
synodic month—the time it takes the Moon to return to the same alignment
with Earth and the Sun—may have conferred some benefit to their fertility.
She believes there may also be a gravitational reason, because several
women’s cycles aligned more strongly with the Moon when it was closer to
Earth.
The study has the usual caveats, including the fact that it included only a
couple dozen people. But poring over Helfrich-Förster’s data sets, I found the
lunar signal to be unmistakable.
“When you think about all the factors that are involved in this, the fact that
you can show a signal at all means there’s something there,” Katherine
Sharkey, a sleep scientist at Brown University, told me. “Why wouldn’t we be
susceptible to these rhythms? It’s super basic priming: If you are an amoeba,
don’t reproduce at noon, because you will get dried up. You have to be able to
organize your reproductive behavior.”
Cave artwork dating to twenty thousand years ago suggests people at that
time may have even figured out the link between the lunar cycles and fertility.
They could have used the Moon and stars to plan their pregnancies, according
to analysis by Michael Rappenglück, a science historian and astronomer in

Gilching, Germany.[15] This would be a more intentional sort of fertility
awareness than the pure biology Helfrich-Förster observed. The rising and
setting of stars at dawn, called the heliacal rise, has been used since
prehistory to mark seasons. Combined with the Moon’s cycles, star watching
could be a potent form of family planning, according to Rappenglück. A
woman might keep track of her menstruation in order to recognize the full
Moon cycle closest to the dawn rising of the bright star Betelgeuse, marking
Orion’s shoulder. If she conceived after that period, she would deliver her
baby when the star was setting at dawn. This meant her birth would happen in
spring, after the harsh winter, when food was more plentiful for the nursing
mother and her infant.
We can’t go back to the Magdalenian era to ask mothers whether they used
this form of family planning. But we know for certain that this deliberate
seasonal synchronicity is true for many animals, including the creatures that
undertake Earth’s most stupendous migration.
Each year on the Serengeti, an ancient grassland that borders Tanzania and
Kenya, a horde of some 1.7 million wildebeest move clockwise from north to
south and back again. The herds cover more than five hundred miles one way
in search of rain-fed grass, and nearly 250,000 of them perish on the journey.
The animals give birth to their calves, nearly 500,000 new wildebeest, while
in the southern part of the Serengeti during austral summer in a narrow,
three-week span in January and February. Calves born outside this window
almost never survive—they fall victim to predators, like crocodiles and lions,
that follow the herd through its great migration. Calves born at the right time
will be old enough, and strong enough, to make the hard journey at just three
months of age.
But for baby wildebeest to be born en masse, their mothers must also mate
en masse, ensuring they conceive their young at the same time. Even though
scientists have struggled to pin down an exact window for these dates, the
estimated conceptions apparently always fall between April and May, in a
window of time determined by two consecutive full Moons, immediately
following the southern fall equinox.

It’s probably worth noting that near the equator, where the Serengeti lies,
the waxing and waning Moon is a powerful luminary. It seems possible that
wildebeest, just like humans, synchronize their lives with a reliable clock in
the sky.
The Moon captained the origins and evolution of life, and it probably
influenced our early biology. Its regular appearance and disappearance
certainly dominated the way we began keeping time. And the Moon most
certainly held dominion over the early human psyche. Humans have long
assumed that the Moon affects us. The words “lunacy” and “lunatic” derive
from it. For millennia, doctors have claimed that the Moon affects biology.
Hippocrates himself wrote that “no physician should be entrusted with the
treatment of disease who was ignorant of the science of astronomy.” In the
1990s, a survey showed that some 81 percent of mental health professionals
believed the full Moon changes behavior.[16] Many of the changes people
often associate with a full Moon—erratic conduct, increased crime, general
“lunacy”—are impossible to prove. But while the epidemiology is hard, there
actually are some correlations between Moon phases and human activity,
from insomnia to mania. Full Moons are known to reduce sleep in adults and
children, which can make some erratic behaviors more likely. Who isn’t
cranky after a lack of sleep? For reasons no one can quite figure out,
hospitalizations for things like cardiovascular problems and some kinds of
hemorrhages increase during certain Moon phases. Medical findings are
mixed, but studies show aneurysms are significantly more likely to rupture
during the new Moon and full Moon phases, when the Moon is aligned with
the Sun. The mechanism for this is unclear, especially because changes in the
Moon’s gravitational pull would be so slight. Yet even a minuscule effect on
the thin wall of a brain aneurysm could change the rupture pattern, note the
authors of a 2017 study.[17] The Moon may play a role, albeit a tiny one, in
the flow of blood through the human body. The litany of anecdotes is broader

than the peer-reviewed studies on the subject. Go into any hospital around the
time of the full Moon and you will notice the correlation.
Beyond affecting physical health, the Moon has observable effects on
mental health, too.
Psychology has come a long way since the days of so-called lunatic
asylums. Most scientists scoff at the notion that a full Moon would make
anyone act differently or engage in the risky behaviors associated with full
Moon cycles. But there is some new evidence that there is in fact a
relationship between the phase of the Moon and human behavior. In 2018,
German scientists showed that in some patients with bipolar disorder,
switches from depression to mania coincided with the synodic month, the
29.5-day recurrence of the new Moon.[18] In one patient, manic episodes
surged because the patient’s wake and sleep cycles synchronized with the tidal
rhythm instead of the circadian rhythm.
Disrupted sleep might be to blame for this. The lunar cycle is also known
to affect sleep, through both light and an apparent gravitational effect that
scientists are still unsure how to explain. In a major 2013 study, researchers
studied volunteers in a sleep lab where they were isolated from artificial light
at night. The volunteers were not told that the study would be looking for any
Moon-related effects. The researchers found that around the full Moon, deep-
sleep-related brain activity diminished by 30 percent, total sleep dropped by
twenty minutes, and it took people an average of five minutes longer to fall
asleep in the first place. The study was the first reliable lab evidence that the
Moon can modulate sleep in humans, even apart from its light.[19]
The Moon has many subconscious effects on humans, in early prehistory
and now. But its pull on the human consciousness is arguably even more
profound.
Archaeoastronomers say the Moon played a potent role in the increasing
complexity of early human thinking. In the Paleolithic and into the Bronze
Age, lunar symbolism likely enabled humans to understand, or at least to
relate to, the otherwise mysterious concepts of becoming, birth, vanishing,
death, resurrection, renewal, and eternity.[20] While the silvery crescent of a
new Moon is emblematic of possibility and fertility, the amber-toned sickle

shape of the waning early-morning Moon can represent endings, or an easing
into nothingness.
Ancient people followed the Sun and the seasons, but they also noticed the
phases and the longer motions of the Moon. Its utility as a daily, monthly, and
even seasonal timekeeper was unequaled.
“If you want to keep time by the Sun for anything longer than a day, you’re
going to start running out of fingers,” said Aveni, the archaeoastronomer.
“But if I were to tell you, ‘We’ll meet at the next quarter Moon,’ that’s an easy
way to mark a couple of weeks. We can say when we see the first crescent
through the west, we can say when the Moon disappears, we can say a full
Moon, and not be off by more than a day either way.”
Archaeologists debate whether ancient carvings and images of the night
sky were created for timekeeping purposes, or for art’s sake, or for more
advanced ritualistic uses we can only guess at. But what’s clear is that the
motifs recur over time and across great distances.
Many Paleolithic people in Europe and the Mediterranean venerated (or at
least frequently painted) bulls, whose horns represented the Moon in later
cultures throughout the world. The paintings of Lascaux Cave, which date to
seventeen thousand years ago, are best known for their evocative depictions
of both horses and bulls. Curvy animals cover the walls and the ceiling of the
cave, along with dots that might represent stars and the Moon. Beyond the
cave entrance, past an area called the Hall of Bulls, a visitor enters a dead-end
passage known as the Axial Gallery. Red aurochs, an extinct form of cattle,
stand in a group, heads together. A huge black bull stands opposite them.
Across the gallery, a pregnant horse gallops above a row of twenty-six black
dots. The mare is running toward a massive stag, whose front legs are
obscured behind thirteen additional evenly spaced dots. Dots and dashes
accompany animals throughout Lascaux and other caves, from Chauvet in
France to Altamira in Spain.
Some anthropologists think the animals and their accompanying notations
may be intended to represent seasons. In Europe, bovines calve in the spring,
and horses both foal and mate in late spring. The deer rut takes place in early
autumn, and ibex, a type of wild goat, mate around the winter solstice. Some

archaeologists believe that in Lascaux, the thirteen dots depict the full Moons
of the lunar cycle, and the twenty-six dots may represent a sidereal month,
roughly the time it takes the Moon to orbit Earth with respect to the stars.
Taken together, the animals and the dots may represent the first steps
toward a primitive calendaring system, perhaps to convey seasonal
information about game.[21]
But these early suggestions of lunar timekeeping still lack an explicit
representation of the Moon. They are just the first steps along the path from a
biological system of timekeeping toward a civil one. It was only after the Ice
Age in the Pleistocene that early people would come to use the Moon as not
only a marker of time but a forecaster. To do this they would need something
more human, and maybe more mystical, than the lunar rhythms pulsating in
their cells. They would need more than a carved bone shard etched with
commas.
We had come a long way from our ambling piscine ancestor stranded by
the low tide. Now we needed tools to hunt those fishy cousins to sustain our
growing communities. We needed a way to govern our days, allowing us to
divide and conquer time and truly take over the world. Reckoning time by
weeks and months rather than days gave our ancestors the ability to plan far
ahead. With a reliable, natural calendar, people could agree upon dates for
harvests, hunts, ceremonies, feasts, slaughters, and wars. They could create
the first societies and the first literate civilizations. To do all of this, they
would use the Moon as their guide.
Skip Notes
*1 In a letter to a friend in 1871, Darwin wrote that life may have originated in “some warm little pond
with all sorts of ammonia and phosphoric salts.” By 1953, the American chemists Stanley Miller and
Harold Urey showed this idea had merit. The duo threw sparks on a mixture of ammonia and methane
and concocted a brown broth full of amino acids. These reactive little molecules contain carbon,
hydrogen, nitrogen, and oxygen. When they link up in long chains, they form proteins, which provide
the chassis for the machinery of life. Chemists repeated the famous Miller-Urey experiments in 2007,
adding some other chemicals known to exist on early Earth, and replicated the production of amino
acids. Though the recipe for life is still unknown to us, the basic ingredients could have been cooked
up from scratch, using the atmosphere—and, crucially, the Moon’s tides.

*2 This would be easier to understand if you could just cut the day in half, but remember the tide
advances by about fifty minutes a day. The Moon moves quickly along its orbit—which is why it looks
different every night. It therefore takes about fifty minutes each day for any given spot on Earth to
catch up to the place it was the day before, directly opposite the Moon.
*3 There is no typical menstrual cycle; anything from 21 to 35 days in length is considered healthy. But
peer-reviewed research shows that 28 to 29 days is the statistical average.

Hilary Murray crouched over her kitchen table and took a green
highlighter to the map she’d spread between us. She traced the roads we’d
traveled that day, then marked the ancient stone circles of greatest merit. She
noted the site of Crathes Castle with a pencil. The estate, built in the
sixteenth century on land donated by Robert the Bruce in 1323, apparently
didn’t merit a mention on the map. But to Scottish archaeologists Hilary and
Charles Murray, the castle’s grounds contain one of the most important
historical sites in the country. Depending on the way one interprets it, it may
well be one of the most important sites in the world.
—
Beside the tan castle building, beyond the ornately sculpted hedgerows and
formal gardens, there is a simple grass field edged with willow and alder trees.
Beneath the field are twelve sunken pits, carved ten millennia ago by Stone
Age hunter-gatherers. They were hidden by time and grass until the parched
summer of 1976, when a dry spell liberated them from the soil, allowing
archaeologist Gordon Maxwell to spot them from a small airplane.

Maxwell and others were conducting a survey for the Royal Commission
on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland, aiming to see what
emerged from the drought-stricken land of Aberdeenshire. Maxwell noticed a
weird wrinkle in the valley of the River Dee, in a glacier-carved field near
Crathes Castle. He snapped some black-and-white photos.
The developed images showed the clearing, called Warren Field, etched by
modern-day plow marks. But beneath them was an unmissable set of
enigmatic shapes: two thick rectangular shadows that appeared to be buried
ridges, and, more oddly, an alignment of pits stretching from southwest to
northeast. Maxwell and his colleagues published their findings in a journal
called Aerial Archaeology.[1] The ridges under the ripening crops were
interpreted as the remnants of a large timber hall, interesting but otherwise
unremarkable, especially in a country littered with the ancient leavings of
Neolithic people. The alignment of pits was unexplained.
—
The same year, Charlie Murray started work as a full-time archaeologist for
the city of Aberdeen, with Hilary joining the department four years later.
During the next few decades, the pair worked to document Middle and New
Stone Age relics and ruins in the region, often being called into service when
developers announced plans for new buildings and roads. As they drove me
through Aberdeenshire in their blue Peugeot, Hilary kept pointing out past
excavations. But it was not until 2006 that the duo excavated the unusual
alignment of pits at Warren Field.
The Murrays, Irish by birth and bearing, are now semi-retired on their
sheep farm and only occasionally take on new excavations in between visits
with their grandchildren in Glasgow and Australia. Hilary has a shock of
orange hair, a neatly clipped brogue, and a fierce stare, but just beneath the
surface is a kind heart and a wellspring of knowledge. Charlie is graying,
slowing a bit with arthritis, and as easy to laugh as anyone I’ve ever met. The
wall behind their kitchen table is papered over in family photos: Charlie and a
grandson, maybe a year old then, laughing heartily; Hilary smiling with a

grandbaby in her arms; a field full of golden flowers and sheep; the family
posing on a balcony in Tuscany one year for Charlie’s birthday.
Even in their semi-retirement, the Murrays do not flinch from the type of
labor their ancestors, and my own, toiled at for centuries. They rise before
dawn to check the lambs. They mash the potatoes and then bake them with
lots of butter. They walk uphill, into the woods, simply for the sake of
walking. Hilary led me through their property, up to the top of a hill amid
thickets of willow and alder like the ones at Warren Field. She wanted to
throw a stick for her Border collie, Banjo, and to check on a badger den. The
Murrays wanted to show me the mouth of the River Dee and its colony of
harbor seals, so we drove to a nearby visitors’ center and then hiked straight
through a thatch of gorse, an evergreen bush that produces brilliant canary-
yellow, coconut-scented flowers and is completely covered in spikes. The
gorse caught on my coat and hair and Hilary and Charlie both beat me to the
beach.
The Murrays are hardworking and hilarious and warm and razor-sharp,
and by the end of a long weekend touring Aberdeenshire’s gentle hills, I felt
like part of their family. Back in the kitchen, Hilary pushed her hair out of
her face and peered at the map, showing me the route we had taken through
Aberdeen and back in time.
In 2004, Hilary and Charlie were hired to excavate the buried history of
Warren Field so that the authorities at the National Trust for Scotland could
determine how to protect the site. Hilary’s PhD research focused on Viking-
era wooden buildings, so she is used to handling complex excavations
involving structures that were used in multiple ways. As the aerial photos
suggested they might, the Murrays and their team found the remains of an
eighty-foot-long, thirty-foot-wide timber hall dating to the Neolithic, also
called the New Stone Age, which corresponds to roughly 3800 b.c.e. The
building contains traces of cereal grains, which means it was used during the
advent of pastoralism and agriculture. The Murrays carefully excavated the

timber hall’s remains, including bits of wall posts and roof supports. They
collected ashes and burned wood fragments to scrutinize how much carbon-
14 the wood contained. The Murrays were able to obtain ages for the samples
by comparing the amounts of carbon-14 in the wood fragments; the older
something is, the less C-14 there is to detect. In the same way that isotopes of
oxygen tell us about the creation of Earth, the Moon, and other rocky worlds,
the Murrays’ carbon dating procedures revealed the age of the hall and the
time when it was used.
Then they turned to the pit alignment nearby. The connection between the
two is not clear. But as the Murrays told me, the people who built the timber
hall would surely have known about the series of sunken holes carved by their
ancestors many centuries before.
Teams of people working together, heaving giant timbers into place, must
have had some ideas about the nearby scoops dug out from the earth. They
surely knew the field was an important place, though they might not have
been able to articulate why. With the passage of ages, the pit alignment’s
origin story may have been subsumed into founding myths, stories of
ancestors, and tales of mythical beings lost to time.
It is almost impossible not to think of these vanished people and their
stories everywhere you go in Scotland. It is a country of legends. The national
animal mascot is a unicorn. Windswept Aberdeenshire seems full of ghosts.
Visitors to Crathes Castle are amazed by the giant, ornately groomed
eighteenth-century yew hedges that loom overhead, and they enjoy castle
visits, a zip line, and other tourist activities. But amid the manicured gardens
and visiting gentry, a low-grade awareness of ancient ways, ancient beings,
followed me like a shadow. It follows Charlie, too, wherever he and Hilary
go. “I think the castle is boring. It’s too new for me. I like them older,” he
said, only half kidding. The castle, completed in the sixteenth century c.e., is
three times more distant from the time of the timber hall as Generation X is
distant from the time of Christ.
And as the Murrays discovered, the pits were even older, dating to around
8200 b.c.e.—10,200 years ago. The pits were also used far longer than the
hall. They are huge, many of them eight feet wide and five feet deep. People

dug them using shovels fashioned of deer antlers, animal shoulder blades, and
wood, exerting considerable effort. Despite their builders’ careful work, the
pits would occasionally slump in, and soil would cover deposits of ash and
pollen. After some time, people would excavate the pits once again, until
more spoil tumbled into them. This pattern continued for two millennia.
This is a remarkable span of time. Very few structures have lasted so long
—consider the Great Wall of China, about 2,300 years old. The Roman
Colosseum is about 1,950 years old. Notre-Dame Cathedral, 860 years old,
lost its spire in a devastating inferno during the week I visited Scotland. Now
imagine a monument lasting more than ten times as long as Paris’s storied
church. The pits of Warren Field are 5,000 years older than even Stonehenge,
a much more famous monument to the sky, towering above England’s
Salisbury Plain five hundred miles south of Aberdeen.
The fact that the pits were dug and re-dug over such a long period of time
is evidence of their importance, Hilary told me. She and Charlie are careful
scientists, and they hesitated to draw conclusions about the meaning of the
pits—that would be left to another landscape archaeologist—but both
Murrays agreed that they meant something important, probably to do with
astronomy, and almost definitely to do with the passage of time. They were
not simply animal traps or mere fire pits.
“It’s very strange to create a monument in negative,” as Hilary put it to me,
after a dinner of lamb steak and Irish-style mashed potatoes. “I’m quite sure
they do represent time. But were people realizing they mark time in years, or
in generations? Could they have been thinking of time across generations?”
The Murrays and their collaborators published a book in 2009 about their
excavation, musing that the rounded pits may have had something to do with
astronomy.[2] They considered it a linear monument, meaning they imagined
its users would stand near one pit so that the others stretched out before it.
They likened the alignment to Stonehenge. That got Vince Gaffney’s
attention.
—

Gaffney, a professor at the University of Bradford in northern England, has
made a career of studying earthworks made by ancient humans from the
North Sea to Croatia. He speaks carefully in a northern English accent, like
an academic Paul McCartney. He is comfortable musing on the quotidian
details of a Mesolithic Scottish lifestyle, and equally comfortable making a
bold claim: that the concept of time itself, and our place in it, originated in
his homeland.
The iconic monument of Stonehenge is exceptionally well studied, but like
any unspeakably ancient artifact, it contains lingering mysteries. Near its rock
pillars, Stonehenge has a long rectangular ditch called the Cursus, which is
older than the rest of the monument. In 2011, construction crews digging out
a new parking lot for tour buses found some pits within the Cursus. On the
summer solstice, the eastern pit aligns with the rising Sun and the western pit
aligns with the setting Sun. Gaffney set out to interpret these pits, and went
searching for other Stone Age monuments with similar features. His
colleague Simon Fitch, a seismic mapping expert at the University of
Bradford, showed him a copy of the Murrays’ book.
Gaffney examined the ghostly rectangle of the ancient timber hall. He
examined the pits. He studied Hilary and Charlie’s hand-drawn renderings of
each, which depicted their placement and made them easier to discern than
Maxwell’s grainy aerial photos. On the printed page, the pits were aligned
vertically, the rough circles tracing a jagged line from north to south. Gaffney
looked at it, squinted, and craned his neck.
“Simon,” Gaffney said. “Turn the book round.”
He says he saw it instantly: “It’s the phases of the Moon!”
As he recalled it later, Gaffney recognized the pits as a structured
monument. To him, the alignment was not linear, the way the Murrays saw it,
forming a line from top to bottom. Instead, the pits formed a distinct curve
from right to left, bent to the horizon. And it struck him as vital that there
were twelve of them. They started out small, gradually growing larger until
reaching the largest pit in the middle. Then they grew smaller again. The
smallest pits are also the shallowest. Gaffney was captivated. He mustered a
team of archaeologists for a second excavation, in 2013. They brought

ground-penetrating radar, equipment to study electromagnetic induction,
magnetometers, and a suite of other geophysical tools. The team did not find
any new features, but they took a fresh look at the pits’ sizes and carefully
mapped their orientation on the landscape.
The alignment made sense to Gaffney, but its orientation was unusual; he
couldn’t figure out why its makers chose this spot, and this arrangement, to
carve Moons into Earth. He stood near the center pit and looked up. The spot
affords a clear view of a V-shaped pass over the Grampian Mountains, called
the Slug Road.
The area was forested in hazel and alder ten millennia ago, but the pass
would have been visible when the trees were bare in midwinter. This is the
time of the winter solstice, when the Sun reverses its course across the sky to
move northward and lengthen the days. Gaffney told me that when he realized
this, he felt as though the heavens were shouting at him: This field not only
mimics the phases of the Moon, it’s an astronomical alignment, too.
Armed with sophisticated landscape maps and three-dimensional
computer renderings, Gaffney and his colleagues decided to turn back the
clock to determine whether the winter solstice was indeed related to the
Warren Field alignment. They had to rewrite astronomical modeling software,
which only cycles backward until about 4000 b.c.e. That’s partly because no
one thought humans were paying much attention to the workings of the
cosmos prior to that. Roughly 4000 b.c.e., some six thousand years ago,
corresponds to the oldest astronomical records in world history, from the first
literate societies in Mesopotamia. With updated software, Gaffney’s
colleagues traced the motions of the Sun back to 8000 b.c.e., ten thousand
years ago, when Warren Field would have been in use and prehistoric humans
wearing furs and carrying stone tools would have warmed themselves by a
communal fire.
Sure enough, anyone standing at the center of Warren Field’s pits would
have had a direct line of sight to the sunrise on the winter solstice. As dawn
pinked the snowy hills, the gathered people of prehistoric Scotland would
wait for the life-giving Sun to show itself.

The arrival of the Sun after the year’s longest night would be a gift in
itself. But the pit alignment calls on the Moon, which makes the pits about
something deeper than the changing seasons. The people of ancient
Aberdeenshire used it to begin their year. Like the turning of a new calendar
page to January 1, the Warren Field pits were a time marker, telling their
users when to begin preparing for a new cycle of seasons.
In this part of Scotland, at that time, the seasons were crucial to the
hunting and gathering of food. It would be scarce for clans of hunter-
gatherers, especially in winter. The solstice would fall two or three Moons
before any sign of spring, when deer, otters, and hares would emerge and
fatten in the warm and greening hills. But the most important food source
was the nearby River Dee, home of the salmon.
In February, two Moons after the winter solstice, the tide carries the fish in
toward the shore. Just as their ancestors did uncountable eons ago, the fish
move out of the sea, toward the land. The salmon are not here to walk,
however; they are here to start their next generation.
The tide-borne fish swim upriver, past the harbor seal colony and the gorse
that caught my coat, past the grounds of Crathes Castle, up toward the waters
of their birth where they will spawn. During bright moonlit nights, they will
swim near the surface to use the night’s luminary as a guide. For the people
hunting these fish, this Moon was the important Moon, offering the longest
nighttime light of the month, the best chance to walk the countryside long
after the Sun was down and cover as much ground as they could. The river
would be so slick with fish, people would have had more than they could
carry. But they needed to plan for this event—maybe to ration their food in
the meantime, maybe to fashion a net, or to whittle a spear, perhaps to
organize the communal festivities that would happen during the salmon run’s
peak.
But these people had not invented writing yet, and two Moons is a lot of
finger counting to remember. They could etch some hash marks on a stick or
a bone, just as their distant ancestors did down on the Continent. But as
Alexander Marshack showed, this is more useful for marking days gone by,
not days in the future. And a stick or a bone sheath can be lost. It would be

better to mark each Moon in a permanent fashion, tallying up the Moons
gone by so you know exactly which one brings the salmon. This is what the
pits represent, Gaffney believes. The twelve pits are a calendrical device,
representing the Moons in a solar year.
There is no doubt that hunter-gatherers would have been capable of
making observations like these. Though they have long been stereotyped as
primitive louts who “tended to be wandering around the landscape, scratching
their backsides,” as Gaffney puts it, Marshack and others showed that early
humans were making lunar notations centuries before they carved the Warren
Field pits. The difference at Warren Field is the permanence of the calendar,
and its alignment to the solstice, both of which make it truly unique. But
Warren Field offers something else, too. The solstice alignment shows that
humans had made a giant leap in thinking.
While the Moon’s phases are a simple way to create small blocks of time,
it’s no small feat to wrangle that thirtyish-day cycle into one that matches
Earth’s seasons. A solar year, meaning the time it takes for the Sun to return
to exactly the same spot in the sky, usually has twelve or thirteen lunar cycles.
That means a calendar that only counts Moons will soon drift from our tilted
planet’s seasons, and make you miss the salmon run by weeks or more.
To keep Sun and Moon in step—in order to use the Moon as your
calendar, to keep time on the schedule by which you live out your life while
remaining in tune with the seasons—you need to add a few extra days to the
calendar.
This could be as simple as tacking on a handful of days around the winter
solstice. The Twelve Days of Christmas are a holdover from this tradition, but
Middle Stone Age clans didn’t come up with that. The ancient Scots thought
of something else. Early lunar calendars would essentially hit a reset button,
starting your Moon year anew after the winter solstice. This way, Moon
counting would stay in sync with the cycles of nature.
This is what makes Warren Field special, according to Gaffney. It is an
annual corrective, a clock reset that allows people to keep tracking time by
the Moon, their reliable nighttime companion, without falling behind the Sun-

driven seasonal year. By watching the solstice from Warren Field, prehistoric
people could use the pits as a timekeeper.
This is a remarkable feat. It’s very practical, but it also represents a
monumental shift in thinking. The Moon pits, Gaffney believes, mark the first
time humans figured out how to predict future time. It was an evolution in
skyward thinking that had started centuries earlier, painted on the walls at
Lascaux and Chauvet caves, and pitted in bone and stone talismans found
throughout central Europe. Even though the cave paintings are Moon
markers, and Marshack’s bones are time counters, those artifacts were likely
not produced with any consistency. There was no universally recognized
beginning, end, or sequence of any kind. They had no continuity, and there
was no way to connect them to one another, or to the seasons. The pits are
different. They can do all of this. They are lunar time reckoners. They orient
the user in time.
Archaeologists have long argued that an appreciation of the passage of
time should not be equated with a system of timekeeping or calendaring. But
time orientation, even if it’s not through a calendar, is a cognitive leap beyond
the simple acknowledgment that day follows night.
It’s hard to overstate the significance of this shift in perspective. Today we
live by time, which we never seem to have in sufficient supply. Never mind
the cycles of the Moon; forget even the rhythm of your own beating heart.
Today we count time so carefully, we measure the second as 9,192,631,770
oscillations of a cesium atom. The sexagesimal system of sixty seconds in a
minute, sixty minutes in an hour, twenty-four hours in a day, bequeathed to
us by the Babylonians, is too inexact for today’s world. Financial markets
operate in fractions of a second, meaning fortunes rise and fall according to
the beat of this randomly chosen quantum phenomenon. Time is the
backbone of society. We live in time. But it is a quintessentially human
construct. As far as we know, only humans can situate ourselves in time, and
mentally move around within it, from the past to the present and to the future.
We can only speculate about when this cognitive ability arose in our hominid
ancestors, but if Gaffney’s interpretation is correct, Warren Field is the first
site we’ve discovered that demonstrates this kind of reckoning. If this is true,

humans began to orient themselves in time far earlier than archaeologists have
long thought.
The Murrays agree, as previously mentioned, that the pits were probably
used for timekeeping of some kind, and for ancient intentions beyond their
understanding. While they stop short of saying the Warren Field pits compose
the first lunar calendar, they say Gaffney isn’t necessarily wrong.
“We had looked at it as a linear monument. He was the first person who
thought of it standing crosswise,” as an arc on the horizon as opposed to
extending in a straight line, Hilary said.
At midwinter, the solstice sun would have risen above the Grampian range,
visible from the central pit when the alder and hazel trees were bare. But the
alignment was meaningful at midsummer, too. Around the summer solstice,
the Moon would have risen on the southern horizon and remained low, owing
to northern Scotland’s extreme latitude. It would appear to roll along the tops
of the hills before disappearing. People may have used the pits to mark the
passage of time as the seasons cycled forward. Maybe each pit represented a
phase of the Moon, or maybe each pit represented a lunation (a complete
lunar cycle; i.e., a month). Or maybe both were true.
A clan of hunter-gatherers might have sent an emissary to the great
gathering place around the solstice time. Maybe they would meet new friends
or see old relations there. Maybe they would conduct rituals or ceremonies,
whose meanings are now hidden by the veil of time. The Northern
Hemisphere’s midwinter solstice, the day with the shortest sunlight of the
year, has been a time for celebration for thousands of years, after all. It’s one
of the reasons so many faith traditions hold festivals around the winter
solstice, including Christmas.
“The fact that you have this massive wash of people going up and down the
river seasonally, it would be quite possible for them to have gathered here at
times during the year,” Hilary mused.

While we can only wonder what people were doing at the pit alignment,
there is one thing we know for sure. After more than two thousand years of
continuous use, the pits fell into disrepair. The holes were later filled in, a
mysterious choice that spooks Charlie. “That’s the truly scary thing to me,” he
told me. “Were they trying to undo something?”
And around the same time, the timber hall was deliberately burned down.
Archaeologists generally agree on the widespread intentional destruction of
Neolithic structures throughout Europe. Hilary and Charlie studied charcoal
patterns and wood samples from the pits to show that the Warren Field timber
hall must have been set on fire deliberately. Oak, which was used to build the
hall, would have been difficult to ignite directly, suggesting that other, more
flammable material was set ablaze first.
The exact dates are hard to identify, in part because Warren Field was
carved by glaciers. For an archaeologist, erosion is a harsh and tricky foe. But
the Murrays have one idea. Around 2300 b.c.e., a volcano called Hekla, in
southern Iceland, blew its top. Later eruptions from this volcano are known to
have cooled global temperatures for two decades. One such event is recorded
in oak tree rings preserved in Irish bogs.[3] Under an ash-choked sky, trees
barely grew for eighteen years.[4] Researchers have suggested conditions were
akin to a nuclear winter, making agricultural life all but impossible in
northern Scotland.[5] Perhaps people viewed the cloudy sky as a bad omen.
Maybe they thought they were being punished for their skywatching. Or
maybe they could no longer see the Moon behind the haze, and thought it had
gone, and so they abandoned their earthen monument. This theme of
abandonment and destruction recurs in other Moon monuments throughout
Scotland, and throughout much of ancient Europe.
—
Today, the pits and the timber hall are invisible. Their exact location is
known only to the Murrays, Gaffney, and a few others. People visiting the
exquisite walled garden of Crathes Castle have no idea what they are missing
as they drive up the hill. The pits and the timber hall’s remains were carefully

filled in and fenced off, to keep curious tourists, rabbits, and other visitors
away from the ancient monument and to protect anyone from falling in.
“It is the only time I cried when a site was being backfilled. It just haunted
me. I went away and walked in the wood. I just couldn’t get over it,” Hilary
told me.
She visited in 2018 and took three acorns from the site. Now three young
oaks from Warren Field grow on the Murrays’ property, descended from the
very towering trees that probably overlooked the pits ten millennia ago.
Hilary and Charlie took me to see the field, warning me that I would only
be able to imagine what lay beneath. Charlie parked the Peugeot along the
road leading to the castle and we hopped over a tall, newly installed wood-
and-mesh fence. Hundreds of years of plowing had turned the once-rolling
glacier field into a flat plain, flanked by woodland. I walked along the
perimeter, where the pits are found, and stopped when Hilary told me. I
looked down. The pasture was almost comically green, the same bright kelly
tone as Hilary’s parka. Trees surrounded the field on every side, and I could
not see the River Dee just a few feet away, but I could see the Grampian
Mountains. I closed my eyes and imagined what this would have felt like ten
thousand years ago.
The wind would be the same, for sure. Scottish spring wind bites like the
gorse. The trees would look mostly the same. Through their burgeoning
leaves, I imagined two hunters approaching, carrying a post that has been
strung up with fat salmon, fresh from the Dee. A couple months into the great
salmon run, there is still plenty to catch. The hunters are wearing animal skins
as clothing. A small party of fishers and hunters trails behind, while ahead of
them, still more people prepare fires. There is heather growing among the
rocks, glacial erratics that are now being used as standing stones or seats near
the outdoor hearth. The cooking fires flank the curved alignment of pits.
Inside four of the pits, more fires glow. They are burning atop torches carved
of felled timbers. It is early in the fourth Moon of the year.

The Warren Field pits may have been the earliest lunar monument in
Scotland, and maybe the world, but they were hardly the last. Long after the
destruction of the Warren Field timber hall, long after the final sad slumping
of the carved lunar pits, the people of northeastern Scotland remained in
communion with the Moon. In the centuries before recorded civilization, they
erected monument after monument to it. These Moon-watching memorials
are called recumbent stone circles, and they are scattered throughout
Aberdeenshire.
While Stonehenge is by far the most famous stone circle of all, similar
arrangements of stones and wood are found throughout northern Europe,
from Ireland to Scandinavia and into Germany and Spain, and even parts of
North America. Some of them are made from glacial erratics. But most stone
circles use quarried rock, a testament to prehistoric humans’ aptitude at
moving extremely heavy objects across great distances.
Recumbent stone circles, however, are unique. They are found only in
northeastern Scotland. Archaeologists have identified as many as one
hundred, from crumbling remnants to towering megaliths scattered through
the Grampian Mountains, the gateway to the Scottish Highlands. Their name
derives from the arrangement of the largest stone, which was laid in a
horizontal, or recumbent, position.
Stone artwork is common throughout the British Isles, on both sides of the
Irish Sea. Celts, Picts, Viking invaders, and earlier residents of the countries
now known as Ireland and Scotland all used granite for artwork, navigation,
and messages we can today only guess at. The Murrays took me to several of
these rock billboards throughout Aberdeenshire, like the Maiden Stone, so
named because it depicts a mirror and a comb—a sexist trope, Hilary scoffed.
But many of the Aberdeen stone monuments are more than megalithic
messages. They are directly related to the Moon, and reflect its importance to
Stone Age, Bronze Age, and Iron Age cultures.
At a churchyard in Kintore, I ran my palm over an ancient etching of a
salmon, leaping over a Pictish symbol for a cauldron. Salmon would have
been important to anyone living in this region fourteen hundred years ago,
when this stone was carved. And they still are. Salmon fishing is big business

in Aberdeen. “If you want to fish here, it will cost you a couple thousand a
day. We have some of the richest fishing in the country here,” Charlie told
me.
On the other side of the salmon carving, on the back side of the stone, is
an unmistakable shape, adorned with the knotty loops of early Celtic art: a
crescent Moon. The Kintore monument’s meaning has been lost to time, but
the motifs it depicts are still crystal clear.
—
After a coffee break, we drove to Easter Aquhorthies, a stone circle on a
hilltop with a view of the surrounding mountains. It dates to the third
millennium b.c.e., not the oldest recumbent stone circle in the neighborhood,
but a particularly well-preserved one. Its name might reflect the reason why:
Easter Aquhorthies may be derived from the Celtic words for “field of
prayer.” People might have appreciated the stone circle’s spiritual significance
long after the original rituals for which it was built faded into prehistory.
The circle is a few moments’ walk up a hill from a modest parking lot. I
was not sure what to expect, though the Murrays had told me about the colors
of the rocks and the circle’s unusual acoustics. At the top, I was completely
caught off guard. Entering the circle was like stepping through a portal in
time.
I climbed three stone steps to enter the circle, brushing past a shiny pillar
of red jasper. It was one of eleven erect stones forming a circle more than
sixty feet across. The circle is completed by the sideways recumbent, which is
flanked by a pair of slabs on each side. Twelve major stones in all, for twelve
lunar phases in a solar year. The recumbent stone, the largest one, is twelve
feet long, pure reddish granite, and probably weighs nine tons. It likely came
from the mountains many miles away.[*1]
I stood in the center and listened to the way the rocks amplified the sounds
of our voices and the ever-present cutting wind. The circle’s acoustic
properties remind Hilary of an old cathedral, where echoes travel to
surprising places, and moreover, where you feel different because of the

environment. The sounds and smells of an old Catholic church are designed
to be familiar to anyone who has previously set foot in one, on any continent.
The stone circles may have played a similar role. It was intimidating. I found
myself hovering close to a pillar at a time, because standing in the middle of
the circle was unnerving. I felt like I did not quite belong there, the way I
have sometimes felt while standing on an altar. Charlie and Hilary stood apart
from me and the rock arrangement’s acoustic properties transported their
voices through the air like some kind of magic trick.
The circles were probably ritual centers where people would gather during
certain times of year. Farmers scattered loosely throughout Aberdeenshire
were the builders, but the circles are not near any former settlement, so,
Hilary told me, they were places people made a special trip to reach. Visitors
would have easily been able to see other stone circles from Easter
Aquhorthies, and vice versa. It’s possible that people used the circles, and
probably bonfires within them, to communicate with neighboring clans—
friendly or otherwise—using smoke and colored flame.
It’s not obvious in the middle of the morning, but the stone circle is special
for more than its size. The orientation of the ancient stones to the Moon’s
cycles is extraordinary. It shows that after ancient people started tracking the
Moon’s cycles to calibrate the course of their year, the descendants of the
Warren Field calendar makers may have also recognized two strange and
useful characteristics of the Moon: the lunar standstill and the Metonic cycle.
To understand these phenomena, we have to talk about the movements of the
heavenly bodies.[6]
If you pay attention to the sky for a few months, you’ll begin to notice a
double Dutch phenomenon between the heavenly lights. In the summer, the
Sun is high overhead, and in winter it sinks low on the southern horizon,
reaching its lowest point at the winter solstice. The Moon is a mirror image.
In the winter, the Moon is high overhead, where it can give the luster of
midday to objects on snow-covered ground. In the summer, the Moon is
lower on the horizon, maybe even appearing in your bedroom window.
Remember that as Earth orbits the Sun, it is tilted on its axis by about 23.4
degrees, which is why we have seasons and why we have the solstices, when

the Sun appears to reach its highest and lowest points in the sky. The word
“solstice” is derived from the Latin words for “sun” and “stand still,” because
twice a year, the Sun seems to pause in its daily path before reversing
direction. But the Sun is not what moves. The Sun and the other planets seem
to arc across Earth’s sky, but they actually follow the same plane, the ecliptic;
our vantage point is what changes as the tilted Earth orbits our star.
For some reason, maybe owing to its cataclysmic formation, the Moon
goes around Earth close to the ecliptic, too, rather than circling our planet
near the equator. Therefore, the Moon also experiences something like a
solstice. It’s technically a “lunistice,” but very few people use this term;
instead, we call it a lunar standstill. While Earth experiences two solstices a
year, the Moon takes much longer to reach its highest and lowest points in the
sky: 18.6 years, to be precise.[*2]
—
Let’s go back to the synodic month, the time required for the Moon to
complete one cycle of phases. After twelve of those, the Moon will be almost
back where it started. The key word is almost. All these moving heavenly
bodies, Sun, Moon, Earth, and stars, seem to sail around with respect to one
another. The Sun and Moon move against the background of stars, and,
further confusing the matter, the stars themselves also seem to move because
of the way Earth is circling the Sun. You’ve experienced this if you’ve ever
gone stargazing at different times of year. At midlatitudes in North America
during the fall, one of the most recognizable constellations is Orion the
Hunter, whose three-starred belt appears over the eastern horizon in the early
evenings. In the spring, Orion is setting in the west by nightfall. To reach the
exact same location in the sky, against the same constellations, on the same
night of the year, the Moon needs more time. This takes nineteen years, or
235 synodic months.
The lunar standstill and the Metonic cycle are not perfectly matched, but
they are very close. Especially close for the unwritten astronomical
knowledge of people living in 2500 b.c.e. The ancient Scots must have

achieved another giant leap in awareness to connect these phenomena, tying
two decades of Sun to Moon, without any system of writing that survived the
ages.
The standing stones of Easter Aquhorthies are arranged so that in the years
of the lunar standstill, just before dawn in the spring, the full Moon sets in the
middle of the recumbent stone, between its twin flankers. Maybe ancient
farmers huddled in the middle, where I stood to hear the voices of Hilary and
Charlie. Maybe ancient people gathered to view the Moon setting. Every
eighteen and a half years, people surely watched in awe as the Moon dipped
down toward the precise center of the recumbent.
The orientation of the ancient stones to this multidecadal cycle is
astounding. Nearly two decades is lengthy in the life of any modern human.
What were you doing eighteen and a half years ago? For a person living five
thousand years ago, two of these eighteen-year rounds represented late
middle age. Constructing a circle whose stones are arranged to embrace the
Moon every 18.6 years requires advanced planning indeed. These people had
real skill, deep astronomical knowledge, and, it seems, true commitment. The
Moon was clearly vital to people of this era. They knew they had to connect
their solar year, the year of the seasons, to the year of the Moon—without it,
they could not plan their lives.
These motifs recur throughout Scotland. Alexander Thom, who may have
coined the phrase “lunar standstill,” first explored this 18.6-year cycle at a
megalithic site called Callanish, in Scotland’s Outer Hebrides, on the western
side of the country. Erected around 3000 b.c.e., the stones are arranged in a
cruciform pattern, and are situated to highlight the Moon’s most extreme
rising and setting points. Thom believed people wanted to track lunar
standstills and eclipses, though it’s also possible Moon watching would have
been practical for daily reasons, too; ancient fishers and island-dwelling
hunter-gatherers would have been focused on the tides as well as the skies. In
2016, archaeologists from Australia reexamined the stone alignments and
concluded that Callanish is a lunar alignment just as much as Warren Field,
Easter Aquhorthies, or any other monument to the Moon.

—
Many of these stone alignments are forgotten and broken, but some are
being recovered and restored even now, thanks to efforts by the Murrays and
other archaeologists. One such circle is on the way to the Cairngorm
Mountains, away from the sea and toward the purple, orange-dappled
landscape of the Scottish Highlands. The circle is next to a rock quarry that
was used until the 1920s, and it sits beside a bunker from World War II. I
thought it would be somewhat sad-looking, a relic forgotten by time, like the
Maiden Stone. I prepared for another hike to see some pretty stones, and I
braced myself against the unending breeze.
When we got out of the Peugeot, the wind lashed at my face, the only part
of myself not protected by multiple layers of Polartec and rayon. We climbed
a hill, both Murrays beating me to the top, and the stone circle of Tomnaverie
revealed itself. It took my breath away.
I looked around. The valley and its hills seemed softer than the area where
the sea embraces the Dee; the region here has been carved smooth over the
ages by both glacier and plow. The grass was golden brown, dappled with
green shoots straining toward spring. Gorse was still poking out everywhere,
but now I saw purple heather, too, an inhabitant of the higher elevations. A
soft rain was visible over the Cairngorms, a few miles to the west. The tableau
may as well have been a postcard in a tourist shop with scotland printed at
the top. It was beautiful. It was very easy to imagine myself in the same spot,
four thousand springs earlier, witnessing exactly the same scene—sheep,
farms, undulating hills, the gorse, the heather, the wind. And the Moon at first
quarter, hanging above us.
Tomnaverie originally contained thirteen upright stones, two of which are
now lost, which increase in height from the northeast to the southwest. They
are arranged symmetrically and they draw your eye toward the northeast
quadrant, which is where archaeologists have found copious evidence of
burning.
I walked toward the recumbent. These northeastern Scottish stone circles
are usually oriented toward the south or southwest. Although some may have

been intended to face the winter sun as it hung low in the sky, there is so
much variation among the circles, it’s almost a certainty that they faced the
summer Moon instead. And there may have been more spiritual reasons for
their alignment, as British archaeologist Richard Bradley notes.[7] The west,
where the Sun and Moon set, may be the direction of the realm of the dead.
Older monuments like Stonehenge in England, Newgrange and Knowth in
Ireland, and Warren Field in Aberdeen are oriented to the movement of the
Sun at the solstices and equinoxes. But for newer (a relative term) monuments
like Tomnaverie, Easter Aquhorthies, and Callanish, the Moon is of prime
importance. And the Murrays and Bradley both argue this is evident in their
construction. Tomnaverie’s standing stones, made of granite and other
igneous rocks, contain quartzite inclusions. These are sparkly pearlescent
chips of white that reflect light—like from a bonfire, or from moonlight. The
Murrays’ property boundaries are marked by stone dykes, many of them
ancient and some of which also contain quartzite. “There are times you go up
there at night and you catch a glint,” Hilary told me. The Moon shining in the
fields.
—
Tomnaverie is one of a small group of stone circles whose orientation is so
far outside the patch of sky where the Sun appears that it must have been
dedicated to the other guiding light of the heavens. But the Moon would not
have appeared over the center of the recumbent every year. Rather,
Tomnaverie might have been oriented to face the Moon every 18.6 years,
corresponding to the Metonic cycle just like Easter Aquhorthies.
The view from Tomnaverie was carefully thought out, according to
Charlie, who oversaw an excavation and partial restoration in 2003. The
recumbent stone and its flankers obscure the immediate foreground and
simultaneously highlight a more distant hill and, more important, a segment
of the sky. Tomnaverie’s vantage point focuses on the summit of Lochnagar,
a mountain several miles away, and the northernmost position of the Moon.

Had the monument been built farther to the south, the Moon’s position would
not coincide with the summit of the mountain.
Bradley walked through eighty-six fields in the glacial basin where
Tomnaverie rests, known as the Howe of Cromar, and found six
concentrations of stone tools dating to the same age as Tomnaverie. The
monument sits at the junction between two different environments, according
to Bradley. On three sides, the Howe of Cromar is fertile farmland, but on the
west—the direction where the Sun and Moon set—the soil is poor. The
monument, and its focal point, lay well beyond the area that was farmed and
occupied at the time it was built. As with Easter Aquhorthies, archaeologists
think Tomnaverie was meant to connect people to realms beyond their own
meager, scattered settlements to places greater than themselves, places they
could only access in spirit. Though this is only one interpretation of the place,
I couldn’t help but see it this way myself.
Tomnaverie has one more unusual feature. Its first boulders were installed
sometime around 2500 b.c.e., 4,500 years ago, but the recumbent stone was
not added until later. It started out with a ring of thirteen pink and white
monoliths surrounding an interior rock pile, or cairn. The inner cairn was
arranged so that it linked to the outer ring at thirteen points. Sometime later,
people added the massive recumbent stone, lying on its side rather than
standing tall. The recumbent effectively closes off the ring of thirteen stones.
The recumbent is whiter than the rest, maybe reflecting the snows of
Lochnagar in the distance, maybe reflecting the Moon high above.
Archaeologists like Charlie and Bradley think the building of the recumbent
was the last act in constructing these sites. Placing the horizontal stone is like
closing a door, or finishing a circle.
Remarkably, the Tomnaverie stone circle was used as recently as the
1600s c.e., when people apparently built funeral pyres within it. I could not
help but wonder what those Scots thought of this monument from four
thousand years earlier. For that matter, what did people of the first century
c.e. think of it? Did they also believe that it was designed to transport people,
both the living and the dead, to another spiritual realm?

—
While Tomnaverie is imposing during a beautiful spring afternoon, its
relationship to the Moon means it was most important, and most heavily used,
during the night. It would have looked, felt, and sounded completely different
in the dark. Moonlight is reflected sunlight, but much weaker, more silvery,
more spectral; it blurs the landscape, shortens perception of depth and
distance, and “emphasizes the sky quite as much as the ground,” as Bradley
put it.[8] Moonlight would highlight the texture of the stones and make the
quartz inclusions sparkle. At night, sound carries longer distances, and the
stone circles have strange acoustic properties. The beating of drums or the
sound of chants would fill the air and travel down the hill, through the howe,
maybe even to other stone circles nearby. And fires lit within the monuments
would totally change their appearance, too. Flames would spread light and
shadows that competed with the moonlight, until the monuments themselves
seemed to come alive.
To an American like me, it felt odd to live and move among the ruins of
people who died two and a half millennia before the dawn of Christianity.
The oldest architectural ruins in my region, the American West, date to three
thousand years after that. From my own culture of white European
immigrants, the oldest thing in my neighborhood is a stone grave marker from
1872 c.e., practically an hour ago in the history of my country, let alone my
people on the other side of the sea. By contrast,  the stone circles of
northeastern Scotland were built in 2500 b.c.e. and used continuously for
millennia. In a way, they are still in use. Hilary, Charlie, and I visited them,
after all. We walked among them, sat inside them, took in the views
surrounding them, listened to one another and to the wind within them.
The stone circles are imbued with a sense of mysticism, but calling them
mysterious or enigmatic structures is uncreative. They are monuments with
meaning, even if we can’t see those meanings anymore. They are incredibly
powerful places, erected with purpose and maintained with care.[9] They were
built and used for ritual and messaging, maybe to the dead, maybe to

neighboring clans. Though we might not know exactly what took place within
them, they are undoubtedly places that were planned and used with intention.
The modern world is as removed from the Mesolithic as my house is from
Aberdeen. And yet it is not far away at all. Everything has changed, but I
could think only of what has not. There is nothing new under the Moon. So
many ways of thinking, so many traditions, have remained as constant as the
heavens, for thousands and thousands of years.
—
On my last evening in Aberdeen, Charlie poured me a gin and tonic—he
eschews Scotch whisky—and we sat in the living room. I sipped my drink as
he played guitar and sang a blue Irish tune. The Murrays’ prized cobalt
Rayburn stove was blazing in the kitchen and the fire in the hearth was going
strong.
I closed my eyes. It was easy to rewind through ten thousand winter
solstices.
In my mind, tall trees shrunk into saplings and asphalt roads melted into
wagon ruts, then into footpaths and deer trails. Around me, farmworkers
toiled under the eye, and the thumb, of watchful landowners. I sped past
Mary, Queen of Scots, through the Middle Ages, breezed by the Picts and the
Celts, zoomed past conquering longboats and Roman sentries, kept flipping
back, back until I reached the roving bands of hunters and gatherers. I arrived
in the Middle Stone Age, on the hills flanking the valley of the River Dee.
Here, prehistoric Charlie and I sit waiting for the sunrise. The Murrays’
hill is still covered in willow and alder. Instead of a house with a couch and a
stove, there is a small tent made of sheepskin. A wolf dog, taller than Banjo
the collie but like him in color and countenance, lounges nearby and
occasionally growls at the badgers in their den.
Charlie is sitting on a sheepskin tuft filled with straw. Instead of a guitar he
is holding a primitive harp, adapted from his hunting bow. He strums the
same sad chords, and the crackling fire plays percussion. The tune we sing
and the spirits we share feel warm in my throat. Above us, the fourth Moon

of the year shines at first quarter. It is a perfect half circle with its round edge
to the west. The sky is filled with stars.
Skip Notes
*1 I marveled at how people could have moved them, but the Murrays said heaving a stone like the
recumbent is easy enough, with the right type of rollers. They have done it themselves, during
reconstructions.
*2 An ancient Greek named Meton of Athens figured this out many millennia after the ancient people
of Aberdeenshire built their lunar megaliths.

The treasure hunters had high hopes when they set out into the hills in the
summer of 1999. Henry Westphal and Mario Renner knew that the
Ziegelroda Forest, in the northeastern German state of Saxony-Anhalt, was
full of relics from World War I, World War II, and untold battles over the
eons. The forest is also full of barrows, prehistoric burial mounds, often
circled by stone cairns, that contain relics from ancient people. The treasure
hunters knew digging up those graves was illegal, but they also knew the right
kind of Bronze Age loot could fetch a princely sum on the black market.
They moved quietly through the forest, swishing metal detectors, looking for
an old Nazi battlefield and even older relics of war.
—
Humans and our ancestors have lived and died in this part of central Europe
for at least four hundred thousand years. At the end of the last ice age, the
retreating glaciers sculpted fertile, rolling plains, which were once covered in
grass and inhabited by mammoths, and later filled with forests and deer. The
people who hunted those beasts also settled here, and over time, they
developed increasingly complex tools and weapons  and often buried their

dead with them. Ancient tombs across France and Germany spill over with
swords and other talismans. Saxony-Anhalt looting laws prohibit anyone from
taking them—they are considered property of the state—but this has not
stopped amateur treasure hunters from doing it anyway.
After hiking for a while, Westphal and Renner found themselves in a small
clearing on a hill about eight hundred feet in elevation. The hill, known
locally as the Mittelberg, is about thirty-five miles west of Leipzig, near a
town called Nebra. Suddenly, Westphal’s metal detector pinged.
The two men started digging with a spade and the upturned earth yielded a
trove of objects that had not seen sunlight in 3,400 years. Westphal and
Renner dug up two bronze swords, two hatchets, a chisel, spiral bracelets, and
a five-pound decorated bronze disk one foot in diameter. In their haste, the
looters chipped part of a gold circular inlay on one side of the disk. By
nightfall, they had loaded their haul into the car and started celebrating at a
pub, newfound riches on their minds.
The damage to the disk was not too severe for a dealer in Cologne, who
bought the lot for thirty-one thousand deutsche marks (about fifty-one
thousand dollars in 1999). During the next two years, the trove changed
hands multiple times on the black market.
In May 2001, Harald Meller had just been appointed director of the State
Museum of Prehistory in Halle when a colleague showed him some photos of
the Ziegelroda bounty, by now infamous in archaeology circles. Plenty of
would-be buyers had been offered a chance at the disk and the related booty,
but once people learned of its illegal provenance, interested museums turned
it down. Finally, a bar owner who hosted a monthly archaeology-enthusiast
drinking club reached out to Meller, claiming to represent the interests of the
owner. The seller wanted seven hundred thousand deutsche marks, Meller
was informed.
He and a colleague stared at a picture of the bronze disk. The copper had
corroded to algae green, but it was inlaid with gold decorations: a full circle, a
crescent, a smattering of dots, and two golden arcs. There was also a space
where a third arc seemed to have fallen off. To Meller, it clearly portrayed the
night sky. Later, he would determine that the stars were the Pleiades, “the

Seven Sisters,” a collection of bright stars in the Taurus constellation. The
crescent was clearly the Moon. The gold disk could be the Sun, but it could
also be a full Moon or the red Moon of a lunar eclipse.
The disk would be extraordinary, if it were real. Archaeologists largely
considered Bronze Age Europe a wild, warlike backwater, a far cry from the
sophisticated, literate societies burgeoning at the time in Egypt and
Mesopotamia. The disk predates the dawn of Greek astronomy by a
millennium. If Bronze Age Europeans created something with this much
beauty and significance, it would show they were far more astronomically
advanced than anyone appreciated.
Whoever made the disk might have used it to study the night sky, maybe
to honor it. They might have used it as a tool to track the seasons, and even to
synchronize their year. Meller considered it the most significant
archaeological find he had ever seen. He wanted a closer look.
An archaeologist focused on Bronze Age artifacts, Meller is a slightly
puffy academic in shirtsleeves and rectangular black-rimmed glasses, hardly a
swashbuckling Indiana Jones type. But he decided the disk belonged in a
museum. He wanted it for his museum.
The State Museum of Prehistory in Halle is a ninety-minute train ride from
Berlin and a world apart from that wondrous, graffitied, historic city. The
state of Saxony-Anhalt, in former East Germany, is the home of composer
George Frideric Handel (of Messiah fame) and one of Germany’s oldest
universities, Martin Luther University of Halle-Wittenberg. The city is
industrial and increasingly full of migrants, especially from Syria, but in other
ways it feels like it has not changed much since Handel walked here. The
streets are lined with trees and charming houses. In a butter-yellow Victorian-
style home, I noticed hand-crocheted curtains hanging in the windows, like
some kind of scene out of The Sound of Music.
Today, Halle’s most interesting landmark is the State Museum of
Prehistory, one of the most well-designed museums in the West and home to

one of the most important archaeological collections in Germany.
On the morning I visited, Harald Meller rushed in, breathless and wearing
a rumpled shirt, a brown blazer, and a three-day beard. He eagerly shook my
hand and offered me a Coke. I was a little early, thanks to the driver Meller
had sent to retrieve me at the train station, and he was running behind, the
type of researcher who is always distracted by something. He was leaving for
Salzburg that afternoon but had promised to show me the museum
collections, his carefully curated archaeological finds, and especially the pride
of Halle, the Nebra sky disk.
—
His tour of the museum begins with a 370,000-year-old mammoth tibia
etched with a repeating series of seven notches. Its meaning is of course a
mystery, especially because the notches are less obvious than the comma
marks Alexander Marshack identified on the Abri Blanchard bone shards. But
it clearly shows the work of a tool user, making deliberate marks in a
repeated pattern. Meller believes it is a form of lunar symbolism, an order of
magnitude older than the oldest known records identified by Marshack. He
believes the Moon has been important in this part of the world for countless
generations.
The cognitive abilities of Neanderthals are a subject of heated debate in
human evolution research, and Meller staunchly defends them as just as
capable as any Homo sapiens. I was struck by his care and interest in
portraying people of the past as capable, joyful, intelligent beings, a far cry
from the depictions of simple hairy brutes I learned about in school. One
mural, in a room dedicated to Neanderthals and early humans, shows women
laughing as they carry water and nurse their children. They are just as human
as you and me. Walking through the museum, you are left with the
impression that you’ve sailed through three hundred millennia only to look in
a mirror.
“In most museums, you see these presented as if you are much smarter
than these old idiots working with stone tools,” he told me. “We always

underestimate our ancestors. Always.”
In the same room, Meller commissioned a sculpture of a Neanderthal man
seated in the same pose as Rodin’s The Thinker. The young male sits on a
ledge, head resting on one hand, peering into the distance, clearly in deep
thought.
“A museum is not a book. It is very complex, if you are a scientist like I
am, to translate this history. We do this together with artists,” Meller
explained.
His museum is full of similar finds, presented with great attention to their
humanity. The famous sky disk is no exception. But Meller wanted to tell me
a story about ancient Germany first.
Down the hall from the Neanderthals rests the bones of a nine-thousand-
year-old priestess known as the Shamaness of Bad Dürrenberg. Workers
excavating a canal in Saxony-Anhalt discovered her grave in 1934. The
woman, between thirty and forty years old, was buried sitting upright, with a
six-month-old infant resting between her legs. Their grave was also filled with
jewelry; red ochre; the bones of deer, turtles, cranes, and beavers; and mussel
shells. Given the care—and the hoard—with which she and the infant were
interred, the woman was probably important. Analysis of her skeleton showed
that she had two malformed vertebrae in her neck, which could have
restricted blood flow in her head and caused involuntary eye movements. She
might have appeared to experience trances, or other mysterious behaviors that
could have seemed otherworldly; she may have been a powerful shaman,
according to Meller. He hired an artist to paint a portrait of the woman as a
fierce goddess-like priestess, with an elaborate headdress and face paint.
A visitor to the State Museum walks through the Pleistocene and into the
Bronze Age before reaching the sky disk’s special room. The portrayals of
Stone Age humans were awesome, in the original sense of the word. I was
oddly shaken. More than three thousand stone axes were arrayed across a wall
like abstract artwork. The room with the mammoth tibia was painted gray,
and its walls were rough like an elephant’s skin. Meller’s vision of past
Europeans is all intentional, and it builds to a crescendo with his
interpretation of the Nebra sky disk. The entire museum, especially the way

he displays its most prized possession, is designed to reflect a culture that was
far more sophisticated, for a much longer period, than scholars once thought.
—
After three and a half millennia of subterranean slumber, the Nebra sky
disk is now suspended in a glass case, lit from above and below, giving the
impression of the artifact floating in space. The effect even comes through in
photos.
It is twelve inches across, roughly the size of a dinner plate. The circle’s
edges are bent in spots; the biggest dent is an artifact of Westphal and
Renner’s digging. The entire thing is furred in verdigris, that blue-green
patina that covers weathered copper, except for the inlaid sections that are
clearly hammered gold. On the right side is a crescent, the size and shape of a
few days’ old Moon, setting near the western horizon. At the left is a full
circle, which Meller believes is not the Sun but a full Moon. Two golden arcs
were added to the disk later; one is gone now, but the other adorns the rim,
and in antiquity they would have bracketed the crescent and the circle like a
pair of parentheses. A third arc, also added later, sits beneath the Moons and
stars like a smile. At the center is a smattering of stars that is, unquestionably,
the Pleiades.
These stars, known throughout the world as the Seven Sisters, Subaru, and
various other names, are one reason the disk is so important. Their
appearance in the sky, when cross-referenced with the phases of the Moon,
indicates the right dates for sowing and harvesting crops.
The Nebra sky disk is ancient, it’s clear. It is rough-hewn, but made with
care. It is delicate, yet tough enough to survive the ages. You can see why it
has become such a cultural touchstone in Germany, especially in Saxony-
Anhalt, the state where it was unearthed. A German astronaut even designed
his International Space Station mission patch to incorporate its features. No
wonder Meller knew he had to have it. No wonder he took such a risk to get
it.

A year after he first glimpsed the sky disk, Meller found himself walking
into a Hilton Hotel in Basel, Switzerland, en route to meet an amateur black-
market antiquities dealer who had offered to sell it to him for a princely sum.
A blond woman met Meller at the hotel entrance and invited him downstairs
to the restaurant. She led Meller to a thin man with gray hair. After a brief
greeting, Meller asked to see the disk so he could verify its authenticity. But
the man handed Meller a sword first.
Meller took the sword and examined it. He had handled dozens of artifacts
like this, and he could tell it originated around 1600 b.c.e. But Meller knew if
he acknowledged its antiquity, the dealer would never part with it, nor the
disk it accompanied, without a huge sum of money. Meller lied and told the
man it was a forgery. He feigned impatience and asked again to see the disk.
The smuggler did not know it, but across the bar and stationed at every
entrance was a cadre of officers from the Swiss Police. Meller worked with
them to set up the transaction, and they were ready to make an arrest as soon
as Meller laid his hands on the one piece of treasure he really wanted. But
Meller was getting nervous. He remembered what one of the Swiss officers
had told him: “The most important thing is that you survive.” Meller
swallowed.
He noticed the man had a small briefcase with him, but he thought the
disk was too large to fit inside. The disk was nowhere to be seen. He began to
worry he had been set up, and his dread worsened when the man put his hand
inside the briefcase, obscuring something within. Meller feared it was a gun.
He pantomimed all this for me, sitting across from me in a coffee shop near
his museum. He had clearly told this story many times, and relished this
detail—fairly enough, because this was probably terrifying, especially for a
researcher used to sitting at a desk and musing on the lifestyle of prehistoric
humans.
Finally, the man opened his coat. He unbuttoned his shirt. He produced an
object wrapped in a towel, which he had draped around his waist. Slowly, he
unwrapped the covering, and handed the green copper disk to the

archaeologist. Meller gasped: The Pleiades! The golden Moon! He tried not
to act too excited. Examining it, he agreed to pay four hundred thousand
dollars for the whole lot, including the disk and the bronze artifacts it was
found with. He excused himself to go to the men’s room, and gave the signal.
The authorities quickly swept in, handcuffing the thin man, the blond
woman, and, just for show, Meller. The smuggler was shocked; Meller had
assured him Switzerland would offer neutral ground for their illicit
transaction. Eventually, the thin man and blond woman would lead Swiss and
German prosecutors down the chain of black-market custody, all the way to
Westphal and Renner, who reached a plea deal that landed them hefty fines
and a short stay in prison—and who led archaeologists to their dig site. But in
the meantime, Meller considered his new treasure. He took in the hammered-
gold Moons and the precise arrangement of seven stars.
“I was astonished it is so big. It’s much heavier than a laptop. It is thick,
and heavy, and I was impressed by its beauty,” he told me. He immediately
believed it was one of the most important finds of the last few decades. “It is
so important for the world. It’s really important. It is the first picture of
heaven,” he said.
Archaeologists the world over were astounded, too. Some argued it was a
fake, and Meller spent the next several years arranging chemical studies of
the metals in the disk, the dirt that covered it when it was found, and
fragments of the wooden hilts of the swords it was buried with. Chemical
analysis of the metal alloys confirmed that the disk dates to 1800–1600 b.c.e.,
the height of the European Bronze Age. The copper comes from the eastern
Alps, a primary source of copper at the time, and the gold was panned in the
Carnon River in Cornwall, on the west coast of England. The tin probably
also came from Cornwall. This diversity of metals shows that trade networks
at this time were vast and complex.
Five millennia after the pit calendar at Warren Field was dug, Bronze Age
humans in Europe had built a flourishing culture, rich with metals and trade,
capable of constructing gigantic earthen monuments. In archaeological terms,
the people who made the sky disk belonged to the Únětice culture, and their
sophistication shows that ancient central Germany was no tribal hinterland.

Theirs was a highly stratified society, with ruling princes buried using
specialized and ornate rites. Their settlements were dense and covered miles
of land. In death, they arranged people on their right sides, with their heads
pointing south, so they would be looking toward the rising Sun. Using the
celestial bodies, their leaders learned how to grasp time, and how to control
its use.
The Moon calendar at Warren Field marks the first time humans learned
to orient themselves in time, a major leap in cognition. The Nebra sky disk, a
few millennia younger, represents another cognitive leap toward what we
might recognize as an early form of modern culture.[1]
Astounding finds from this culture began emerging from the German
countryside in the first half of the twentieth century c.e. Archaeological sites
suggested a powerful prehistoric culture, its boundaries encompassing much
of what is now Europe. The Nazis seized on these findings and positioned the
party as the inheritors of this patrimony; in the years after World War II,
prehistoric German archaeology slowed down and was limited to a small
academic community. Only after the looters Westphal and Renner found the
sky disk did interest in the Únětice culture reemerge in the public
consciousness.
It would take a few more centuries after the time of the Nebra disk for
humanity to use the Moon to create religion and to consolidate power through
it, erecting the foundations of modern society. The idea of divinely bestowed
power would finally take root in Mesopotamia, the land of Gilgamesh and
Enheduanna and Nabonidus, whom we will meet soon. But Meller believes
that the Únětice took some of the first steps on this path, guided by the light of
the Moon.
In his interpretation, the disk is like a map legend, holding the key that
unlocks the sky. To read it, we need to talk about celestial mechanics.
—
Remember the double-Dutch jump-rope motions of the Sun and Moon,
arcing across the sky during the winter and summer? As the Sun crawls

toward its summer height, the Moon sinks on the southern horizon. When the
Sun dips low and moves southward, the Moon creeps higher, reaching almost
the zenith—the top of the sky—at midwinter. A few times a year, the two
cross paths, and that is when we have eclipses. Ancient people around the
world, from Egypt to Scandinavia, imagined a great solar boat was
responsible for this celestial flip-flopping. According to Meller, the bottom
arc on the Nebra sky disk represents this solar boat, or barque.
Together, the golden arcs on the sides of the disk—one of which is now
missing, but left a shadow—span an angle of 82.5 degrees. This represents
the angle through which the Sun traverses the horizon between the winter and
summer solstices in Nebra. This makes the disk a precisely calculated
depiction of the path of the Sun, made before math, made before written
language, made possible by the Moon.
The shape of the disk’s crescent Moon holds the other key.
It is not a sliver, which suggests it’s not a new Moon, the first Moon to be
seen after a day or so of invisibility. Instead, it is a young waxing Moon, seen
after four or five days, hanging, scythe-like, on the western horizon. Why
would a time device use a Moon that is at least four or five days old?
The answer was written down eight hundred years later, in Mesopotamia,
in the first millennium b.c.e. The Mesopotamians would eventually figure out
a more sophisticated calendar reset than the solstice tracker at Warren Field.
They realized that to keep the lunar year in sync with the solar year, they
should add a thirteenth month every few years. They used the Moon to mark
when this should happen.
The oldest compendium of Mesopotamian astronomical knowledge is
called the MUL.APIN, which is just the first two words of the treatise. It
translates to the name of the constellation “the plow,” or the Big Dipper in
North America. It names stars and astral phenomena, but more important, it
contains two schemes for aligning the lunar calendar with the solar, seasonal
year. The catalog lists the heliacal (dawn) rising of certain constellations, the
time between the spring and fall equinoxes, and the summer and winter
solstices. When the celestial bodies deviate from their predicted positions
during these annual events, it’s time to insert an intercalary month to fix the

discrepancy between the seasons and the calendar.[2] The MUL.APIN writers
described an “ideal” calendar of twelve months equaling thirty days each, and
used it as a template to figure out when to add the extra month.
For example, the spring equinox of the ideal year takes place on the
fifteenth day of the month called Nisannu. This is the first month of the Old
Babylonian year, like our modern January 1, but Nisannu was comparable to
March or April. If a star or constellation is first visible when expected, then
nothing needs to change. But if the star arrives a month later than called for
on the ideal calendar template, then that year should be a leap year.
“If the Fish [the constellation Pisces] and the Old Man [the constellation
Perseus] become visible on the 15th of Adarru, the year is normal. If the Fish
and the Old Man become visible on the 15th of Nisannu, this year is a leap
year,” the text reads, in one example.[3]
The MUL.APIN’s second scheme for calibrating the calendar, and the
more relevant for the Nebra sky disk, tracks when the Moon is in conjunction
with the Pleiades. On the ideal calendar, this should happen on the first day of
Nisannu. The Mesopotamian sky priests note that when this conjunction
comes later than expected—indicating that the seasonal, solar year and the
human-centered lunar year have slipped out of sync—it is time for a leap
year. When the waxing crescent Moon meets the Pleiades in the spring just
after the equinox, it is time. A thirteenth month should be added when
astrologers observe a young Moon in exactly the orientation that appears on
the Nebra disk, which says the same thing, only without words. Is it possible
that Bronze Age Europeans figured out this intercalary trick a millennium
earlier than the Mesopotamians?
Meller and other scholars can only speculate. No written language from
the Únětice culture survives, so we will never know how the disk’s makers
gained such advanced astronomical knowledge. But the disk is evidence that
they did. These Bronze Age sky priests would have used the Nebra disk like a
clock held against the sky. They would insert an extra month, a leap month,
whenever the sky mirrored the gleaming disk in their hands. This would
happen every two to three years.

If the sky disk could correlate the solar year with the lunar year, and even
calibrate the calendar every two to three years, it would have been an object
of great power indeed. The men who make the time are the men with the
power. Just as Egypt’s pharaohs observed the stars to predict the seasonal
flooding of the Nile, the Moons of the Nebra sky disk could have turned its
owner into an oracle—and given that person great control over the
burgeoning early society of ancient central Germany.
The Nebra sky disk is the most intricately detailed, arguably most beautiful
ancient depiction of the heavens. But in the area where it was found, a
different group of prehistoric Germans were still at work on the landscape,
building earthen calendars of their own.
The Goseck Circle stands in a nondescript wheat field, much like the
ancient Warren Field calendar. It was created around 4900 b.c.e., three
millennia before the Nebra sky disk, and the discovery of human and bovine
skeletons within its boundaries suggests it was used for some sort of sacrificial
rituals. Cultural groups rebuilt the circle in the early 2000s c.e., and now you
can stand within its wooden stakes, seven thousand years after distant fellow
humans did, and watch the sunrise. The Goseck Circle is a solar observatory,
not a lunar one. On the winter solstice, the Sun rises and sets between the
circle’s southwestern gates. The summer solstice Sun rises in the gaps
between the wooden stakes.
The proximity of Goseck to the Nebra findspot suggests a deep connection
between the heavens and the humans who lived in eastern Germany. Tracking
the Sun and the Moon was crucial for farming, especially aligning Moon-
based civil time with the solar, seasonal year. For at least four millennia,
European cultures used the Moon and the Sun to track time and probably to
conduct rituals, ceremonies, and conquests. The Nebra disk may be the
earliest known example of lunar timekeeping in northern Europe; many other
lunar symbols came later.

One of the most beautiful, and arguably the strangest, of these is now in
Berlin’s Neues Museum, where ancient artifacts of central Europe stand next
to damaged pillars bombed by the Allies in World War II. It is known as the
Berlin Gold Hat.
Dating to the first millennium b.c.e., the giant conical hat seems like
something out of Harry Potter, or a Merlin costume for a production of King
Arthur. And this is probably a legitimate comparison; though its function has
been lost to time, the giant hat was most likely worn by a priest or ruler
carrying out some kind of lunar ritual. The hat’s brim is reinforced with
bronze wire, and its dimensions fit an average male head. The wearer was
probably in charge of some agricultural or astronomical task, designed to
control timekeeping and the structures of civil life. He would have been very
powerful indeed. He may have even been viewed as divine.
The hat is mounted on a circular plinth in a darkened room, and its gold is
dazzling. It stands thirty inches high, as tall as a desk, and is forged of a single
gold sheet. Mounted on its plinth, the hat rises taller than me and looks
incredibly imposing. The entire hat is stamped in circular ornaments, which
add up to fifty-seven Moons—fifty-seven months, roughly four and a half
solar years. The hat was probably used much like the Nebra sky disk. It was
probably used to calculate the all-important intercalary month, the leap
month, that would bring the lunar year in alignment with the seasons of the
Sun. Without the Nebra disk or the ability to write anything down, ancient
people in central Europe still found a way to count time, to mark their year,
and to use this ability to structure their lives.
Though the Berlin Gold Hat came to the Neues Museum without any
provenance, three other similar hats also emerged from the earth, were found
by farmers, and now sit in museums. One was discovered in Schifferstadt, in
1835, and appears to have been buried intentionally. The Schifferstadt hat
dates to 1400 b.c.e. The Avanton and Ezelsdorf-Buch Golden Cones, found
in France and Germany, respectively, were uncovered without brims. The
cones are so similar to the other hats that they probably once had brims, too,
and were likely used for similar purposes. All these golden hats date from
1400 to 800 b.c.e., a few centuries after the Nebra sky disk was forged. All of

them are hammered from single gold sheets and contain alloys of copper and
tin, the most powerful metal of the Bronze Age. Each of them is stamped in
golden orbs representing the Moon.
Just like the Mesolithic Scots of Warren Field, these ancient hatters knew
they needed to somehow connect the solstices, when the Sun seems to stand
still, with the cycles of the Moon. In this way, the Moon would allow them to
track the year as well as the seasons.
Warren Field represents the first time people figured this out; the Nebra
sky disk may be the first time they figured out how to use the heavens to do it,
not just the landscape. The hats are a progression of the same idea.
—
All these skywatchers apparently shared one other thing: They decided to
leave no traces of their precious timekeepers.
For reasons we can never know, the users of the Nebra sky disk buried it
on the Mittelberg. The realm of the sky disk never grew beyond modern-day
Saxony-Anhalt. The area’s inhabitants lived in peace for four hundred years;
neither Meller nor any other archaeologist has been able to find evidence of
major fires, battles, massacres, or any other violence. The villages were not
fortified. There were no golden walls like the ones erected in Babylon,
twenty-nine hundred miles to the east. The sky disk’s owner, or the ruler
whom the sky priest served, was part of an agrarian society with a large
standing army that protected the land and the people. They controlled the
flow of amber, copper, tin, and other valuable materials through the heart of
Europe. The Únětice culture had a powerful empire; why didn’t they last?
Meller believes they may have been ravaged by plagues from foreign lands,
as migration and trade introduced new people, new customs, and new
diseases. Their lack of a written language may have even played a role. If the
Nebra disk maker learned the secrets of the sky in the lands of Mesopotamia,
they certainly did not bring home cuneiform script, the first form of writing
on planet Earth. As always, knowledge was power, and for the Únětice, stories
were apparently the only way to transmit it. The creator of the sky disk either

refused or was unable to share their knowledge. Meller told me he thinks the
disk itself, especially the later addition of the solar “boat,” is evidence of a
slow slide into mysticism. The disk was built as an astronomical device, but in
its later years, Meller argues, it was imbued with myth. Ultimately, it was
hidden from view, buried in the earth far from the sky it represents, away
from the Moon whose phases it was designed to use.
—
Today, the findspot of the Nebra disk hosts an observation tower and a
nearby museum, hanging above the town like a ship, or maybe a solar barque.
It is called Arche Nebra, “Nebra’s Ark,” and it tells the story of the disk and
its people. Bettina Pfaff, the museum’s director, took me through carefully
constructed exhibitions that depict the various humans to have lived in central
Europe, from the invention of farming to the disk and into the Middle Ages.
The rooms are designed to represent the images on the disk—from
outside, the walls look like a crescent Moon, but within, their swooping sides
display artifacts related to the disk and the people who wielded it. According
to Pfaff, the design of the museum building was meant to “set the content
free.” The museum even tells the story of Westphal, Renner, and the sting in
Basel through a puppet show. The curators are careful to not turn the treasure
hunters into heroes, Pfaff says.
The disk was buried with several valuable items, including daggers and
jewelry. Pfaff points out that it was put into the earth at the end of a
prosperous era, but a few centuries before the Bronze Age collapse.[4]
“Maybe the times had been so bad, maybe they buried the most valuable
thing they had,” she speculates. Maybe its owners laid the item to rest like
they would a loved one or a powerful prince, surrounding it with valuable
offerings.
Whoever buried the disk made a few alterations before its interment. The
left arc seems to have been taken off. This could have been an accident, or
maybe not, Pfaff told me. Intentional destruction of vital artifacts occurred
often throughout the Bronze Age.[5] The recumbent stone circles of

northeastern Scotland were closed off. Warren Field’s timber hall was
deliberately burned down. Across the Irish Sea, Celtic swords were crushed
before being offered to the waters. The list goes on.
“Maybe they meant to destroy it, and bury it forever, so that no one could
use it anymore,” Pfaff said. The thought was chilling. What were they trying
to hide? Or what were they trying to protect?
—
After lunch in the museum’s café, Pfaff took me to the findspot on the
Mittelberg hill in the nearby forest. A family of hikers stared at us as we
drove up the gravel road. At the top, I climbed an observation tower that
Meller’s teams of creative architects erected to commemorate the resting
place of the disk and its accoutrements. On the ground below, engraved metal
railings mark the path of the Sun on the solstices. The tower is situated so
that during the June solstice, the setting Sun shines into the tower’s central
shaft. Sunlight spills through the monument, illuminating its yellow interior.
After climbing fifteen flights of stairs, I emerged onto a platform that
overlooked the hills of central Germany. The beech trees were leafing out
among the tall spruces, and I could see forever through the Ziegelroda, past
Nebra, and to faint hills in the distance.
Below, the hole where the disk was dug up is now covered with a plastic
cap. Its endoming bothered some who wanted the hole and its contents re-
created so that tourists could see what the diggers saw. But Pfaff and Meller
took a more philosophical approach. The covering allows you to see inside,
but it is also meant to reflect the sky above, inviting the visitor to imagine the
celestial sphere that the disk represented and was designed to echo.
The Moon was not up yet when I climbed down the Mittelberg and into
the car with Meller’s driver, an easygoing eastern German named Rolf. We
took the Autobahn back to Halle, where I boarded a train back to Berlin. In
Meller’s black Mercedes-Benz, Rolf noted that the Autobahn has no speed
limit. “It’s okay if I go fast?” he said more than asked. “Sure,” I said. He
pressed the gas. The car roared to life. The last time I checked the

speedometer, the black Mercedes was humming at 224 kilometers per hour,
or about 140 miles per hour, which is faster than it is legal to travel on any
road where I come from and faster than I could handle. I closed my eyes.
Later that night, I stepped outside my hotel to look for the Moon and the
Pleiades. It was early April, and I knew they would be hanging in the sky just
as they are depicted on Meller’s glorious disk. In northern Germany, the four-
day-old crescent Moon was a lazy sickle, a curve toward the bottom right of
where the Moon’s disk would be. The Pleiades were hard to spot in light-
polluted Berlin, but they were there, above the Moon. The following year,
2020, would be a leap year. The disk could have told me that.
The Nebra sky disk and its attendant museum would both be incredible
tourist attractions, lovely archaeological treasures in the German countryside,
even if they had no higher meaning. But they are momentous milestones on
the journey human consciousness walked with the Moon for more than thirty-
five thousand years. In prehistoric human minds, the Moon started out as a
fertility symbol, a time counter, and a form of notation. It soon progressed to
a new role as a time reckoner, enabling people to orient themselves in time,
imagining the future as well as recalling the past. And it was immortalized in
the first primitive watch, hammered in gold and used to keep the lunar
calendar in sync with the seasons. The Moon’s role as a marker of time
connects our ancestors to us, through untold millions of lunations. The Moon
is responsible for the beginning of time.
—
But as the Stone Age collapsed into the Bronze Age, the Moon would
become useful for much more than anticipating the seasons. It was the most
important feature of the cosmos as humans shook off the heavy mantle of
prehistory. The Moon’s time-setting abilities meant humans could use it to
plan, which meant they could invent. Using its cues, people figured out how to
grow enough food that they could stop chasing and foraging. The Moon

enabled the beginning of history. The first pieces of human writing owe their
existence, and their content, to the Moon’s cycles. As the first literate
civilizations arose in Mesopotamia and Egypt, the Moon took on importance
as more than a marker of time. It became a recorder of events; a predictor of
fates; an instrument of might; and a god in its own right. The Moon would
ultimately lay the foundations of philosophy and religion, in the East and the
West, and set the course of history.
The Moon’s dependable timekeeping had helped humans prepare for the
future. But its role as a silent, silvery clock in the firmament was soon to be in
the Moon’s own past.

It is the privilege of antiquity to mingle divine things with human.
—Livy, History of Rome, book 1, part 7
O Sîn, king of the gods of heaven and the netherworld, without whom
no city or country can be founded or restored.
—The Nabonidus cylinder of Abu Habba (The Dream Cylinder of
Sippar), col. ii.26–32, trans. Paul-Alain Beaulieu
Long after our languages and civilization have been lost to history and
archaeologists of the future dig out the British Museum, they might find some
of its collections hard to interpret. The looted Parthenon Marbles would just
be pretty carved friezes, with no greater meaning behind the Horse of Selene
or the centaurs. The Rosetta Stone and its inscription in three languages
would just be a big granite slab covered with indecipherable scribbles.
Countless objects spanning thousands of years of human history would be
things of beauty, but of enigmatic purpose.
But there are a few exceptions. Certain artifacts need no semiotic
interpretation, because their symbols have meant the same thing throughout

time. When something is decorated with a crescent, there is no doubting what
that symbol represents. Sometimes more data is necessary to figure out what
the Moon signifies or why it’s being used, but the crescent itself is
unmistakable. What else could it be?
One such artifact displayed at the British Museum might catch the interest
of future excavators for a couple of reasons. It contains a remarkably obvious
depiction of the Moon, and an equally obvious depiction of worship.
It is a basalt stone, rounded at the top, shaped like a headstone and about
as big. It depicts an upturned crescent floating above a man with his right arm
raised, saluting. He is engaged in an act most people would recognize as
prayer. The man is carved in relief, and he is standing to the left, facing the
crescent and other symbols on the right. He wears long, resplendent robes,
which are etched in intricate designs indicating that they were embroidered or
woven. This would have been an expensive garment, fit for a king. The regal
figure is wearing a pointy hat and a neat beard nearly as long as his hat is tall.
In his left hand he holds a staff, a symbol that has been used across societies
for thousands of years to represent power. The staff has a crescent at its top,
echoing the crescent Moon in the sky. Lined up beside the Moon and more
distant from the king are a winged disk and a seven-pointed star.
If you visit the British Museum, the label beneath this artifact will tell you
that this is the stela of Nabonidus, the last king of Babylon. He is praying to
the Moon God Sin, the ever-favorite object of his heart. The stela depicts Sin
as the supreme deity, more important than the Sun God—the winged disk—
or the morning and evening star, which we know as the planet Venus. This
hierarchy reflects a choice that would be Nabonidus’s downfall, and that of his
entire empire. The king’s devotion to the Moon above all else brought about a
final end to the finest and most sophisticated culture of ancient Mesopotamia.
But the full, glorious story of this man and the Moon would never fit on a
museum label.
—

The stela is just a whisper of the long history, beginning more than five
thousand years ago, that humanity has shared with the Moon God, once the
most popular deity in the ancient Near East. Though the Moon God has long
since faded into history, his influences surround us to this day. The various
traditions of his followers—animal sacrifice, devotions, temples where people
would gather to worship him, totems featuring his image—would appear in
all the organized religion that followed. During part of the Sumerian era, the
Moon God was worshipped along with his wife, Ningal, “the Great Lady” and
goddess of reeds, and their son, the Sun, making him the chief god of the first
known holy trinity.
The Moon God was one of the first gods in human history, if not the very
first. For a long time, he was the most important deity of all, and worship of
the Moon God laid the groundwork for all the other faith traditions that
followed.
—
At Warren Field and in the Nebra sky disk, people brought the Moon to
Earth for the practical purpose of timekeeping. In the Fertile Crescent,[*1]
humans used the Moon to transcend the rhythms of daily life. Through them,
the Moon became holy.
The Mesopotamians saw, in the Moon’s waxing and waning, the cycles of
birth, death, and rebirth. For three nights every month, the sky is Moonless.
On the third night, it rises again. The people who built Warren Field and the
people who hammered the Nebra sky disk understood that the Moon held
cosmological and spiritual power, and they tried to channel some of this
power through themselves. But Mesopotamia was the first place where the
Moon itself was exalted for its power.
The Moon transformed humans from skywatching bands of wanderers into
landowning farmers who created civilization. As far as archaeological records
show, this happened for the first time in the southern plains between the
Tigris and Euphrates rivers. By 5800 b.c.e., people were living permanently
in the verdant Eden that was Mesopotamia (from a Greek translation of “the

land between the rivers”). The first cities rose from the plains and were
populated by tens of thousands of people. The first was Uruk,[*2] the home of
Gilgamesh, which at its height in 2900 b.c.e. probably had eighty thousand
residents.
Mesopotamia seven millennia ago was marshy, glacier worn, and
supremely fertile, but with unpredictable rain and blazing-hot summers. To
solve this problem, people invented irrigation, diverting fresh water into their
fields. Once land was worked in this way, it became valuable. People needed
a way to protect their land, and to secure some guarantee for it if they sold it
or gave it to someone else. Law and finance arose; so did writing.
—
As people started harnessing the forces of nature, they turned to the Moon
for aid of a more spiritual sort. Political rulers were able to exploit this early
devotion for their own gain and build the world’s first empires. As these
empires grew more literate and capable through the ages, rites dedicated to
Moon and sky worship grew more complex and more intentional. Moon
worship required careful observation of the heavens for sacred purposes,
more than the civil purpose of timekeeping, and this led to something new:
the first stirrings of science. In endowing us with religion, the Moon taught
humans both a new means of control and a new form of thinking. The Moon
would bring our ancestors closer to a full understanding of the celestial
bodies, and of the world around them.
In his youth, Nabonidus would never have expected to become king. “I am
Nabonidus, who have not the honor of being a somebody—kingship is not
within me,” he wrote during his reign, according to a clay cylinder found at
the ruins of Sippar.[1] Raised by a mother who worked as priestess to the
Moon God, he probably began his career as a bureaucrat before ascending to
power in his sixties.

As king, he was evidently uninterested in conquest, instead preferring to
study archaeology and architecture. He spent great amounts of time and
capital excavating the ruins of his own civilization’s forebears, placing special
emphasis on the temples they built to the Moon God Sin. He is sometimes
called the first archaeologist.
Nabonidus restored temples to the Moon God both in his birthplace, a
Turkish city called Harran, and at Ur, one of the world’s oldest metropolises.
He oversaw the restoration of the wedding-cake-like step pyramid called the
Great Ziggurat of Ur, originally built in the late third millennium b.c.e.
Nabonidus painted the façade black and rededicated the sacred Giparu, the
temple’s inner sanctum, for his daughter Ennigaldi-Nanna. He made her High
Priestess of the Moon God, just like his mother had been. Ennigaldi built a
museum and a school there, in the most luxurious conditions available.
Ennigaldi’s fastidious treasure collecting, like the elaborately braided hair she
wore, connected the king and the princess to earlier dynasties[*3] that had
ruled over the great grassy plains between the Tigris and Euphrates rivers.
Thousands of years ago, the ziggurat would have broken the horizon for
miles and miles, just like the bonfires inside the stone circles of northeastern
Scotland. The ziggurat and its Moon temple would have been a beacon,
lighting the night and calling its people before the Euphrates moved ten miles
to the east, before the city fell finally into ruin, before the temple and all of
Ur were swallowed by the sands of what is now Nasiriyah, Iraq.
—
Modern archaeologists began to dig out Ur in 1853, mostly on behalf of
the British Museum.[2] Before their excavation, the ziggurat was merely a tell,
the Arabic word for a mound. Ur’s Great Ziggurat was called Tell al-
Muqayyar, the “mound of pitch,” because its bricks were held together by
bitumen, a component of road asphalt. It was probably the first valuable
product to spill forth from Iraq’s vast oil fields. The oily, durable mortar
waterproofed the baked clay bricks, and bound the ziggurat together. Its
resilience helps explain why so much of the ziggurat remains, even after four

thousand years of reaching for the heavens, even after damage inflicted by
invaders both ancient and modern.
The British Museum is full of artifacts like the Nabonidus stela. Much of
what comes from the Babylonian civilization, and from the ruins of Ur in
particular, were uncovered by an archaeologist named Leonard Woolley. In
the Moon God’s temple, he found a distant forebear of the museum that now
houses his loot. The High Priestess of the Moon God, Nabonidus’s daughter
Ennigaldi-Nanna, kept what might be the world’s first museum of antiquities.
The relics tell a profound story of the Moon God and those devoted to him.
Woolley liberated them from the sand in 1927 c.e. He was initially
befuddled by the motley collection of objects, which included a boundary
stone dating to 1400 b.c.e., a statue of a king dating to 2280 b.c.e.,
foundation bricks from 2220 b.c.e., and an even older piece of weaponry.
“The evidence was altogether against their having got there by accident,”
Woolley wrote of the collection, noting that they instead had “a curious air of
purpose.”[3]
Some of the relics made sense after Woolley’s team of excavators found a
barrel-shaped cylinder the size of a soda can. It was etched in four columns of
cuneiform writing, humankind’s earliest written script, and it contained what
may be the world’s oldest museum label: “These are copies from bricks found
in the ruins of Ur…which I saw and wrote out for the marvel of beholders,”
an ancient scribe had written.
Woolley then found another object, this one a little easier to interpret. It
was a carved calcite disk bearing the image of a robed woman with a large
nose, long braided hair, and a pointy hat, much like the one Nabonidus wears
on his stela. She is followed by attendants who are bringing offerings toward
the ziggurat, the Moon God’s temple. The woman was also a High Priestess
of the Moon God. Her name was Enheduanna, and her father, Sargon the
Great, was the king seventeen centuries before Nabonidus. The museum
curator, Princess Ennigaldi-Nanna, was a successor.[4]
The two priestesses were separated by more than 1,700 years of history,
but they were united in their common heritage and their common cause. Both
women were elevated to the EN-ship, or Moon priestesshood, by their fathers,

both kings of the lands of Mesopotamia. The EN-ship was one of the most
powerful positions in civilization, and the kings exploited that power through
their daughters. The Moon God was their shared patron, tool, and idol.
Enheduanna and Sargon called this god Nanna, in the language of Sumer.
Ennigaldi and Nabonidus called him Sin,[*4] in the language of Sumer’s
successor, Babylonia. He was the Moon, personified.
—
The idea of Moon and Sun worship probably followed the celestial bodies’
original roles in human life. Most early societies have stories about nature
gods, because nature controlled their lives; of course you would look to the
heavens for aid, from whence comes the life-giving Sun and rain, and the
crop-killing hail and pestilence.
For hunters and gatherers, the Moon was literally a guide, allowing people
to see at night and to plan their lives. When people got good at growing food
and taming animals and built the world’s first cities, they continued using the
Moon for practical reasons. It shone upon the fields and the city streets. You
could watch your grains and your sheep, and you could walk down the road at
night to your home or shop. This obvious benefit eventually evolved into a
more spiritual connection to the sky and its forces. Maybe the holy Moon was
a vestigial reminder of the first farmers’ hunter-gatherer heritage; maybe the
original stories morphed into myths, and the Moon’s light became evidence of
beneficence or intentional aid. Early odes to the Moon God are accented with
this legacy. They were probably passed down through spoken stories first, and
then eventually inscribed on tablets made of clay, the world’s first written
records. The writing on Sumerian clay tablets was cuneiform, made by
pressing a triangle-shaped stylus into wet clay and baking it dry in the sun.
Early poems on these tablets revered the Moon God as a kind of holy
wrangler, who would watch over the herds of Mesopotamia and ensure
plentiful milk, butter, and meat.
The uncredited poem “The Herds of Nanna” tallies up all the cows under
his care, some 39,600, apparently, and praises him as “god of living

creatures, leader of the land.” Nanna was also the blessed purveyor of beer,
the most popular drink in Mesopotamia.
“He is able to provide abundantly the great liquor of the mountains, and
syrup, and alcoholic drink,” the poem reads. “O Father Nanna, be praised!”[5]
Nanna is sometimes presented as a bull himself, in a motif that recurs in
all the earliest devotional practices throughout cultures on Earth. The cave
painters of Lascaux fixated on aurochs. Ancient Egyptians worshipped Apis,
a bull adorned with a full Moon between his horns, as a powerful fertility god.
To the east is Shiva, the supreme being in one of the major veins of
Hinduism, whose steed is a huge bull. The Hindu god Krishna, who
represents love and compassion, was a cowherd in his youth. In the Old
Testament, worship of a golden calf idol is an act of ghastly apostasy.[*5] High
Priestess Enheduanna described Nanna this way:
“Shining bull, lift your neck to [the Sun] who…[*6]in the sky! Your
shining horns are aggressive, holy and lustrous. Bearing a beard of shining
lapis lazuli,…, your prince, the mighty sunlight, the lord who…the true word,
who lightens the horizon, who lightens the sky’s…vault.”[6]
In poetry and prayer, Nanna/Sin is referred to as “father of the gods,”
“head of the gods,” and “creator of all things.” This is how people viewed
him long before the first monotheist set out from the Moon City Ur and
moved to the Promised Land.
In the time before that story, which comes from the Book of Genesis, early
temples were erected to nature gods throughout the Fertile Crescent. One of
the very first known settlements was Jericho, today a Palestinian city on the
West Bank, in disputed territory near Jerusalem. The earliest relics at Jericho
date to an era before humans invented pottery, around 9500 b.c.e., a
millennium and a half earlier than the pits of Aberdeenshire’s Warren Field.
In antiquity, people came to Jericho for two reasons: a freshwater spring and
the Moon.
Jericho’s spring, now named Ein es-Sultan, was a popular gathering spot
for the hunter-gatherer people called the Natufians. Beyond its life-giving
waters, a spring is also a potent symbol for people fixated on human fertility,
as we know many Neolithic people were. Like other early hunter-gatherer

groups, the Natufians are known by the tiny stone tools they left behind. They
are called lunates: small crescent-shaped stones used to cut grasses. Natufian
hunter-gatherer groups visited the Jericho spring in warm seasons. Around
9600 b.c.e., a period of droughts and cold called the Younger Dryas finally
ended, and the Natufians stayed put in Jericho. The oldest city on Earth grew
up around these water seekers. Befitting the spring’s connection to fertility
rituals, Jericho became a pilgrimage site for worshippers of the Moon.
Scholars have a few theories for the origin of the city’s name—some say it
derives from a word meaning “fragrant,” describing its abundant flowers—but
the Palestinian government’s tourism office describes Jericho as “the City of
the Moon.” Jericho was an early center of worship for a Canaanite god named
Yarikh, a god represented by the Moon. People traveled to the city to visit a
temple to his honor. This may also explain the origins of other proto-cities of
the third millennium b.c.e. The temple probably came first, and a city stirred
to life in the buildings erected around it. “Ur of the Chaldees” in Sumerian
cuneiform script is 
, rendered as URIMki or UNUGki, which
translates to “the abode of Nanna.”[7]
—
Mesopotamia by the third millennium b.c.e. was a hodgepodge of city-states,
including Uruk, Ur, Kish, and Akkad, the ruins of which were lost to history.
Inhabitants of these city-states fought one another for centuries over the best
lands and water access between the rivers. King Sargon hailed from Akkad
and became the first to unify the city-states and the first to create something
resembling an empire, controlling people through shared bureaucracy and
religion. He conquered Ur in 2334 b.c.e. with an army that was stronger than
previous Sumerian kings’, in part because his troops had bows and arrows, a
rare sight in a land without many trees.[8] Sargon’s domination was a real feat
given his humble beginnings. His autobiographical origin story tells of a baby
born to an unknown father and a priestess mother, who gave birth to him in
secret, put him in a reed basket sealed with tar, and cast him into the
Euphrates.[*7]

When the fighting was over, Sargon needed a way to unify his realm
through means that were stronger than arms. Bureaucratic control can have
more staying power than military might—the reed stylus is more powerful
than the sword, in other words—and Sargon achieved this in a few ways. He
standardized weights and measures, which were previously different from
place to place. He levied taxes, and he kept members of old Sumerian ruling
families as members of his court. He initiated a bureaucracy beyond anything
developed beforehand in Sumer. But his most important bureaucrat was his
daughter, the well-coiffed priestess Enheduanna. “Daughter” may have been
an honorific rather than signifying Enheduanna was Sargon’s biological child,
but either way, Sargon must have trusted her greatly. On his behalf, she used
the Moon to unite the gods of Akkad and the gods of Sumer, solidifying the
first empire on planet Earth.
—
Enheduanna’s very name was the first step in this process. Her original name
was probably Semitic in origin, but changed to a Sumerian form to placate
the people she now aimed to unite. Enheduanna is a nom de plume: 
 (EN)
translates to “lady, High Priestess” combined with 
 (HEDU), which
means “ornament.” Followed by 
(AN), the sky god, and 
(NA), her
name means “High Priestess of the ornament of the sky,” of the Moon.
—
Akkad included the Moon God in its greater pantheon, but Akkadians were
more devoted to the goddess of love. The Sumerians called her Inanna.[*8]
The Babylonians would later call her Ishtar. In Greece, she was Aphrodite,
and in Rome she was called Venus, for whom the second planet from the Sun
is named.
Yet she was no Moon. Nanna was the most popular god of Sumer, and in
Sumer he must be exalted. A king who wanted to run Ur needed to venerate
Nanna, so Enheduanna was installed as the Moon God’s High Priestess and
technically as his wife on Earth. She knew she had to honor Nanna, but she

also knew the great power she could derive from introducing Ur to Inanna,
too, and building a connection between the two deities, and therefore the two
city-states. She accomplished this in a poem called “The Exaltation of
Inanna.”[9]
At some point during her forty-year tenure, Sargon’s grandson Naram-Sin
became king of Sumer. Some Ur residents rebelled against the Akkadian
leaders and challenged Enheduanna’s priesthood. Kicked out of the sacred
Giparu, she went into exile and wrote at length of the miseries she suffered,
cut off from her sanctuary and unable to perform her holy duties. Without a
direct line to Nanna, she appealed instead to Inanna for help. Finally,
according to her own writings, the gods answered her plea and she returned to
the Giparu. Her tale of woe, written in verse, was an extremely astute
narrative choice. She successfully manipulated her story of suffering to turn
the focus toward Inanna, not just Nanna. Enheduanna probably proposed
declaring that Inanna was Nanna’s daughter, as she is later described in
Sumerian poetry. This relationship would have justified the goddess’s power
over Ur and southern Sumer, while maintaining Nanna’s supremacy.
The gods are further glorified in Enheduanna’s so-called Sumerian Temple
Hymns, forty-two verses about the holy places throughout the lands of Sumer.
They are not the world’s oldest religious text—that is the Epic of Gilgamesh,
the story of the king of Uruk and his wild friend, which contains the earliest
references to the Flood—but Enheduanna’s hymns began to change the way
people in the Bronze Age viewed their gods. These hymns made the gods
more interesting and more human. They had thoughts and cares and went on
adventures. Inanna became Queen of Heaven. In Enheduanna’s telling,
Inanna visits the wise old patricidal god Enki[*9] while he is drunk and tricks
him into giving her the gods’ collective cosmic powers, known in Sumerian as
the me. This shows Inanna’s cunning as well as her sheer power. Nanna in his
many manifestations became a deeper, more well-rounded character. The
gods seemed more invested in the lives of everyone, not just certain
Sumerians or Akkadians. The Moon priestess’s poems are sensual, erotic,
playful, humane, and deeply passionate. Through her writing, humanity tried
to make connections between heaven and Earth for the first time. Bronze Age

humans narrowed their focus of worship, moving from the abstract affairs of
nature gods toward their direct involvement in the lives of people. Thanks to
Sargon’s daughter, the most interesting gods now had more in common with
their worshippers.[10]
The temple hymns were probably written to unify the lands Sargon
conquered. Though a few versions probably existed earlier, Enheduanna
claimed credit for penning them, and in doing this she is recognized as the
first named author, the first person to ever byline a piece of writing. She
herself wrote: “The compiler of the tablets was Enheduanna. My King,
something has been created here that no one has ever created before.”[11]
The forty-two temple hymns were copied and recopied for more than two
millennia, longer than the recorded history of the New Testament.
Enheduanna’s evocative, ardent style laid the foundations for the liturgical
works of Judaism and early Christianity. In “The Great-Hearted Mistress”
(also sometimes translated simply as “A Hymn to Inanna”), the poet writes:
You are magnificent, your name is praised, you alone are magnificent!…
My lady…I am yours! This will always be so! May your heart be
soothed towards me!…
Your divinity is resplendent in the Land! My body has experienced your
great punishment.
Bitter lament keeps me awake with…anxiety. Mercy, compassion, care,
Lenience, and homage are yours, and to cause flooding, to open hard
ground and to turn
Darkness into light. (lines 218, 244–53)[12]
Abject worship like this has come down through the ages. You can hear
these plaintive lines echo in any church today: The Kingdom and the Power
and the Glory are yours, now and forever.
—

Uniting the god of Ur, the Moon City, with the most important Akkadian
goddess gave the Akkadian dynasty legitimacy and secured the priestess’s
own position. By connecting Inanna and Nanna, Enheduanna maintained her
grasp on power, and so did her family. She was so successful at uniting the
South and North that later kings would appoint their daughters to the position
of High Priestess of Ur long after Sargon’s dynasty faded into history.
A woman with so much influence would have loomed pretty large through
the centuries. So perhaps it’s no wonder that Ennigaldi, daughter of King
Nabonidus, kept relics from Enheduanna in her personal museum. The earlier
priestesses of Ur may have been honored as heroes and icons, in the way
modern Catholics pray to saints for intercession. Woolley, after pulling
artifacts out of the ground, remarked that earlier priestesses were probably
honored for political reasons, just as the gods themselves were. “Whether the
god was Jehovah or Nanna mattered little” to later rulers, Woolley wrote.
“The king’s purpose was to placate his people by subsidizing their particular
forms of worship.”[13]
—
Enheduanna’s clever hymns may have served as the mortar linking the
disparate bricks of Sumerian society. But it would not last. “Old things are
passed away; behold, all things are become new,” as another holy author
would later write in a letter.[14] In the centuries after Enheduanna’s tenure, Ur
was besieged by rebellion and invasion and a series of impotent, short-lived
rulers. “Who was king? Who was not king?” a document called the Sumerian
King List asked ruefully. By the turn of the second millennium b.c.e., the
third dynasty of Ur was suffering from famine. Centuries of irrigation had
started to take a toll. The waters of the Tigris and the Euphrates are slightly
salty, and over time the canals that fed the fields also deposited salt, changing
the mineral makeup of the soil. Crops began to fail.
In 2004 b.c.e., four millennia before U.S. Marines toppled a forty-foot
statue of Saddam Hussein in Baghdad, just fifty-five miles north, a
Babylonian king named Ibbi-Sin was faced with a coup. Marauders broke

down the walls of Ur, burned the palace, leveled the Moon God’s temple, and
brought the Sumerian era to a final, staggering end. Poems described the
city’s woe and, more ominously, the failure of Nanna and his wife to protect
it.
Father Nanna…
Your song has been turned into weeping before you—how long will this
last?
Your city weeps before you as its mother. Ur, like a child lost in a street,
seeks a place before you….
Your brick-built righteous house, like a human being, cries, “Where are
you?”…
How long will you stand aside from your city like an enemy?[15]
The most important god in the Sumerian pantheon, the oldest god of gods,
had lost some of his potency. The nature gods of the Near East were shaken
for the first time. They would finally succumb fifteen centuries later, when the
Moon God failed to save his most ardent patron, the last Semitic king of
Babylon: Nabonidus.
History is written by the victors, so the Moon God has long since faded
from glory in favor of the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. The Torah, the
Christian Bible, and the Quran mention the Moon God mainly to condemn
his worship. The holy books do not mention Ennigaldi or Enheduanna or the
other uncountable women who made the Moon God paramount in the
thousands of years before the God of Genesis revealed himself. But a straight
line connects the Moon to the God of Genesis, the God of Abraham, the God
most people on Earth worship today. The line runs through the first
monotheist, Abraham himself, and through his hometown: Ur, the original
Moon City.

In the books of the Bible, Abraham is the progenitor of Judaism,
Christianity, and Islam. In Genesis, God orders him to leave Ur and make his
way to Canaan, where he is to become father of many nations. He is the
patriarch of the Twelve Tribes of Israel, through his grandson Jacob. In Islam,
he is known as Ibrahim, the “friend of God” and the father of Ishmael, the
ancestor of the Arab nations. No archaeological record of him has ever been
found, but according to multiple faith traditions, he grew up in Ur. If that is
true, Abraham—born as Abram—would have grown up surrounded by
people who at least paid lip service to the Moon God, including his father,
Terah, and his wife/half sister, Sarai. Her name is the Akkadian version of
Nanna/Sin’s wife, the goddess Ningal. Given this legacy, it makes sense that,
according to Genesis, God renames them Abraham and Sarah[16] when he
makes his new covenant. Their new monikers symbolically ditch Ur and the
Moon, and add the new syllable “AH,” the first syllable of the name of the
God of the Israelites in Genesis (YHWH).[*10] The parable is a way to erase
an older, well-loved deity and replace him with a new, singular one, who
would eventually overcome all others. According to Genesis, Abraham and
his family leave Ur, then take a detour to Harran, before heading to the
Promised Land. Alongside Ur, Harran was the most important center for
worship of the Moon God from the third millennium b.c.e. until the rise of
the Persian Empire. It was where Nabonidus was born and where his mother
worked as High Priestess to the Moon God.
King Nabonidus’s story also comes down to us from the Hebrew Bible. We
meet Nabonidus in the Book of Daniel, where his name is confused with that
of his predecessor Nebuchadnezzar II—the Bible’s bad Babylonian king, who
sacked Jerusalem in 587 b.c.e. and burned the Temple of Solomon. This
conflation happened because whichever scribes wrote down the story of
Daniel consistently avoided mentioning Nabonidus by name. The error
carried through the centuries in part because so many classical scholars
celebrated Nebuchadnezzar, attributing Babylon’s greatness to that king’s long
reign.[17] But historical accounts of the time, as well as a long record of
cuneiform texts known as royal inscriptions, show that Nebuchadnezzar’s
successor Nabonidus is the actual “mad king” who goes wandering in the

wilderness living among oxen, as the Bible tells it. Historical records and
several clay cylinders, now in the collections of the British Museum and
Berlin’s luminous Pergamon Museum, round out Nabonidus’s biography.
—
Nabonidus began his career as a civil servant, probably a prefect in Babylon,
something like an unelected city alderman. At some point during the reign of
Nebuchadnezzar II, Nabonidus was working as a military officer. He helped
broker an important cease-fire during a conflict between the Medes and the
Lydians in Asia Minor, according to Herodotus. Some tablets dating to the
reign of Nebuchadnezzar suggest Nabonidus could be abrasive and
cantankerous; in one account, he ordered the beating of a man who had
inquired about a robe adorning the statue of a god. But he was by all accounts
pious, interested in archaeology, and devoted to the Moon. By the time
Nebuchadnezzar died, in 562, Nabonidus was probably a trusted member of
the court. Chaos followed the death of Nebuchadnezzar, whose son and
grandson both ruled briefly before being assassinated. Ultimately, perhaps via
a coup orchestrated by his adult son, Belshazzar, the pious bureaucrat
Nabonidus ascended to power.
The new king dearly loved the Moon God, his mother’s favorite deity, to
whom she dedicated herself as priestess. The Moon God held great influence
over the son long into his adulthood. In the second year of his reign, he
rededicated the Temple of Sin in Ur during a lunar eclipse, and installed
Ennigaldi as High Priestess there. Cuneiform cylinders from the reign of
Nabonidus tell of his piety and his many architectural works in the Moon’s
honor, including the restoration of the temple where his mother worked.
Other scattered relics throughout the Middle East fill in the story of
Nabonidus and his Moon. In 1881 c.e., an Iraqi Assyriologist named
Hormuzd Rassam uncovered the ruins of the Temple of Shamash, the Sun
God, in the ancient remains of a city once called Sippar. He found temple
treasures and a small clay cylinder covered in tiny cuneiform script. The
cylinder, dating to the sixth century b.c.e., is now in the Pergamon Museum.

The Canadian Assyriologist Paul-Alain Beaulieu translated the cuneiform in
the 1980s c.e., and found that it contains this prayer, written on behalf of
King Nabonidus:
May the gods who dwell in heaven and the netherworld constantly praise
the temple of Sin, the father, their creator. As for me, Nabonidus king of
Babylon, who completed that temple, may Sin, the king of the gods of
heaven and the netherworld, joyfully cast his favorable look upon me
and every month, in rising and setting, make my ominous signs
favorable. May he lengthen my days, extend my years, make my reign
firm, conquer my enemies, annihilate those hostile to me, destroy my
foes.[18]
But by the time Nabonidus ascended to the throne in his sixties, with a
son, Belshazzar, in his forties, the Moon God was less popular than Babylon’s
Sun-centered agriculture god. Marduk’s priests made Nabonidus miserable,
and the king complained about not being able to venerate Sin, his mother’s
god. He ultimately grew so unhappy that he made his son co-regent, left him
to rule in his place, and departed Babylon altogether. With his daughter
Ennigaldi safely ensconced as the Moon God’s priestess, and his son,
Belshazzar, in charge in Babylon, Nabonidus went on a walkabout in Arabia.
Scholars think he may have had a few motivations for this absence,
including an attempt to control trade routes through western Arabia. There is
also evidence he suffered from some kind of illness, maybe a skin malady.
The Dead Sea Scrolls, discovered at the Qumran Caves in the West Bank
between 1946 and 1956, preserve a work called “The Prayer of Nabonidus,”
in which the king is said to suffer from an “evil ulcer.” In Babylonian
medicine, several skin conditions, from psoriasis to leprosy, were interpreted
as divine punishments from Sin.[19] Maybe Nabonidus fled his city to avoid
infecting others; maybe he fled to the dry desert for relief; perhaps he rebuilt
temples to his favorite god in desperation for a cure. These stories inspired
the tale of the “mad king” in the Book of Daniel, in which Belshazzar’s father

(really Nabonidus) lives among animals for seven years before reaching an
understanding with the God of Israel.
Nabonidus himself wrote of his disgust with the Marduk cult, and his
frustration at being unable to worship as he pleased after his subjects
disregarded Sin’s rites.
“As for me, I removed myself out of my city Babylon and [I proceeded]
on the road to Tayma…. During ten years, I went back and forth among these
cities and did not enter my city Babylon,” Nabonidus complained.[20] He
brought his army to places like Tayma, Dadanu, Yadihu, and other Arabian
cities, and visited his birthplace, Harran. The armies of Babylon and the
Medes had marched on Harran in 610 b.c.e. and despoiled its venerable Sin
shrine. The residents of the city viewed the desecration as a result of divine
abandonment—just like Nanna had abandoned Ur in 2004 b.c.e.—and
believed that restoring the temple would be a way of restoring Sin. So
Nabonidus went home and rebuilt the ancient Temple of Sin, Ehulhul, or
“house of joys.”
In May 1906, an archaeologist named Henri Pognon found the remains of
the temple in the floor of a twelfth century c.e. mosque. Stelae from the
temple had been used in the mosque’s floors so that Muslim worshippers
would walk upon the idol of the infidels on their way to prayer.
Pognon was trained as an epigraphist, specializing in ancient writing, and,
while exploring a mound near Harran, he came across a damaged stela with
the remains of four columns of cuneiform inscription. His published
translation showed that the author of the text was a devoted worshipper of the
Moon God Sin. The second column described, in great detail, the
reconstruction of the once-famous Sin sanctuary at Harran. The inscription
tells how King Nabonidus restored the temple, and references him as “the
son, the offspring of my heart.”[21]
At first, Pognon reasoned that whoever wrote this must have been a priest
of the temple, who held great affection for his benefactor; calling the king of
Babylon his son might have been a term of endearment. He later found three
more stelae that confirmed the much more interesting truth: The stelae
represent a biography of Nabonidus’s mother. They tell the story of how Sin

appeared to Nabonidus’s mother, Adad-guppi, in a dream, promising her that
her only son would be called to kingship and would rebuild the temple at
Harran. Another inscription describes her death, apparently at the age of 104,
and the ceremony Nabonidus held in her honor:
I am the lady Adda-guppi’, mother of Nabium-na’id, king of Babylon,
votaress of the gods Sin, Ningal, Nusku, and Sadarnunna, my deities….
My blessings, the goodly things which they gave me, I too by day, night,
month, and year, gave back to them. I laid hold on the hem of the robe
of Sin, king of the gods, night and daytime my two eyes were with him, in
prayer and humility of face was I bowed before them (and) thus (I
prayed), “May thy return to thy city be (vouchsafed) to me, that the
people, the black-headed, may worship thy great godhead.”[22]
May the people—the descendants of the Sumerians and the inheritors of
Ur, “the black-headed”—return to the City of the Moon God to worship him.
Nabonidus made good on this promise, but it would come at a cost: his
kingdom for the Moon.
—
By the early 540s c.e., King Nabonidus was at best unpopular. While away
in Arabia, he made a fateful decision not to come home to Babylon for the
vital New Year’s festival held in spring. During these important annual rites,
the king would accompany an effigy of Marduk through Babylon’s splendid
Ishtar Gate. The city walls were decorated in lapis-blue tiles, embedded with
daisy rosette mosaics, and guarded by striding dragons and ferocious lions.
The gorgeous blue tiles of the Processional Way, leading to the glorious gate,
were the backdrop for the New Year’s festival. The ceremony affirmed the
king’s right to power by simulating the transfer of kingship from heaven to
Earth, with Marduk as the shepherd. You can see parts of the walls today,

lining a corridor in the Pergamon Museum, not far from the prayer cylinder
of Sippar.
Nabonidus could never bring himself to honor Marduk, even to accept the
transfer of kingship from heaven, and sacrificed his secular duties in favor of
his sacred honor. Though later accounts likely exaggerated how much this
bothered people, many Babylonians probably were offended and even
outraged. In the east, a ruler named Cyrus saw an opening.
By 540, the Persian king Cyrus was already sending forces along Babylon’s
borders, sniffing out territory he might want to invade. Nabonidus’s army held
them off, aided by a forty-foot moat and double walls. Babylon’s residents had
enough food and water to outlast any siege, even up to twenty years,
according to the Greek historian Xenophon, and maybe this made them
complacent. Cyrus and his men decided to seize the opportunity presented by
a weakened, unloved, and mostly absentee king. In October 539 b.c.e., Cyrus
made his move. His men dug trenches along the Euphrates and diverted the
river’s waters so they could march under the walls of the city. They crept in
through the mud and sang like drunken revelers, escaping notice until they
reached the palace.
Inside the palace, the acting king, Belshazzar, was hosting a great feast.
According to the legend in the Book of Daniel, he imbibed using precious
vessels that had been stolen in the destruction of the Temple in Jerusalem[*11]
a few decades earlier, illustrating his unholy debauchery. In the Bible, the
nature of the feast is vague. But the date was the sixteenth day of the month
Tišritum, a feast day and very possibly a celebration in honor of the Moon
God.[23] The Moon was huge and bright, a harvest Moon that rose late and
orange through the darkness.[24]
As the revelers partied, a disembodied hand appeared and began to write
on the wall in a mysterious language. Belshazzar, terrified, called for someone
who could read it. Daniel, an exiled Jewish youth, came over. He read the
Hebrew: “Mene, mene, tekel, upharsin.”
“God has numbered your kingdom and put an end to it. You have been
weighed on the scales and been found wanting. Your kingdom has been
divided and given to the Persians.”

That night, the forces of Cyrus stormed the palace and killed Belshazzar.
Historian William Shea suggested in the 1980s c.e. that Belshazzar likely
heard the Persians had defeated his father at Sippar and hosted the banquet
for his own coronation.[25] But nothing is known for certain of the fate of
Nabonidus. He may have gone into exile; he may even have been fortunate
enough to live out his days in quiet piety, praying to the Moon every night.
—
With apologies to Belshazzar, the Persian takeover was a mostly bloodless
coup; fed up with their absent ruler, the residents of Babylon apparently
didn’t put up much of a fight. What’s more, Cyrus took pains to placate the
people and ensure he would be greeted as a liberator. Babylon was an
immense city, and clay tablets were not exactly newspapers or Twitter feeds,
so it took a while for word to spread.[26] “It is said when it was captured,”
Aristotle wrote later, “a considerable part of the city was not aware of it until
three days later.”[27]
—
With Cyrus’s unqualified victory over Babylon, the power center of
civilization moved eastward. The plains between the two rivers were now
ruled by the Persians, a neighboring empire from the mountains. The final fall
of the Moon God would not take place for another thousand years, until a
messenger of God named Muhammad would destroy his likeness inside
another temple, called the Kaaba. But the golden age of Mesopotamia was
over. And the defeat of Belshazzar and Nabonidus signified a major cultural
shift: the first major defeat of the nature gods.
The fall of Babylon dealt an especially devastating blow to the most
powerful nature god, Sin. If the Moon God could not protect his most
powerful disciple, a king personally devoted to his name and his sacred
honor, how could Sin possibly help the meek and downtrodden? What good is
a shepherd who cannot protect his flock? In losing Babylon, Nabonidus lost
much more than his own kingship. He forfeited the divinity of nature. The

Moon, the Sun, the sky, the waters were all exposed as weaklings, controlling
just a few aspects of the natural world.
When Cyrus took Babylon, he made another crucial decision: He freed the
people of Judea, allowing them to return to Jerusalem and rebuild their
temple. In sparing the Jews, he spared their story and their God. The God of
Abraham rose in popularity after the fall of Sin. This God sat above all
natural forces and all heavenly bodies, orchestrating them like a great
conductor. He built the natural world in just a week. And he acted alone. No
separate, lesser gods helped him or even fought him. No one tried to rule
alongside him. No one tricked him and tried to steal the me from him. It was
just him, Elohim. I am that I am, he said.
The word of this God spread across the varying cults of the Near East
throughout the next five centuries, and it continued to spread after a
philosopher from Bethlehem began teaching that he was this God’s son. The
glory days of the Moon God were at an end.
—
Meanwhile, other civilizations from Egypt to Carthage caught up to the
heretofore unparalleled brilliance of the area we now call Iraq. Rome was
growing in size and power. And the beginning of democracy was taking hold
in Athens. Instead of worshipping nature, trying to placate it and please it and
beg it for its intercession, humans and their gods began to transcend nature.
So did human ideas. As the nature gods became more obscure, the Moon
became a tool for thinking rather than just for subjugation. Though Babylon
itself fell, its astronomical records, kept as a form of prayer, would become
the first example of scientific evidence observed for its own sake. The Moon
was becoming the central feature in a new project of intellectual curiosity.
During his rule, Nabonidus devoted a great deal of energy and resources to
understanding the messages of the heavens. Cylinders found in the ruins of
Sippar record royal orders from Nabonidus to pay beer and food rations to

scholars studying the skies. The scholars had their own place to work, called
the bit mummu, which the Nabonidus expert Paul-Alain Beaulieu terms a
“temple academy.” Though Nabonidus revered the Moon, there was a more
practical reason for his careful attention. And it led to something Nabonidus
could never have expected.
Scholars under his orders would study the Moon to better predict eclipses,
which were viewed with great superstition. How could a blood-red Moon, or
worse, the disappearance of the Sun, be perceived as anything but an ill
omen? During an eclipse of the Moon, Sin is stricken with grief, “covered in
mourning.” The word for “lunar eclipse” in the Akkadian language can be
written with the logogram ‘IR—the same word that means “to cry.” Though
most young societies have viewed eclipses unfavorably, perhaps none
prepared for them so fervently as the people in Babylon, the most
sophisticated early society.
Forecasting the next eclipse with mathematical precision allowed kings to
start preparing the necessary protective rituals, ensuring they had enough
beasts to slaughter, enough incense to burn, enough trustworthy people in
court to carry everything out. Precautions included beating a copper
kettledrum at the temple gates and shouting “Eclipse!” while people sang
lamentations, and an elaborate ritual called šar pūhi, the “substitute king
ritual.”[28] If the sky priests predicted the worst type of lunar eclipse—for
instance, if Jupiter would be invisible while the Moon was drenched in blood
—the king would disguise himself as a farmer and hide. Some other person
would be chosen as a regal doppelgänger and would be dressed like the king
while a priest recited the dark omen foretold by the eclipse. The ritual would
end with the death of the substitute—fulfilling the prophecy of regicide, while
sparing the actual rex.
Nabonidus, his daughter Ennigaldi-Nanna, and their astrologers carried out
these rituals for religious reasons. They wouldn’t have thought of themselves
as scientists, surely not in our modern sense of the word. But the scientific
enterprise was nonetheless the result of their devotion. Their work ultimately
became the legacy of Babylon. From the dutiful records of celestial omens,
the reality of the heavens emerged. This reverent record-keeping was about

charting the movements of the actual Moon across the sky, and the result was
the beginnings of mathematical astronomy, the first exact science. This work
at the Moon City of Ur and in Babylon reached its apex during the reign of
Nabonidus.
“ ‘Natural phenomena’ became objects of study not in spite of their being
products of divine agency and will, but precisely because they were physical
signs of divine agency and will,” writes the Assyriologist Francesca Rochberg.
[29] Though their original motivation may have been holy, the knowledge
these skywatchers obtained was secular, and it was for everyone. The sky
priests’ records started out as simple lists of stars; progressed to charting and
acknowledging the relationships between celestial events, and correlations
between heavenly and Earthly events; and finally became a way of drawing
inferences about these events. The texts that compose the Babylonian
compendium called MUL.APIN, the one whose charts and Moon positions
show the validity of the Nebra sky disk, is one of the earliest records of
science in human history.
—
The unfolding of this new form of science—call it knowledge from heaven
—took place in many locations at the same time. In China, astrologers looked
to the heavens for divine inspiration and authority, to ensure imperial
security, and to better predict future events. And just as in Mesopotamia,
Chinese astrologers began to understand real nature as a result.
Early astrology led to a watershed moment in the history of human
thought. The Moon and the planets were being referenced and observed not
simply because they were divine, not just because they were representative of
change, but because their movements were information. And information can
be used.
The entire body of cuneiform mathematical work, all the records on the
clay tablets from three thousand years of Mesopotamian civilizations, are
quantitative: numerical records and accounts. They are predictive, because
their whole purpose was for sky priests to order the heavens and plan

accordingly. And they are empirical, in the modern sense of that word, in that
they are based on firsthand observation. The disciples of the Moon God,
toiling in his honor, gathered more fundamental truths than they could have
expected, and people began to understand the heavens like never before.
“The phases of the Moon, the expression of its image in the sky, is really a
good tool for thinking,” Willis Monroe, an Assyriologist at the University of
British Columbia, told me. “For Mesopotamia as a whole, I think you could
really say this is very much what the intellectual project is about. It’s about
watching the world around them and finding these patterns. For astrology, the
patterns are real. They’re not just things happening in the world. They are
very real patterns that can be studied, and the Moon is far and away the most
obvious of these patterns.”
—
By 500 b.c.e., the residents of planet Earth were busy building something
resembling the world as we know it. Huge numbers of people lived in big
cities full of waterworks and fortresses and temples. Farmers did an excellent
job providing food for hungry and growing populations. Some people quit
farming and went into other trades. People invented money. Some journeyed
hundreds of miles along the ancient Silk Road, to trade for metal, clothing,
food, animals, trinkets. The Olympics started. The study of history began.
And the very early stages of philosophy were taking root from Greece to
China.
Nearly 2,500 years had gone by since the people of Mesopotamia invented
religion. Now the Persians, conquerors of Babylon, were the leading experts
on the daily and nightly happenings above. They made the most advanced
measurements of the heavens any humans had achieved yet. Their astrological
omen tablets show a detailed understanding of the Moon’s motions, eclipses,
the movements of planets and stars through the constellations, and how the
Moon interacted with them. These astronomers—or call them astrologers,
their goal was the same—gave us the signs of the zodiac that we still use
today, by dividing the sky into twelve zones and assigning each section the

name of the most prominent constellation within it. Do you know your zodiac
sign? Studies show that 90 percent of Americans do, when given the list of
twelve options.[30] We can thank the Babylonians for these.
The sky priests of Mesopotamia also figured out the eclipse cycle. Earth’s
solar and lunar eclipses repeat the same geometry every 6,585 days—18
years, 11 or 12 days depending on leap years, and about 8 hours. Think about
the precision and perseverance it would take to have figured this out three
millennia ago. Before paper, before pen, before what we would consider
arithmetic, Babylonian astronomers counted out what we now call the Saros
cycle. They did all this work under the aegis of the king, but the records left
behind could be interpreted by anyone. And early Greek scientists relied on
them to make astonishing new observations about the cosmos and how it
functions.
Across the Arabian Desert, in a land to the west of Mesopotamia, an
immigrant from the Persian Empire would become one of the first people to
use this information for something entirely new: the earliest stirrings of
modern science.
Skip Notes
*1 The region is not named for the Moon, though it’s a nice coincidence. The Fertile Crescent was the
cradle of human civilization, a marshy arc that spanned the Nile delta in Egypt, up through the Levant
(which includes what is now Israel and Palestine), into southern Turkey, and down into what is now
Iraq and western Iran.
*2 The city’s name may have influenced the Arabic word al-Irāq, from which the modern country takes
its name, though scholarship is split on this etymology.
*3 A modern ruler named Saddam Hussein also restored the ziggurat’s lower foundations, with the
same motivations in mind. During the American-led war in 1991, Saddam parked fighter jets near the
ziggurat because he imagined the Americans would not risk destroying the priceless monument. It was
still damaged by bomb shrapnel.
*4 Though Ennigaldi and her father would have called the Moon God by the name of Sin, her own
name is derived from a more ancient Sumerian spelling of the same deity. Nabonidus was deeply
interested in archaeology and his own country’s history, and apparently gave his daughter an ancient
Sumerian name that means “the desire of the Moon God.”

*5 Exodus 32:1–8, 1 Kings 12:26–30, Deuteronomy 9:16, and other chapters in the Old
Testament/Hebrew Bible tell the story of a golden calf idol drawing God’s ire.
*6 The ellipses represent lacunae, the term for missing fragments from the ancient tablets that have
been lost to time—or were destroyed by later people.
*7 Doesn’t this story sound familiar? Sargon’s birth tale predates that of Moses by eight hundred years.
*8 The name looks similar to Nanna because our transliteration of cuneiform is limited. The first
writers on planet Earth didn’t have a sophisticated alphabet; just you try coming up with an original set
of characters that can convey the entirety of human experience.
*9 The same god who killed his father, Apsu, maker of heaven and Earth with Tiamat.
*10 Modern usage spells this name as Yahweh or Jehovah, but these are really not names, just ways to
spell the words of the name God gives himself: YHWH, according to the story in Genesis 15:7. This
four-letter moniker was also later known as the Tetragrammaton in Greek.
*11 In the Bible, the Babylonians under Nebuchadnezzar sacked Jerusalem and destroyed the Temple
of Solomon in 587–586 b.c.e. The stolen vessels may have included the famous Ark of the Covenant,
which 1 Kings 8:1–10 says was stored in the Temple’s inner sanctuary. The gilded box, said to contain
the Ten Commandments tablets, disappeared during the destruction of the Temple. No record of its
whereabouts exists, unless, perhaps, it is in a wooden crate in U.S. government storage.

The Sun imparts to the Moon her brilliance.
—Anaxagoras of Clazomenae as recorded by Plutarch, De Facie[1]
On the night of August 20, 2017, I sat studying Google Maps for the best
way to follow the Sun. The St. Louis forecast for the next day was dicey, and I
could not bear the idea of missing the “Great American Eclipse,” as news
media, myself included, were calling it.
The Saros cycle determined by the Babylonians predicted that the Moon
would completely block the Sun on August 21, 2017, resulting in two minutes
of daytime darkness across a swath of the continental United States—
including my own backyard. But I did not trust St. Louis weather. I canceled
plans with friends, woke with my family well before dawn, and drove toward
clear skies over Paducah, Kentucky.
The previous eclipse visible across the contiguous United States was in
1918, so Americans had reason to be excited.[*1] It is a rare thing to witness
the Sun disappear from the sky, with only its atmosphere, called the corona,
visible surrounding what appears to be a black hole. Humans throughout time

have marveled at this sight in abject terror, awe, ecstasy, euphoria,
transcendence, hope, despair, and infinite variations of those feelings—and
this remained true long after people figured out what eclipses were. I knew
what to expect, geometrically speaking, but I was excited to find out how the
total solar eclipse would make me feel.
—
We found a spot on Paducah’s riverbank to wait for the Moon to slide into
position. I noticed as the sky gradually dimmed to a steely yellow cast.
Sunlight through the leaves along the Ohio River fell on the ground in
crescent form, like little Moons scattered on the ground. Color seemed to
drain from the world. The rooftops were strangely yellowed, as though veiled
by smoke, only there was no smoke, and shadows were sharply defined. I kept
checking my watch. Then, finally, at 1:22 p.m. central time, the Sun
disappeared. In the instant before “totality,” as the full eclipse is known, a
dazzling beam shone through one of the Moon’s craters, causing what is
known in eclipse circles as the “diamond ring” effect. The sky turned to
twilight, and I stared at the Moon.
The crowd on the banks of the Ohio cheered; some wept. My older
daughter, then two, protested that she didn’t want to go to sleep. I laughed as
the katydids began their dusk-hour clacking. In the Sun’s place was a halo of
fire surrounding a black spot in the sky. The Sun’s disk was gone behind the
Moon, because in an incredible celestial coincidence, while the Moon is
about four hundred times smaller than the Sun, the Sun is about four hundred
times farther away from us.
I expected to feel some combination of fear or exultation, maybe a sense
of cosmic kinship, as I stared at the corona. Instead, I felt a giddy sense of
friendliness.
The Sun’s outer atmosphere was pale, but not ghostly like I had imagined,
not spectral like the full Moon on a cold December night. It was quiet,
empyrean light. I imagined it reaching gently toward me, which is, in fact,

what it was doing. The corona gives rise to the solar wind, and we are all
swaddled in it.
With a few seconds left before the diamond ring reappeared, I wrenched
my eyes away, back to my family. The sky brightened. Totality was over.
Around noon 2,495 years earlier, the shady groves around Athens, Greece,
began casting weird shadows, too. Crescents dappled the streets and the sky
dimmed. This eclipse, on February 17, 478 b.c.e., was different; the Moon
was more distant from Earth, at apogee, so it was unable to block the entire
Sun. A small ring of orange was visible around the Moon’s black disk,
causing what’s called an annular eclipse—still beautiful, still terrifying to
behold.
The citizens of devastated Athens, which had been pummeled by the
Persian army two years earlier, might have cried out, just like the people
around me in Paducah. But this ancient Athenian eclipse was different from
any before it. That day, perhaps for the first time in the history of human
thought, someone was looking up who understood what was happening.
A twenty-two-year-old Persian refugee named Anaxagoras wrote down
what he saw, determined to find out more about where the eclipse shadow
fell. Like his scientific descendant Alfred Wegener 2,400 years later,
Anaxagoras started by asking his neighbors. In the weeks and months after
the eclipse, he went down to a port city called Piraeus and interviewed
traveling merchants and sailors, asking them what they witnessed and
compiling a narrative. He learned that the eclipse shadow, called the umbra,
covered the entire Peloponnese. It covered Athens and spread all the way to
Anaxagoras’s home city of Clazomenae, in Asia Minor. But beyond the realm
of the Greek world, it was not visible. This was a shocking revelation at odds
with all other knowledge about eclipses up to that point. The darkness of the
eclipse was limited.
Anaxagoras had already developed several novel ideas concerning the size
of the Moon, its distance from Earth, its nature, and its place in the heavens.
His eclipse investigations allowed him to prove some of these notions. His
observations were a test of what may be the first scientific hypothesis: A solar
eclipse is not the death of the Sun, nor a form of divine punishment. It

happens because the Moon slips between the Sun and Earth. Likewise, a
lunar eclipse is not a Moon washed in blood or a crimson portent of war. It
happens because Earth gets in the way of the Sun, blocking its light from
directly reaching the Moon.
Anaxagoras’s correct ideas—and his most substantial incorrect one—have
not received the credit they are owed for establishing the bedrock of the
Western tradition. His works were lost in antiquity, and only transmitted to us
through other luminaries of philosophy and science, especially Claudius
Ptolemy in his opus the Almagest.[*2] As a result, Anaxagoras has been
unrecognized and unappreciated—just like the Moon’s role in originating
Western scientific tradition.
For millennia, credit for the conception of modern science has gone to
Aristotle, along with Plato, Aristotle’s teacher and the most famous student of
Socrates. The “pre-Socratics” are often dismissed as pre-scientific thinkers
with odd ideas. This is not their fault. Despite all their creativity, they could
not offer any proof for their ideas.[2] The pre-scientific era had not equipped
them with any way to test or demonstrate their theories, truthful as they might
have been. In his dialogue on the soul, the Phaedo, Plato describes Socrates’s
fascination with Anaxagoras. His revelations were astonishing for a youthful
Socrates, who enjoyed learning facts about the shape and location of Earth, as
well as speculation about the Moon. But Socrates was disappointed that
Anaxagoras didn’t lay out any reasons why things were the way they were. “I
thought…he would go on and explain what is best for each and what is good
for all in common,” Socrates complained. “My glorious hope, my friend, was
quickly snatched away from me. As I went on with my reading I saw that the
man made no use of intelligence, and did not assign any real causes for the
ordering of things.”[3]
The tradition of pooh-poohing people before Socrates is actually as old as
Socrates. But the revelations of the pre-Socratics, and especially Anaxagoras,
were unique in the history of science to that point. Anaxagoras realized things
that no one had realized before, or even thought to assume; his ideas upended
millennia of human thought and helped to germinate a new form of thinking
about nature.

Through observers like Anaxagoras, the Moon became a tool for
understanding the universe. By the middle of the first millennium b.c.e., the
study of celestial bodies was evolving into a form of study for its own sake.
The patterns in the sky had transcended their utility as tools of timekeeping
or of augury. By the time of Anaxagoras, the motions of the heavens, and the
calculations of those motions, were not just about astrology. Instead, Greek
scholars sought universal truths. They began to move from myth to logos—
away from supernatural explanations conjured by the human imagination and
toward rational thought and observation of natural phenomena. Accumulating
knowledge for the maintenance of power was less important than
accumulating knowledge to make sense of the world. Anaxagoras’s
observations marked the first time people began to do this in earnest, and he
was, like many after him, focused primarily on the Moon.
Anaxagoras was from Ionia, across the Aegean Sea from Greece in what is
now Turkey, and arrived in Athens in 480 b.c.e. during the Greco-Persian
Wars. He came from the great Persian tradition of skywatching and brought a
distinctly Persian spirit of scientific inquiry to his adopted city, where he
probably traveled as a war veteran or refugee. It was good timing. Athens was
in what would later be considered its golden age, and its thinkers had just
begun to study nature for its own sake, and to study thought itself. They were
also in the process of formulating democracy—rule of the people, by the
people—a dramatic change from the Babylonian or Chinese ideas of kingship
as a divine right.
Like most serious philosophers of his day, Anaxagoras was fixated on
astronomy and all the goings-on in the strange realm above the world.
Between 550 and 450 b.c.e., philosophers were circulating a few unusual
new ideas about that realm, which young Anaxagoras himself would have
heard. One was from a man named Thales of Miletus. Many historians,
dating back to the early Greeks, report that Thales was the first to successfully
predict a solar eclipse, which occurred as he said it would in 585 b.c.e. But

we don’t know how he predicted it. Thales didn’t leave any written theory or
ideas about how to arrive at such a precise calculation. Later philosophers,
especially Aristotle, approached Thales with skepticism. Thales might have
gotten lucky, or he might have somehow studied Babylonian eclipse records
with great care; more likely, he paid attention and picked out a pattern,
noticing that solar and lunar eclipses come in pairs, usually about two weeks
apart. Anaxagoras would likely have known about Thales’s prediction and the
repeating eclipse pattern.
Another radical idea circulating at the time held that the Moon is not
illuminated on its own, but reflects the light of the Sun. “A light by night,
wandering around earth with borrowed light/ever gazing toward the rays of
the Sun,” reads a poem by the philosopher Parmenides.[4]
You can try it for yourself. Go watch the Moon, starting with the next new
phase, and you will have a hard time not seeing it this way.[*3]
We’re not sure who thought of this first, Anaxagoras or Parmenides, but,
ultimately, it doesn’t matter, because Anaxagoras’s ideas had more staying
power. He was the first person to synthesize the strange, multifarious ideas
about the cosmos—some from the great civilizations in Mesopotamia, and
some in Greece—and come up with a viable new version of reality.
Anaxagoras was the first to offer a geometrical, scientific approach to
astronomy, and his ideas form the bedrock of all empirically minded
astronomers to follow, from Ptolemy to Copernicus.
“The Sun imparts to the Moon its brightness,” Anaxagoras wrote.
Equipped with this hypothesis, he watched the eclipse of 478 b.c.e. with
alacrity. If the slivered crescent Moon appeared very near the Sun, as it looks
just before or just following the new Moon, then where did the Moon go
during a solar eclipse? Probably, he reasoned, right in front of the Sun. This
meant a heavenly body was blocking another heavenly body.
Anaxagoras had no instruments, no math, no data to draw these
conclusions. All he had was his ability to ask questions and a top-notch brain
to work out whether he was right. His idea that eclipses result from a
blockage of Sun or Moon was a truly remarkable leap from the many weird
ideas of the day. The early philosopher Anaximander, for instance, said the

Moon was a vast ring and that humans viewed it through a small portal.
Anaximenes said it was a flat circle, like a leaf. Xenophanes said it was a
cloud. Heraclitus said it was a bowl full of fire, which faced us head-on once a
month when the Moon was full.
Anaxagoras alone said the Moon was “Earthy” and had plains, mountains,
and valleys. This was an astounding leap from centuries of tradition. His
initial insights about the Moon were empirical, not merely philosophical
musings on a hypothesis. His thoughts and ideas were grounded in his own
observations, and by continually observing, he accumulated evidence that
bolstered his ideas. Anaxagoras was building the outlines of a scientific theory
for the first time, and in a way that no Greek before him had done.
Eventually, evidence for Anaxagoras’s theories expanded beyond the realm
of the Moon, to the rest of the celestial sphere. Twelve years after the eclipse,
searing hot evidence from above came crashing down to Earth to show that
his ideas about the heavens had merit.
In late spring 466 b.c.e., a comet appeared in the early-morning sky, its tail
striping the entire dome of the heavens. It grew brighter every day as it fell
toward the Sun, and falling stars seemed to streak across the sky at night. On
July 18, 466 b.c.e., the comet disappeared in the Sun and reappeared in the
evening sky, as the Sun set. Soon afterward, a bright fireball lit up the
daytime skies of Ionia. A huge meteorite thundered to the ground, and a
burned rock the size of a wagon landed near the town of Aegospotami (now
Gallipoli).
It immediately became a tourist attraction, and for good reason. A wagon-
sized meteorite would have come from a positively enormous space rock. It
would have produced an earsplitting sonic boom and left a sizable crater.
Reports of the spectacular fall from heaven are peppered throughout
antiquity, from Aristotle himself to Pliny the Elder and Plutarch of
Chaeronea, a seminal Roman historian and biographer.
“It is shown to this day by the inhabitants of the peninsula, who stand in
awe of it,” Plutarch writes in Lysander.[5] “It is said that Anaxagoras
predicted that one of the bodies entangled in the heaven might, if there were
some slip or agitation, break off and fall or be cast down.”

The claim that Anaxagoras predicted this particular meteorite fall is even
more spurious than the claim about Thales and his eclipses, because we have
no record of how he could have done it. But Anaxagoras did realize
something new, and for this he deserves credit. He may have predicted “the
possibility that a rocky body could fall from the sky given the nature of
heavenly bodies he hypothesized,” said Brigham Young University
philosopher Daniel W. Graham.
“Immediately the story was, ‘Well, Anaxagoras predicted that,’ because his
was the only theory that had heavy bodies in orbit,” Graham told me. “There
is a line in Homer about Zeus throwing rocks at the Earth, so before that
time, the explanation would have been, ‘Zeus must be angry at someone.’ But
instead, people said, ‘Anaxagoras is right.’ They didn’t see this as a divine
portent anymore. This was a prediction of an event that could have happened,
and when it did, it was taken as a confirmation of his theory.”
If the rock that fell on Aegospotami came from above, from the realm of
the Sun, Moon, and stars, then those objects were probably made of similar
stuff as the rock, Anaxagoras reckoned. He extended this idea to everything
else in the sky. He argued that the Sun was a hot mess of fiery metal. He said
the stars and planets were giant pieces of stone that had been shorn from
Earth and later ignited. He said we don’t feel heat from the stars because they
are so far away. He came up with explanations for the light of the Milky Way
and the solstices. Anaxagoras in his own time earned the nickname “Mr.
Mind,” according to the third century c.e. historian Diogenes Laërtius,[6]
because he believed the cosmos is controlled by Nous, a great mind or
intelligence that served as a cosmic architect. Socrates, the great philosopher
of Athens, liked this notion, too. Anaxagoras believed that the universe’s
original state was a mixture of all its current components, but not evenly
distributed, and that Nous organized it all. He argued that everything that
exists contains some of this primordial material—anticipating, in a way, the
basic outlines of what we now call the Big Bang.
Some of these ideas would be dismissed in antiquity only to be proven
right millennia later. But the meteorite, above all, showed that Anaxagoras

correctly understood a key feature of the skies above. The celestial bodies are
rocks.
Once people got over their fear of the Gallipoli meteor, they approached
the steaming celestial visitor and realized what it was. The thing had clearly
fallen from above, like Anaxagoras said it might; they knew it was true
because so many people saw it fall. They knew the rock was real because they
could touch it. It was a tourist attraction for the next five centuries. The
meteor was Earthy; it was a thing with mass that could be perceived; it was
not made of the ether or some cloud. And it came from the realm overhead,
somewhere above Earth and closer to the Moon. (There’s a reason we still call
the study of Earth’s weather, its atmospheric phenomena, meteorology.)
The comet was visible for as many as eighty days, according to
reconstructions of the event using modern astronomy software. Its tail was
gigantic, spanning almost the entire sky. We know of one other comet that
has done this, and done so repeatedly, every seventy-six years. The comet[*4]
could have been Halley’s, named for a pal of Isaac Newton’s who predicted it
would reappear, and became famous when it did, long after his own death.
Anaxagoras may have been the first to record it, and to glean some new
insight from it. Maybe we should call it Anaxagoras’s Comet.
—
All of Anaxagoras’s unorthodox ideas refuted earlier theories. There were
no giant cosmic bowls up above, there were no flat leaves—there were rocks,
and the Moon was one of them. The notion that the Sun illuminated the
Moon meant the phases of the Moon made sense like never before, and so did
the nature of eclipses. Between Anaxagoras’s experiences of the eclipse and
the meteor, his ideas about the heavens began not only to make sense, but to
suggest evidence that could be tested. Anaxagoras represents a bridge
between philosophy and the history of science: a man of lofty ideas who
realized he could observe the world, and through observing, test those ideas.
But there was a problem. During Anaxagoras’s life, these ideas were
considered not only ridiculous, but heretical. The Sun was the god Helios,

who drove his chariot up and down the sky at sunrise and sunset, while
“bright beams from his person blaze dazzling.”[7] At night, his horses rested
under Earth. The Moon was the goddess Selene, Helios’s sister, whose long-
maned steeds only reached full speed in the middle of the month. In Hesiod’s
Theogony, 225 years before Anaxagoras, meteorites are attributed to “The
Hundred-Handed Ones,” giants with one hundred arms and fifty heads who
hurled great boulders to help Zeus defeat the Titans on Mount Olympus. To
argue that the Sun and Moon were merely hot rocks in the sky was impious,
to say the least.
So it should not be surprising that Anaxagoras was eventually put on trial
in Athens. Even his friend Pericles—the heroic general, builder of the
Parthenon, and founder of Greek democracy—could not protect him.
Anaxagoras was convicted of heresy and sentenced to death.
He fled home to Ionia, arriving in a city called Lampascus. But he would
not be silenced. His book was still published in Athens, and anyone could buy
it on the street for a drachma, according to Socrates. In his infamous trial,
that great philosopher was accused of sharing Anaxagoras’s blasphemous
beliefs. Plato’s Apology tells the story of how Socrates was accused of
“corrupting the youth” and of disbelieving in the gods of Athens. Socrates
defends himself by parodying his accusers.[8]
“Do you mean that I believe neither the Sun nor the Moon to be gods, like
other men?” Socrates says at one point, exasperated. The judge Meletus
retorts that yes, you think the Sun is a stone and the Moon is an Earth.
Socrates is annoyed: “My dear Meletus, do you think that you are prosecuting
Anaxagoras? You must have a very poor opinion of these men, and think
them illiterate, if you imagine that they do not know that the works of
Anaxagoras of Clazomenae are full of these doctrines.”[*5]
Socrates says the book was widely available, although no copies survived
from antiquity. A long list of Greeks built on Anaxagoras’s work in their own
ways, and their works survive, so those scholars are more well known than
Anaxagoras now.
—

Plato, born around 428 b.c.e., the year Anaxagoras died, wrote about
Anaxagoras’s ideas but he did not share in them. He was suspicious of
astronomy because he disliked any conclusion that was based on observation;
he thought we should study the mathematical motions of the heavenly bodies,
not the motions they appear to make as seen from our limited perspective. He
taught that reason can yield truth, but only pure reason that was unmarred by
experience.
Plato also gives us the idea of a supreme being. In his dialogue Timaeus,
God is a creator who deliberately crafts reality and creates time. Philosophy,
the study of knowledge and existence, flowed from this mathematical
construct. Plato was explaining something that the Scots of Warren Field had
figured out eight millennia earlier, albeit in a much more literal way. He
understood that the Moon and the Sun give us a concrete representation of
the passage of time. But to Plato, time was more than a means of reckoning
the past and figuring the future. For Plato, time was the originator of
philosophy; “number was the explanation of the world,” as the historian of
philosophy Bertrand Russell explains it. The cosmos owes its nature to the
numbers that compose its very essence—numbers that Pythagoras and his
students had revealed.
“God made the Sun so that animals could learn arithmetic,” Russell writes.
“The sight of day and night, months and years, has created knowledge of
number and given us the conception of time, and hence came philosophy.”[9]
Though he knew the Moon was crucial for timekeeping—it was the basis
of the Greek calendar, after all—Plato was more obsessed with ideal forms,
the nature and movement of the soul, and the concept of Mind, Nous, than he
was with the Moon. His most famous student, Aristotle, saw things
differently. Aristotle saw beauty in the order of things, but more than Plato,
he wanted to know why things were the way they were. He wanted to
understand natural processes, not just note that they occurred. This is why
Aristotle, not Anaxagoras, gets credit for ushering in what we’d consider the
pursuit of science. Science, according to Aristotle, is observation and the
unraveling of mystery in the pursuit of truth.

In Aristotle’s cosmology, De Caelo, the heavens originated at the Moon,
which he considered the boundary of the realm of perfection. To Aristotle,
perfection did not mean the divine or a deity, the way Plato or religious
people thought about it. Perfection to Aristotle meant the perfect ideal of
something. Everything below the Moon was in the realm of change,
corruption, and imperfection. The Moon and beyond were perfect. He
explained away the Moon’s mottled appearance by arguing that it was
contaminated by Earth.
The most important contribution of Aristotle’s Moon-centric cosmology
was the idea of astronomy as a scientific discipline. Anaxagoras took the first
small steps, but after Aristotle, astronomy was more science than art. It was
practiced in order to figure out the universe, purely for the sake of
understanding. Studying the Moon was the honorable work of high-minded
rational gentlemen, not cultish sky priests tasked with hedging bets for
twitchy sovereigns. Thanks to the Moon, people started imagining the skies as
a classroom, where lessons could be learned about the nature of reality. The
educated were to observe the cosmos, to explain their observations in theory,
and to check those theories against other observations.
Anaxagoras did this first—arguably, the Babylonians under Nabonidus
began a version of it even earlier—but Aristotle was the one who made
investigation his explicit mission. He founded his own school, called the
Lyceum, a version of the temple academies of the past and Plato’s own
Academy. Students were surrounded by maps, scrolls, and books, the first
library in the ancient world. They had laboratory tables for dissecting animals
and large lecture halls where students could hear Aristotle hold court. His
successors carried the ideals of the Lyceum into the future and ensured they
would reach all the way to the Enlightenment. The American historian Arthur
Herman, in his Plato-vs.-Aristotle biography The Cave and the Light, notes
that Aristotle saw his philosophy, including his Moon-centric cosmology, as a
complete picture of reality. It encapsulated everything. But “by stressing the
power of observation as the main source of knowledge, he had let the genie
run free,” Herman writes. Others would carry this scientific method forward,
make their own observations, and ultimately surpass Aristotle’s neatly

packaged cosmos. The concept of seeking astronomical knowledge for its
own sake would power the minds of the most consequential scientists to
follow, twenty centuries later: Nicolaus Copernicus, Johannes Kepler, and
Galileo Galilei.
But not yet.
—
To follow in the footsteps of Anaxagoras and Aristotle, the makers of the
Western scientific tradition first had to shake off these thinkers’ most
egregious mistakes. Both Anaxagoras and Aristotle believed, mistakenly, that
the Sun revolved around Earth. They probably believed this because of the
Moon; it makes a lot of sense, especially if you’re Mr. Mind and look to the
Moon to figure out reality.
At least one ancient Greek figured out the truth, but his works were lost
until after Copernicus independently made this realization a second time.
Aristarchus of Samos (310–230 b.c.e.) realized that when the Moon is
exactly half full, the angle between Earth, Moon, and Sun will be ninety
degrees. He calculated the ratio of the Earth-Moon distance to the Earth-Sun
distance and found out the Sun is much more distant than the Moon, though it
appears to be the same size in the sky. This revelation led to an absolutely
astonishing conclusion: The Sun is much bigger than the Moon. The monarch
of the night is therefore not on par with the ruler of the day. Aristarchus
realized that given these huge sizes and distances, Earth must revolve around
the Sun, and not the other way around. But nobody listened to him.
Despite these geocentric blunders, Greek astronomers after Anaxagoras
learned a great deal about the motions of the heavens. And they began to
realize they could use their knowledge of those heavenly movements to seize
control of time. Just like the Scots of Warren Field and the Únětice warlords
who hammered the Nebra sky disk, the classical Greeks knew that time is a
cudgel.
Writing around the same time as Anaxagoras, Meton of Athens figured out
that nineteen solar years and 235 lunar months are almost the same length:

the Metonic cycle. He introduced this cycle into the Attic calendar, which was
based on the cycles of the Moon. Then in 331, Alexander the Great, a student
of Aristotle’s, became the next to conquer Babylon, that great city on the
Euphrates. He ordered the Babylonians’ astronomical tablets translated into
Greek. The Greeks found a wealth of knowledge within, and Alexander
became another in a long line of rulers to grasp the immense power that
derives from being in charge of time. He who controls the calendar controls
society, as the builders of Warren Field knew, as the makers of the Nebra sky
disk knew, as the first farmers of Mesopotamia knew. Time confers power to
whoever commands it, and the Moon remained the simplest and most
predictable way to seize that command.
Working on behalf of Alexander, a fellow student of Aristotle’s named
Callippus used the Babylonian records and the knowledge of his Greek
predecessors to once again recalculate the length of the lunar month.
Callippus proposed a new calendar, which started on June 28, 330 b.c.e.,
eight months after Alexander captured Babylon.
The new calendar, which all later Greek astronomers used, runs for
seventy-six years, or four Metonic cycles. After 940 Moon months, at the end
of every fourth nineteen-year period, Callippus’s calendar drops a day. This
keeps the lunisolar calendar even better aligned with the seasons of the solar
year.
Building on the religiously motivated observations of the Babylonians and
the scientific reasoning of the Greeks, humans in antiquity got better and
better at making calendars. As a result of their increasingly precise
timekeeping, the Moon would fall, for the first time, from the height of its
influence over the human mind.
Alexander the Great had conquered the world, in a manner of speaking, by
the young age of twenty-five. He controlled a vast empire that stretched from
the Adriatic Sea to the northeastern edge of India. Long after his empire
collapsed, long after Alexander’s death in Babylon, a thirty-nine-year-old

Roman nobleman named Julius Caesar was vexed that he had not yet done
the same. But he ultimately would. And his mastery over the calendar,
especially as it related to the Moon, would quickly become even more
consequential than Alexander’s.
By 61 b.c.e., Julius Caesar was a well-liked general with outsized political
ambitions. He was a self-obsessed looker, a lover to countless women and
probably at least one man, an appreciator of fine art and jewels, and a skilled
military commander. After various heroic military exploits, he was appointed
governor of Spain, and brought it under Roman control. It was not enough for
him, however. Gaius Suetonius, a biographer of the Caesar dynasty, says
Julius saw a statue of Alexander the Great during his Spanish adventures and
“was overheard to sigh impatiently,” frustrated that he was still a mere
general.[10] Caesar vowed to make his own mark. So in 59 b.c.e., he returned
to Rome to run for consul, basically an elected co-executive over the Senate.
He needed allies, and fortunately for him, there were other ambitious, petty,
and arrogant military men to connect with. Caesar struck up an alliance with
two: Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus, commonly known as Pompey, and Marcus
Licinius Crassus. They formed a triple pact, jointly swearing to oppose all
legislation any one of them disliked. The First Triumvirate was a fragile
partnership, because each mistrusted the others.
The downfall of the First Triumvirate, their imbroglio, and the rise of
Caesar as emperor is one of the best-known stories from antiquity. We can
mostly thank William Shakespeare for that, though Caesar’s exploits were
renowned hundreds and hundreds of years before any English writer penned a
play about him. There is something among all his adventures that neither
Caesar nor Shakespeare gave much thought to, however. The Moon was
central to three important events in Caesar’s life—including its end.
—
A decade before Caesar ran for consul, Crassus was failing in his effort to
crush the enslaved gladiator rebellion led by Spartacus—the man played by
Kirk Douglas in the 1960 movie—and the Senate called in General Pompey

as backup. Crassus never got over this slight. Pompey, in turn, was annoyed
by Crassus’s reputation as the wealthiest man in Rome, and by Crassus’s
attempts to needle him and block him from spending state money on bribes.
Caesar intervened as a truce maker and solidified his own partnership with
Pompey by arranging a marriage between Pompey and Caesar’s daughter,
Julia.
While Pompey and Crassus were co-consuls, Caesar had full support to
rampage through Gaul and Britain, racking up military victories and glory for
Rome. He may have slaughtered as many as a million people[11] in the whole
region, though historians like Pliny the Elder later struggled to determine the
exact number, instead accusing him generally of “a crime against humanity.”
Then three key events happened between 55 and 53 b.c.e. that would
change everything.
On August 23, 55 b.c.e.,[*6] Caesar attempted to invade the southern coast
of England, claiming that the Britons had helped his enemies in Gaul.
(Suetonius said he was looking for pearls.) Archaeologists found evidence in
2017 c.e.[12] that his forces landed in Pegwell Bay, fifteen miles north of
Dover’s white cliffs, where Caesar set up a camp to prepare for the rest of the
legions to join him. But the cavalry was not coming. The Moon ensured that.
Caesar, who was used to the mild waters of the Mediterranean, was
unprepared for the high tide in the English Channel. His navigators weren’t
ready. It was a full Moon high tide, one of the two highest tides of the month
—which the Allies exploited two millennia later, on D-Day. Caesar’s ships
started taking on water. His troop transports were dashed against one another.
Some of his ships wrecked and others were so damaged they couldn’t make it
home. He turned tail and fled back to Rome, with neither conquest nor pearl.
But Caesar had nonetheless done something new. He had planted the flag
of Rome on the soil of a new world. At the time, some Romans weren’t even
sure Britain really existed. It was a thousand miles away, across the Alps and
multiple rivers and the English Channel. Caesar and his troops proved that it
was real, and they would be back to take it over.[*7]
In Caesar’s own telling, his standard-bearer from the Tenth Legion jumped
into the high waters to fight the Britons. “Jump down, soldiers,” he shouted,

[13] “unless you want to betray our Eagle to the enemy—I at least shall have
done my duty to the Republic and to my commander.”[*8]
The citizens of Rome were so impressed to hear of their Eagle banner on
British soil that the Senate ordered a twenty-day festival in thanksgiving,
which included gladiatorial games, feasts, and other activities that endeared
the people to their swashbuckling general. Crassus, Pompey, and others
watched it all with dismay. Crassus, still smarting from his unsuccessful
battles against Spartacus, also wanted to earn military glory. He figured a war
against the Parthian Empire, which controlled much of Mesopotamia and
what is now Iran and Turkey, would be “simple, glorious, and profitable,” in
the words of the Roman historian Appian.[14] Crassus decided to declare war.
The Senate tried to block him, because the Parthians had done Rome no
harm, but Crassus went anyway. In spring 53 b.c.e., he marched his army
through the Mesopotamian desert. On June 6, under a first-quarter Moon,
they were met by the forces of the Parthian general Surena. The Parthians
decimated the parched Roman troops and Crassus was beheaded.
Crassus died along with thousands of his men in a city the Romans called
Carrhae, in what is now Turkey. Carrhae had another name: Harran. Crassus
died seeking glory in the Moon City of the East. The city of Nabonidus’s
birth, the city where his mother, Adad-guppi, was High Priestess of Sin, the
city where Nabonidus restored the Moon God’s temple in defiance of the
priests of Babylon. Crassus never saw Rome again.
—
Everything fell apart after the Battle of Carrhae. Crassus was dead and so
was the First Triumvirate. Caesar’s only child, Julia, had died in childbirth a
few months before, and so had her infant. Caesar’s alliance with Pompey was
on the rocks. After Crassus was killed, a young bureaucrat named Gaius
Cassius Longinus acquired the Roman watch over Syria. Caesar had been in
Gaul for nine years, assembling and leading a military force numbering forty
thousand troops, and Pompey and the Senate decided that was long enough.
Caesar was called home and told to disband his army. He was infuriated, so

sometime around January 10, 49 b.c.e., nearly a full Moon, he made a fateful
decision. Standing on the banks of the Rubicon, the river that formed the
boundary between the wild lands of Gaul and civilized Roman Italy, he
mulled over his options. Suetonius says that Caesar and his men were visited
by an apparition, who seized a Roman trumpet, ran across the river, and blew
the instrument in an obvious omen from the gods. Appian says that Caesar
reflected thoughtfully, remarking, “If I refrain from this crossing, my friends,
it will be the beginning of misfortune for me; but if I cross, it will be the
beginning for all mankind.”[15] Suetonius, Appian, and Plutarch all say that
he crossed the river defiantly and, quoting an Athenian playwright, said, “Alea
iacta est.” The die is cast.
It was an act of civil war. Caesar was marching on his own city with his
own army. Pompey fled to Alexandria, where he hoped to hide and organize
his troops. But the pharaoh of Egypt, Ptolemy XIII, had Pompey killed.
Caesar declared war on Egypt, too, killed Ptolemy, and installed Cleopatra as
queen. The infighting in Rome now encompassed the entire Western world.
Caesar was made dictator in Rome. He held parades and festivals, made his
friend Mark Antony second-in-command, paid lavish bribes to politicians to
legitimize his takeover, and generally brought about the end of the Roman
Republic. He had everything at his disposal. And one of the first things he did
was remake the calendar, the ultimate power play, seizing command of the
order of time.
—
During the consular era in Republican Rome, the year was only 355 days
long and was based entirely on the cycles of the Moon. The first day of a
month, the Calends, from which we get the word “calendar,” took place when
the new Moon was first sighted. The Nones marked when there would be nine
days until the Ides. The Ides was the day of the appearance of the full Moon.
But as we know, the lunar year is not the same length as the solar year. To
make the calendar match the real seasons, Roman priests had the solemn duty
of occasionally adding an intercalary month to make up for that roughly ten-

day lunar lag. This would ensure that the Moon-directed civic calendar kept
in time with seasonal holidays, harvests, and festivals, just like the Nebra sky
disk and the Babylonian calendar accomplished.
But the Roman calendar keepers did not always add the intercalary month
correctly or on time. The Roman Republic was big and messy. Sometimes,
people in the far-flung provinces would not hear about an intercalation for
months after the fact. Imagine showing up for a holiday dinner after an
arduous journey, on horseback if you were lucky, and being told you missed
it because it happened six weeks ago. Sometimes the calendar makers were
distracted by other affairs of state; often, the authorities would miss an
intercalation during wartime. As a result, the calendar year and the natural
year were often weeks or months apart. The harvest festival might fall when
crops were still growing, and the spring months would fall during midwinter.
The calendar mishap happened during Caesar’s civil war, so he set out to fix
it.
Caesar likely had heard of a unified Moon-Sun calendar, called a lunisolar
calendar, while consorting with Cleopatra. The traditional Egyptian calendar
had 365 days, comprising twelve months of thirty days apiece, plus an extra
five intercalary days. To keep in time with the solar year, the Egyptian
calendar would include a sixth intercalary day, a leap day, every four years.
The Roman statesman Pliny the Elder writes in his Natural History that
Caesar worked with Sosigenes, an Alexandrian mathematician, to design his
own new calendar and produce a new astronomical almanac. The new
calendar divided the year into twelve months with thirty or thirty-one days,
except February, which has twenty-eight. An intercalary “leap day” is added
to February every four years. It’s essentially the same calendar we use now; it
has received just one update in the two millennia since.
Remember that because of the way Earth wobbles on its axis, a calendar
based on the movement of the Sun against the stars does not quite match the
time between spring equinoxes over many years. Those days when Earth is
not tilted toward or away from the Sun, giving us an almost equal day and
night, define the tropical year. The fix of Caesar and Sosigenes was still
slightly off: The time from one spring equinox to the next takes 365.2422

days, and Caesar’s calendar makers counted 365.25 days. Caesar’s calendar
drifted against the solar year by one day every 128 years.[*9] By decree,
Caesar reorganized the year 46 as a transitional year, lasting a whopping 445
days—convenient for the first year of a new dictatorship. Romans began their
year as usual, but knew they would have three extra months tacked on at the
end. After this final “year of confusion,” the new, far more accurate calendar
finally began on January 1, 45 b.c.e.
It was a dramatic improvement for timekeeping, but it was a tragedy for
our relationship to the Moon. For the first time in the history of our species,
the Moon was separated from time. The days slowly slipped out of sync with
the Moon’s cycles. The Ides were reduced to signify a numerical meaning, the
fifteenth day of a month, rather than the mark of the full Moon. The Julian
calendar was revised in 1517 and in 1582 c.e. so that Easter would align with
the spring equinox. We now call it the Gregorian calendar, but the version
Julius Caesar bestowed upon us is still the predominant marker of time in the
modern world, still separate from the Moon’s cycles.[*10]
Though he fixed the calendar, Caesar, beloved by the Roman people but
not its Senate, was increasingly under siege. In early 44 b.c.e., he mustered
one hundred thousand troops, intending to march them to the Moon City of
Harran/Carrhae and exact revenge for the death of Crassus. But a few days
before he was to leave for the East, his friends and enemies surrounded him
in the Senate house. Cassius, the official in Syria who was promoted after the
death of Crassus, led the conspiracy. They stabbed him twenty-three times on
March 15, 44 b.c.e., the Ides of March. The Moon was full.
The death of Caesar ushered in another few years of chaos, as his friends
and allies fought against the conspirators. His nephew Octavian, later known
as Caesar Augustus, ascended to power. The year after Julius Caesar died,
Augustus named what is now our seventh month of the year for his uncle:
July instead of Quintilis. Roman prestige and power spread through the
Mediterranean and the Levant, and into mainland Europe. Augustus’s

successor and stepson, Tiberius Caesar, levied taxes throughout the empire to
pay for its increasingly expensive exploits and public displays. Around 33 c.e.,
the Roman governor in Judea thought he could trick a man who had been
telling people not to worship Augustus or Julius Caesar, who by then had
both been deified. The governor, Pontius Pilate, thought the philosopher from
Bethlehem would also oppose paying taxes to the emperor, and challenged
him on it. “Render therefore unto Caesar the things which are Caesar’s; and
unto God the things that are God’s,” the man reportedly replied.[16]
The assassination of Julius Caesar started the downfall of Republican
Rome. But the first generations of emperors—of Caesars—ushered in a two-
hundred-year-long period of prosperity, expansion, and peace called the Pax
Romana. In this time of relative tranquility, thinkers in Rome continued the
tradition of Anaxagoras and Aristotle, turning skyward for answers to their
deepest questions.
Even though the Moon was divorced from the predominant Western
method of civil timekeeping, it still occupied a place of high regard, both in
the sky and in the minds of philosophers. If you are inclined to think about
the nature of things, how the cosmos is arranged, and what it all means, the
Moon will always be an interesting subject. It exists in a realm apart from
Earth but is clearly inseparable from Earth. Its appearance changes every
night, but it always returns. It is safe to gaze at the Moon for long periods,
unlike the blazing Sun. People used the Moon for quotidian reasons like
calendaring, but humans through the ages also just looked at it, enjoyed it,
and wondered about it.
Many philosophers came up with various reasons why it would not fall
down on us all, coming up with creative cosmologies that explained its
distance from Earth. Explanations ranged from a circular, flat terra firma
surrounded by a river, like a moat keeping the Moon from getting too close,
to a flat Earth protected by a heavenly top layer, like a cake with frosting.
Some believed that the celestial bodies were harmonic perfect spheres that
could never come into contact, lest they pollute one another. From the holy
patron of Mesopotamia to Aristotle, scholars had also imagined the Moon as
a haven for the divine and a harbor for souls. Plato’s dialogues suggested that

the Moon and Sun were places we might visit once departed, if we had lived a
good life. But arguably the most famous discussion of the Moon and the soul,
and arguably the most important, comes from the Roman statesman and
historian Plutarch of Chaeronea.
Plutarch, who lived between 45 and roughly 119 c.e., is best known for his
Moralia and Parallel Lives, paired biographies of Greek and Roman
statesmen and military leaders. He’s the main reason we know what we know
about Anaxagoras, and one of the reasons we know about Caesar’s adventures
abroad.
But Plutarch was also a prolific writer of philosophy, mostly in the form of
dialogues. His treatise On the Apparent Face in the Orb of the Moon, usually
abbreviated as De Facie, attempts to describe the nature of the Moon and its
relationship to the nature and fate of the soul. It’s practically a compendium
of early astronomy, covering Plato, Aristarchus, Anaxagoras, and more. The
mathematician and astronomer Johannes Kepler, who was keenly interested in
the Moon, produced his own translation of De Facie and considered
publishing it. He called it “the most valuable discussion of the Earth’s satellite
to come down to us from antiquity.”[17]
De Facie is a complicated dialogue among several young men who are out
for a stroll. As the characters promenade through the city, probably Rome,
they chat about the nature of the Man in the Moon.[*11] One character argues
the Moon’s apparent face is just a reflection of Earth’s oceans. (Seventeen
centuries later, astronomers still thought this was the case.) Some think the
Moon is a “mixture of air and gentle fire,” while others say it’s “a body of
weight and solidity” like Earth. The characters tease one another for their
unorthodox ideas, discussing geometry, attempting to deduce the Moon’s
size, and trying to determine why it does not fall down on Earth. They
compare its features to the Caspian Sea and the Pillars of Hercules (the rocky
outcrops that flank the Strait of Gibraltar). They even mention the bizarre
eclipse rituals of Babylon: “Most people have the custom of beating brasses
during eclipses and of raising a din and clatter,” Plutarch writes.
Then a character named Theon blurts out a remarkable notion.

“I should like before that to hear about the beings that are said to dwell on
the Moon—not whether any really do inhabit it but whether habitation there
is possible. If it is not possible, the assertion that the Moon is an Earth is
itself absurd, for she would then appear to have come into existence vainly
and to no purpose.”[18] Someone replies that sure, the Moon is probably
inhabited, but by an ethereal type of being who views our world as slimy and
gross and the Moon as the only true paradise.
This whole discussion is novel in written history. If people had posed these
questions before, no one had written them down, at least not in a manuscript
that survived the ages or the keen eye of the pious. What is the meaning of
the Moon? What is the point of the celestial bodies? Are we alone?
Humans were beginning to understand the Moon as a world unto itself.
They could imagine the Moon as a place with features that would look
familiar. Far from a mysterious, distant orb, the Moon was just like home.
This realization further diminished the Moon’s stature for us. As we
attempted to make sense of the Moon, it necessarily grew less mysterious. It
had already fallen from its secular, civic height in keeping time; now, through
the unromantic lens of philosophy, the Moon had become less holy, less
spectral, and less vital.
Plutarch’s characters ultimately established that the Moon was “a second
Earth,” some version of a terrestrial body. They agreed with Anaxagoras that
the Moon was Earthy. They even imagined other beings living on it. De Facie
provided the seed, and, sixteen centuries later, Kepler cultivated what became
the next seminal shift in the Moon’s history.
—
By the turn of the first millennium c.e., humans had realized that the Moon
was closer to Earth than the Sun is. It was no longer of equal stature to the
Sun, but a distant second. We had realized it was not a god, but a mere
object, and a plain one at that: not a star, not a heaven, just a rocky, spotted
ball like Earth. The Moon wasn’t even the Western world’s timekeeper
anymore, just an interloper in the solar-focused year. And philosophers had

begun to argue that it was neither perfect nor divine, but merely a place. As
Western civilization entered the age of Christianity, the Moon’s importance
was on the wane. And it remained in this diminished state for more than a
millennium, until the scientific revolutionaries of the seventeenth century
hurled it back to the forefront.
Skip Notes
*1 Another total eclipse crosses the United States on April 8, 2024, and after that, August 2044.
*2 We will get to Ptolemy, and his tortuous, vexatious epicycles, soon enough.
*3 Start out when the Moon is new. Find the crescent hanging low in the sky at dusk, before it’s dark
outside. The Moon will follow the Sun down, sinking on the western horizon before night fully falls.
The next night, look again. The Moon is thicker now, and a little higher in the sky when you first spot
it. Keep watching, and within a few days, the Moon is half illuminated—a pie sliced in two, with the
visible side facing the early-evening Sun. The Moon is full when the Sun is setting, and in the
following days, the Moon shrinks again. By last quarter, you can see it just ahead of the Sun in the
early-morning sky, once again with its luminous half facing our nearest star. The Sun lights the Moon.
It’s obvious, once you see the pattern often enough. And once you make this conjecture, that the Sun is
what lights the Moon, your repeated observations turn into something else. They turn into evidence.
*4 There’s no way to prove whether Anaxagoras’s meteorite came from the comet—it might have been
a coincidence—but comets do cause meteor showers and can cause meteorite impacts. Though the
vast majority of meteorites that land on Earth are cleaved from asteroids, some researchers believe a
few of Earth’s largest impacts have come from comets, in part because their orbits around the Sun
grant them high speeds when they get close to us.
*5 Socrates put together an impressive self-defense, and at one point his judges offered clemency
against the death penalty if he would admit to minor charges of impiety and corruption. He refused,
and poisoned himself by drinking hemlock tea. He died in 399 b.c.e.
*6 This date is according to the Julian calendar for 55 b.c.e. Caesar would not inaugurate that calendar
for another decade, but the dates of his exploits as written here were “translated,” in antiquity, to the
timekeeping system he made up.
*7 Julius Caesar never gave up, so he tried again the following year and succeeded.
*8 That Eagle symbol would last through the centuries. It was adopted by, among others, the Nazi Party
during World War II and the United States, where it became the insignia of the Apollo 11 mission and
the name of the human-inhabited spaceship that touched the Moon for the first time.
*9 Over the centuries, this added up to a lot, and the calendar was out of whack again.
*10 Many cultures still use a lunisolar calendar, notably the Hebrew, Chinese, Buddhist, Hindu, and
traditional Korean, Japanese, and other Asian calendars. The Islamic calendar is a lunar calendar. But

the global systems of finance, trade, and politics all use the Western timekeeping system.
*11 In Western folklore, as in Plutarch’s essay, the full Moon appears to have a face, depending on how
you look at it. Other cultures imagine a rabbit with large ears. If you’re looking for the apparent face,
the large, dark splotch that forms the “right eye” is Mare Imbrium, the Sea of Rains. This is where
geologist/astronaut Jack Schmitt raked up lunar soil in 1972, lifting troctolite 76535 off the Moon and
into history.

PART III
HOW WE MADE THE
MOON

My dear Kepler, what would you say of the learned here, who, replete
with the pertinacity of the asp, have steadfastly refused to cast a
glance through the telescope? What shall we make of all this? Shall we
laugh, or shall we cry?
—Galileo Galilei, Frammenti e lettere[1]
People through the ages used the Moon for timekeeping, for accumulating
power, and for understanding the world. But by the sixteenth century c.e., the
Moon mainly caused cosmological misunderstandings instead.
The societies of Mesopotamia were content to measure the motions of the
celestial bodies without trying to answer why things move the way they do.
They wanted to know the heavens for religious reasons. In their careful
studies, they learned a form of science, but the Moon was the fly in the
ointment. If we had no Moon going around Earth, maybe the Babylonians
would have understood things more accurately. They may have figured out
that when Venus appears as both morning and evening star, it’s because
Venus circles around the Sun. The weirdly backward motion of Mars, Jupiter,
and Saturn would also be explained by their mutual orbits of the Sun. People
may have grasped the truth that Earth, closer to the Sun with a shorter orbital
period, just overtakes the other planets sometimes, like a fast runner lapping a

slower one. If the Moon did not so obviously revolve around Earth, there may
never have been a reason for humans to believe that everything else did, too.
The classical Greeks were more intentional about studying cosmic reality,
but they were curtailed by their limited knowledge and their obsession with
how the universe was controlled—which many, from Anaxagoras to Aristotle,
thought was via Nous, some indistinct form of consciousness. Aristotle did
come up with explanations for the nature of the universe, making
observations and drawing conjectures in his De Caelo. But many of his
conclusions were way off. He wrote, self-assuredly but incorrectly, that the
Sun circles Earth just the way the Moon clearly does. Early thinkers fixated
on this fact—the Moon goes around Earth—and extrapolated from there: so
must everything else.
This arrangement is certainly logical, to be fair. There is no obvious reason
why different celestial orbs should do different things. Especially in the early
Christian world, when Scripture was considered infallible and the only
mechanism for understanding reality, why would anyone assume the Sun and
Moon do not behave the same way? Moreover, why would such a perfect
system, endowed by a perfect creator, have more than one means of heavenly
motion? The geocentric model was easy to accept because it made sense. As
long as you didn’t ask too many questions.
By the turn of the seventeenth century c.e., people did start asking those
questions, or at least they finally began writing them down and publishing
them. Men like Thomas Harriot, Johannes Kepler, and Galileo Galilei
changed the way we saw the cosmos. They were the first modern scientists,
and they bequeathed to us a new era and a new way of thinking. Confronted
with unfamiliar lands beyond the seas, the scientific thinkers of this
generation realized the received wisdom of antiquity—and the Church—was
not the last word on the world. Confronted with new realms on display in the
heavens, they realized knowledge could be sought, and then attained. These
men promoted and then proved the revolutionary heliocentric theory of
Nicolaus Copernicus. They began to figure out, for the first time, how the
heavens are actually arranged. Using the height of modern technology, the
telescope, they were finally able to learn about the cosmos using more than

geometry and conjecture, the way Anaxagoras and Aristarchus and Plutarch
had learned. These men could see like no one before them, and the first place
they looked was the Moon. But they did not merely see the universe more
closely. They saw it more truthfully. In the seventeenth century, people finally
saw the heavens as a tapestry of detail and realism. Humans put away
superstition[*1] and the ancient world dissipated like a fog lifting, a fog
obscuring the true Moon.
As it did under Plutarch a millennium and a half earlier, human
understanding of the Moon took a giant leap forward. By the late seventeenth
century, the Moon resolved into a three-dimensional place. Anaxagoras was
right: It had mountains and valleys, and it was Earthy. Plutarch was right:
This recognizable Earthiness could be mapped. The Moon had posed a
problem in our cosmology for centuries, but when it finally became real to us,
it revealed the truth.
The rupture between the real world and the Holy Word finally cracked open
a half century after the work of a quiet, pious university student christened
Mikołaj Kopernik (he Latinized his name after attending college). But the
origins of this schism go back much further, to the earliest stirrings of
Christianity, to the Roman Empire, to the world’s most magnificent library. A
pioneering scholar sat under the eaves of the Library of Alexandria and paged
through its scrolls, thousands of them. The library in the city of Alexander,
the great conqueror who died in Babylon, had stood for centuries by the time
the scholar worked there. Its collections weathered the sieges of Julius Caesar
and his friend Mark Antony and Caesar’s nephew Octavian, and the library
was restored after Rome took over the Egyptian city when Octavian defeated
Cleopatra and Antony in 30 b.c.e.
The scholar’s surname, Ptolemy, echoed the Egyptian dynasty that ruled
the region for centuries, but his first name was Claudius, a Roman appellation
indicating his citizenship in the great new empire. Claudius Ptolemy was the

only great astronomer of Roman Alexandria, and he used the library’s
contents to come up with a mathematically justifiable world order.
Before Ptolemy, a simple, Aristotelian, Earth-centered universe was the
most widely accepted cosmology. The other planets, the Moon, and the Sun
traced a circular path—because circles are a “perfect” shape—around Earth.
The celestial bodies do not actually do this, of course, and that is obvious if
you watch them. So philosophers performed mental gymnastics to
satisfactorily “save the phenomenon” of the Sun’s apparent rotation around
Earth. A theory of cosmology must account for the actual cosmos, after all.
Claudius Ptolemy performed incredible feats of mental goaltending to
achieve this save. And it is his work that made geocentrism so persistent in
Western culture.
We know very little about his life, but he was probably born around 100
c.e. and lived in Alexandria. He was, from a young age, enthralled by
astronomy. Working in that great library, with access to every important text
ever inscribed up to that point, Ptolemy made himself one of the world’s first
true global scholars, marrying the collected knowledge of Babylon, Greece,
Egypt, and Rome. Ptolemy’s masterwork synthesizes a millennium’s worth of
Aristotelian physics, Archimedean math, Babylonian astronomy, Euclidean
geometry, and his own contributions. It is an impressive feat of scholarship
and original thinking, and it is utterly wrong.
Ptolemy called it Mathematike syntaxis (Mathematical Arrangement). But
through the Arabs who kept it safe and translated it, the treatise became
known by the first word in its Arabic title: The Greatest Compilation, 
 or Al-majisṭī. Almagest.
Ptolemy’s model of the heavens placed a stationary Earth at its center, just
as thinkers before him had done through the ages. But Ptolemy was the first
to attempt to explain how this arrangement could work, using what might
generously be considered fuzzy math. He made a series of omissions and
intentional cheats that attempted to explain the different movements of the
Sun, Moon, planets, and stars. The most important is Ptolemy’s description of
an idea that dates to a few centuries earlier, from Hipparchus, the one who
figured out the precession of the equinoxes: the epicycles. It’s a convoluted

way to work out circular orbits for all the planets, and it calls for a series of
circles moving around the circumference of larger circles. It’s like a
Spirograph for the solar system.
In Ptolemy’s system, the cosmos is arranged in a circle with an imaginary
point at its center. To one side of that imaginary point, barely offset from the
middle, sits Earth. On the other side of the imaginary point, opposite Earth,
is another pretend location Ptolemy called the “equant.” All the planets orbit
Earth in a circular path called a “deferent.” Each body that goes around Earth
sweeps out from the equant, at equal angles, to move along its deferent. The
equant is essentially a tool that enables the planets to move at different speeds
along the deferent, because the planets do appear to move across the sky at
different speeds. These are combined with a second orbital scheme, called an
“epicycle.” to explain retrograde motion. A planet’s epicycle sits on the
outside of its deferent. Imagine coffee-drip rings overlapping on a café table,
forming concentric circles. Ptolemy posed that the epicycle spins counter to
the deferent, so sometimes an object going around Earth would appear to
slow down or move backward, thus explaining retrograde motion.
So now you have Earth inside a large circle that represents the movements
of the other celestial bodies. They are also running laps along their own mini
circles, which sit on the edge of the larger circle. Ptolemy’s system of circles
was thereby wrangled into a neat arrangement that predicted planets’
locations with great accuracy. But the Moon was a problem for him.
To describe the motions of the Moon using these schemes, Ptolemy
needed to calculate its distance from Earth and figure out where the Moon
would orbit on its deferent. He used lunar eclipses to do this, because lunar
eclipses were the best way for astronomers to make precise measurements of
celestial positions. When the Moon is awash in Earth’s shadow during a lunar
eclipse, the Sun is, by definition, 180 degrees opposite the Moon’s position.
This is why the Moon appears red, as it reflects the sunsets of the day before
and the sunrises of the day to come. When you know precisely where the
Moon and Sun are in the dome of the sky, you can measure the locations of
stars and planets, too. It’s like checking a celestial compass to orient yourself.

Ptolemy consulted the Babylonian eclipse prediction catalogs and found a
few upcoming eclipses that would have Sun-Moon arrangements of similar
duration and geometry. They occurred on April 5, 125  c.e.; May 6, 133;
October 20, 134; and March 6, 136. He also consulted old Babylonian eclipse
records, which included the precise time of lunar eclipses.[*2]
Ptolemy used the eclipses to come up with what amounts to a
mathematical fudge: The Moon’s deferent is tilted with respect to the others.
But if this were true, the Moon’s distance from Earth would change
dramatically—by a factor of two or more—over the course of its orbit. At
apogee, under Ptolemy’s model, it would be twice as far away as at perigee.
The marines at Tarawa Atoll would have seen a tiny half-Moon waning away,
and been shocked two weeks later when it grew immense. This funhouse
mirror Moon is not a real thing, of course. Though it does draw closer at
times and present us with “supermoons,” its apparent size is very similar,
especially on the scales the ancients would have measured; on the Moon and
its extremely complicated motions, the careful Ptolemy was not even close to
correct.[2]
Islamic Arabs, who carried the light of consciousness through the Dark
Ages, were apparently the only scholars to doubt Claudius Ptolemy’s bizarre
plan. From the ninth through early fourteenth centuries, many Islamic
scholars recalculated some of Ptolemy’s more cumbersome notions,
improving on his planetary models. Some were completely unimpressed with
him.
“Ptolemy assumed an arrangement that cannot exist,” scoffed the Arab
mathematician and astronomer Ibn al-Haytham (Latinized to Alhazen), the
father of optics, in a withering critique called “Doubts Concerning Ptolemy.”
“The fact that this arrangement produces in his imagination the motions that
belong to the planets does not free him from the error he committed in his
assumed arrangement, for the existing motions of the planets cannot be the
result of an arrangement that is impossible to exist.”[3]
Ptolemy’s crime, according to al-Haytham, is not just that his ideas were
wrong, but that he ignored the problems inherent in his ideas, thereby denying
that there could be any better ones. “In short, Ptolemy’s approach is not the

right path to be followed if science is to make any progress at all,” writes
Hassan Tahiri, a twenty-first-century c.e. scholar of Arab science and
philosophy in the Middle Ages.[4]
Outside the Islamic world, however, nobody seems to have asked many
questions. Almagest and its complicated series of circles became the accepted
explanation for the heavens above, and its ideas were incorporated into
Western thought during the next fourteen centuries. With the help of a new,
unquestioning Christian philosophy, Ptolemy’s Earth-centered cosmos
calcified, and for the most part, scholars left it at that.
We can thank Saint Augustine of Hippo, in part, for the hold Ptolemy’s
idea had over the Western conception of the world order. In the early fifth
century c.e., Saint Augustine (354–430) looked inside Plato’s cave and
developed a new Christian philosophy. Plato had preferred the playground of
thought over actual experiment because he believed our senses and our
experiences deceive us of the truth—they are merely the shadows of reality.
Augustine’s Neoplatonic Christian philosophy likewise held that facts are
merely illustrative of truth, not starting points for experiments that would lead
to new questions. Augustine argued that ideal forms exist only in the mind of
God, and that the reality that we can detect is just an illusion. To Augustine,
the path to knowledge and enlightenment, truth and God, was reachable only
by turning inward. Augustine’s philosophy formed the pillars of the Christian
church, and few would try to modify it[*3] until the Enlightenment. For
centuries afterward, the Church taught that truth was revealed only through
Scripture.
Almagest fit nicely into this Neoplatonic worldview. At the very least, the
prevalence of this school of thought helps explain why, for centuries, people
accepted Almagest and hardly anyone thought to ask, “But what about the
Moon?”
—
Scholars translated Almagest from Greek into Arabic around 827 c.e., and
after Christians conquered the city of Toledo in 1085, they translated it into

Latin. Almagest remained the most popular astronomical text into the
fifteenth century. But with the fall of the Byzantine Empire, a new intellectual
era dawned.
In April 1453 c.e., the Turks laid siege to Constantinople, the seat of the
Byzantine Empire for eleven centuries. The night of May 22, 1453, the Moon
rose darkened and blood red, eclipsed. Seven days later the city fell to the
invading Turks. As the empire fell apart, Greek-speaking scholars fled West
toward mainland Europe, bearing with them their treasured texts, their
translations of the works from antiquity, and their tremendous body of
knowledge. One of these migrants was a man named Basilios Bessarion, who
studied philosophy in Constantinople. He vowed to reunite the Greek and
Latin worlds, both their religions and their faith traditions, and in this quest
he saved huge swaths of material that may otherwise have been destroyed by
the new Turkish regime.[5] Pope Eugene IV made him a cardinal, and
Bessarion traveled the Latinate world, accumulating a huge library and
befriending scholars. Among the texts in his collection was a copy of
Almagest. Then, in 1460, Bessarion traveled to Vienna and had a fateful
encounter with a young man named Regiomontanus.
Bessarion commissioned Regiomontanus and another scholar to produce a
new translation of Almagest. It would be used for teaching, so they cut it in
half and included a handy reader’s guide—essentially a SparkNotes version of
the most important mathematical treatise to come down from antiquity.
The Epitome of the Almagest was a pleasant abridgment of Ptolemy’s
masterwork, and like modern literary criticism, the translators had no
problem pointing out errors, either of fact or of omission. Chief among
Regiomontanus’s critiques was the fact that Ptolemy had been wrong about
the Moon. In 1491, an eighteen-year-old student at the University of Kraków
picked up a copy of the Epitome and grew intrigued.
—
Though Copernicus revered Ptolemy as “that most astounding of
astronomers,” he was skeptical of the elaborate orbits Ptolemy’s cosmology

required. They were messy. They were too complicated. They didn’t make
sense as a unified system of heavenly order, because each planet required its
own set of finely tuned movements.
“I often considered,” he wrote in 1514, “whether there could perhaps be
found a more reasonable arrangement of circles.”[6]
To figure it out, Copernicus turned to the Moon.
Like Ptolemy, Copernicus watched three lunar eclipses, in 1511, 1522,
and 1523, using them as a celestial compass.[7] Then he used his eclipse
observations to correct Ptolemy’s lunar motions. Under the Copernican
system, the Moon was not supposed to grow huge in the sky and shrink again
over the course of the month. He knew that the Moon occasionally blocks the
Sun, demonstrating that the Moon revolves around Earth. “In expounding on
the Moon’s motion,” he wrote, apparently without irony, “I do not disagree
with the ancients’ belief that it takes place around the Earth.”[8]
On March 12, 1529, Copernicus witnessed the Moon block the planet
Venus from view: “I saw Venus beginning to be occulted by the Moon’s dark
side midway between both horns at one hour after sunset,” he wrote in On the
Revolutions. He used this occultation, and others from the star catalogs of
antiquity, to deduce the motions of Venus. He was beginning to realize that
Ptolemy was wrong about more than just the Moon’s weirdly tilted deferent.
He began to understand the truth: that the immobile Earth is not at the center
of a whirling universe, but that we inhabit but one of many planets, which all
revolve around the Sun.
Historians have long tried to figure out why Copernicus was struck with
this revelation, which was completely unique as far as he knew.[*4]
Some modern scholars suggest that Copernicus knew of research from
thirteenth-century Islamic astronomers who were members of the so-called
Maragha School. These astronomers worked at Maragha Observatory in what
is now northern Iran, under the leadership of the Persian polymath Nasir al-
Din al-Tusi.
Al-Tusi and others came up with planetary models that eased some of
Ptolemy’s especially strained notions, including detailed geometrical solutions
for the orbit of the Moon. Some of the math behind these models also

appears in Copernicus’s treatise, suggesting Copernicus might have known of
the Maragha School’s work. Although scholars still debate this history, it
seems reasonable to assume that if Bessarion and Regiomontanus introduced
Almagest to Europe, then other people brought different geometrical and
mathematical works from the Arab-speaking world, too.[9]
We will probably never know; the chain of custody of such ideas may be
all but impossible to recover. For his part, Copernicus writes that he was just
bothered by Ptolemy’s inelegance and, moreover, the system did not seem
sufficiently divine.
“After long reflection, I began to be annoyed that the movements of the
world machine, created for our sake by the best and most systematic Artisan
of all, were not understood with greater certainty by the philosophers,” he
wrote in his book’s dedication, which was to Pope Paul III. He mentions that
he read the works of earlier philosophers, notably Plutarch, and noticed a few
short references to other ancients who thought Earth moved around the Sun.
He figured he might as well imagine what could be, he wrote to the pope.
Copernicus’s groundbreaking theory had taken shape by 1514, but he did
not publish it for almost thirty years, until he had reached old age. In the
meantime, he worked as a priest and a doctor, but never neglected astronomy.
He may have hesitated to publish because he understood the consequences of
doing so. Even with the most religious, worshipful intent—even with a
dedication to the pope himself—authoring a missive calling for Earth’s
displacement was revolutionary, even heretical. The very act of wondering
about it was revolutionary. In Copernicus’s world, repeated observation as a
means of building knowledge, or what we would consider the definition of
scientific pursuit, was rarely combined with the impertinence of asking hard
questions.
“The men who founded modern science had two merits which are not
necessarily found together,” the historian of philosophy Bertrand Russell said
of Copernicus. “Immense patience in observation, and great boldness in
framing hypotheses.”[10]
Anaxagoras had offered up some bold hypotheses, to be sure. And no one
can doubt the incredible patience and reverent repetition of the sky priests of

Babylon. But hardly anyone had both merits at the same time. “And,” Russell
says flatly, “no one in the Middle Ages possessed either.”
But there was something Copernicus, like Anaxagoras and his fellow
pluralists, still lacked: proof. There was no way to demonstrate Copernicus’s
bold claim, and no way to show that the heavenly bodies revolved around the
Sun and not Earth. It would fall to the next generation to show their work and
convince the world. And they would use the Moon to do it.
The oldest images of the Moon seen through a telescope are, frankly, bland.
They are scrawled in ink on yellowing parchment and surrounded by notes,
commentary on the weather, and other random scribblings. Though some are
detailed, many are so vague you’d be forgiven for wondering whether they
even depict the Moon at all. They were made by Thomas Harriot, someone
whose sharp intellect and mathematical prowess did not necessarily translate
to artistic skill, which is one of the reasons his drawings are not better known
and he does not get the credit he deserves for bringing the Moon closer to
home.
Crescent Moons, gibbous Moons, full Moons, sketched by Harriot, are
found in a sheaf of paperwork stored unceremoniously in a storeroom. The
storeroom is tucked in the basement of a grand country estate called Petworth
House, one of England’s proudest patrician mansions, located in a tiny village
in West Sussex, fifty miles southwest of London. Upstairs, the palatial house
is adorned with Romantic paintings by J. M. W. Turner and some of the most
ornate furnishings imaginable. Downstairs and through a nondescript hall you
can find a huge leather volume the size of an average cubicle desk, stuffed
with Moons. Only Alison McCann can show them to you, and you can view
them only with permission from one of England’s aristocratic lords, the 7th
Baron Leconfield, 2nd Baron Egremont, descendant of the Earl of
Northumberland, known to history readers as the World War I scholar Max
Egremont.

On a clear spring morning, McCann, Lord Egremont’s family archivist, sat
across from me in her office and poured us each a cup of coffee. The huge
binder full of Moons would wait a moment; proper English etiquette insisted
that we chat first. As I sipped, she told me about Harriot, English
mathematician and scientist, and the creator of this bundle of Moons.
Harriot ought to be better known, because he was one of Elizabethan
England’s finest scholars. He is considered the father of modern algebra and
at his time was regarded as the equal of any Renaissance thinker. He might
be the greatest mathematician Oxford has ever produced. He served as a
navigator and cartographer to Sir Walter Raleigh, one of Queen Elizabeth I’s
eminent transatlantic explorers. Harriot was one of the first Englishmen to
make the journey to the New World, sailing to the doomed Roanoke Colony
in modern-day North Carolina. His A Briefe and True Report of the New
Found Land of Virginia might be the earliest European account of Native
Americans, and of the continent’s flora and fauna. He learned and translated
the Carolina Algonquian language and learned from the Algonquin people
how to smoke dried tobacco leaves. Harriot’s writings helped make tobacco
trendy among the elite, and its tangy, yellowy smoke soon spread beyond
taverns and inns.
—
Around 1590, Harriot and Raleigh befriended a younger man, a mildly
deaf, dark-haired, aquiline-nosed, would-be alchemist known as Henry Percy.
He was the 9th Earl of Northumberland,[*5] the heir to a prominent Catholic
family who had run into trouble with the monarchy. Percy’s father, the eighth
earl, had committed suicide in the Tower of London, where he was
imprisoned after being accused of conspiring to replace Queen Elizabeth with
Mary, Queen of Scots. By 1598, Harriot was working for the charismatic
Percy, known as “the Wizard Earl,” who paid him a lifetime pension and gave
him rooms in Syon House, at the Northumberland estate on the Thames.
Harriot was able to live a scholar’s life, and he didn’t even have to publish.

“He had a house, he had a salary, and he could just indulge in pure
science,” McCann told me.
Harriot’s breakthroughs mounted quickly. In 1601, Harriot discovered the
law of refraction, which predicts how much light will bend when it travels
through a material. The law had eluded Harriot’s contemporary and frequent
correspondent, the inimitable German astronomer Johannes Kepler.
“Measuring refractions, here I get stuck. Good God, what a hidden ratio!”
Kepler wrote ruefully in 1603.[11] Figuring out the law of refraction should
have won Harriot enduring fame, but he didn’t seem to care much about that.
His former student and friend Sir William Lower berated him for his “too
great reservednesse,” arguing in a 1610 letter that Harriot should take credit
for his discoveries, particularly his work in algebra. Harriot’s decorum “hath
robd [him] of these glories,” Lower wrote.[*6]
Harriot was a painstakingly thorough scientist, long before that word was
invented, and made measurements in careful, repeated experiments that
ultimately led him to new conclusions. He observed sunspots and noticed they
appeared to be moving west, and used their appearance to correctly deduce
the Sun’s rotation period, though at the time nobody thought the Sun rotated
at all. Though Sir Francis Bacon gets credit for originating the modern
Western method of experiment-based science, Bacon himself said in 1608
that he was inspired by Harriot, who was “already inclined to
experiments.”[12]
In early 1609, Harriot got his hands on a new invention, which the
Dutchman Hans Lippershey had tried to patent in October 1608. Spectacle
makers were grinding glass in larger sizes and combining them to produce the
world’s first telescopes. Harriot bought one that magnified his sight by six
times, and had it mounted on the roof of his quarters at Syon House.
On July 26, 1609, he became the first person to draw an image of the
Moon as seen through a telescope. The Moon was a five-day-old waxing
crescent, and Harriot placed it at the top of his page, the crescent arcing over
the parchment.
I stared as, with gloved hands, McCann removed this drawing from its red
folder. The first telescopic Moon image in human history looked very much

like it does on the Nebra sky disk: thicker than a scythe, bulging, growing
larger but not yet half full. It is not a beautiful image. Awkward and jagged, it
seems as if its creator were unsure of his hand. Harriot drew a full circle, but
sketched a ragged arc, forming the bridge of the nose of the Man in the
Moon, to mark the boundary between the illuminated crescent and the darker
part of the sphere. The full circle may have been visible through reflected
earthshine, but it’s not clear if Harriot wanted to convey that. He sketched
some furry-looking features in its midsection, but they are vague and poorly
rendered, not really representative of the familiar Moon.
McCann set the drawing on a cloth, and I craned my neck, trying to view
it from a new angle. I thought about Vince Gaffney suddenly seeing the
calendar of Warren Field, and I pulled up a modern Moon map on my phone.
Comparing the two images, I could see that Harriot’s furry features might
depict the Sea of Tranquility, the spot where Apollo 11 would land three and
a half centuries later.
This image predated the drawings of that talented Tuscan, Galileo Galilei,
by four months.
To celebrate the four hundredth anniversary of the first telescope use, in
2009, the Egremont estate shared the image with the British press, and
McCann was inundated with queries. She was frustrated by the attention and
the sudden realization that Harriot, not Galileo, was the first to view the
Moon through spyglass. The Egremont family had known the whole time. “It
really annoys the Italians. They borrowed this for an exhibit about Galileo,
and I bought a copy of the catalog because it’s such fun how dismissive they
are of Harriot,” she added with a grin.
The drawings are monumental not because they are good, and not just
because they are first, but because of what they are. Harriot was the first
person to record the Moon—or any astronomical object—through a
telescope. He was also the first person to grapple with what that meant. The
telescope had finally let humans slip the surly bonds of Earth[13] and see
beyond it, beyond ourselves, even. What Harriot saw defied the imagination,
even philosophy. For Harriot, there were no introspective ramblings on the
Moon’s features, no fervent or religious embellishment of its chalky face. He

did not even emulate Copernicus, his more recent forebear, and attempt to
ascribe any scriptural beauty or heavenly order. Harriot was educated in the
classics and he knew Plutarch’s De Facie, but even his distant Moon-watching
kin could not prepare him for actually seeing literal terrestrial features on
another world. It must have astounded him. At no point in human history had
anyone ever seen the Moon magnified the way Harriot now could. To
document it, perhaps to share it with others, Harriot rushed to record what he
saw in the form of a picture. He must have known, even though he would
never publish them, that his uncertain scribbles would be more valuable than
any words he could jot down.
Galileo knew this, too, and, trained as a painter, he did a much better job
conveying what he saw. Galileo’s masterwork Sidereus nuncius (Starry
Messenger) was published in March 1610. Harriot received one of the first
copies, hot off the press,[*7] and read it avidly. Correspondence between
Harriot and his friend Lower show their mutual excitement about Galileo’s
work and their own enjoyment of the telescope, which they call “the
perspective cylinder.” At one point, Lower asks Harriot to “send me also one
of Galileo’s books if any yet be come over and you can get them.”[14] As a
scholar of renown, in frequent contact with men like Kepler, it’s likely he
received books like Starry Messenger and Kepler’s Conversation with the
Starry Messenger from the authors themselves.
McCann showed me how Harriot’s own drawings progressed after he saw
what his Italian counterpart had produced. On some pages, he drew crescent
Moons side by side, or small half-Moons accompanied by algebraic tables. He
apparently liked to plan ahead, because McCann showed me several pages
that had been marked with a perfect circle, ready to be used as a Moon
template, though Harriot didn’t use them all. One page in particular may have
made the distant ancestors of the Percy family, the Scots of Warren Field,
quite happy. It shows a sequence of twelve circles, each with a different Moon
phase, from crescent to gibbous to full.
On September 11, 1610, Harriot sketched a thin crescent with a very
prominent dimple, which again may have been the Sea of Tranquility. “The
appearance was notable, rugged in many places,” he wrote, complete with

“ilands and promontoryes.” “But I could not get down the figure of all,
because I was troubled with the reume,” he concluded. He had a cold and
went to bed.[15]
Harriot also produced the first drawing of a completely full Moon.
Finished in 1611, it is heavily annotated with letters and numbers, which
Harriot used to mark his position as his eyes darted from the eyepiece to the
page. It is divided into light and dark, maria and plains, an unpretentious-
looking and mathematically precise diagram. He was a mapmaker, after all,
and his drawings were a form of cartography. He even wrote down his
telescope’s magnification, like a sort of map key. By 1613, Harriot had
produced two full-Moon maps, many with features you could easily recognize
in today’s high-definition imagery.
Though the drawings are drab in comparison to Galileo’s, they are
nonetheless extraordinary. They represent a forward shift in thinking that
married raw observations with accurate mathematical interpretation.[16]
Harriot’s maps would have amazed Plutarch and Ptolemy, not to mention the
Neolithic Moon watchers of Scotland. His maps were especially impressive
given the rudimentary telescopes he worked with. The level of detail in his
full-Moon map would be unequaled for another half century, until people
started grinding high-quality telescope glass, leading to a seminal lunar map
by the Polish cartographer Johannes Hevelius in 1647.
—
When it came time to document the first-ever close-up of the Moon, pictures
were all Harriot managed. It wasn’t as though Harriot couldn’t write; in the
mysterious Roanoke Colony, he recorded the flora, fauna, and native North
American inhabitants in assiduous detail. But he did not attempt to offer a
high-level interpretation of his observations, nor were his Moon drawings
accompanied by any attempt to rearrange the heavens. Often, he didn’t even
annotate them. Because he didn’t publish, Harriot’s diary entries are the only
version of his history with the Moon. We can’t know what Harriot wondered
as he stared at the large bright crescent through his spindly brass spyglass. We

don’t know why he never published his drawings. Biographers have suggested
that Harriot cared more about living his life than about attaining fame. He
may have hesitated to invite more scrutiny upon himself because he was an
atheist, or at least suspected to be one. He never had a financial need to
publish; Raleigh and then Percy kept him gainfully employed, and he had no
reason to impress any benefactors or religious elite, unlike his contemporaries
Kepler and Galileo. But it may have been political drama that kept Harriot
quiet, and that may explain why his papers wound up at Petworth House.
Around 1597, when Harriot first went to work for Henry Percy, Queen
Elizabeth I refused to name the Scottish king James VI as her heir. This set
off ferocious infighting among factions who fought to succeed “the Virgin
Queen” as the ruler of England and the empire. When she died at age sixty-
nine, in 1603, James became king anyway. The palace intrigue made the new
monarch view many elites, including Raleigh and his friends, with suspicion.
Then, on November 5, 1605, conspirators including Guy Fawkes, Henry
Percy’s relation Thomas Percy, and several others were arrested for
attempting to blow up the Houses of Parliament. The infamous Gunpowder
Plot led to a series of side investigations, and even Harriot himself was briefly
imprisoned, accused of casting a horoscope of King James as a form of dark
magic. Eventually, Henry Percy, Harriot’s friend and patron, was imprisoned
in the Tower of London. He remained there for sixteen years, as Harriot
studied optics, saw Halley’s Comet, and mapped out his observations of the
Moon.
After Percy was released, he was barred from living in London and retired
to Petworth House, McCann told me. There, he received Harriot’s papers
after the eminent scientist died of cancer on July 2, 1621.[*8] Egremont,
Henry Percy’s distant descendant, is now the steward of 453 pages of
Harriot’s work. McCann knows them all well.
“I don’t think I’ve ever got blasé about it,” she told me. “What I love is
actually the feeling that you can almost make these people live on. They are
only little glimpses; if you think logically about what’s left, it’s not a complete
record. It’s not every bit of paper that was ever created. But you get these
little glimpses of people’s lives.”

I thought about Harriot on my train back to London. The Sussex
countryside and its lemon-yellow rapeseed fields melted into steel and glass as
my train rumbled toward the great city. Inside Petworth House, surrounded
by Turner’s paintings and the grandest, most absurdly ornate furnishings I
have ever seen, I might as well have been a courtier in the seventeenth
century. In London two hours later, I breezed through tube stations, climbed
onto Kensington High Street, and stood at a counter to drink an espresso. It
was jarring, like traveling into the future.
Did Harriot feel something similar, squinting through his 6x magnification
lens? Harriot and Galileo, Copernicus and Kepler, all these brothers in
science, must have felt the weight of their discoveries; they certainly knew
they were charting a new course. They talked about it with one another in
letters, offering praise in their correspondence, and clearly enjoyed the
adventure of discovery. But did they know they stood on a precipice between
two worlds? Did Copernicus really understand that his certainty about the
“chief world systems,” as Galileo called the heliocentric and geocentric
models, would upend society as he knew it? For that matter, did Galileo?
Even if they did not fear the truth, the reality of the Moon must have been
unsettling. Through observations that began with Harriot, it became clear that
the Moon was not made of “ether” or some other substance. It was rocky,
mountainous, cratered, and contained dark areas that looked like seas. It was
a world. It was, like brave Anaxagoras had said, “Earthy.” Harriot saw it this
way himself. McCann showed me where Harriot named one feature “The
Caspian,” which appears isolated on his drawing, as the most “land-locked”
watery feature, just like Earth’s Caspian Sea. The Caspian corresponds to the
area later named Mare Crisium, on the near side of the Moon’s northeast
corner, northeast of the Sea of Tranquility. Mare Crisium means “Sea of
Crises.”
It’s an apt name for the only lunar feature Harriot cared to label. He
observed the Moon at a time of crisis in his own country and in the broader
Western world. While Harriot stared through his perspective cylinder,
Galileo’s observations and astute writing upended the Aristotelian, ethereal
order. Galileo’s beautiful drawings went a step beyond Harriot’s. He

illustrated what he saw, making a valiant effort to show others how things
really were, but on top of that he offered his own philosophical interpretation.
A half century after he published them, Copernicus’s ideas would change
everything for both Galileo and a young Johannes Kepler, at university in
Germany.
In 1595, Kepler dove into Copernicus’s work in much the same way that
Copernicus had studied the Epitome of the Almagest. On a scholarship to
learn philosophy at the University of Tübingen, Kepler read Plutarch’s De
Facie and Copernicus’s On the Revolutions, and proclaimed that the
Copernican system was “an inexhaustible treasure of truly divine insight into
the wonderful order of the world and all bodies therein.”[17] Kepler decided
to focus his dissertation on the Moon, aiming to use its motions to prove
Copernican ideas. Amid his studies, he emulated his ancient predecessors and
used shadows to determine the height of some lunar surface features, as he
would later explain to Galileo.[18]
Around the same time, about 475 miles to the south, at the University of
Pisa, Galileo was employed as a mathematician. In his study of gravity and
motion, he gradually came to doubt the teachings of Aristotle. His
uncertainty about Aristotle led him to question everything else, and, like
Kepler, to accept the wild heretical ideas of Copernicus. In the summer of
1609, while Harriot looked through his telescope and made his sketches in
England, Galileo visited Venice and, for the first time, gained access to a
telescope. There, he observed the Moon’s surface; the cloudy, luminous stripe
of the Milky Way; and the large moons of Jupiter, which he called “the four
planets.”[*9]
In Starry Messenger, Galileo draws a distinction between the maria and the
lunar craters, the latter of which “have never been observed by any one before
me.”[19] He correctly explains, as Harriot had roughly sketched, that the night
advances on a jagged edge across the face of the Moon. The shadows of the
Moon were present because the Moon had surface features. This was a

stunning departure from Aristotle’s view, long believed, that the Moon was a
spotless sphere, though it echoed Plutarch’s assertion that the Moon was
Earthy. Galileo still stops short of calling the surface features mountains,
referencing vague “prominences and depressions,” and is careful to avoid
saying the Moon is like Earth. But if it was, he thought the dark spots were
seas: “if one wishes to revive the ancient opinion of the Pythagoreans, that the
Moon is like another Earth, the brighter part of which represents the surface
of the land, and the darker part more fittingly the expanse of water.”[20]
Though Galileo’s telescopes were modest by modern standards, thin brass
instruments that magnified his vision some twentyfold, they were more
powerful than Harriot’s spyglass. Now in a museum in Florence, mounted in
glass cabinets with carefully controlled humidity and temperature sensors,
they are some of the most precious pieces of technology in the history of
humanity. Even Galileo’s contemporaries understood the weight of his ideas.
“Most accomplished Galileo, you deserve my praise for your tireless
energy,” Kepler gushed to him. “Putting aside all misgivings, you turned
directly to visual experimentation. And indeed by your discoveries you caused
the sun of truth to rise, you routed all the ghosts of perplexity together with
their mother, the night, and by your achievement you showed what could be
done.”[21]
In the years after publishing Starry Messenger, Galileo wrote letters on the
nature of sunspots and conducted experiments to understand gravity. In 1632,
he finally decided to circulate his own argument for the moving Earth,
Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems. In colloquial Italian, not
Latin, he outlines the case for Copernicus while attacking the demonstrably
wrong physics of Ptolemy and Aristotle. While Harriot was content to
contemplate the Moon from his roof and publish nothing, Galileo got global
attention because he sought it. He wanted a broader audience for his ideas.
In his dialogue, he argues that the Moon and Earth are both clearly round.
He claims the Moon is solid and dark, like Earth—meaning not made of
ether. He correctly speculates on the nature of earthshine, which people had
for centuries named “the ashen glow,” the phenomenon that lets you view the
dusky figure of the dark sector of the Moon. This is visible when the Moon is

a crescent. It happens because sunlight reflected from Earth’s surface is bright
enough to partially light the Moon, too, like a mirror shining back at you. In a
scientific echo of Enheduanna’s paean to the Moon 3,860 years earlier, “Your
shining horns are…holy and lustrous,” Galileo wrote that “this light is seen
most clearly when the horns are the thinnest.”[22]
All these impressions marked a giant leap forward from the old
Aristotelian view of observation for its own sake. It was also a giant leap from
the Neoplatonic view of accepting what you were taught, especially Scripture,
at face value, over the observations of your own eyes.
Galileo followed the ancient Greek tradition and wrote his argument as a
conversation, in which his characters talk about the two systems and debate
their usefulness. It’s a storytelling framework that makes scientific arguments
easier to digest, but it was also strategic. In dialogue form, Galileo himself
didn’t have to take sides, or discuss Copernican ideas on their merits. But it is
obvious where he stood. His Aristotelian character was named Simplicio, for
instance. Not exactly subtle.
After a discussion of the Moon’s orientation in the sky, another character,
Salviati, says he’s glad Simplicio finally gets what he is trying to say.
“For my part I more often encounter heads so thick that when I have
repeated a thousand times what you have just seen immediately for yourself, I
never manage to get it through them,” Salviati says.[23]
What came next will always remain one of the most famous trials in the
history of the Western world. Galileo was charged with heresy in 1633 but
avoided being burned to death at the stake because he agreed to plead guilty
and deny heliocentrism. He spent the rest of his life under house arrest.
As far as the Moon was concerned, however, Galileo’s impact was
irreversible. His Moon illustrations, like Harriot’s, fulfilled the words of
Anaxagoras and the prophecy of Plutarch: The Moon was Earthy, and it was
flawed. Galileo’s artistic renderings look natural, real, and artistic. They are
pure art, “a self-contained embodiment of observation,” as the historian Scott
Montgomery put it. The Moon was teleported to Earth, and the truth of its
image was revealed through the lens of a telescope, not through the written
Word.

One of Galileo’s lifelong friends, Lodovico Cigoli, even used the newly
realistic Moon to transmute religious art, in the very seat of power of the
Church.
In 1612, two years after Galileo stunned the world with Sidereus nuncius,
Cigoli completed a fresco in the Basilica of Saint Mary Major in Rome, the
most important Marian shrine in Christendom. During Galileo’s lifetime, the
large basilica had two new chapels added[*10] and Cigoli was hired to paint a
scene from the Book of Revelation, which takes place during the Apocalypse.
His subject was “a Woman clothed with the Sun, and the Moon under her
feet,” standing opposite Saint Michael the Archangel. Cigoli painted as he
was told. But the Moon at her feet was not the smooth orb of many early
counterparts, who used the spotless Aristotelian Moon as a metaphor for the
spotless Virgin Mary, mother of Christ.
It was Galileo’s Moon, craggy, crater-pocked, indented, marred. Cigoli
painted an astronomical Moon, not the Platonic ideal of a Moon. This fresco
is still the subject of debate among scholars, but whatever Cigoli’s intent—
acting contra Counter-Reformation Church politics, or just making a very
well-placed hat tip to his art school friend—his Moon changed things.[24]
Moons in art became real. Paintings might have remained religious in nature,
but their depictions of the sky and Moon were vivid, believable, and
terrestrial, taking their cue from modern astronomy.
—
The moons of Jupiter were another huge problem, both for the world order
and for the Moon. By charting the Jovian satellites’ motions, Galileo had
shown that not all heavenly bodies revolve around Earth. Io, Europa,
Ganymede, and Callisto—now called the Galilean moons—were proof of the
Copernican principle and challenged Ptolemy, Aristotle, and the Church.
But the addition of these new worlds also demoted our own Moon. Our
satellite was no longer perfect or unique, and therefore neither were we. Earth
was not even the only world with a companion. The Moon was toppled from

its place of honor, no longer on par with the Sun and the observable planets.
It was demoted to humble satellite, and just one of many.
“Our moon exists for us on the Earth, not for the other globes. Those four
little moons exist for Jupiter, not for us. Each planet in turn, together with its
occupants, is served by its own satellites,” Kepler wrote to Galileo,[25] using
the word “satellite” for what may be the first time. The word is rooted in the
Latin satelles, meaning “attendant.”
Other worlds were also served by their satellites. They were worlds
accompanied by worlds. This is obvious now, but it was an extraordinary
insight considering the time in which these people lived.
There was no broader universe beyond the solar system. In the middle of
the second millennium c.e., there were still no such things as galaxies.
Nobody knew how the universe was arranged. When Copernicus was in
medical school, he was educated in techniques designed to balance “the four
humors” of blood, phlegm, black bile, and yellow bile, and learned astrology
to aid in the diagnosis and treatment of disease. In medicine, the phases of
the Moon in particular were thought to be correlated with severity of illness.
Most people still believed, as they had for centuries, that the Moon was a
smooth sphere and that Earth was the center of everything.
Galileo’s pronouncements to the contrary—backed by evidence—were a
shot heard around the world. They were a salvo in a battle that had been
brewing since at least the days of Copernicus, since Regiomontanus translated
Almagest with a skeptical eye. In this battle, received authority was pitted
against scientific inquiry. It set the written Word of Scripture against the
evidence that lay before our own eyes: “Tremble before him, all the earth; he
has made the world firm, not to be moved” (1 Chronicles 16:30). Galileo’s
artwork and his writing flew in the face of the Council of Trent, the great
Catholic reply to the Lutheran Reformation, which proclaimed that “no one,
relying on his own skill, shall…presume to interpret the said sacred Scripture
contrary to…the unanimous consent of the Fathers,” even if those
interpretations were new and never intended to be published.[26]
Many historians consider this schism to mark the dawn of modern science,
with the Moon in a starring role. The scientific revolution certainly gained

momentum in the decades to come, but the break between religion and
empirical science was not a clean one. The change took place on a
continuum. As Galileo understood, the Moon was still powerful as a symbol,
and as more than a mere chink in the scriptural armor. Galileo’s painterly
views could not divorce the Moon from the divine, nor remove it entirely
from myth. Exploration could not kill spirituality. Galileo’s frequent
correspondent, Johannes Kepler, understood this better than arguably anyone
else of his generation. Though he revolutionized astronomy by giving us the
laws of planetary motion, Kepler imagined that the heavenly bodies produced
music, harmonies, as they moved around, and he was unafraid to attribute
meaning to the tunes. Though his conclusions are scientific, his writing is
imbued with the mysticism of the medieval world he inhabited.
After spending millennia as a perfect sphere representative of the divine,
the Moon became Earthy in both a literal and a figurative sense. Its role above
us had changed dramatically in the two millennia after Anaxagoras, and once
again in the century between the books of Copernicus and Galileo. We had
unmasked the Moon as a thief of the Sun’s light, and as just one rocky
companion among many satellites of many planets. We mapped its surface in
glorious, illuminated detail, and we named its features. It became a place
where we could imagine ourselves, because that was fun and newly possible,
but also because it was easier, maybe even safer, to play out our human
struggles someplace else.
In the centuries to follow, through art, music, and literature—including the
first work of science fiction, by Kepler himself—the Moon would emulate
Galileo’s ashen glow, reflecting us back to ourselves.
Skip Notes
*1 To a certain extent, anyway.
*2 Ptolemy used all these Sun-Moon-Earth alignments to figure out the Moon’s parallax. This just
means a displacement in its apparent position in the sky.
*3 The Franciscan friar Roger Bacon (namesake of the later Francis Bacon, progenitor of the scientific
method) is one person who tried something different in the Middle Ages, attempting to discern truth

from nature instead. For this brave effort, the elder Bacon was imprisoned in 1277 and his books were
banned.
*4 He wasn’t aware of Aristarchus, who had promulgated a similar theory more than a millennium and
a half earlier, because the writings of that Greek philosopher had not yet been reintroduced.
*5 Northumberland’s outcrops of complex rocks formed during the closure of the Rheic Ocean, when
fish learned to walk. Everything comes back to geology.
*6 Credit for the law of refraction went to Willebrord Snellius in 1621 and René Descartes in 1637.
*7 The printing press, invented around 1440 c.e., had become commonplace by the early seventeenth
century.
*8 Scholars believe Harriot probably suffered from lung cancer. He may have been the first Englishman
to die of lung cancer after a lifetime of smoking tobacco, which he helped introduce to mainland
Europe.
*9 Jupiter actually has at least eighty moons, but four was still a big surprise.
*10 The newer one was the Pauline Chapel, built by Pope Paul V, and the older one is called the Sistine
Chapel, built by Pope Sixtus V. Though it has the same name, this Sistine Chapel is not to be confused
with the one in the Vatican, the one painted by Michelangelo a century earlier.

It was a dark and stormy night.
It was 1608, and no one had yet seen the Moon through a telescope. But it
was up and full, and after pondering it for some time before the clouds rolled
in, Johannes Kepler fell into a deep sleep and began to dream.
In his dream, he picked up a book by an Icelandic astronomer named
Duracotus, who explains how long ago, he had ticked off his mother by
peering into a mysterious parcel she was planning to sell to some sailors. She
kicked him out at age fourteen, and he sailed off to Denmark. There, he met
the famous astronomer Tycho Brahe, who took young Duracotus under his
wing and taught him all about astronomy.
After several years studying with the genial Dane, Duracotus returned to
his homeland and was reunited with his mother, Fiolxhilde. And it turned out
she knew about astronomy, too. But she didn’t need Brahe’s “wonderful
machines” to know the face of the Moon. Instead, she used magic to converse
with the Moon just as clearly as if she were walking on it. She knew how to
summon nine spirits from the tribes of beings who lived up there, on an island
they knew not as our Moon, but as Levania.
Fiolxhilde decides to teach her son her ancient ways, and the two summon
a tutelary daemon from Levania.[*1] He is “most gentle and purest of all,
[and] called forth by twenty-one characters,” the mother explains.

In a hoarse, lisping voice, this daemon holds forth on several subjects,
from the Metonic cycle—that nineteen-year round known to the ancients,
corresponding to the time it takes for the Moon and Sun to line up again in
the same spot in the sky—to the geology and biology of his home. According
to the daemon, Levania is covered in mountains, oceans, and caverns, and the
life-forms that dwell among them are all huge and short-lived. They call Earth
Volva, because it clearly revolves around Levania. “The most pleasant of all
occupations on Levania,” Duracotus explains, “is the contemplation of its
Volva.”
The Levanians build boats and crawl through caves to escape the scorching
heat of the lunar daytime—equivalent to fourteen Earth days, Duracotus
recalls. And they hide underwater when the Sun makes it too bright. “By
combining nature with art, they can take refuge,” the daemon says.
At this, hearing lashing rain and thunder, Kepler woke up. The tale comes
from his book Somnium, seu astronomia lunari (Dream, or Astronomy of the
Moon), circulated during his life but only published after his death.
Johannes Kepler stood on a fulcrum between two worlds. His training,
education, upbringing, and belief systems were decidedly medieval, but his
own research and writing were practically modern. He learned Ptolemaic
astronomy, read the ancient tablets and star catalogs, but then he performed
measurements of his own in order to draw independent conclusions. At the
University of Tübingen, he became a believer in the Copernican system and
even tried to argue for it publicly, but the university wouldn’t let him. His
beloved professor Michael Maestlin was ultimately forbidden from speaking
openly about Copernicus. Though Kepler shelved his dissertation, which
focused on the Moon’s motions and was aimed at proving Copernican
principles, many of its ideas would be expressed in the book that became
Somnium.
Like his contemporaries, Kepler was Moon-obsessed, and this obsession
led him to some of his greatest insights. He is remembered as the legislator of

planetary orbits, but Kepler was also the first to suggest that the Moon is
responsible for the tides.
Kepler posited in 1609, in his groundbreaking New Astronomy, that the
Sun is the center of the orbits of the planets; that the Sun moves them along
their orbits, and that Scripture, which states otherwise, should be appreciated
as poetic analogy but not taken as dogma; and that the planets do not orbit the
Sun in a circle, but in an ellipse. He wrote that he used to think the planets
were alive and moved around because they had souls, but that physics makes
more sense.
In this beautifully composed work, Kepler also argued, for what is likely
the first time, that the Moon’s gravity causes the tides. He considered
magnetic attraction, and reasoned that attraction is caused by two bodies
rather than one. “If the Earth ceased to attract the waters of the seas, the seas
would rise and flow into the Moon,” Kepler wrote. “If the attractive force of
the Moon reaches down to the Earth, it follows that the attractive force of the
Earth, all the more, extends to the Moon and even farther.”[1]
Galileo found this absurd and mocked lunar tides as “childish” and
“occult” in 1616’s “Discourse on the Tides,” but of course Kepler was right.
[*2]
Kepler’s findings were all remarkably bold, especially for a devout,
mystical man writing in the early seventeenth century. Kepler stood above the
field of science arrayed before him, from Copernicus to Brahe to Galileo, and
applied his own observations to draw original conclusions. Kepler’s creative
thinking and his novel ideas position him, like Anaxagoras, as a bridge
between the old world and the new.
—
Galileo was persecuted for his work proving the Copernican perspective,
but he gave people a chance to see for themselves the empirical truth of his
findings. Along with posing a serious problem for the Renaissance-era
Church, the observable fact of actual worlds and their own moons, plural,
generated lots of speculation about their nature and their purpose. Kepler

himself mused in correspondence with Galileo that one day someone would
build ships to “sail the void between the stars.” He was sure there would be
plenty of explorers ready to volunteer for the journey. “In the meantime, we
shall prepare, for the brave sky travelers, maps of the celestial bodies—I shall
do it for the Moon, you Galileo, for Jupiter,” the imperial mathematician
wrote.[2]
This was a brief hint at Somnium, which Kepler had already completed in
secret but shelved. Kepler told Galileo that the manuscript was a type of
“lunar geography.” Isaac Asimov and Carl Sagan both considered it the first
work of science fiction. The book is simultaneously a manifesto for science
that went against Church orthodoxy and an ode to the mythical, beautiful,
spectral Moon. In straining against the accepted geocentric view, which
Kepler knew to be wrong, he spins a tale of literal flights from Earthly reality.
—
A smattering of earlier works also feature imaginary lands, but they don’t go
nearly as far as Kepler and they don’t invent fantasy for the purpose of
explaining reality. Plato wrote about a mysterious lost city called Atlantis in
his Critias, a sequel to Timaeus, but the story is not really based in science. A
couple centuries later, Plutarch’s De Facie asked what types of inhabitants the
Moon might harbor, but the story includes no make-believe visit. A few
Greek-speaking poets, notably the Syrian poet Lucian, also wrote about
people going to the Moon, but their works are intended as satire. As pieces of
fiction, Critias and De Facie serve as a scaffolding for philosophical argument,
but they’re not really allegorical.
Somnium depicts a strange and unfamiliar world, but it grounds this space
oddity in reality by relating it to scientific knowledge. It’s the first time
someone imagined the Moon as a place inhabited by strange beings that could
talk about what it was actually like, based on human observations. While the
book is scientific in its tone and purpose, it also reveals that the Moon held
deep spiritual significance for Kepler himself. He was able to hold two
opposing ideas at the same time: the Neoplatonic view, that the Moon is a pit

stop for souls,[*3] and a more modern view, that the Moon is a body with
mass, and that it obeys the laws of planetary motion—the latter of which
Kepler himself discovered. This duality is a sharp break from classical
tradition, and it represents a new, modern way of thinking. For the first time,
storytelling is used to advance modern scientific speculation.
Kepler’s Moon has two hemispheres, called Subvolva and Privolva.
Subvolva is the near side, the half of the Moon that faces Earth always, while
Privolva never sees Earth. This Moon is also covered in pine cones that
release living creatures when the conditions are right. In Somnium, travel
between Earth and the Moon takes just four hours, but is only possible during
a lunar eclipse, and is exceedingly dangerous for humans. Kepler reasoned,
long before anyone understood the mechanics of flight or even Newton’s laws
of motion, that overcoming Earth’s gravity would take extraordinary force.
Daemons must help anesthetize any Moon-bound traveling humans so their
bodies wouldn’t fall apart after being “spun upward as if by an explosion of
gunpowder.” This detail would blossom in the mind of Jules Verne, Kepler’s
successor in imagination based on lunar realism. It would ultimately guide a
German rocket scientist named Wernher von Braun and his contemporaries
on their quest to ignite real rockets.
Between this strange combination of mysticism and hard science lies the
real goal of Somnium: to attack the prevailing, Ptolemaic worldview that
Earth is the center of everything. Somnium scoffs at the idea that people can
be assured this is true simply because we can see the Sun and stars circling
us. Kepler argues that the same thing would be true anywhere else. The
Levanians see Earth and the Sun moving across their sky, so they assume
their home, the Moon, is the center of the universe. And why wouldn’t they?
Everyone believes they’re the center of the universe. We all, at some point,
experience the tragic epiphany that demonstrates otherwise. “Of all
discoveries and opinions, none may have exerted a greater effect on the
human spirit than the doctrine of Copernicus,” another German, Johann
Wolfgang von Goethe, would say two centuries later. “Never, perhaps, was a
greater demand made on mankind.”[3]

The narrative in Somnium is much shorter than Kepler’s 223 footnotes and
charmingly titled “Geographical or, if you Prefer, Selenographical
Appendix.” The footnotes, added between 1622 and 1630, are heavy with
science, and modern scholars believe they were partially meant to exonerate
Kepler’s mother, Katharina, from accusations of witchcraft, an eventual
outcome of Kepler’s attempt to gently awaken Earthlings to our centuries-
long sleep.
“Everyone says it is plain that the stars go around the earth while the Earth
remains still,” he wrote in footnote 146. “I say that it is plain to the eyes of
the lunar people that our Earth, which is their Volva, goes around while their
moon is still. If it be said that the lunatic perceptions of my moon-dwellers
are deceived, I retort with equal justice that the terrestrial senses of the Earth-
dwellers are devoid of reason.”[4]
—
It’s hard to imagine how Kepler could have completed Somnium without a
telescope. Unlike Plutarch and Lucian, he could actually see the Moon in
great detail, and he could tell, as Galileo had explained, that the Moon was a
world. Somnium, like Kepler himself, is a bridge between the old ways of
thinking and the new.
“It has these postmodern features in a medieval text, and it’s bringing
together all these motifs from different kinds of genres,” Dean Swinford, an
English professor at Fayetteville State University who is an expert on
Somnium, told me. It is proto–science fiction, but it is framed as a dream, a
familiar storytelling structure in both medieval and classical literature. A
dream narrative can be a place where truth is revealed without fear of
retribution. We can’t control our dreams, after all.
While Kepler stands firmly on the side of Copernicus and his friend
Galileo, he also clearly reveres the Moon and believes it must hold some
spiritual properties, Swinford told me. “He was never fully able to replace the
mythical Moon with the scientific Moon,” he says. Kepler was also unable to
separate his spirituality and Lutheran belief in God from the worlds he saw in

the telescope. Copernicus made it impossible to believe Earth was the center
of the universe, but Kepler still could not remove a version of centrality from
Earth’s story. It is the best place, he wrote in Dissertatio cum nuncio siderio,
or Conversation with the Starry Messenger, because it is the only planet from
which you can see the entire solar system without any other world being
obscured by the Sun’s brilliance. Anyone living on Jupiter, for instance, may
not see worlds like Mercury or Earth. That is why God gave those creatures
four moons instead of one for company, Kepler writes. “We humans who
inhabit the Earth can with good reason (in my view) feel proud of the
preeminent lodging place of our bodies, and we should be grateful to God,
the creator,” Kepler wrote in Conversation with the Starry Messenger.[5]
—
Though he remained pious, Kepler’s well-known support of Copernicus and
Galileo made it harder for him to get a good job when he graduated from
university. Instead of procuring a faculty position in astronomy like he
wanted, Kepler was sent to practice astrology in faraway Graz, Styria, which
is now part of Austria. He did not like it, scoffing that astrology is “a
sortilegious monkey-play.” (Shakespeare is not the only proof that the early
seventeenth century was the golden age of insults.)
“A mind accustomed to mathematical deduction, when confronted with
the faulty foundations [of astrology], resists a long, long time, like an
obstinate mule, until compelled by beating and curses to put its foot into that
dirty puddle,” Kepler complained in one exemplary letter.[6]
Though he was writing Somnium around this time, Kepler put it aside and
instead published The Cosmographic Mystery, another weird amalgam of
mystical and evidence-based meanderings that compare Copernican and
Ptolemaic cosmology. The great Tycho Brahe read it and appointed Kepler
his assistant, rescuing Kepler from astrology. When Brahe died in 1601,
Kepler took over Brahe’s role as imperial mathematician to Holy Roman
Emperor Rudolph II.

While Kepler worked on the orbit of Mars and his new laws of planetary
motion, parts of Somnium were making their way across mainland Europe in
manuscript form, before he ever formally published it. Kepler himself
believed John Donne read a copy, which inspired that famous poet’s satire of
the Catholic Church called Ignatius His Conclave. Donne writes that since the
Moon might be a world, all the Jesuits presently infesting this one should
leave and head on up there. Though Kepler had set it aside, Somnium was
making its way into the public consciousness.
Unfortunately, because parts of the story were autobiographical, it was
easy for people to conclude that Kepler’s mother, Katharina, like Duracotus’s
mother, Fiolxhilde, was a witch. Kepler wrote that a first draft was carried
from Prague to Leipzig, and then to Tübingen in 1611, where a local barber
overheard a discussion of it and came to this conclusion.[7] Ultimately,
twenty-four witnesses argued various charges against Katharina, including
that she magically entered rooms through closed doors. She was formally
accused of witchcraft and jailed.
—
The imperial mathematician devoted six years to her defense. “I have no
idea if this ridiculous situation, which has been blown all out of proportion,
will also blow away my fifteen years of imperial service,” he wrote to the
Leonberg Senate on January 1, 1616.[8] “This would break my mother’s heart
entirely (which is, of course, my chief concern, far more important to me
than any of my personal sorrows).”
Though her son finally prevailed in 1622, Katharina died shortly after her
release. Her death compounded a lifetime of tragedy for the famed scientist,
who had already lost his first wife and two of his children in their youth.
Somnium may have led to his mother’s imprisonment, but her death only
strengthened Kepler’s resolve to use it to defend Copernicanism. In later
footnotes to his lunar allegory, he says there are nine spirits on Levania
because there are nine Greek Muses. The Levanian tutelary daemon has
twenty-one characters in his name because, as Kepler explains, that is the

number of letters required to spell out Astronomia Copernicana. The point
was to demonstrate reality through a story, Kepler explains. On December 4,
1623, about a year and a half after Katharina died, he wrote to a friend
named Matthias Bernegger about his goals for Somnium. “Would it be a great
crime to paint the cyclopian morals of this period in livid colors,” he said,
“but for the sake of caution, to depart from the Earth with such writing and
secede to the Moon?”[9] Maybe the Inquisitors wouldn’t notice if his anti-
Ptolemaic polemic was set on the Moon. Maybe people wouldn’t be so mad if
he passed it off as a wild and fantastical dream.
As further armor against criticism, Kepler even translated Plutarch’s De
Facie and Lucian’s Moon satire A True Story on his own, and wanted to
publish them alongside Somnium as a sort of trilogy. But he never saw a word
of Somnium published. It only saw the light of day as a complete work—such
as it was—when his son, Ludwig, published it four years after Kepler’s death
in 1630. Kepler had left his family penniless upon his sudden death, and
Ludwig, who was in medical school, hoped the manuscript would sell enough
copies to support his family.
By the late eighteenth century, the period the writer Richard Holmes has
dubbed “the Age of Wonder,” the Enlightenment was at full tilt. People were
making new discoveries about everything from the nature of gases to the use
of anesthesia. In 1781, the Americans defeated the British at the Battle of
Yorktown, creating a new nation on the face of the Earth. The same year, the
British astronomer William Herschel discovered the planet Uranus,
expanding the boundaries of our solar system for the first time. Imagine living
in such an age of upheaval—that is, if you were living through it as a literate
white man who owned property, which is the only way you would have
known about it. People were capable of creating new worlds! They were
making new political worlds defined on paper and finding new astronomical
worlds orbiting in the distant cosmos. Who knew how many other planets
lurked in the great beyond? Who knew what types of beings lived on them?

—
The frenetic pace of change would have been terrifying, as it can be today.
Waves of immigration coincided with the popularity of science fiction, where
aliens were frequent stand-ins for immigrants or native inhabitants (this is still
true).[*4] And the Moon was a favorite setting for these science fiction
allegories.
The Moon’s gradual disappearance and return to wholeness, and its innate
otherness, made it a powerful symbol of change and impermanence. Just as it
had been for Plutarch and Kepler, the Moon was a natural place to test out
new moralities. In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries this sometimes
meant examining the morality of enslavement or of immigration, including
westward expansion by white American settlers who pushed into lands that
had been tended, and lived in, for centuries.
Washington Irving, the father of the American short story, offers a shining
example. Irving is best known for short stories like “Rip Van Winkle” and
“The Legend of Sleepy Hollow,” the tale of schoolteacher Ichabod Crane and
the Headless Horseman. But Irving was also a prolific writer of satire. In his
1809 A History of New York, he imagines a race of superior beings from the
Moon who travel on mythical beasts and decide to conquer the lesser beings
of Earth, treating Earthlings much as colonialists treated Indigenous people.
Irving sails through millennia of ideas about the history of Earth,
ultimately pronouncing that it looks like an orange, bulging at the sides, and
that it’s a rock. As for the Sun, he notes that the best idea of antiquity came
from Anaxagoras, who maintained that the Sun was merely a huge rock lofted
skyward and ignited.
“But I give little attention to the doctrines of this philosopher, the people
of Athens having fully refuted them by banishing him from their city; a
concise mode of answering unwelcome doctrines, much resorted to in former
days,” Irving writes of Anaxagoras.[10]
Irving next connects Noah (of the Ark) to the Dutch, the founders of
modern, white New York, and outlines the brutal first contacts between
European migrants and the Native American and First Nation peoples who

already lived there. He imagines what would happen if Moon citizens came
down from on high and gave readers a taste of their own medicine. The
“Lunatic” leader would issue the following proclamation:
Whereas a certain crew of Lunatics have lately discovered and taken
possession of a newly-discovered planet called the earth; and that
whereas it is inhabited by none but a race of two-legged animals that
carry their heads on their shoulders instead of under their arms; cannot
talk the Lunatic language; have two eyes instead of one; are destitute of
tails, and of a horrible whiteness, instead of pea-green—therefore, and
for a variety of other excellent reasons, they are considered incapable of
possessing any property in the planet they infest, and the right and title to
it are confirmed to its original discoverers. And, furthermore, the
colonists who are now about to depart to the aforesaid planet are
authorized and commanded to use every means to convert these infidel
savages from the darkness of Christianity, and make them thorough and
absolute Lunatics.[11]
Like Kepler before him, Irving uses the Moon to imply that it’s better to
reveal society’s ignorance by refracting it through the distorted lens of
imaginary others. The best science fiction makes this a goal and serves as a
way to talk about otherness. Through this new lens, first polished by Kepler
and later sharpened by Irving, French author Jules Verne, and others, the
Moon in its nearness and realism becomes a tableau for addressing very
Earth-bound problems.
Just as Somnium is a bridge between worlds and worldviews, Verne’s From
the Earth to the Moon offered its nineteenth-century readers a glimpse of the
future. Americans are presented as overconfident, rakish land-grabbers
obsessed with their guns. American political differences are portrayed as
personal and vindictive. And there is even more realism in the storytelling;
Verne presents the first mathematically grounded basis for space travel.

Verne is the forefather of the “hard” science fiction that infuses imaginary
worlds with detailed discussions of rocketry, astrophysics, and politics. H. G.
Wells, Ray Bradbury, Gene Roddenberry, Neal Stephenson, and Isaac
Asimov are the inheritors of Verne’s oeuvre.
From the Earth to the Moon depicts the fictional Baltimore Gun Club, who,
begrudgingly at first, use their Civil War artillery expertise to build a giant
cannon, the Columbiad, for peaceful efforts: to launch men to the Moon.
Imagine a postwar society focused on finding new uses for all its guns.
Verne correctly predicts an unnerving number of things, from the launch
location in central Florida to the political wrangling and the jingoism
surrounding the achievement. But what sets the book apart is the particular
material Verne chooses to emphasize. The highlight is not, possibly for the
first time, descriptions of the Moon itself. Instead, the story focuses on the
human preparation, politics, and the journey. The book sets the tone for the
next century of science fiction in part for this reason. The story is propelled
by the journey’s technological challenges, from the Columbiad’s construction
and launch base to the primitive telemetry used to track it.
In 1865, there was no radio, let alone live-streaming video, so the only way
for humans on Earth to track the mission’s progress would be through an
optical telescope, just like Galileo’s. The problem is, optical telescopes have
to be positively enormous to see distant objects in great detail. That’s because
of the law of refraction, explained first by the greatly underappreciated
Thomas Harriot, which dictates that how far you can see depends on the size
of your glass.
To make a huge telescope worth using, you also need a clear atmosphere.
The best place to find this is in a desert or on a mountain. Verne had the
foresight to predict a mountaintop telescope, and he situated it on one of the
most recognizable mountains in Colorado, Longs Peak.[*5]
American ingenuity builds the telescope, but the launch is so appallingly
explosive that it clouds up the atmosphere for the next several days, making
Moon viewing impossible. And then, finally, the Moon emerges from the
clouds, and so does the crew of the Columbiad—spoiler alert—not on its
surface, but in Earth orbit. In Verne’s telling, the Moon the visitors behold is

cratered, but essentially empty. One character sees what could be the ruins of
an aqueduct, but there is no life, and nothing to find.
The book is so compelling, and so clearly scientific, that it’s no wonder a
generation of scientists drew inspiration from it. They ultimately made its
predictions real. The rockets that sent men to the Moon were originally built
for warheads. And the ship that flew the first humans who landed on the
Moon, the Apollo 11 command module, was called Columbia.
The genesis of the Moon missions of the 1960s c.e. lay in one of Verne’s
few, yet noteworthy, miscalculations. The travelers “had placed themselves
outside of mankind by going beyond the limits which God had imposed on
earthly creatures,” Verne writes after they shoot off Earth through the nine-
hundred-foot barrel of the Columbiad.[12] Reality would have been much
uglier, however. The cannonball occupants would be subjected to positively
horrendous g-forces at the moment of ignition, likely turning them into mush.
A cannonball to the Moon just wouldn’t work. Luckily for Neil Armstrong
and company, a young Russian boy named Konstantin Tsiolkovsky read
Verne’s seminal book while in bed with scarlet fever, and became obsessed
with it.
By the year that Verne died, 1905, Tsiolkovsky was an impoverished
schoolteacher. Still preoccupied with the questions raised by Verne’s novel, he
bought books instead of food and taught himself enough physics to figure out
that multistage rockets would be a better method for launching to the Moon.
[13] A first stage could provide sufficient power to lift a rocket off Earth, and
then a second stage could ignite afterward, giving the ship a big boost to reach
escape velocity. Tsiolkovsky realized multiple rocket stages would allow
humans to survive the terrific battle against gravity and discovered that
pressurized gases would be more effective for propulsion than artillery,
especially in space.
A decade later, the German scientist Hermann Oberth built on
Tsiolkovsky’s ideas, also drawing inspiration from Verne’s novel, and drew up
plans for multistage chemical rockets that would be safer and more efficient
than giant howitzers.

A few years after Oberth worked on his plans, a young German rocket
builder named Wernher von Braun—who had also read Verne and Verne’s
successors—saw an article in a 1920s astronomy magazine that imagined a
voyage to the Moon. He would recall later that it filled him with a “romantic
urge.” “Interplanetary travel! Here was a task worth dedicating one’s life to!
Not just to stare at the Moon and the planets but to soar through the heavens
and actually explore the mysterious universe! I knew how Columbus had felt,”
he told a New Yorker writer in 1950.[14] Von Braun, a Nazi and a member of
the SS, had managed, like the Gun Club’s president Impey Barbicane, to
hastily find a lunary use for his war machines.
Von Braun was “a master popularizer, a talented writer, and a brilliant
speaker…a charismatic engineering manager, technological entrepreneur, and
system builder,” writes one biographer, the Smithsonian historian Michael J.
Neufeld. And no single person did more than von Braun to advance the idea
of space travel to the American public, nor to prove the practicality of space
travel to American politics and industry.
Von Braun grew up in Berlin in a wealthy aristocratic family. After he
made his confirmation in the Lutheran Church, like Johannes Kepler before
him, von Braun’s mother gifted him a telescope. He read Oberth’s rocket
designs as a child, ultimately working with Oberth to test liquid-fueled
rockets while enrolled in the Berlin Institute of Technology. After earning his
PhD in physics, von Braun toiled under the commission of Adolf Hitler. In
1940, he officially became a member of the Nazi Party and, using the labor
of concentration camp prisoners, built the V-2 on Hitler’s behalf.[15] The
rocket, Vergeltungswaffe Zwei (Vengeance Weapon Two), Earth’s first long-
range ballistic missile, could carry a one-ton warhead nearly two hundred
miles and killed thousands of British citizens in the Blitz.
In March 1945, with Germany in retreat, von Braun saw the writing on the
wall and surrendered to the Americans. The U.S. government’s secretive
Operation Paperclip brought him and about a hundred other German

scientists to the United States. He became the director of Marshall Space
Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama: rocket central USA. Von Braun’s
obsession, which he claimed was the reason for his Faustian bargain with the
Nazis, was space travel.[16] He wanted to travel to the stars, and as he told
later chroniclers—safely ensconced on American soil—he was less concerned
with the morality of his funders and more concerned with doing the work.
After the war, space-related science fiction was all the rage. As historian
Walter McDougall put it, “After V-2s and atomic bombs, any fantasy seemed
credible.”[17] Von Braun actively tried to channel this interest in space fiction
into space reality. He published a series of vividly illustrated articles in
Collier’s magazine describing his hopes for—and the benefits of—an
aggressive spaceflight program. He wanted to send artificial satellites into
orbit first, followed by the first human passengers; he wanted to develop a
reusable spacecraft for reliable travel to space; he wanted a permanently
inhabited space station; and ultimately, he advocated for human exploration
of the Moon and other planets. All of these dreams would come to pass.[18]
(NASA is still working on that last part.)
Von Braun even served as technical adviser on three films Walt Disney
produced in the 1950s. The second, called Man and the Moon, aired on
December 28, 1955, and features von Braun describing a phased Moon
journey, with the first stage launching from Earth and the second stage
launching from a nuclear-powered space way station. The following summer,
President Eisenhower—who called Disney personally and asked to borrow a
copy of the first film—announced that the United States would launch a small
satellite between July 1957 and December 1958.[19] Russia did this first, of
course, and called it Sputnik 1. But von Braun would have his moment soon
enough.
If Galileo had only observed the moons of Jupiter and the rings of Saturn, if
he had never turned his lens toward the Moon, writers and storytellers may
have imagined flights to those worlds instead. Kepler’s dreamworld might

have been Mars, and Verne may have envisioned a journey from Earth to
Venus. Irving might have written satirical works addressing immigration that
were set on Uranus, the fancy new planet. It’s possible.
But even after Galileo revealed that the Moon was a world, and that other
planets had satellites of their own, our Moon remained special. It maintains
its mystical aura even though you can see it every day. Of course it’s the first
place we imagined visiting.
Lunar fiction that explored the real, scientific view of the Moon gave us
the promise of lunar travel. Its proximity, and the stories that our artists and
writers projected onto its beguiling face, gave us the gumption to get there.
Especially before the late twentieth century c.e., attempts to reach other
planets were totally illogical. The Moon is 238,000 miles away, give or take a
few miles. Mars is an average of 65 million miles away. The Apollo
astronauts traveled to the Moon in three days; in the early 2020s, when
countries from the United States to the United Arab Emirates sent spacecraft
to Mars, the one-way trip took about eight months with the most powerful
rockets imaginable. Mars is a long shot at best. Anywhere else is a pipe
dream.
By the time von Braun wrote his popular articles and appeared in Disney
movies, journeys to the Moon were no longer confined to fictional
entertainment. Exploration and expansion are in our nature, as they have been
since the Moon calendar makers of Warren Field planned their salmon haul,
since Abraham bade farewell to Moon City of Ur and set out for the
Promised Land, since my great-grandparents boarded ships and left Ireland in
search of a new and better life. The Moon seemed reachable. We had the
technology. It was time to try.
Skip Notes
*1 This is not an evil demon in the way modern Western people think of them, but more like a spirit
guide.
*2 Sir Isaac Newton finally figured out the full tidal mechanism eighty years later. In the Principia, he
correctly showed that the tides depend on both the gravitational attraction of the Moon, like Kepler
said, and centrifugal forces caused by the Moon-Earth orbit.

*3 In a nod to Aristotle, Plutarch, and Saint Augustine.
*4 Where to even begin? Here are just a handful of selections. For allegorical treatment of ethnicity
and fear of otherness, see Philip K. Dick, Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? as well as its film
adaptations, both Blade Runner movies. For good stories about borders, citizenship, and fascism, see
Robert A. Heinlein, Starship Troopers and The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress. For stories about ethics,
otherness, and equal rights, see Isaac Asimov, I, Robot. For frank treatment of climate-driven mass
migration and segregation based on race and homosexuality, read N. K. Jemisin, The Broken Earth
Trilogy. For allegorical treatment of a big, beautiful wall dividing cultures, see Ursula K. Le Guin, The
Dispossessed. For a sweetly allegorical story about displacement and migration, read Jill Paton Walsh,
The Green Book, one of my all-time-favorite children’s books.
*5 To me, Verne’s most egregious error is his opprobrium toward Longs and the Colorado Rockies, a
range the Frenchman clearly never actually visited, or else he would not have written that “these
mountains are not very high; the Alps or the Himalayas would look down upon them from their lofty
heights.” Actually, the Colorado Rockies contain most of North America’s highest peaks, and Longs
soars to 14,259 feet above sea level.

It is reserved for the practical genius of Americans to establish a
communication with the sidereal world. The means of arriving thither
are simple, easy, certain, infallible.
—Impey Barbicane, president of the Baltimore Gun Club, in Jules
Verne’s From the Earth to the Moon
Andrea Mosie greeted me at the doorway to the Moon with a wink. “Are
you ready?” she asked. I had been warned about the technical procedures that
would precede my visit, but I was not prepared for what I would see, and she
knew it.
Only a few hundred humans have ever been to space. Only a handful have
ever walked on the Moon. But there is one other way to experience that other
realm, and it is through a doorway at NASA’s Johnson Space Center in
Houston. I entered a plain-looking, boringly tan federal building, passed a
wall of flags and Apollo portraits, walked up an undecorated flight of
corrugated stairs, and reached the vault of our stars. It is called the
Astromaterials Acquisition and Curation Office, possibly the most interesting
name ever coined for a storage room, and it is where you can meet 842
pounds of the Moon, up close and personal. Mosie is their primary caretaker,
and she promised to introduce me.

Only five people on Earth get to touch these rocks, which comprise the
bulk of the material returned to Earth during the Apollo missions. If you’re
the guy who picked up a rock from the lunar surface, they’ll make an
exception, Mosie told me. But the curators who work with Mosie undergo
lengthy training before they begin work preparing the rocks for scientists,
who themselves spend considerable time getting ready to request just a few
grams of Moon. The sample lab ships rocks across the United States and the
world without any special labeling or insurance, because no amount of money
can replace them. Sometimes Moon rocks are mailed out in big batches
around the end of the year, when there is more holiday mail, when a heavily
padded bag out of Houston might attract less attention.
Mosie is a gregarious and warm woman who has worked at the
Astromaterials vault’s Lunar Sample Lab since 1969, when she joined as a
high school intern. Her sister Waltine Bourgeois, six years Mosie’s senior,
helped her get the job. Bourgeois worked at Johnson Space Center as a
computer coder in the Lunar Receiving Lab, built during the Apollo missions.
She punched cards to program the early computer systems. Mosie didn’t have
a car, so she needed to find a job somewhere she could get a ride, and
Bourgeois drove her to NASA every day. At the time, she was one of the few
women, let alone Black women, in her department. After her internship,
Mosie wound up earning degrees in chemistry and math and working her way
up through the sample lab. In 1997, she was named lab manager. It’s the only
place she’s ever worked.
Early in her career, friends would ask if she took any of the samples home.
Wouldn’t it be tempting?
“No! Don’t even say that! Some of these things you don’t play about,”
Mosie told me. “Every time you touch them, you realize it’s a special
opportunity. It’s an awesome responsibility.”
Before I could enter the clean room, we had to dress head to toe in
protective gear. I took off my wedding ring, my watch, and my necklace.
Mosie took my clicker pen and handed me a fountain pen instead. The tiny
metal springs in my clicker might shed a molecule of aluminum, she
explained. No extra molecules are allowed in the clean room, lest they

interfere with our measurements of the Moon. But my paper notebook was
just fine. We know there are no trees up there—we know any paper dust,
anything resembling anything organic, came from here, from us.
We know this now, but back in the Apollo days not everyone was so sure.
Until humans stepped on the Moon, we could only imagine what it looked
and felt like. Craters made by meteorite strikes suggested the landscape was
dust, but no one knew how thick it was. Before Apollo, some scientists
worried the Moon would swallow spacecraft like quicksand. NASA scientist
Thomas Gold worried that the dust would sink the Apollo landers, and that
lunar material would be so reactive that the samples might ignite when
exposed to oxygen, which is why Armstrong and Aldrin were so cautious with
the omnipresent lunar dust.
Until Apollo, no one knew which elements composed the Moon. Scientists
didn’t know whether its craters were formed by volcanoes or asteroid impacts.
They thought the Moon was monochrome, the way it appears from Earth, but
the Moon visitors found its landscape full of browns, yellows, golds, even rosy
pinks. People could only guess at everything the Moon had in store, which
meant the first-generation Lunar Receiving Lab had to be ready for almost
anything.
Several scientists even worried about protecting Earth from a lunar
pandemic caused by Moon microbes. After splashing down in the Pacific
Ocean, Apollo 11 crew members stayed in a quarantine unit for three weeks
to ensure they did not spread any lunar germs. President Nixon waved at them
through a sealed porthole. The first bits of the Moon were quarantined, too.
About seven hundred grams, roughly a pound and a half, were placed in
containers with mice, fish, birds, shrimp, flies, worms, bacteria, and thirty-
three species of plants and seedlings. Scientists watched to make sure none
developed weird Moon diseases or obvious mutations, just in case the rocks
were poisonous. Everything was fine.
In the Lunar Sample Lab, a half century later, we know that we only need
to worry about contaminating the Moon.
After reluctantly handing Mosie my pen, I covered my shoes in fabric
booties, like the ones doctors and nurses wear in a surgical suite. I shrugged

white coveralls up over my clothes, zipping the suit up to my throat. Snaps
ringing my neck, wrists, and ankles tightened the suit against my body,
allowing nothing in or out. I could not be allowed to pollute the Moon.
I pulled on purple nitrile gloves, donned a hairnet, tugged knee-high,
astronaut-looking white shoes over my bootied feet, and turned to face Mosie.
She’s done this thousands of times, yet she laughed with me as I tried to shift
my awkward bulk. She opened the locker room door and we stepped into an
air shower. I stood on a Swiss-cheese-like rubber mat as a fan blew down
from the ceiling. Any Earth dust, any human dust, on our suits was whisked
away.
Finally, Mosie opened the entrance to the clean room, and I was
surrounded by the Moon.
Most of it was locked behind a vault whose door came courtesy of the
U.S. Federal Reserve. But the Lunar Sample Lab is an active geology lab, and
bits of the Moon were laid out everywhere. The Moon was in cabinet
drawers, displayed with special placards inside glass hoods, filling plastic
baggies, perched unceremoniously in stainless steel baskets.
The rocks were so obviously not from around here. Most Earth rocks have
a weariness, no matter where they are found. They are molded by beach
waves and rain, smoothed by wind and time, covered in lichen, surrounded by
trees or grass. The Moon rocks are nothing like Earth rocks. They are jagged,
blocky, crystalline. Some are inky black and others are chalky, sparkling
white. They look exactly like what they are, pieces of the shimmering Moon
brought down to Earth. A few of the Moon bits Mosie and her team shared
with me were more familiar-looking, especially the volcanic rocks, which
resemble Hawaiian pumice—itself an alien-looking specimen born in the
dark and molten heart of our world. Most are made up of minerals that are
also found on Earth, though one called armalcolite (named for Apollo 11
astronauts Neil Armstrong, Buzz Aldrin, and Mike Collins) was found first on
the Moon and is vanishingly rare on this planet. But even the rocks with
familiar chemical makeup look weird and not, with apologies to Anaxagoras
and Plutarch, “Earthy.”

Mosie showed me some highlights, and then led me over to a microscope.
The Moon people knew I had a favorite rock, and they took out troctolite
76535 before I arrived.
Apollo 17 astronaut Jack Schmitt used a rake to lift this rock off the Moon
on December 13, 1972. He was walking in a valley called Taurus-Littrow, on
the southeastern edge of the Moon’s Sea of Serenity. Schmitt is the only
geologist to visit the Moon, and he knew how to look for weird rocks. This
little greenish, grayish specimen—troctolite is from the Greek troctos,
meaning “trout,” for its spotted green appearance, and lithos, for “rock”—has
been called the most interesting sample to come back from the Moon.
It is coarse-grained, and it cooled off slowly after being forged in the
Moon’s depths. The most recent studies on this rock show that when it was
made, the Moon had a rotating liquid core, just like Earth does. That core
endowed the Moon with a magnetic field, just like Earth maintains today. But
the Moon is calm now. Its magnetic field is no more. Troctolite 76535 tells
this story because troctolite 76535 is the oldest rock to come home during
Apollo. It is almost as old as the Moon. At 4.26 billion years of age, it is
almost as old as Earth.
I wanted so badly to hold it and feel my hand pulse against it. It looked like
no rock I had ever seen. It was jagged and cubelike, almost like a geode from
a tourist shop in the mountains, but more alien. It had a grayish, spectral cast,
and the olivine mineral within it gave the whole thing a faint hint of green. A
cubical crystal grew from the top left of the rock. I kept moving the
microscope dial to change the focus. Troctolite 76535 looked sharp and stiff,
not crumbly at all. It was so utterly other. Up close, the greens and golds
became clearer. I saw a dark flake that looked like gold or pyrite, fool’s gold,
and Mosie told me it was a mineral called pyroxene. The whole thing was
smaller than I expected, so little and fragile inside its sterile box. The ancient,
primordial Moon, almost close enough to kiss.
I thought of the white full-Moon disk kept safe by Ennigaldi, seventeen
centuries after Enheduanna wrote poems to the Moon God. The daughter of
Nabonidus may have believed it held something of Enheduanna’s spirit.
Troctolite 76535 was likewise imbued with something ethereal, something

hallowed. It was the Moon beneath my eyes, not above them. It was
touchable, instead of hanging forever unreachably far away from me. Relics
like this tiny crystal are what make Apollo as special today as it was in 1969.
The astronauts’ postcards and the story of their adventure will live forever,
but the pieces of the Moon itself are the finer legacy.
Because of Apollo, the glimmering orb that illuminates our nights and
accompanies our days was finally made manifest. And from its unique,
disorienting point of view, the Apollo program gave us—all of us—Earth.
Viewing Earth from a distance totally revised our thinking about this planet,
ecumenically and scientifically. Apollo brought the Moon down to Earth, and
it brought Earth down to size. For the first time, we saw the Moon up close
and Earth from a distance, and our understanding of both worlds changed
forever.
The first creatures to assist in humanity’s collective disorientation were not
humans but tortoises, packed alongside a bunch of seeds into a Russian
spacecraft called Zond 5. Twelve days before their launch in September 1968,
the tortoises were strapped in the rocket capsule and deprived of food and
water, so scientists would be able to study any changes in their bodies without
being confused by the activity of their metabolisms.
The tortoises had no Earthly idea what was happening, but if they felt any
sort of humanlike emotions, surely one of them was confusion. How strange,
to be immobilized without anything to eat or drink for two weeks, to then be
launched off the world. At least the humans who followed the tortoises knew
where they were going, and had some idea of why.
Inside the capsule, the Soviet space engineers had mounted a small
camera, which took pictures of Earth as Zond 5 hurtled away from it. If the
tortoises had been able to look out at our cloud-wisped world, would they
have recognized it at all?
Today, you can follow a Twitter account that posts daily whole-Earth
images from a satellite called the Deep Space Climate Observatory. People

have been living on the space station continually since 2000. A rich guy even
launched his car into the void in 2018.[*1] Space is workaday. But until the
late 1960s, no one had ever seen Earth from afar. In 1966, the short-lived
Lunar Orbiter 1 sent home a fuzzy image showing a crater-dappled, curved
lunar surface, with a crescent Earth rising above it. Russian surveillance ships
also sent back snapshots, including the first image of the Moon’s far side. But
radio transmission in the 1960s was poor, so the images were grainy, mottled,
and hard to credit.
Then came the tortoise ship. Zond 5 was the first spacecraft to circle
around the Moon and come back home, carrying the raw negatives of its
otherworldly postcards.
Almost fifty-six thousand miles away from home, a little more than one-
fourth of the distance to the Moon, Zond 5 snapped a seminal photo of a
waxing gibbous Earth. Africa appears in the central part of the frame, the
Sahara plainly visible. A cloud shaped like a cresting ocean wave swirls above
the North Atlantic.[*2] Clouds eddy around the Cape of Good Hope, and
Antarctica is blanketed in white. North America is invisible, because it is not
sunlit; like the Moon after first quarter, some 20 percent of Earth seems to
have vanished in the void.
For the first time in the history of life, we saw Earth the way we usually
see the Moon. It’s easy to forget how singularly strange this was. We saw
Earth as it really is: alone. It’s so fragile, so cosmically small, so completely
isolated and precious and limited. Earth is all we’ve got. Until the Russian
tortoises and their camera silently sped around the Moon, nothing that was
born here had ever left the place. So in a very real sense, it was impossible to
see Earth as a world among many. We didn’t have a cosmic perspective on
our only home. For all our countless centuries of dreaming, we couldn’t see it.
No creature that breathes or swims, nothing that evolved with the tides to
walk on land, no seed that bursts forth into a tree that reaches forever
heavenward—nothing, ever, had left Earth behind.
The tortoises weren’t the first animal astronauts; a long line of organisms,
from chimpanzees to dogs to people, had preceded the tortoises into space
beyond Earth’s atmosphere. But the passengers of Zond 5 were the first lunar

visitors, the first beings to truly leave this planet. They were the first creatures
to journey beyond Earth’s orbit, to escape the sphere of Earth’s influence, and
to venture somewhere else.[*3]
—
After capturing the gibbous Earth, something went wrong with Zond 5’s
camera, and the spacecraft wasn’t able to bring home photos of the Moon’s
surface. But it did bring back the tortoises. They might have achieved some
level of reptilian notoriety had they been given names, but the Soviets just
referred to them, rather coldly, as “the experimental animals.” Though they
were deprived of food and drink, they flew with all the trappings of a meal
and the scent of home: seeds of peas, carrots, and tomatoes, wildflowers and
pine; and some samples of humanity’s most important crops, wheat and
barley, so scientists could study how the seeds fared in space. The Sumerian
beer goddess Ninkasi would have been proud.
They circled the Moon on September 18, 1968 c.e., and on September 21,
their capsule splashed down in the Indian Ocean with incredible force. U.S.
intelligence later reported that the capsule careened through the atmosphere
with the speed and energy of a meteorite, a violent journey that would have
killed a human. But the tortoises survived. Then they traveled back to
Moscow, where scientists cut them open and examined every inch of their
starved, desiccated bodies.
Symptoms of starvation aside, the creatures didn’t seem any different from
the eight control animals that stayed behind. There was no Moon cancer or
rocket-jitter syndrome or any other weird, ominous side effect. The tortoises
had fulfilled their mission. Their bodies reported that it must be safe out
there, and safe to swing around the Moon, at least briefly.
Three months later, humans did it, too.
Apollo 8 was supposed to be an Earth-orbit mission, designed to test the
command capsule and the lunar lander that would eventually take Neil
Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin to the Moon’s surface. But the tortoises’ historic
mission helped convince NASA officials to move the equipment test to the

Moon instead. The point of Apollo was to beat Russian people there, after all.
So on December 24, 1968—Christmas Eve—astronauts Bill Anders, Jim
Lovell, and Frank Borman became the first human beings to loop around
Earth’s companion.
From Earth, the Moon was a waxing crescent. The Moon was between
Earth and the Sun that night, which meant its far side, the dark side for those
on Earth, was fully illuminated. The three men gaped at the sight, which no
human being had ever witnessed.
There were no obvious plains of basalt, the Moon’s dark maria, which face
Earth and give the appearance of a rabbit or a person’s visage. These ancient
lava fields cover some 30 percent of the near side, which is the Moon we see.
They formed during violent meteor strikes, when the Moon was pummeled so
hard it became drenched in its own molten rock. But they are a feature of the
near side alone, owing to the Moon’s formation story. The far side was tightly
packed with craters and, as we know now, looks more like the dimpled face
of planet Mercury, or the crater fields of Mars.
As Apollo 8 circled around to the Earth-facing near side, Anders was busy
shooting photos of the surface so engineers could plan landing sites. But he
took a second to look up. There, again, was the rising gibbous globe.
“Oh my God, look at that picture over there!” Anders shouted. “That’s the
Earth coming up. Wow, is that pretty.” All three astronauts stared, and
Anders and Lovell switched the camera to color film. All three would recall
the sight countless times during the next five decades.
“It was the most beautiful, heart-catching sight of my life, one that sent a
torrent of nostalgia, of sheer homesickness, surging through me,” Borman
recalled in a 1988 autobiography.[1]
The crew had a television camera on board, and they trained it on the
distant Earth as they circled its Moon. Images of the lonely world shone from
some one billion television sets spread across sixty-four nations. Each
astronaut read from the Book of Genesis, the creation story written after
Gilgamesh’s Flood, and long after Enheduanna made the Moon paramount in
the first literate cultures of Mesopotamia. The crew had had the Bible’s first
ten verses printed on fireproof pages and inserted into their flight plan.

“In the beginning,” Anders read, “God created the heavens and the Earth.
The Earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face of the
deep. And the spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters.” Tens of
thousands of radio stations carried the broadcast.
—
Back on Earth, tickers in New York’s Times Square heralded the news:
astronauts borman anders and lovell circle moon. In April of that year,
the tickers had blared the news of Martin Luther King, Jr.’s assassination. In
June they told of Robert F. Kennedy’s assassination. They told of the
American military’s losses during the Tet Offensive in Vietnam, and riots at
the Democratic National Convention in Chicago, and a silent protest by Black
athletes Tommie Smith and John Carlos during the Olympics, and the
presidential victory of Richard Nixon. For many people, the circumnavigation
of the Moon was a welcome respite from the turmoil of a singularly violent,
unsettled year. Apollo 8’s view of the rising Earth offered a new perspective
on our fractured world. Borman later commented that Apollo 8 moved the
nation forward diplomatically as much as scientifically. “It cast the country in
a favorable light, at a time when there were many things that cast it in an
unfavorable light,” he told the Smithsonian Institution historian Teasel Muir-
Harmony. NASA wanted it to be that way; the space agency and the nation
needed a public-relations win. But the result was far more dramatic than even
NASA officials expected.
The science fiction author Arthur C. Clarke wrote that the Apollo 8
broadcast “marks one of those rare turning points in the human history after
which nothing will ever be the same again…. We no longer live in the world
which existed before Christmas 1968.”[2]
The Apollo missions were the culmination of uncountable dreams since
the beginning of time, maybe since the beginning of eyesight. They were the
pinnacle of human exploration, the most stunning events of the second
millennium c.e. They were a new manifestation of the American spirit of
technological innovation, and a very American brand of religiosity. They were

simultaneously the grandest possible endorsement of the power of science,
and the grandest possible example of American technological prowess. When
President John F. Kennedy announced to Congress on May 25, 1961, that
we’d land someone on the Moon “before this decade is out,” there was no
technology that could make it happen. NASA had no rockets powerful
enough to get anything that far, not to mention computers small enough to
travel on safe, habitable spaceships, which also did not exist. All of it was
invented from thin air in less than a decade. From October 1957 to July
1971, a span of 165 months, Americans went from embarrassing space-race
losers to the nation that sent human beings to the surface of the Moon, where
they drove cars and hit golf balls.
President Kennedy announced what would become the Apollo program
about six weeks after a Russian cosmonaut named Yuri Gagarin became the
first person to fly in space. It was about a month after the failed Bay of Pigs
invasion, when a group of CIA-trained refugees landed on a Cuban beach and
tried to topple the communist Castro government. The so-called space race
was just past the starting line, and in focusing on the Moon, Kennedy was
trying to shift attention away from a hemisphere in crisis. Kennedy didn’t care
about rocks. He didn’t send brave souls to the Moon for science. The goal was
to beat the Russians to the Moon, to defeat the great bogeyman of mid-
century America and score a win for republican democracy over communism.
The Apollo missions became the most expensive nonmilitary program ever,
eclipsing even the Panama Canal construction, according to longtime NASA
historian Roger D. Launius. The only comparable undertaking in American
history is probably the Manhattan Project to build the atomic bomb.
Apollo was a planetary-scale boast, a giant risk with high reward, a daring
gamble for a youthful nation. It was propaganda at its finest. Its astronauts
were upstanding white Protestant men who had traditional families and wore
casual pants and drank whiskey from highball glasses. They were red-blooded
American heroes who cooked homemade pizzas and played baseball with

their kids, then put on spacesuits and did the impossible. They were Manifest
Destiny incarnate, bursting with promise and American masculinity, their
legacy rising like the phallic rockets that launched them.
This picture forms through the blurred lens of history, through the
carefully staged photographs of the astronauts and their families, and a long
legacy of laudatory pop culture iconography. But the Apollo program was not
a universally beloved emblem of American exceptionalism at the time. By
1962, members of Congress were decrying the increase in federal spending
dedicated to the Moon shot. Public opinion wasn’t much better. Throughout
the 1960s, more than 40 percent of Americans opposed government-funded
journeys to the Moon, according to Launius’s research.[3] In 1965, Americans
favored spending money on anti-poverty programs and “Medicare for the
aged” more than they favored building star-spangled rockets. Social and
physical scientists criticized the program as a “moondoggle,” according to
Launius. Opponents of the Vietnam War, figures from the feminist
movement, and civil rights leaders used Apollo as an emblem for problems
with the federal government.
Republicans critiqued Apollo’s government-led excesses. Former president
Dwight Eisenhower lamented that the Moon shot took money away from
education and automation research. Meanwhile, Democrats in Congress tried
and failed to redirect funding away from Apollo toward social programs, even
as President Johnson argued federal spending in the South—where America’s
rockets are still made today—would lift up impoverished communities. He
and Vice President Hubert Humphrey tried to tie the Moon shot to the larger
scaffolding of the Great Society. “We can put a man on the Moon at the same
time as we help to put a man on his feet,” Humphrey said.[4] But visions of a
spacefaring nation were clouded by civil rights struggles and by Vietnam. And
many could not square Humphrey’s promise to lift up people while lifting
rockets. Many of those who felt excluded were not silent, even during the
biggest space event of them all.
A few days before Apollo 11 lifted off, a contingent of five hundred
mostly Black protesters, marshaled by the civil rights leader Ralph Abernathy,
the right-hand man and successor of Martin Luther King, Jr., arrived at the

gates of Kennedy Space Center. Abernathy and other members of the
Southern Christian Leadership Conference brought four mules and two
wooden carts, calling back to the promises of emancipation and drawing a
stark contrast between the lives of working poor Americans and the gleaming
white obelisk on the launchpad. They met with the NASA administrator,
Thomas Paine, and they sang “We Shall Overcome.”[5]
One archival photo shows Abernathy holding a sign that reads $12 a day
to feed an astronaut. we could feed a child for $8. As Paine later
recalled, Abernathy told the NASA chief that one-fifth of Americans lacked
adequate food, clothing, shelter, and medical care, and that the money for the
space program should be spent to “feed the hungry, clothe the naked, tend the
sick, and house the shelterless.” But Abernathy did not ask for a scrubbed
launch; he sought a promise that NASA would task its employees with
addressing hunger, and that the agency would support the movement to
combat poverty and other social problems. At the protest, Abernathy thanked
Paine, and told a UPI reporter he was proud of the accomplishment and
believed in what Apollo 11 stood for.
“On the eve of man’s noblest venture, I am profoundly moved by the
nation’s achievements in space and the heroism of the three men embarking
for the Moon,” he said. But “what we can do for space and exploration we
demand that we do for starving people.”
Paine later recalled telling Abernathy that NASA’s goal was “child’s play
compared to the tremendously difficult human problems with which you and
your people were concerned.” He told the civil rights leader that he was a
member of the NAACP and was sympathetic to their cause.
“If we could solve the problems of poverty in the United States by not
pushing the button to launch men to the Moon,” Paine told the group, “then
we would not push that button.” He gave one hundred members of
Abernathy’s group some VIP tickets to the launch, and suggested that
NASA’s space success should be used as a yardstick to measure American
progress in other areas.
The morning of the launch, buses picked up Abernathy and members of
his group, and they sat with other dignitaries to watch the liftoff.

Kennedy’s bold pronouncement in 1961 certainly gave the newly minted
National Aeronautics and Space Administration a lot to do. In the span of
eight years, NASA would launch the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs,
sending one and then two people at a time into orbit around Earth. They
performed the first spacewalks and the first docking maneuvers, testing the
skills and equipment they would need to fly to the Moon and return safely to
Earth. While they flew, more than four hundred thousand other humans toiled
below them to make sure they were safe.
Mercury, in the early 1960s, had been a success. Gemini, the middle child
of the space program, was another win. By January 1967 it was time to test
Apollo, beginning with the crew module that would serve as a home for the
teams of three who would fly to the Moon. On January 27, 1967, Virgil
“Gus” Grissom, Roger Chaffee, and Ed White climbed into the Apollo 1
capsule, called the command module, for a test run. Their actual launch was
still a month away. The crew strapped in and prepared to check all their
launch systems while Mission Controllers ran tests. Grissom shifted in his
seat, brushing up against a bare copper wire. Voltage spiked across the wire
an instant later, and the sealed capsule—pressurized with pure oxygen—
erupted in flames. White tried to open the door, but the atmospheric pressure
inside the cabin made it impossible. The three astronauts suffocated within
seconds.
The tragedy continued to unfold over the next twenty months. The Moon
race was put on hold while concurrent congressional investigations ran their
course. NASA and its contractors redesigned the capsule so crew members
could push the door out in three seconds, should anything similar ever happen
again. The spacecraft’s atmosphere was adjusted to a mixture of nitrogen and
oxygen, more like Earth’s own and less volatile than pure oxygen. The new
Apollo command module contained fire-resistant materials and a redesigned
electrical system. Armstrong would later tell his biographer Jay Barbree that
Apollo 1 ended up saving lives, too. “We uncovered a whole barrel of snakes.
We would have fixed them one by one,” he said. “The fire forced us to shut

the program down and redo it right, and we got there on the backs of Gus,
Ed, and Roger.”[6]
On October 11, 1968, Apollo 7 lifted off from launchpad 34 on Cape
Canaveral, Florida. The crew of three stayed aloft for nearly eleven days,
proving the Apollo capsule would be a safe home for even longer than was
necessary for a lunar round trip. Only a few tests stood between the Moon
and the first human boots to walk on it.
The lunar module, the actual lander that would ferry two men to and from
the surface, would not be ready for its first checkouts for another few months.
Some at NASA wanted to wait to orbit the Moon until the entire Apollo
apparatus could be tested together. But NASA officials told Lyndon Johnson
they wanted to go for it with just the orbiting capsule. The tortoises had
already won this race; there was no reason for NASA to be slow and steady.
So a few days after his successor, Nixon, was elected president, Johnson gave
the go-ahead. On Christmas Eve, Apollo 8 circled the Moon carrying
Borman, Lovell, and Anders with his camera. Apollo 9 rose from the
launchpad in March 1969, carrying the capsule and the brand-new leggy
lander into Earth orbit. Apollo 10 lifted off in May 1969 and flew to the
Moon, a full dress rehearsal for the first landing.
And then finally, in July 1969, it was time. Time to leave Earth and set
foot on another world. Time to make the giant leap across the void, from
home to the unknown. Time to bring the Moon from imagination into reality.
Time to visit the realm of the divine.
Neil Armstrong, Buzz Aldrin, and Mike Collins had trained and tested for
years. In the haste to meet Kennedy’s deadline, NASA launched five Apollo
missions in the span of ten months, which imbued the whole enterprise with
an intensity and energy that belied the care and precision of NASA’s flyboys.
Armstrong, Aldrin, and Collins were among the agency’s best pilots. Each
spent months mastering every inch of the command module and lunar lander.
Aldrin focused on the science experiments, while Armstrong repeatedly
tested flying in the Lunar Lander Training Vehicle, a full-size replica of the
machine that he would later land on the Moon. Collins would not descend to

the Moon, but would remain in command of the capsule that brought them
there, and would ensure the first moonwalkers could make it home.
—
The morning of the launch, July 16, 1969, more than a million people
packed the beaches of eastern Florida. They came in RVs and camper vans,
or cars with tents or just cots. NASA alone had invited twenty thousand
people, including the vice president and half of Congress.[7]
Armstrong was the first man on board, followed by Collins and Aldrin.
They rode an elevator to the top of the skyscraper-sized rocket. Then they sat
in the capsule and waited. It must have been interminable. Each man would
tell the story countless times in the decades to follow, especially Aldrin, who
never shied away from the spotlight. Still, no post hoc account can fully
capture what they must have felt as they prepared for a rocket to carefully
explode beneath them. They were going to the Moon. They were leaving Earth
for that other place, for real.
We don’t often pause to think about how strange the whole thing was, how
strange to send a bunch of strapping young men to the Moon just because.
How utterly odd that sentient pieces of Earth—because that’s all we are,
really, bits of the planet remolded by time and sunlight—made a choice to
send some of their brethren away from it. What a weird thing to do, just for
the purpose of seeing what it was like, and saying that it had been done. Just
to do it, because it’s hard, because we think we can, because we think
someone we don’t like might do it before us. In his autobiography of Apollo,
Carrying the Fire, Collins himself reflected on the oddity of his space
mission. Sitting in the capsule moments before launch, he thought to himself,
“Here I am, a white male, age thirty-eight, height 5 feet 11 inches, weight 165
pounds, salary $17,000 per annum, resident of a Texas suburb, with black
spot on my roses, state of mind unsettled, about to be shot off to the Moon.
Yes, to the Moon.”[8]
As the Apollo 11 crew waited, perched on their Saturn V, thousands of
people working in Florida and in Houston checked screens and ticked boxes.

They each reported “GO” as they checked and rechecked the status from
every handwoven computer wire, every carefully molded rubber hose, every
solid bit of fuel. GO.
Apollo 11 was ready. Humanity was ready. “The time for farewells had
come.”[9] At 9:32 in the morning Florida time, on July 16, 1969 c.e., the
Saturn V rocket ignited. The tower strained against the gravity of Earth, the
planet that birthed us, the only planet covered in life, the only one
accompanied by a solitary spectral Moon. The rocket trembled. Armstrong,
Aldrin, and Collins felt themselves smooshed against their seats as the rocket
strained against the atmosphere. Bolts fired and released the Saturn V from its
shackles. Then it did the improbable, and the inexorable: It left. Promethean
thunder scattered the birds and a shockwave rippled across the beach, ruffled
the ties of the assembled men, swished the updos of the women, pressed
against the hopeful chests of children who didn’t yet know space launches
could end in grief. In a moment, the rocket and its flame were a speck in the
sky as they sped Moonward. The astronauts’ target was 218,096 miles away.
Three days passed. Earth grew smaller in the window and the crew’s quarry
grew larger. The astronauts named their command ship Columbia. It was not
at all a coincidence that the ship lofted by the brains of von Braun would
carry the moniker of Jules Verne’s Moon ship. They named the lunar lander
Eagle. Their emblem was our national mascot,  alighting on the Moon
carrying a small golden replica of an olive branch, a global symbol of peace.
The eagle comes to us from the Roman legions, and the olive branch comes
down to us from the story of Genesis. But like that story, the bird has an even
older heritage. After the Flood, Noah sends out a dove, which returns bearing
an olive branch as a sign of dry land and a truce with God. In the Epic of
Gilgamesh, after the Flood, Utnapishtim sends a dove, a swallow, and a raven.
Only the raven doesn’t come back, and Utnapishtim knows the bird stayed
behind, having found what he sought.

The Apollo crew arrived in lunar orbit on July 19, and the next afternoon,
Armstrong and Aldrin floated into the Eagle lander, closing the door of
Columbia. Collins orbited the Moon while the pair descended. On the
afternoon of July 20, they undocked from Columbia and turned on the Eagle’s
engine. The ship began to descend toward the lunar surface. Armstrong and
Aldrin felt their bodies grow heavier again, though faintly, as the Moon’s
gravity reached toward them. They were falling now.
A few hundred feet from the surface, Armstrong took command of the
Eagle. He looked out the window. He and Aldrin had scrutinized the photos
made by Apollo 8 and 10, and they knew where they wanted to land.
Armstrong watched the target crater recede in the distance. They were almost
four miles off the mark.
Armstrong, by many accounts the most careful pilot in the astronaut corps,
had the controls. His hands tensed and relaxed with surgical precision, puffing
gas through the Eagle’s thrusters to adjust its course. Nothing but boulders lay
beneath them. If Armstrong set the lander down on a slope or a rock, the
Eagle’s legs might tip over, meaning it would never take off again, consigning
the two astronauts to the Moon forever. He scanned the horizon as Aldrin
called out their altitude above the Moon. They were falling at twenty feet per
second.
“120 feet.” Aldrin’s voice was tranquil. Mission Control was silent.
“Okay. 75 feet. There’s looking good,” Aldrin noticed where Armstrong
planned to set down.
Houston beeped in. “Sixty seconds,” said Charlie Duke, who was serving
as CAPCOM, an astronaut on Earth tasked with crew communication. One
minute of fuel remained. If it ran out before the Eagle touched down, they
would crash.
They fell further. Thirty seconds. Silence from the lander.
“We copy you down, Eagle,” Charlie Duke said. Hundreds of millions of
people on Earth held their breath.
“Houston, Tranquility Base here. The Eagle has landed,” Armstrong said
evenly. Duke was less calm: “You got a bunch of guys about to turn blue.
We’re breathing again. Thanks a lot,” he said.[10]

“Thank you,” Armstrong said. Thank you. Yes. I am now on the Moon.
Thanks. The poise in his voice on the recordings is hard to comprehend, an
engineer’s calm and a pilot’s formality. How many other people would have
let out a barbaric yawp? At the very least, a gasp?
NASA told the media that Armstrong and Aldrin would go to sleep for
four hours, which did not happen; instead, the pair readied themselves to get
out. By the time they were ready, it was time for Sunday dinner in America,
and early morning in Europe. Schoolchildren around the world were given
July 21 off. One-fifth of humanity watched on live TV, in an era when the
vast majority of people didn’t have televisions. Mission Controllers in
Houston told Collins, orbiting above in Columbia, that Armstrong and Aldrin
wanted to get out early. “Tell them to eat some lunch before they do,” he said.
[11]
As he prepared to exit the lander, Armstrong realized his piloting prowess
had almost gotten them into trouble. The Eagle was supposed to touch down
with a bit of force, which would collapse its legs a bit and make the descent
down the ladder a little easier. Armstrong alighted like a hummingbird, the
barest touch bringing the Eagle down. That meant the lander’s spiderlike body
hovered far above the surface, making his first small step more like a jump.
The last rung of the ladder hung three feet from the Moon’s surface.
He opened the hatch.
He got out.
He checked the distance to the ground—“it takes a pretty good little
jump,” he warned Aldrin—and prepared to walk on the Moon.
“I’m going to step off the LM now,” he said. And at 10:56 p.m. Eastern
Daylight Time, on Sunday evening, July 20, 1969 c.e., he did. You know
what he said next.
—
Neil Armstrong was the only man on the Moon for about eighteen minutes.
He walked around a bit, getting his bearings, and accidentally trampling his
first bootprints. He’d meant to take a photo of those. He scooped a quick

sample, in case he and Aldrin had to evacuate suddenly. And then he
photographed Aldrin coming down the ladder. The photo sequence shows
Aldrin’s leg out, arm holding on, descending, in one of the most active photos
from the duo’s brief jaunt on the Moon. This photo, more than many of the
others, brims with meaning.
Until Armstrong photographed Aldrin, every image of the Moon had been
from afar—from a distance, looking up, or even looking down from its orbital
embrace. But now, humans were on it, on the inside looking out. The
influential twentieth-century photographer Edward Steichen once noted that
“a portrait is not made in the camera but on either side of it.” Once captured,
the moment really exists among three parties: the subject, the photographer,
and the viewer. In this photo of Aldrin climbing down, all three are on the
Moon for the first time. The human mind was inhabiting the Moon for the
first time, instead of projecting onto it from the outside.
The landscape was unlike anywhere on Earth. It had that acrid gunpowder
aroma. Its surface seemed to undulate, a trick of the terrain and the stark
shadows cast by angled sunlight falling flat, with no atmosphere to bend it.
The surface was sandy and soft, which Aldrin later compared to finely
powdered carbon.[12] The Moon was not gray, but a landscape flecked with
color. Apollo 10 astronauts sailing above its surface had noticed a range of
browns, from light tan to milk chocolate. Buzz Aldrin remarked at one point
that some rocks resembled biotite, a greenish-brownish-black substance. He
joked that some rocks near the surface even seemed to sparkle with purple.
[13] Analysis of the Moon rocks has since found volcanic glass in every color
of the spectrum, from yellow and orange to green and brown and blue.
Despite the vivid surroundings, the landscape was deathly quiet. The
astronauts talked to each other through voice-activated microphones, so their
helmets were full of machine beeps and garbled commentary from Earth and
each other. But if they could have listened to the Moon, they would have
heard nothing at all.
Though Armstrong’s famous first step and the precious rocks the pair
collected will live forever, their lunar sojourn lasted only two hours. After all
that, they were supposed to sleep.

They tried to rest, but whirring life-support pumps and bright sunlight
foiled any attempt at real shut-eye. Later Apollo missions carried hammocks
so the astronauts could sleep a little more comfortably, but Armstrong and
Aldrin had to curl up on the Eagle’s floor. Armstrong’s nose was stuffed up,
probably because of all the Moon dust they had tracked inside, and because
of space itself. Many astronauts report feeling congested in low gravity. It was
also too bright to sleep. The pair pulled shades over the lander’s windows, but
the Eagle’s instrument panels were illuminated, too. “After I got into my sleep
stage and all settled down, I realized there was something else,” Armstrong
said at a later debriefing. He was nestled beneath the Eagle’s telescope, which
the crew used to chart their journey against the stars. “Earth was shining right
through the telescope into my eye. It was like a light bulb.”[14]
The first human being to step on a world besides Earth blocked his home
planet’s light with a rock-collecting bag.
When Neil and Buzz and Mike came home, the world wanted a piece of
them. The Nixon administration sent them on a tour, including their wives
and a few NASA officials and a secretary named Geneva “Gennie” Barnes.
They visited twenty-seven cities within twenty-four countries in a dizzying
span of forty-five days.
The astronauts knew their journeys were monumental, but in the context
of the 1960s, and in the context of their daunting engineering and piloting
work, they put poetry aside. Collins, who stayed alone in the Columbia orbiter
while his colleagues went gallivanting about, once lamented that the
astronauts were not equipped to talk about what they witnessed.
“We weren’t trained to emote, we were trained to repress emotions, lest
they interfere with our very complicated, delicate, and one-chance-only
duties,” he demurred in his memoir. “If they wanted an emotional press
conference, for Christ’s sake, they should have put together an Apollo crew of
a philosopher, a priest, and a poet—not three test pilots.”[15]

The immortal tale became a burden to many astronauts. Neil Armstrong
came home as the most famous person alive and largely retreated from public
life. The other Apollo moonwalkers often struggled to reenter the regular
world—the one we all live on, the quotidian one with meetings and humdrum
tasks to which the rest of humanity has eternally been consigned—after
witnessing that world recede in the distance. Several of them got divorced
after their return. Buzz Aldrin has written at length about his alcoholism. Jim
Irwin, who collected some of the most important rocks to come home from
the Moon, became a born-again Christian and dedicated himself to spreading
the Gospel, once saying “God walking on the Earth is more important than
man walking on the Moon.”[16]
Some astronauts tried to translate their un-Earthly experiences in other
ways. Russian cosmonaut Alexei Leonov[*4] and Apollo 12 astronaut Alan
Bean both produced art after returning from space. Bean retired from NASA
and became a full-time painter after returning home as the fourth man to
walk on the Moon. His canvases are textured with bootprints and crater
dimples. The paintings are wild with color, streaked with golds and pinks,
purples and oranges—colors that astronauts and the rocks report were true,
but that look nothing like the stark black-and-white images captured by the
cameras. Many astronauts had described the vivid colors of the Moon, but
Bean was the only one to dedicate his remaining years to rendering them for
the rest of us.
The astronauts were human, so naturally they tried to have fun while
ticking items off their endless checklists. Walking on the Moon was a joyful
exercise; they bounced! They had a hard time getting back up when they fell
over. They reported that the views were magnificent, spectral, colorful. The
technical, jargon-filled Apollo transcripts are peppered with moments of
delight.
But even their joy is tempered with a certain kind of grandeur. The Moon
was strange, walking and working on it was strange, and as Irwin put it, it
changes you. Moonwalking was revelry limned with ecstasy, of the kind that
would be familiar to the faithful.

Many astronauts were pious people. Of the thirty-two men assigned to the
Apollo missions, twenty-six were Protestant and six were Catholic. They
served as leaders in their congregations, a  narrative that neatly fit NASA’s
picturesque Americana propaganda. Several of the men spoke of their faith in
the Christian God, the God of  Abraham of Ur, Moon City of the ancient
Near East. They did so even after a lawsuit from an American atheist named
Madalyn Murray O’Hair, who sued the space agency for First Amendment
violations after the Apollo 8 Genesis reading. Aldrin, a Presbyterian, worked
out an arrangement with his church to quietly consume a thimbleful of wine
and a Communion wafer while on the lunar surface. In a ceremony that took
place during radio blackout, he read from the Gospel of John: “I am the vine,
you are the branches. Whoever abides in me, and I in him, will bring forth
much fruit. Apart from me you can do nothing.”[17]
And later, en route home from the historic first landing, Aldrin took part
in a TV broadcast during which he quoted from Psalms: “Personally,
reflecting [on] the events of the past several days, a verse from Psalms comes
to mind to me. When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the
moon and the stars, which thou has ordained; What is man that thou art
mindful of him?”[18]
From Nabonidus and Sin to Copernicus’s papal dedication, astronauts like
Aldrin, Irwin, and the Apollo 8 crew followed a long tradition of explorers
invoking a higher power in command of their cosmic pursuits. For the space
explorers, some of this was demographically predestined. America in the
1960s and 1970s was a more overtly religious nation than it is now.[19]
Among people born in the “Silent Generation,” from 1928 to 1945, a
whopping 84 percent of Americans identified as Christian, according to the
Pew Research Center. This generation includes every member of the Apollo
astronaut corps. But elements of the astronauts’ religiosity were also baked
into their mission.
Project Apollo was, metaphorically and truly, a mission much like an
organized religion. It grasped for immortality. Its political goals, set against
the backdrop of the Cold War and the civil rights movement, were in some
sense a way of seeking absolution. Its messengers were exemplars of courage

and conviction, and their tasks inspired a kind of reverence. The missions
even brought about a new awakening, in this case new knowledge and a
different way of thinking about humanity’s home and our shared experience.
In the simplest terms, Apollo was about leaving Earth behind, a mission that
until 1968 had been limited to stories about gods and higher beings. It makes
sense that the people who actually transcended Earth were imbued with
mythical power.
There is another reason for the religion-soaked commentary and ritual.
Regardless of their faith traditions, most people who leave Earth have borne
witness to the journey’s transformational power.
By the early 2020s, only about 550 human beings had slipped the surly
bonds of Earth and floated above it far enough to see its curvature, to see the
eggshell-thin line of our life-giving atmosphere. Many report feeling an
overwhelming sense of clarity and unity, a heart-swelling state of heightened
awareness and togetherness that is common enough to have its own name: the
“overview effect.”
The term comes from aviation, and if you’ve ever flown in a plane you
might have experienced a version of it. The sense of boundaries evaporating,
of your own puniness when arrayed against the broader world; the unnerving
shift in perspective as cars turn into tiny dots and metropolises melt until you
notice only land and water. You realize we are all hanging on to the same
rock, the only place any of us can turn in deadly turbulent waters. You realize
it’s worth protecting. You realize its inhabitants are worth protecting.
This is how Edgar Mitchell, the sixth man to walk on the Moon, described
the overview effect in 1974, in an interview with People magazine:
You develop an instant global consciousness, a people orientation, an
intense dissatisfaction with the state of the world, and a compulsion to do
something about it. From out there on the Moon, international politics
look so petty. You want to grab a politician by the scruff of the neck and
drag him a quarter of a million miles out and say, “Look at that, you son
of a bitch.”[20]

A visitor to space does not need to be pious to feel this epiphany.
Back on Earth, in Houston’s Lunar Sample Lab, it was possible to
experience a similar version of this otherworldly awe. After Andrea Mosie
took me through the first door, we performed a series of steps that felt very
much like a purification ritual. I removed any Earthly pollutants from my
person. I clothed myself in pure white, handling each step with care and
something like fear, because I didn’t want to contaminate the special
garments. I walked through a literal cleansing shower before I could approach
the Moon. As someone who grew up with the rituals of Catholicism, it was a
bit familiar. I felt separated from common things and closer to spirituality,
similar to how I felt inside the stone circles of northern Scotland. The place
and the process were designed to be special, and so the experience was
special, too.
The sample lab’s attention to lunar detail also imbues the place with
something almost holy. Before the astronauts lifted the rocks, they
photographed their orientation on the Moon and noted how the rocks came to
rest. The Lunar Sample Lab keeps that orientation, so that the rock is stored
according to the way it was found. That way, scientists who study a sliver of it
will know whether that side was exposed to the void and bombarded by
cosmic rays, or whether it was protected by the Moon. All this information
provides a baseline for scrutinizing the rock’s makeup, but it also endows the
samples with a bit of mysticism. This is exactly what it looked like, up there,
the orientation says. You, too, can glimpse the spotless relic. See where it takes
you.
The sample preparers stick their covered arms through rubber gloves
attached to a cabinet filled with pressurized air. They employ forceps to pick
up sheets of Teflon, which they use to wrap the Moon bits before stuffing
them into plastic baggies. These are sealed before the rocks enter Earth’s
atmosphere. Then they are placed in small canisters for shipping. Mosie’s
team takes extreme care to ensure the Moon material does not touch Earth or

any of its creations until scientists are ready to receive their samples. The
work is tedious and artful; it’s tricky to manipulate tiny shards of rock while
wearing three layers of rubber gloves. But the curators are not clumsy. They
treat the rocks with a kind of reverence.
The Lunar Sample Lab is no Holy Sepulchre, of course, and the Moon
rocks are not religious relics. But visiting them is a sort of devotional
pilgrimage nonetheless, a Houston Hajj to a different kind of Black Stone.
These rocks tell the story of our origins. They tell of a very real and very
ancient Flood, one that covered the Moon, one that covered Earth from which
the Moon was made.
—
Toward the end of Neil Armstrong’s short lunar sojourn, he visually weighed
the treasure chest and found it wanting. He dumped in nine extra shovelfuls
of sand to fill it up. He could never have expected that the last-second scoops
contained some of the most important rocks to ever come down to Earth.
“Neil turned out to be the best field geologist on the Moon, until Apollo 17,
that is,” Jack Schmitt, a field geologist who walked on the Moon during
Apollo 17, told me in 2019. “In twenty minutes, he collected some of the
most interesting samples we got. Had we never had another mission, we
would have gotten enough.”
Armstrong’s afterthought rocks were anorthosite, that low-density material
that forms when minerals crystallize within molten rock. Their existence
hinted that the Moon was once bathed in an ocean of magma. “We knew
right there that the Moon would be a record of the early history of the Earth,”
Schmitt explained to me. “That was not clearly understood before Apollo 11,
but it was understood afterward, and now.”
After Apollo 11’s triumph, NASA’s confidence grew and later missions
lasted many days. The last three missions even sent a car so astronauts could
drive farther and collect more unusual rocks. Apollo 15 astronauts Dave Scott
and Jim Irwin, the one who later dedicated himself to Christ, went to the
Moon with a wish list. Geologists were hoping for volcanic rocks, glass beads

that form inside fire fountains, and other samples that would shed light on the
Moon’s youth. On their second day on the Moon, the Apollo 15 moonwalkers
struck gold. They were taking samples of material ejected from a crater
called Spur, inside the Moon’s Mare Imbrium, or Sea of Rains, when Scott
saw an unusual rock, which sat on what he would later describe as a pedestal
of soil. He lifted it and dusted it off, and the astronauts recognized right away
that the rock was special.
“Oh, man!” Irwin shouted. “Look at the glint!…Almost see twinning in
there!”
Both astronauts started whooping with glee.
“Guess what we just found,” Scott radioed Houston, as Irwin laughed.
“Guess what we just found! I think we found what we came for.” Both men
hollered and started describing the rock. “What a beaut!” Scott said.[21]
It was an anorthosite, and a big one. Reporters covering the mission were
told it could help tell the story of the Moon’s formation from a vast flood of
oozing rock. They named it Genesis Rock.
Genesis Rock was sitting in a pressurized box the day I visited. It was so
very, very white. It was in a plastic baggie, and some crumbs filled the bag’s
right corner: little bits of the Moon that had started to flake off and fall apart,
as prosaic as the dust from the bottom of a cereal box. The crumbs were the
perfect encapsulation of the new worlds Apollo brought to us: rocky, maybe
even “Earthy,” three-dimensional, tangible, real.
—
The Moon shaped our evolution and served as our timekeeper and our
spiritual lodestar through the ages. It guided the grand barque of civilization
through the dawn of religion, the onset of philosophy, the age of exploration,
the ideals of the Enlightenment. But only in the age of Apollo did it finally
exist as a material place in space and time.
The Apollo missions were designed to use the Moon as a tool. It was an
instrument of might, just as surely as it was for the stone circles of northern
Scotland, the Nebra sky disk, and the temples dedicated to Sin. Americans

walked up there to show they could do it, and in doing so, demonstrated what
glory was possible through democratic republicanism and white Protestant
Christianity, rather than Soviet communism and godlessness.
But the Moon during Apollo also gave us something unexpected. Like the
work of the sky priests toiling under Nabonidus, Apollo’s expeditions
bestowed upon us something we weren’t necessarily seeking. Apollo was a
civic errand, but our journeys to the Moon gave us new knowledge about the
universe and our place in it. The Moon reoriented our ideas about that
universe. The heroic journey came first, steeped in myth like the Babylonian
sky records. New knowledge, a new logos, came after.
Because of the Apollo missions, the Moon is no longer a faceless luminary
in our imaginations; it isn’t just a dreamworld where brave characters go
exploring, whether in novels or on real, live TV narrated by Walter Cronkite.
Through Apollo, the Moon became an awesome three-dimensional sphere. Its
physicality became measurable and quantifiable. The “terribility of her
isolated dominant implacable resplendent propinquity,” as James Joyce
described the Moon, was literally close at hand. The Moon’s surface was well-
trodden now. We sifted it in our very real hands, its dead soils slipping
through fingers pulsing with life. Thanks to Apollo, it is here, among us. A bit
of Earth returned triumphant, our patrimony brought home, to tell us all our
own story.
Skip Notes
*1 Elon Musk launched his Tesla into space to demonstrate the launch capability of a new SpaceX
rocket, the Falcon Heavy.
*2 This is technically called a Kelvin-Helmholtz cloud, and they form when the atmosphere is unstable,
such as when the air above the clouds is moving more quickly than the air below them.
*3 Earth’s gravity prevails at the Moon, which is one reason the Moon is still around. But Earth’s
influence is more than its gravity. Visitors to the Moon travel beyond Earth’s magnetic field, which
shields the planet from cosmic and solar radiation. Moon travelers go past even the Van Allen
radiation belts, a region where charged particles loop around inside Earth’s magnetic field. In satellite
instruments and drawings, the Van Allen belts appear like a bow tie with Earth as the central knot.
Zond 5 stayed within Earth’s gravitational sphere of influence, which is known as the Hill sphere and
extends about four times beyond the Moon’s most distant orbital locations. But by going around the

Moon, and feeling its pull more strongly than Earth’s, in a very real sense, Zond 5 and its passengers
were the first to truly leave Earth completely.
*4 Leonov was one of the Russian space program’s most accomplished cosmonauts and had hoped to
become the first person on the Moon. He lost to the Americans, but he was the first person to conduct
a spacewalk, exiting his Voskhod 2 capsule for about twelve minutes in 1965.

My daughter’s tiny purple hiking boots crunched in the dirt as we climbed
up the steep trail, ascending stone steps and exposed rock slabs. Juniper and
scrubby pines bordered the trail to our left, heading toward Colorado’s San
Juan mountain range. Nothing guarded the cliff on the other side, and the
road was visible a vertiginous drop below. When I turned around, I could see
the valley floor, opening toward the barren landscape of northern New
Mexico. In front of us loomed the geologic feature we were there to see: two
towering spires of sandstone, with a U-shaped gap between them.
One hundred million years ago, the towers made up the sandy floor of a
vast interior sea. When volcanoes lifted the Colorado Plateau forty million
years ago, the dry seafloor was exposed. Eons of wind, rain, and water
flowing through the Piedra River etched away the sandstone, leaving two
towers, one known as Chimney Rock and one uncreatively known as
Companion Rock. They tower above a village of ghosts.
One thousand years ago, the spires soared above a bustling settlement
populated by Anasazi, a people now more commonly known as the Ancestral
Puebloans. They built more than two hundred structures here and lived in
them for many years. Archaeological excavations have found wooden beams
that were erected in 1076 c.e. and others that were built in 1093 c.e.—almost
eighteen years apart. People lived here for several decades after that, and
then, suddenly, they left and never returned.
Anasazi dwellings are found to this day in the mountains throughout my
home state of Colorado and surrounding states, carved into the rocks,

sculpted from the hills that protect them, in crevasses that guard them like
eaves. They lived in Mesa Verde, Chimney Rock, and Chaco Canyon. They
disappeared before the arrival of European settlers who would come to
dominate America.
The Ancestral Puebloans lived around 800 c.e., but their rhythms recalled
much older civilizations that rose and fell in places like Aberdeenshire, in
Scotland; like Jericho, in Palestine; and near Nasiriyah, in Iraq, where the
Moon City of Ur was located. The Anasazi used the Moon and the stars to
chart their lives, to learn and follow the seasons, and to plan for the year.
Near what is now Pagosa Springs, Colorado, they constructed a house that
turns its face to the Moon every 18.6 years.
Thirteen years before I visited the spires with my older daughter, the
Moon rose at sunset above the deserted village and its stone houses. The first
shimmer of its light crested the horizon between the two spires, and from the
house my daughter and I were heading toward, the towers seemed to cradle it
like a hug.
The place is now called Chimney Rock National Monument. It includes
several stone buildings erected by the Ancestral Puebloans, but most
important is the Great House, a stone building with a great round room at its
center, called a kiva. The house was erected in the style of Chacoan Great
Houses, which can be found peppered throughout the American Southwest.
The Ancestral Puebloans built these houses with straight walls, air ducts,
ventilation shafts, and core walls insulated with veneer walls to give the
buildings strength.
Drought and changing cultural patterns likely dispersed the Anasazi over
more than a century. But Chimney Rock was abandoned abruptly between
1125 and 1130 c.e., earlier than other Anasazi sites, earlier than all other
Ancestral Puebloan sites except Chaco, in what is now New Mexico.
—
The people who built this structure were not thinking of convenience. It’s far
from any water source; the Piedra River is a thousand feet below the Great

House. It looms far above the fields where they would have grown maize,
beans, and other crops. It was not built for easy living.
The Ancestral Puebloans often lifted their houses to the skies. But the
Chimney Rock Great House is even loftier and was probably built for ritual.
It was erected in exactly the right spot to see the two towers embrace the
rising Moon.
Remember the stone circles of northeastern Scotland, in Easter
Aquhorthies and Tomnaverie, and their arrangement in honor of this roughly
nineteen-year round? Owing to the movements of the celestial bodies, the
Moon returns to roughly the same patch of sky after twelve lunar cycles. But
it does not return to the exact same spot. It rises at different points on the
horizon over the years, just as the Sun changes where it rises and sets on the
horizon during the course of one year. The cycle of rising and setting is
complete after 18.6 years. At the end of each arc across the horizon, the
Moon appears to pause in place for about three years, rising at the same point
on the horizon before starting to move in the opposite direction on the
horizon each night. This long phase is known as the major lunar standstill.
In July of these years, the whisper-thin new Moon rises between the spires
at Chimney Rock just before dawn. At the winter solstice in December, the
full Moon rises between the spires at sunset. During the spring equinox the
following year, a half-Moon is visible through the monoliths at midnight. The
summer solstice new Moon rises in the rock cradle at sunrise. The Ancestral
Puebloans set one of their stone houses into the side of the cliff for the best
possible view of these events.
Were they setting their calendar, like the pit diggers of Warren Field and
the metalsmiths of the Nebra sky disk? The Ancestral Puebloans were
agrarian people, and it’s possible they wanted to keep track of the seasons
with a year that began at the winter solstice. It’s possible the Chacoan people
traded or connected somehow with the Maya or Inca of Central America,
who also observed these lunar phenomena and their relation to the solstices.
The Sun also rises through the pillars in the spring, so maybe they used the
rock formation to study both celestial lights. Maybe the Puebloans who built

Chimney Rock’s houses used the natural towers for ceremonies we no longer
know or understand, ones we assume were ritual in nature.
Archaeological evidence shows that the site hosted large fires, probably
intentional bonfires, likely set as signal fires. I thought immediately of
Aberdeen, where the people who gathered under the full Moon at its
standstill, every 18.6 years, lit bonfires to communicate with others. Standing
on the ridge in Colorado, I imagined a succession of small fires dotting the
landscape below us, down into the valley, down into the canyons of New
Mexico. Watchmen set on neighboring ridges might have lit the next blaze in
a signal relay. Flame and smoke are visible for miles here—something the
Forest Service can attest to. The Civilian Conservation Corps erected a fire
detection tower beside the Great House in 1940. It was removed in 2010 so
future lunar standstills would be visible from the site.
Maybe these people were trying to communicate with their kin, people
living in places like Pueblo Alto, down the valleys into New Mexico, down to
the great town of Pueblo Bonito within Chaco Canyon. Maybe they were
communicating with their relatives and neighboring clans. Maybe, like at
Tomnaverie, they were communicating with another realm entirely. I
wondered about this other realm as I walked with my daughter, and then I
came across this Tewa Pueblo song printed on a trail marker:
Yonder comes the dawn
The universe grows green
The road to the underworld is open!
At the height of Chimney Rock’s settlement, some two thousand people
lived in eight villages spread out across a five-mile radius. They grew squash,
corn, and beans, and collected seeds and other plants for food and medicine.
Some of the storerooms around the settlement contained pottery painted with
spiral designs, big flasks for storing water or other drinks, carved animal
figurines, and flat stones with holes bored into them, maybe used to hold
candles or incense. Archaeologists from the University of Denver who
excavated Chimney Rock in the 1920s and the 1970s found collections of

high-quality pottery, seemingly too lovely to leave behind. The beautiful ruins
are among the pieces of evidence suggesting the settlement was abandoned in
haste.
In some rooms, the people who lived here kept materials we also don’t
understand, so we assume they were used for rituals. Other rooms were
empty when archaeologists excavated them in the 1970s. They might have
been guest rooms, used for certain times of year when people visited from
more distant reaches, like Chaco Canyon and other Chacoan communities.
Throughout the Southwest, archaeoastronomers have found evidence that
Ancestral Puebloans and their contemporaries around North and Central
America possessed detailed knowledge of astronomy. In many places
petroglyphs carved into boulders are arranged to catch sunlight or moonlight
at certain times of year. In Chaco Canyon, on a rock slab on a landform
called Fajada Butte, Chacoan people carved a spiral that catches a triangle of
sunlight on the summer solstice. During the lunar standstill, a shadow crosses
the same spiral when the Moon rises.
—
Imagine figuring out these patterns ten centuries ago, with no written
language, no known system of written mathematics, no formal calendar that
survives to now. There were no astronomical charts, no telescopes, not even
cuneiform tablets. But at some point, an ancestor figured out how to bring the
Sun and Moon to Earth, how to catch their light, and how to use that light to
mark time. This person took a chisel, hiked up to a crevice on the butte, and
hammered the right boulder in just the right place. Their contemporary in
Chimney Rock looked up, witnessed Earth embracing the rising Moon, and
marked the spot: Here is where we should build our Great House, here is
where we will hold our calendar ceremony, here is where we will make our
lives.
The Moon gave the Chacoan priests, like the calendar makers of Warren
Field, control of time. In turn, this ability gave them control of society, in the
same way as the artisans who made the Nebra sky disk. Management of the

calendar meant jurisdiction over ceremonial rituals, trade festivals, harvest
times and feasts, and even social events. Like the sky priests of Nabonidus,
the astronomers of the Chacoan world would have led lives of comfort and
prestige. They might have worn elaborate clothing, turquoise beads and
macaw feathers on their heads, maybe special headgear like the Shamaness of
Bad Dürrenberg. They might have played drums or flutes, might have sang
tunes around a hearth like I sang with Charlie Murray.
The Ancestral Puebloans used the Moon in ways we tend to describe as
ritualistic or spiritual, but this characterization is likely born of our ignorance.
When we don’t know how to communicate with a vanished people we
describe them as mysterious. But there is no difference, really, between their
vision of the Moon and my own. There is no difference between the power
they derived from the Moon and the power imbued in the Nebra sky disk, or
the Berlin Gold Hat, or the telescopes of Galileo and Harriot. There is no
difference, fundamentally, between the Moon in the eyes of the European
explorers of the Americas, who followed the Moon over the Atlantic and
dreamt of riches, and the Moon in the eyes of Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos, who
sees its surface and thinks of riches. There is no new thing under the Moon,
to paraphrase a scribe from Mesopotamia.[1]
The Moon can bring us knowledge, pure information, for its own sake.
And it can also afford us a spiritual experience. It helps us understand time,
both the daily rhythms of human life and, from its quiet vantage, the grander
scale of the entire universe, to the time before we evolved, to a time before
even the first stars existed. The Moon still gives us everything it has ever
given us. It reflects what we want it to reflect, in our particular culture, in our
particular time.
So what do we owe it in return?
When Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin departed the Moon in 1969, they
left a commemorative plaque mounted on the legs of their Eagle lander. It
contained the Apollo 11 crew’s names and signatures, plus that of the

American president at the time, Richard Nixon. It contained a simple
projection of Earth’s two hemispheres, showing all the landmasses according
to their plate tectonic arrangement as of 1969 c.e. And engraved in a
rounded, 1960s-style font were the words:
HERE MEN FROM THE PLANET EARTH
FIRST SET FOOT UPON THE MOON
JULY 1969, A.D.
WE CAME IN PEACE FOR ALL MANKIND
The Moon landing occurred during, and because of, the Cold War. So in
one sense it is impressive that the language included “for all mankind” in that
(unfortunately gendered) last line. NASA officials didn’t need to say this.
They could have included a silver-and-black engraved American flag instead.
But they acknowledged the world, because even in the height of the space
race, they recognized that if the Moon belongs to anyone, it belongs equally
to everyone on planet Earth.
We might never have stared at the Moon’s peaks and valleys in such detail
if Mesopotamian artisans had not figured out how to mix sand, soda, and lime
to make glass. The NASA “computer” Katherine Johnson’s calculations for
the Apollo 11 trajectory rested on the mathematics of the Greeks and
Babylonians who learned numbers in the measurement of time. Apollo may
have been an American effort (with the help of some German expats), but the
achievement was the whole world’s.
Yet in the early twenty-first century c.e., the Moon is widely perceived as a
place to build, to extract, to maybe get rich or die trying.
Some modern scientists now argue we should use the Moon to move some
types of dirty manufacturing off this fragile planet and onto its barren
companion. As people begin realizing that Earth is in fact special, and that we
have no second option, more humans (if not those in power) have started
arguing more vociferously for ways to protect Earth and its resources. But the
Moon is not quite as valuable, according to this argument. Aristotle’s

sublunary realm is now the perfect one, and the heavens are ripe for
exploitation.
Humans have touched the Moon—Americans have touched it—but that is
not enough for China, or India, or even the United States in the twenty-first
century c.e. The leaders of these countries each want their particular brands
of boots to mar its surface, and their own particular twenty-first-century
names engraved on plaques to be mounted forever in its dust. We have to
identify the real reasons why we’d like to revisit the Moon, and what we
would do once we got there. Will we go back because it’s still hard? Because
we have something to prove, some faceless enemy nation to impress? Because
we would like some rocks in the name of science? Because we would like to
make money? Or because of something grander, something more ineffable?
From Kepler’s Somnium to von Braun’s dreams to NASA’s new Artemis
missions, which seek to return Americans to the Moon in the 2020s, our
celestial companion cannot be rinsed of myth. The Moon has always been
spiritually special, even when it was a tool for power. The drumbeats
reverberating off the white stone of Tomnaverie, the chants that accompanied
the use of the Nebra sky disk, the pious Moon prayers of Nabonidus, the
now-unknown ceremonies hosted in the Chimney Rock Great House—none
of these rituals could be erased from our journey with the Moon through
time, not even after Galileo unmasked its true nature. Mysticism still imbues
our visions of the Moon. Today, spaceflight offers a form of transcendence,
and is almost a form of civil religion  in modern America. Modern space
exploration is limned—sometimes explicitly, depending on who’s talking—
with the idea of immortality, of generating a way of leaving Earth that would
perpetuate the light of human consciousness even after this planet is
uninhabitable. To some spacefarers and space proponents, the survival of the
species is the endgame. Or, put another way, space could be our ultimate
salvation.
The return to the Moon should require a reckoning with these ideas. The
Moon deserves a conversation about its own legacy, and its own meaning to
us, among any discussion of geopolitics. We owe it to the Moon, and to
ourselves.

In the early 2020s, private companies are the de facto arbiters of the space
surrounding Earth. The rocket company SpaceX controls nearly one-fourth of
all space launches, and by 2022 had lofted 3,400 miniature internet-
broadcasting satellites into near-Earth orbit. Private companies aim to launch
satellites and scientific equipment to the Moon with a regular cadence by the
mid-2020s, but existing international governance with respect to the Moon is
vague. Less than two years before Apollo 11 lifted off, the United States,
United Kingdom, and Soviet Union signed the Outer Space Treaty, which
stipulates that no nation can claim territory on a celestial body, that space
exploration is for the benefit of all nations, and that exploration must be
conducted peacefully. But the treaty contains language that private companies
—and the American government—are eyeing as a means to protect their
territory nonetheless. The clauses call for the signatories (113 parties and 23
signatories, as of March 2023) to avoid harming one another’s science
experiments or Moon bases. This means in principle that no one can land on
them, for instance, or even land near enough that existing equipment might be
damaged.
As Alan Bean and Pete Conrad learned during Apollo 12, landing on the
Moon and lifting off from it kicks up a considerable dust storm, and fast-
flying lunar dust can scour a spacecraft—or a habitat building—like a Brillo
pad. So the Outer Space Treaty’s noninterference clauses could essentially
mean whoever lands on whatever lunar location first has a claim to it, maybe
for good. This is going to be a problem moving forward, because several
nations and private companies are interested in the same areas.
Many different countries and private corporations are planning missions in
the coming years that will focus on the same regions, often the poles and
especially the South Pole–Aitken Basin. The Moon’s permanently shadowed
craters, areas where the Moon’s orbital angle is so extreme and mountains are
so high that the Sun never reaches their floors, would be another prime target.
So, too, the Peaks of Eternal Light, a few of Thomas Harriot’s
“promontoryes” where the Sun always shines. In permanently shadowed
craters, water ice may remain locked in the dust, where machines could
theoretically be installed to extract it and use it for rocket fuel or other

purposes. On the Peaks of Eternal Light, solar arrays could soak up sunlight
to power rovers or almost any kind of equipment.
Anyone who places equipment on these areas, then, could always have
access to it—and no one else would be able to touch it, according to some
interpretations of the Outer Space Treaty. Imagine someone erecting a solar
telescope on one of the eternally sunny promontories. “Its operation would
require non-disturbance, and hence that the Peak remains unvisited by others,
effectively establishing a claim,” notes Martin Elvis, an astronomer at the
Harvard–Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, in a 2016 research paper.[2]
NASA is also making its intentions in the twenty-first century c.e. clear,
and this time, they’re not about going for all mankind. In 2020, NASA
announced its own new system of bilateral agreements, some of which
underscore the Outer Space Treaty and some of which are new. The agency’s
agreements would require peaceful uses of space, protection of heritage
locations like the Apollo landing sites and the final resting places of various
rovers, and agreements for things like space debris and space rescues. But the
accords contain two lines that anyone who cares about the Moon ought to
note. One says that space systems ought to be “interoperable,” which means
bases could use universal docking systems or other sharable technology. This
might favor American companies, accustomed to building sharable
technology for American spaceships. The second clause argues that the Outer
Space Treaty allows “extraction and use of space resources.” Read: mining.
The Moon, our silvery sister and silent eternal companion, could by the
end of the 2020s become a mining outpost like Chile’s Atacama Desert or the
oil fields of Iraq. Private companies took the first steps toward this process in
late 2022, with the launch of a privately funded Japanese lander carrying a
rover from the United Arab Emirates (though the mission failed in a crash
landing). Nations from India to China to the United States plan to send
astronauts back by the mid-2020s. In April 2023, NASA announced the first
crew that would orbit the Moon since Apollo, and the Artemis III mission,
which aims to return humans to the Moon for the first time since 1972, is set
to launch sometime in 2025. That means humanity doesn’t have much time to
decide whether lunar development and even mining are things we all support.

—
Some of the most enthusiastic lunar exploration advocates hope for a return
to the Moon soon, within their lifetimes, to start up a new Moon-based
economy. Billionaires like Amazon’s Jeff Bezos are planning missions, and
government entities like the European Space Agency even hope for an entire
Moon Village populated by astronauts, scientists, and entrepreneurs. Water
would probably be the most valuable resource to begin with, because its
hydrogen and oxygen can be cleaved into the ingredients of rocket fuel—a
legacy of Moon fans Konstantin Tsiolkovsky and Hermann Oberth, who
invented multistage liquid-fueled rockets. Water prospecting is likely to draw
diviners to the Moon’s permanently shadowed craters. Under NASA’s
Commercial Lunar Payload Services program, private firms are competing
for grants to design spacecraft that can deliver various landers and
instruments, including some that can search for resources like water.
“The economic benefit of Apollo was huge. It put us on a whole new path
for miniaturization in our electronics. Our cellphones are because of Apollo,”
Clive Neal, a lunar geochemist at Notre Dame and a lunar exploration
advocate, told me. But government investment on that scale is unlikely to
happen again—and moreover, this is still a mostly capitalist society driven by
profit. “New commercial involvement is what is going to make it sustainable,”
Neal said.
One of Moon mining’s biggest advocates, Paul Spudis, argued that the
Moon’s own resources would enable us to become a truly spacefaring
civilization. There is “no El Dorado on the Moon,” he wrote in his 1996
book, The Once and Future Moon. “Nevertheless, the Moon is an object of
incredible potential wealth.”
The Moon’s regolith contains materials like oxygen, helium-3, silicon,
aluminum, and iron, all of which could be refined into things like fuel,
building materials, and solar panels. As Spudis often put it, profit on the
Moon would not necessarily mean money in the bank. Profit could mean the
ability to obtain something in space, like rocket fuel, which would be far less
costly than carrying everything you need from Earth.

Until he died in 2018, Spudis also argued passionately for a return to the
Moon for science. It is a natural laboratory for planetary science, just a three-
day flight away. He argued we should use it to study the Sun, the Moon,
Earth, and ourselves.
—
The vast majority of people who study the Moon, and the vast majority of
people who are concerned with its caretaking and future, are still scientists
like Spudis. Many of them hope the Moon may become some sort of
scientific preserve, where people can visit under extreme, austere conditions
and conduct research for the benefit of everyone. Under this scenario, the
Moon would be much like Antarctica. It would be like an eighth continent
shorn from Earth, set apart from the seven continents Wegener’s plate
tectonics gave us in the present day.
China is already focused on the Moon’s far side, developing the hardware
it will need to land its taikonauts there. For now, the Chinese Space Agency is
focused on research, and its pronouncements are famously coy, but many
American observers think China’s ambitions include mining and an eventual
settlement. In 2018, the country accelerated development of its Long March 9
rocket, similar in size to the Saturn V that launched the Apollo missions.
Chinese officials have said the rocket will power its first lunar surface
missions in the 2030s. In January 2019, the Chang’e 4 spacecraft and its
Yutu-2 “Jade Rabbit” rover landed inside the South Pole–Aitken Basin, the
first mission to ever land on the Moon’s far side. It was a towering
achievement, and a major step toward China’s long-term Moon plans. The
Chinese Space Agency unveiled a new emblem for its lunar exploration
program in time for the Chang’e 4 launch. It is a calligraphic crescent
embracing two hash marks, and at a glance it looks like the Chinese character
for “Moon,” 月. The two hashes are not just marks, but gray bootprints, a
clear sign of China’s intent.
Plenty of other governments are also eyeing the far side for science.

In 2019, an Italian scientist named Claudio Maccone, of the National
Institute for Astrophysics in Italy, called for a radio-free zone on the far side
of the Moon. The Moon itself would block the entire hemisphere from any
Earthly interference, allowing for operation of the solar system’s largest radio
telescope, a new observatory that could peer into the darkest heart of the
cosmos. In April 2020, NASA funded a study to explore building just such a
telescope. The Lunar Crater Radio Telescope would be mounted inside a
three-mile-wide crater on the far side of the Moon, and it could look at the
universe in ultra-low-frequency wavelengths, especially the types that can’t
make it through Earth’s atmosphere. In 2023, the space agency funded an
even bigger telescope, which will use the Moon’s own soil to enable on-site
construction of solar cells, antenna parts, and power lines. The FarView
telescope will be able to see back to the so-called cosmic dark ages, when the
first stars ignited—a time that has so far been invisible, even to the powerful
James Webb Space Telescope.
The Moon’s far side, shielded from Earthly emissions or atmospheric
vapors, is a prime location to study the earliest days of the universe. In China,
scientists are studying satellite arrays that would fly in formation around the
Moon to make similar observations. But even purely exploration-driven Moon
bases might invoke some of the Outer Space Treaty’s non-interference
clauses. Nothing happens in isolation.
—
Though much of the lunar exploration agenda of the early 2020s is focused
on science, the fundamental questions astronomers seek to answer are just
one avenue on the greater road of discovery. Science is only one way of
coming to know the universe, but it has the most power, Lisa Messeri, an
anthropologist at Yale University, told me. “This becomes a tricky argument.
I am someone who believes in the science of climate change, and the science
of vaccination. I am also someone who wonders what it means to take a
Native American cosmology and treat it equally to our scientific cosmology,
when it comes to the Moon.”

Who gets to decide the way to use a precious thing, a limited, special,
spectral, spiritual thing, that we all share?
—
There is another perspective to consider. That of the Moon itself. It is a
place, and it exists nearby but not impassively. “It has cultural and historical
agency,” as Messeri put it. The Moon does not have feelings, of course. But
Spudis himself often spoke of its intrinsic value. A British astronomer named
Vera Assis Fernandes has written that the Moon should be acknowledged as
an entity deserving of respect.
“The celestial body closest to the Earth is an important, powerful and
fragile environment that needs to be understood and taken into consideration
before we finally set sail to it again,” she wrote in a 2019 research paper.
“Have we ever asked why humans want to return to the Moon and then
colonise it?”[3]
There is a way forward that considers these questions and answers them in
dissent. We don’t need to build a human settlement on the Moon. We don’t
need to do anything at all to the Moon. The Moon cannot speak for itself. We
have to speak for it. And no one person, no single culture, can speak for
everyone who shares the sky. The Moon belongs to everyone, which means it
belongs to no one.
When I was writing this book about our relationship with the Moon, I
originally planned to visit the lunisolar arrangement at the Cahokia Mounds,
located ten miles east of St. Louis, my home for ten years. The mounds are
the remnants of the great Mississippian culture, people who lived in the
American Midwest a millennium ago. At its height, Cahokia was as sprawling
as the city of London in the 1600s. It is sometimes referenced as “the City of
the Sun.” Cahokia was first inhabited beginning around 700 c.e., and the
Mississippian culture eventually grew to some twenty thousand residents by
1200 c.e. Around 1100, they built a wooden circle, now nicknamed

“Woodhenge,” that aligns with the solstice sun. But the most striking
characteristic is the series of Cahokia Mounds, which served a variety of
civic and ritual purposes. The largest mound connects to an elevated
embankment, and it aligns with the southernmost moonrise of the year.
Then my family made a sudden decision to move across the country, back
to Colorado. Once I was in the West, where I grew up, I planned to visit
Canyon de Chelly in Chinle, Arizona, to view prehistoric rock art and talk to
Navajo and Hopi traditional practitioners. The Hopi people in the 1960s had
celebrated the Apollo Moon landings, because a legend in their folklore
speaks of a new beginning when the Eagle lands on the Moon. But I had also
read that some Navajo people were offended by the missions, believing that
human footprints on the Moon would be akin to desecration of a holy site.
When the father of planetary science, Eugene Shoemaker, died in 1997, his
family and NASA officials placed an ounce of his ashes on board the Lunar
Prospector mission. The satellite was intentionally crashed on the Moon after
almost two years in orbit, consigning some of Shoemaker to the Moon
forever. The Navajo Nation president at the time, Albert Hale, called the act
“sacrilegious, a gross insensitivity to the beliefs of many Native Americans, to
place human remains on the Moon.”[4] I wanted to talk to the Dine people,
who most white European descendants call the Navajo, about their vision of
the Moon. And then the coronavirus pandemic shut everything down. Navajo
lands were closed to outsiders as the virus rampaged through the population.
As an alternative, I planned a road trip to the Bighorn Medicine Wheel, an
ancient stone circle in northwestern Wyoming, built between three hundred
and eight hundred years ago by the Plains Indians like the Cheyenne and
Pawnee. It is visible only during the summer, usually covered in snow through
most of the winter months. It contains an arrangement of cairns and spokes
that are thought to align with the summer solstice and the heliacal rise of
certain stars. And even more intriguingly, the wheel contains twenty-eight
spokes. There are about twenty-eight days in a lunar cycle, and I wanted to
explore the ruin and learn the Moon traditions of the Plains Indians who lived
in this area before me. But most of the West was under a stay-at-home order
during the beginning of the pandemic. It was too far to drive.

It was after the stay-at-home orders were lifted that I brought my family
with me to Chimney Rock. We could not go at night, because of the
pandemic and because it would have been unsafe for my then five-year-old.
Under the summer Sun, I walked past the Great House foundation and
toward the cliff, toward the towers. I wanted to give myself a minute to stare
at them, wondering if I would feel something like I felt at Tomnaverie. The
ghosts in that lunar monument were quiet. It was not unlike stepping into a
very old church, or walking into an uncrowded old-growth forest; the
experience was humbling and awesome, in the old sense of that word. I
thought if it was quiet enough, I might be faced with something similar at
Chimney Rock and forge a connection with the people who built this place.
Maybe I could peer through some kind of portal of consciousness to see the
Moon they knew, and the sky they watched.
But my daughter was so excited to be walking with me, and so enthusiastic
about the small cacti on the trail, and so eager to look for animals hiding in
the rocks. She chattered nonstop, as ever. Crackling with kindergartner
energy, she ran toward the foundation of the Great House and approached a
docent, who was there to answer questions and to warn people where they
could and could not step. She climbed down into the house at the docent’s
invitation, trying to make her voice echo, asking questions about the staircase
and the brick walls and why there was no longer a ceiling. There was no such
thing as quiet. I realized this was exactly as it should be.
Ten centuries earlier, another young family probably walked through the
same house. They brought supplies and snacks like we did, although instead
of hydration backpacks, they may have carried woven baskets and painted
clay pottery. There were probably lots of kids running around, shouting to
their cousins and friends, playing games gathered under the Great House’s
adobe roof. They might have been there for a celebration, maybe a feast that
meant a great deal to them but which we don’t understand anymore. I think
it’s fair to assume the village was not at all quiet.
The people who lived here before me looked different from me and my
family. But I feel confident saying we shared certain things, and that some of
them have remained the same through the last millennia, or through any span

of time. They probably traveled to Chimney Rock with their families. The
children were probably restless from a long journey, and wanted a chance to
play. They probably brought toys, like my daughter’s stash in the back seat of
my car. In Ennigaldi’s museum at Ur, the diggers found clay dog figurines that
were painted red, likely toys for the students at the sacred Giparu. The
parents were probably excited to show their children the special places, and to
teach what the places meant to their forebears and to the parents themselves.
The parents probably worried about their children approaching the cliff’s
edge. A mother like me might have smiled at her firstborn’s precociousness.
She may have stood beside the Great House, watching her oldest, thinking
about her new child yet to be born, and wondering if she would be fierce and
independent like her sister. My experience mirrored their experience, which
mirrored even older experiences, which have always repeated themselves,
under the same Sun, under the same Moon.
—
Just as it was for the Puebloans, just as it was for Enheduanna and
Nabonidus, just as it was for the Greek philosophers and Johannes Kepler and
Wernher von Braun and Michael Collins, the Moon can still be special and
untouchable. It can remain a spectral reminder in the night. It can still be an
omen worth celebrating. It can be joyous to witness, full and glittering on a
freezing winter night, or a surprising crescent peeking through summer-leafed
trees. It can sneak up on us; most Moons you will see throughout your life are
gibbous, not quite there but not quite gone. The Moon is only full and bright
for two or three days a month. If you’re lucky, you will see a few hundred of
these in your life. Once in a while you might catch it hanging overhead as a
scimitar at dusk. It might startle you, yellowish and half dark on the eastern
horizon, if you awaken in the hours before dawn. It might sail ahead of the
Sun hours before your alarm clock rings, and hang low in the west in the
morning as you leave for work or school. It might fade into the background,
like white noise, like the stars you may be lucky enough to see at night.

But wherever you are, whatever you believe, from whichever, if any,
descendant of Abraham of Ur you take your tradition, you will always be able
to trust in the Moon. It will always be above you. It will always return, quietly
lighting the night for you, peering through the clouds in the morning for you.
You will be able to count on its inconstant appearance. You can be sure that it
will rise, cool and glimmering, sometime tomorrow. You’ll be able to see it
from wherever you are here on Earth, the Moon’s home, its eternal
companion, its cloud-wisped sister and reason for being. Walk outside under
the Moon tonight or tomorrow morning. Look up, walk along with it, and say
hello.

photo by camerique/getty images. used with permission.
Marines wounded in the landing on Tarawa are towed out to larger
craft bound for base hospitals in the South Pacific. The Battle of
Tarawa, in November 1943, ended in the worst casualties in United
States Marine Corps history, because the tide did not rise as
predicted, owing to the Moon’s position relative to Earth.

photo by nasa.
The Moon’s far side looms beyond the Orion spacecraft in this image
taken November 21, 2022, during NASA’s Artemis I mission. The
darkest spot on the Moon is Mare Orientale. If you squint, the
slightest hint of a cheery rose color is visible on the Moon’s right
limb.

illustration by lucy reading-ikkanda. originally
published in quanta magazine. used with
permission.
Numerous theories have been proposed to explain how the Moon
came to be, but none is definitive yet.

illustration c. 1880. ann ronan picture library, london. used with permission.
Hipparchus of Nicaea attempted to map the entire night sky and is
credited with figuring out the precession of the equinoxes, in which
Earth’s axis seems to wobble like a top over time.

sisse brimberg/geo images collection, art resource, new york.
used with permission.
The Venus of Laussel, a carving in relief dating to twenty-seven
thousand years ago, is thought to represent a connection between
human fertility and the lunar cycle. The bison horn in the woman’s
hand is etched with thirteen notches, which might represent the lunar
cycles in one year.

left: photo by the author; right: courtesy of murray archaeological services ltd.
Hilary Murray and Charlie Murray stand in Warren Field, which sits
atop the ruins of the world’s oldest known lunar calendar. It was made
from a series of pits in the ground in a field adjacent to a fifteenth-
century castle in Aberdeenshire, Scotland.

photo by the author.
The stone circle of Tomnaverie, in Aberdeenshire, Scotland. These
monuments are found only in northeastern Scotland and are
characterized by a large stone on its side, flanked by two upright
stones, usually on the south or southwest arc of the circle.
Tomnaverie’s sideways stone is in the center and may be aligned to
match the cycles of the Moon.

juraj lipták/state office for heritage management and
archaeology, saxony-anhalt. used with permission.
The Nebra sky disk, which dates to sixteen hundred years ago, is one
of the most important archaeological finds from the European Bronze
Age. The circle of hammered gold might be the Sun or an eclipsed
Moon, facing a golden crescent Moon that is a few days into the lunar
cycle. The Pleiades constellation, also known as “the Seven Sisters,” is
visible. The golden arc at the bottom may symbolize the Sun’s
apparent path across the sky between solstices.

claudia plamp/museum for pre- and
early history, berlin state museums,
art resource, ny. used with
permission.
The Berlin Gold Hat is covered in circular ornamentation representing
lunar cycles. It was probably used to calculate intercalary months, also
known as leap months, in order to bring the lunar year in alignment
with the seasons of the Sun. The hat dates to the late Bronze Age,
about 1000–800 b.c.e., or three thousand years ago.

image copyright the trustees of the british museum. used with permission.

This basalt stela depicts a king and the Star of Ishtar, or Venus; the
winged disk of the Sun God, Shamash; and the crescent of the Moon
God, Sin. The Moon God’s representation is the closest to the king
and the largest, depicting his supremacy. The stela’s inscription
recounts how King Nabonidus, the last king of Babylon, performed
good deeds and as thanks, the gods put an end to a period of drought,
bringing prosperity to his country. The stela was excavated near what
is now Nasiriyah, Iraq, in the ruins of Babylon.

image courtesy of the penn museum, object number b16665.

This calcite disk was excavated in 1926 from the temple of Ningal,
revered as the wife of the Moon God Nanna, at the palace of Ur, an
ancient city in what is now Iraq. On one side, seen here, is a depiction
of a sacrifice being completed by priestesses including Enheduanna,
daughter of Sargon of Akkad, the first ruler to unify the lands of
Mesopotamia. The disk’s reverse side contains an inscription of the
priestess. Enheduanna used worship of the Moon God to help unify
the lands in Sargon’s kingdom.

u.s. air force photo by staff sgt. christopher marasky.
The Great Ziggurat of Ur stands after four thousand years near what
is now Nasiriyah, Iraq. Its construction was completed in the twenty-
first century b.c.e. by King Shulgi and restored in the fifth century
b.c.e. under King Nabonidus. Its exterior was restored again in the
1980s c.e. by Saddam Hussein. The site was part of an American air
base during the Persian Gulf War and the later war in Iraq.

courtesy of the smithsonian libraries.

In this woodblock print from 1496, the man on the right, Johannes
Müller von Königsberg, also called Regiomontanus, meets with
Claudius Ptolemy. The centerpiece is an armillary sphere that depicts
the night sky, including the constellations of the zodiac. The sphere
represents Ptolemy’s view of the cosmos, with Earth at the center of
the universe. Regiomontanus co-authored an updated account of
Ptolemy’s masterwork, Almagest, which included simplified
translations and commentary. The new version inspired a student
named Nicolaus Copernicus to begin his own work, ultimately
overthrowing Ptolemy’s geocentric view and ushering in modern
science.

courtesy of the smithsonian libraries.
Born Mikołaj Kopernik, the doctor Latinized his name after attending
medical school. Copernicus revered Ptolemy as “that most astounding
of astronomers,” but was skeptical of the elaborate orbits Ptolemy’s
cosmology required. Copernicus’s new cosmology, published in 1543
as On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres, updated Ptolemy’s
ideas and would ultimately overthrow a millennia and a half of
wrongheaded notions about the universe.

photo by the author. image used with permission of lord egremont.
This image was sketched on the night of July 26, 1609, by an English
mathematician named Thomas Harriot. He was the first person to
draw an image of the Moon as seen through a telescope, completing
his sketch a few months before Galileo Galilei. The Moon was a five-
day-old waxing crescent, which Harriot scribbled in a note at the top
right.

courtesy of the smithsonian libraries.
Galileo Galilei trained as an artist and was capable of producing
lovely renderings of what he saw in his telescope. In Starry Messenger,
from which this page is taken, Galileo commented in detail on the
Moon’s apparent physical features, describing the maria and the lunar
craters, noting that some large spots appear “more depressed” than
brighter areas.

courtesy of the smithsonian libraries.
Johannes Kepler was a polymath, astronomer, devoted son, bereaved
father, mystic, devout Christian, dedicated servant, creative thinker,
beautiful writer, and scientific giant.

courtesy of nasa.
Wernher von Braun stands in front of the Saturn V rocket on July 1,
1969, as it is readied for the historic Apollo 11 mission. Von Braun,
who dreamed of space exploration since boyhood and learned to build
rockets under the auspices of Adolf Hitler, led development of the
Saturn V at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center.

photo by the author.
Troctolite 76535, a sample of the Moon collected during Apollo 17,
rests underneath a microscope at NASA’s Lunar Sample Laboratory
inside Johnson Space Center. The rock has been dubbed the most
interesting sample to come home from the Moon.

courtesy of nasa.
Astronaut Edwin E. “Buzz” Aldrin, Jr., climbs down the lunar module
Eagle, preparing for his first steps on the Moon. Neil Armstrong, who
stepped onto the Moon a few minutes before Aldrin, took this photo.
For the first time, the human mind was occupying the Moon and
looking upward and outward, rather than looking toward the Moon.

photo by the author.
Chimney Rock National Monument in southwestern Colorado is a
natural alignment formed by erosion over eons. Every eighteen years,
the full Moon rises between the spires. Around 1093 c.e., the site
hosted a large city populated by a people often known as the Anasazi,
now commonly called Ancestral Puebloans. They likely visited the
site to commemorate the eighteen-year cycle known as the lunar
standstill.

nasa/gsfc/arizona state university.
The Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter captured this oblique view of the
rim of Shackleton Crater, located at the Moon’s south pole. Three
points on the crater’s rim remain sunlit for 90 percent of the year,
while the crater interior never sees the Sun. Near the Peaks of Eternal
Light are depressions on the crater rim that also sit in permanent
shadow. These depressions form so-called cold traps that can contain
ice, which private companies and government agencies are interested
in harvesting.

For my daughters

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Many writers like to complain about the lonesome toil of creating their art.
I do not agree with them. A nonfiction book may be constructed in a writer’s
head, often in the middle of the night, but this work would be impossible
without friends, colleagues, and readers. Writing a book is one of the most
communal tasks I can imagine, and I am so thankful to you, reader, especially
if you’ve gotten this far.
I am eternally grateful to my wonderful agent, Laurie Abkemeier, for her
insight and boundless patience. A hundred thousand thanks to my brilliant
editor, Hilary Redmon, a generous, intellectually curious writer’s editor I am
so lucky to work with, and who saw what I wanted to do with this book better
than I did. I am also grateful to my editors at Sceptre, Juliet Brooke and Jo
Dingley, who offered helpful insight and narrative advice.
The first seeds of this book germinated in the Peakview Elementary
School library, where I sat on the floor as a student and listened to the Apollo
11 recordings. I am indebted to my history teachers, especially Doug Chilton,
who first taught me about the Sumerians; Deborah Milliser, who gave me
Howard Zinn when I was sixteen; and Elizabeth Jones, who showed me new
perspectives on Western history. I am also grateful to Susan Wise Bauer for
reminding me that history writing can be stylish and fun as well as
comprehensive. And I am grateful to my parents, for encouraging me in all
things but especially for fostering my love of books and of space for as long
as I can remember. The Halley’s Comet 1986 T-shirt I wore in kindergarten
is probably in a basement storage box somewhere, my official U.S. Space
Camp windbreaker is still in my closet, and my autographed photo of Neil
Armstrong, courtesy of my dad, now hangs in my home office.
Many scientists, academics, museum curators, assistants, archivists, and
librarians helped me piece together this narrative and guided me on my

travels. I am especially grateful to Hilary and Charlie Murray, for opening
their home and work to me; to Harald Meller, Konstanze Geppert, Georg
Schafferer, and Bettina Pfaff of the State Museum of Prehistory in Halle,
Germany; Alison McCann, archivist at Petworth House, and Lord Egremont;
Don Olson; Vince Gaffney; Willis Monroe; Hannah Byrne; Per Ahlberg;
Kristin Tessmar-Raible; Charlotte Helfrich-Förster; Anthony Aveni; Andrea
Mosie; Ryan Ziegler; Charis Krysher; Andrea Jones; Teasel Muir-Harmony;
Roger Launius; Brad Joliff; Clive Neal; Bill Bottke; Sarah T. Stewart; Simon
Lock; Dave Stevenson; Dean Swinford; J.  McKim Malville; and Daniel
Graham. Many others also helped me at Johnson Space Center, the British
Museum, the galleries and museums of Berlin’s Museum Island, Chimney
Rock National Monument, the Charles L. Tutt Library at Colorado College,
the Pikes Peak State College Library, the Pikes Peak Library District, the
John M. Olin Library at Washington University in St. Louis, and the National
Archives’ National Personnel Records Center in St. Louis. I’m grateful to my
fact-checker, Maya Dusenbery; and Kaeli Subberwal, Miriam Khanukaev,
and the editorial teams at Random House in the United States and Sceptre in
the United Kingdom, especially the extremely thorough copy desk and
production teams. Any errors that remain are mine. If I left anyone out, I
apologize; feel free to be newly annoyed at me every time the Moon is visible.
Thanks to Tom Kearney, Mary Allen, Chris Cobler, and Randy Bangert
for giving me a start, and to every editor who accepted a story after I left
daily newspapers, especially Paul Adams, Susannah Locke, Brigid Hains,
Ross Andersen, Michelle Nijhuis, Michael Moyer, Alan Burdick, Michael
Roston, Lee Billings, and Clara Moskowitz.
Large portions of this book were written and revised at night while my
children were sleeping. My deep appreciation goes to Lin-Manuel Miranda,
Elton John, Kristen Anderson-Lopez, Robert Lopez, and Chris Ballew aka
Caspar Babypants for providing the soundtrack to my life. I am indebted to
Kate Werner for watching my older daughter during the bizarre summer of
2020, and then caring for my newborn the following year.
I work alone in my home office, an arrangement I would never survive
without my dog, Sunshine, or my many supportive colleagues, especially

Christie Aschwanden; Lisa Grossman; Sarah Scoles; Julia Rosen; Alex Witze;
Virginia Hughes and the Gentlewomen; Jeanne Erdmann, for introducing me
to so many of these fine people; Swapna Krishna and everyone in the Miss
Guided Missiles; Adam Rogers, Maryn McKenna, Emily Willingham, and
the other talented journalists of The Thing; Jersey Knit Goals; the writers of
the group blog The Last Word on Nothing; Andrew Curry; David Brown;
Ferris Jabr; Ed Yong; and so many others. I am most grateful to Katharine
Gammon, for wisdom, wit, and camaraderie while navigating motherhood
and a journalism career, and to Peter Brannen, for introducing me to my
agent, for sending research materials, and for never being more than a chat
window away over the years. Sláinte.
Finally, this book absolutely would not have happened without the support
of my family, especially my parents, Nancy and Doug; my husband, Greg;
and my two daughters. Abigail and now Evelyn have both loved the Moon
since their earliest times on this planet, and I pray it will give them comfort
throughout all of their days.
May the Moon’s appearance in the sky do the same for you.

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY
“Across the Reef: The Assault on Betio.” Naval History Magazine 22, no. 6 (December 2008).
Accessed 
March 
14, 
2022. 
https://www.usni.org/​magazines/​naval-history-magazine/​2008/​
december/​across-reef-assault-betio.
Aldersey-Williams, Hugh. The Tide: The Science and Stories Behind the Greatest Force on Earth. New
York: W. W. Norton, 2017.
Aldrin, Buzz, and Ken Abraham. Magnificent Desolation: The Long Journey Home from the Moon.
Reprint ed. New York: Three Rivers Press, 2010.
Alexander, Joseph. Across the Reef: The Marine Assault of Tarawa. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Marine
Corps Headquarters, History and Museums Division, 2013.
Allen, Reginald E., ed. Greek Philosophy: Thales to Aristotle. Rev. ed. New York: Free Press, 1991.
Ambrose, Stephen E. D-Day: June 6, 1944: The Climactic Battle of World War II. Reprint ed. New
York: Simon & Schuster, 2013.
———. Pegasus Bridge. New York: Touchstone Books, 1988.
Appian. The Civil Wars. Translated by John Carter. Penguin Classics. New York: Penguin Books, 1996.
Arianrhod, Robyn. Thomas Harriot: A Life in Science. New York: Oxford University Press, 2019.
Armstrong, John C., Llyd E. Wells, and Guillermo Gonzalez. “Rummaging Through Earth’s Attic for
Remains of Ancient Life.” Icarus 160, no. 1 (November 1, 2002): 183–96. https://doi.org/​10.1006/​
ICAR.2002.6957.
Asimov, Isaac. The Tragedy of the Moon. New York: Dell, 1978.
Asphaug, Erik. When the Earth Had Two Moons: Cannibal Planets, Icy Giants, Dirty Comets, Dreadful
Orbits, and the Origins of the Night Sky. Reprint ed. New York: Custom House, 2019.
Aveni, Anthony. The Book of the Year: A Brief History of Our Seasonal Holidays. New York: Oxford
University Press, 2002.
———. Empires of Time: Calendars, Clocks, and Cultures. New York: Basic Books, 1989.
———. People and the Sky: Our Ancestors and the Cosmos. London: Thames & Hudson, 2008.
Barboni, Melanie, et al. “Early Formation of the Moon 4.51 Billion Years Ago.” Science Advances 3,
no. 1 (January 11, 2017): e1602365. https://doi.org/​10.1126/​sciadv.1602365.
Barbree, Jay, and John Glenn. Neil Armstrong: A Life of Flight. New York: Thomas Dunne Books,
2014.
Bates, Bryan C. “Hopi and Anasazi Alignments and Rock Art.” In Handbook of Archaeoastronomy and
Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 607–19. New York: Springer, 2015. https://doi.org/​10.1007/​
978-1-4614-6141-8_42.
Battaglia, Pietro, et al. “Influence of Lunar Phases, Winds and Seasonality on the Stranding of
Mesopelagic Fish in the Strait of Messina (Central Mediterranean Sea).” Marine Ecology 38, no. 5
(October 1, 2017). https://doi.org/​10.1111/​MAEC.12459.
Bauer, Susan Wise. The History of the Ancient World: From the Earliest Accounts to the Fall of Rome.
New York: W. W. Norton, 2007.

———. The History of the Medieval World: From the Conversion of Constantine to the First Crusade.
New York: W. W. Norton, 2010.
———. The Story of Western Science: From the Writings of Aristotle to the Big Bang Theory. New York:
W. W. Norton, 2015.
Beard, Mary. SPQR: A History of Ancient Rome. Reprint ed. New York: Liveright, 2016.
Beaulieu, Paul-Alain. A History of Babylon, 2200 BC–AD 75. Hoboken, N.J.: Wiley-Blackwell, 2018.
———. Reign of Nabonidus, King of Babylon (556–539 B.C.). New Haven, Conn.: Yale University
Press, 1989. https://doi.org/​10.2307/​j.ctt2250wnt.
Bedrosian, T. A., and R. J. Nelson. “Influence of the Modern Light Environment on Mood.” Molecular
Psychiatry 18, no. 7 (July 2013): 751–57. https://doi.org/​10.1038/​mp.2013.70.
Belmonte, Juan Antonio. “Ancient ‘Observatories’—A Relevant Concept?” In Handbook of
Archaeoastronomy and Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 133–45. New York: Springer, 2015.
https://doi.org/​10.1007/​978-1-4614-6141-8_9.
———. “Solar Alignments—Identification and Analysis.” In Handbook of Archaeoastronomy and
Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 483–92. New York: Springer, 2015. https://doi.org/​10.1007/​
978-1-4614-6141-8_36.
Benson, L. V., E. M. Hattori, J. Southon, and B. Aleck. “Dating North America’s Oldest Petroglyphs,
Winnemucca Lake Subbasin, Nevada.” Journal of Archaeological Science 40, no. 12 (December 1,
2013): 4466–76. https://doi.org/​10.1016/​J.JAS.2013.06.022.
Bergaust, Erik. Wernher von Braun: The Authoritative and Definitive Biographical Profile of the Father
of Modern Space Flight. Washington, D.C.: National Space Institute, 1976.
Bertman, Stephen. Handbook to Life in Ancient Mesopotamia. New York: Oxford University Press,
2005.
Biddle, Wayne. Dark Side of the Moon: Wernher von Braun, the Third Reich, and the Space Race. New
York: W. W. Norton, 2009.
Bloom, Terrie F. “Borrowed Perceptions: Harriot’s Maps of the Moon.” Journal for the History of
Astronomy 9, no. 2 (June 22, 1978): 117–22. https://doi.org/​10.1177/​002182867800900203.
Borman, Frank, and Robert J. Serling. Countdown: An Autobiography. Norwalk, Conn.: Easton Press,
1997.
Bostwick, Todd W. “Hohokam Archaeoastronomy.” In Handbook of Archaeoastronomy and
Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 551–64. New York: Springer, 2015. https://doi.org/​10.1007/​
978-1-4614-6141-8_43.
Boyle, Rebecca. “These Dusty Young Stars Are Changing the Rules of Planet-Building.” Nature 564,
no. 7734 (December 4, 2018): 20–23. https://doi.org/​10.1038/​d41586-018-07591-8.
Bradley, Richard. A Geography of Offerings: Deposits of Valuables in the Landscapes of Ancient
Europe. Philadelphia: Oxbow Books, 2017.
———. The Moon and the Bonfire: An Investigation of Three Stone Circles in North-East Scotland.
Edinburgh: Society of Antiquaries of Scotland, 2005.
———. The Significance of Monuments: On the Shaping of Human Experience in Neolithic and Bronze
Age Europe. New York: Routledge, 1998.
Braun, Wernher von, and Thomas O. Paine. The Mars Project. Reprint ed. Urbana: University of
Illinois Press, 1962.
Caesar, Julius. The Civil War of Caesar. Translated by Jane P. Gardner. Reprint ed. Penguin Classics.
Harmondsworth, U.K.: Penguin Books, 1976.

———. The Gallic Wars. Translated by Thomas Holmes. N.p.: CreateSpace, 2016.
———. Seven Commentaries on the Gallic War with an Eighth Commentary by Aulus Hirtius. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1996.
Campion, Nicholas. “Astrology as Cultural Astronomy.” In Handbook of Archaeoastronomy and
Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 103–16. New York: Springer, 2015. https://doi.org/​10.1007/​
978-1-4614-6141-8_16.
———. Astrology and Popular Religion in the Modern West: Prophecy, Cosmology and the New Age
Movement. New York: Routledge, 2016.
Caspar, Max. Kepler. New York: Dover, 2012.
Cerveny, Randall S., and Robert C. Balling. “Lunar Influence on Diurnal Temperature Range.”
Geophysical Research Letters 26, no. 11 (June 1, 1999): 1605–7. https://doi.org/​10.1029/​
1999GL900303.
Chamberlain, Von Del. “Diné (Navajo) Ethno- and Archaeoastronomy.” In Handbook of
Archaeoastronomy and Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 629–40. New York: Springer, 2015.
https://doi.org/​10.1007/​978-1-4614-6141-8_44.
Chapman, Allan. “A New Perceived Reality: Thomas Harriot’s Moon Maps.” Astronomy and
Geophysics 50, no. 1 (February 1, 2009): 1.27–1.33. https://doi.org/​10.1111/​j.1468-
4004.2009.50127.x.
Churchill, Winston, The Second World War, vol. 5: Closing the Ring. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1951.
Cline, Eric H. 1177 B.C.: The Year Civilization Collapsed. Rev. ed. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press, 2021.
Collins, Michael. Carrying the Fire: An Astronaut’s Journeys. 50th anniversary ed. New York: Farrar,
Straus & Giroux, 2019.
Comins, Neil F. What If the Moon Didn’t Exist?: Voyages to Earths That Might Have Been. New York:
HarperCollins, 1993.
Connor, James A. Kepler’s Witch: An Astronomer’s Discovery of Cosmic Order amid Religious War,
Political Intrigue, and the Heresy Trial of His Mother. New York: HarperCollins, 2009.
Cotte, Michel. “Archaeoastronomical Heritage and the World Heritage Convention.” In Handbook of
Archaeoastronomy and Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 301–11. New York: Springer, 2015.
https://doi.org/​10.1007/​978-1-4614-6141-8_18.
Crawford, Harriet. Sumer and the Sumerians. 2nd ed. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
Cullen, Christopher. “The First Complete Chinese Theory of the Moon: The Innovations of Liu Hong
c. A.D. 200.” Journal for the History of Astronomy 33 (February 1, 2002): 21–39. https://doi.org/​
10.1177/​002182860203300104.
———. Heavenly Numbers: Astronomy and Authority in Early Imperial China. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2017.
Dalley, Stephanie, trans. Myths from Mesopotamia: Creation, the Flood, Gilgamesh, and Others. Rev.
ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009.
Daly, Reginald A. “Origin of the Moon and Its Topography.” Proceedings of the American
Philosophical Society 90, no. 2 (1946): 104–19. https://www.jstor.org/​stable/​3301051.
Darwin, Charles. The Origin of Species. 150th anniversary ed. New York: Signet, 2009.
Darwin, George Howard. The Tides and Kindred Phenomena in the Solar System. Boston: Houghton
Mifflin, 1899.

Della Monica, Ciro, Giuseppe Atzori, and Derk Jan Dijk. “Effects of Lunar Phase on Sleep in Men and
Women in Surrey.” Journal of Sleep Research 24, no. 6 (December 1, 2015): 687–94.
https://doi.org/​10.1111/​jsr.12312.
Dijk, Derk Jan, and Anne C. Skeldon. “Biological Rhythms: Human Sleep Before the Industrial Era.”
Nature 527, no. 7577 (November 11, 2015): 176–77. https://doi.org/​10.1038/​527176A.
Eisenhower, Dwight D. Crusade in Europe: A Personal Account of World War II. New York:
Doubleday, 1948.
Elardo, Stephen M., Matthieu Laneuville, Francis M. McCubbin, and Charles K. Shearer. “Early Crust
Building Enhanced on the Moon’s Nearside by Mantle Melting-Point Depression.” Nature
Geoscience 13, no. 5 (May 2020): 339–43. https://doi.org/​10.1038/​s41561-020-0559-4.
Eliade, Mircea. The Sacred and the Profane: The Nature of Religion. Translated by Willard R. Trask.
San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1987.
Emo, Robert B., et al. “Evidence for Evolved Hadean Crust from Sr Isotopes in Apatite Within
Eoarchean Zircon from the Acasta Gneiss Complex.” Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta 235
(August 15, 2018): 450–62. https://doi.org/​10.1016/​J.GCA.2018.05.028.
Fagan, Brian. From Black Land to Fifth Sun: The Science of Sacred Sites. Reading, Mass.: Basic Books,
1999.
———. Return to Babylon: Travelers, Archaeologists, and Monuments in Mesopotamia. Boulder:
University Press of Colorado, 2007.
Feng, Li. Early China: A Social and Cultural History. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2013.
Fisher, Victor B. “Presentation of Archaeoastronomy in Introductions to Archaeology.” In Handbook of
Archaeoastronomy and Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 251–61. New York: Springer, 2015.
https://doi.org/​10.1007/​978-1-4614-6141-8_12.
Fitzpatrick, Andrew P., and Colin Haselgrove, eds. Julius Caesar’s Battle for Gaul: New Archaeological
Perspectives. Oxford: Oxbow Books, 2019.
Fox, Robert, ed. Thomas Harriot and His World. New York: Routledge, 2016.
Frank, Roslyn M. “Origins of the ‘Western’ Constellations.” In Handbook of Archaeoastronomy and
Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 147–63. New York: Springer, 2015. https://doi.org/​10.1007/​
978-1-4614-6141-8_11.
Galilei, Galileo. Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems: Ptolemaic and Copernican.
Translated by Stillman Drake. New York: Modern Library, 2001.
———. Sidereus nuncius. N.p.: Apud Thomam Baglionum, 1610. https://doi.org/​10.5479/​
sil.95438.39088015628597.
Garrick-Bethell, Ian, et al. “Troctolite 76535: A Sample of the Moon’s South Pole–Aitken Basin?”
Icarus 338 (March 1, 2020): 113430. https://doi.org/​10.1016/​j.icarus.2019.113430.
Gates, Charles. Ancient Cities: The Archaeology of Urban Life in the Ancient Near East and Egypt,
Greece and Rome. New York: Routledge, 2003.
Gavin, James Maurice. Aerial Warfare. Washington, D.C.: Infantry Journal Press, 1947.
———. Airborne Warfare. Lulu.com, 2020.
Gee, Henry. “Moonlight and Global Warming.” Nature News, June 24, 1999. https://doi.org/​10.1038/​
news990624-9.
Goldin, Paul R., ed. Routledge Handbook of Early Chinese History. New York: Routledge, 2020.
González-García, A. César. “Lunar Alignments—Identification and Analysis.” In Handbook of
Archaeoastronomy and Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 493–506. New York: Springer,

2015. https://doi.org/​10.1007/​978-1-4614-6141-8_37.
Graham, Daniel W. Explaining the Cosmos: The Ionian Tradition of Scientific Philosophy. Princeton,
N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2006.
———. Science Before Socrates: Parmenides, Anaxagoras, and the New Astronomy. Oxford; New York:
Oxford University Press, 2013.
Greenbaum, Dorian Gieseler. “Astronomy, Astrology, and Medicine.” In Handbook of
Archaeoastronomy and Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 117–32. New York: Springer, 2015.
https://doi.org/​10.1007/​978-1-4614-6141-8_19.
Guthke, Karl. The Last Frontier: Imagining Other Worlds, from the Copernican Revolution to Modern
Science Fiction. Translated by Helen Atkins. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1990, 1993.
Haba-Rubio, José, et al. “Bad Sleep? Don’t Blame the Moon! A Population-Based Study.” Sleep
Medicine 16, no. 11 (2015): 1321–26. https://doi.org/​10.1016/​j.sleep.2015.08.002.
Hansen, James R. First Man: The Life of Neil A. Armstrong. Reissue ed. New York: Simon & Schuster,
2018.
Hartmann, William K., and Donald R. Davis. “Satellite-Sized Planetesimals and Lunar Origin.” Icarus
24, no. 4 (April 1975): 504–15. https://doi.org/​10.1016/​0019-1035(75)90070-6.
Henry, John. Moving Heaven and Earth (Icon Science): Copernicus and the Solar System. London: Icon
Books, 2017.
Herman, Arthur. The Cave and the Light: Plato Versus Aristotle, and the Struggle for the Soul of Western
Civilization. New York: Random House, 2013.
Hetherington, Norriss S., ed. Encyclopedia of Cosmology: Historical, Philosophical, and Scientific
Foundations of Modern Cosmology. New York: Routledge, 2015.
Holmes, Richard. The Age of Wonder: How the Romantic Generation Discovered the Beauty and Terror
of Science. New York: Vintage, 2009.
Hoyt, Edwin P. Storm over the Gilberts: War in the Central Pacific, 1943. New York: Avon Books,
1983.
Hurt, Harry, III. For All Mankind. Reprint ed. New York: Grove Press, 2019.
Ilias, I., et al. “Do Lunar Phases Influence Menstruation? A Year-Long Retrospective Study.” Endocrine
Regulations 47, no. 3 (2013): 121–22. https://doi.org/​10.4149/​endo_2013_03_121.
Irving, Washington. A History of New York. 1809; reprint London: Penguin Books, 2008.
———. Knickerbocker’s History of New York, Complete. Chicago: W. B. Conkey, 1809.
https://www.gutenberg.org/​files/​13042/​13042-h/​13042-h.htm.
Irwin, James B. More Than Earthlings: An Astronaut’s Thoughts for Christ-Centered Living. Nashville,
Tenn.: Broadman Press, 1983.
Iwaniszewski, Stanisław. “Astrotourism and Archaeoastronomy.” In Handbook of Archaeoastronomy
and Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 287–300. New York: Springer, 2015. https://doi.org/​
10.1007/​978-1-4614-6141-8_21.
———. “Concepts of Space, Time, and the Cosmos.” In Handbook of Archaeoastronomy and
Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 3–14. New York: Springer, 2015. https://doi.org/​10.1007/​
978-1-4614-6141-8_2.
———. “Cultural Interpretation of Archaeological Evidence Relating to Astronomy.” In Handbook of
Archaeoastronomy and Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 315–24. New York: Springer, 2015.
https://doi.org/​10.1007/​978-1-4614-6141-8_24.

Jacobson, Seth A., et al. “Formation, Stratification, and Mixing of the Cores of Earth and Venus.”
Earth 
and 
Planetary 
Science 
Letters 
474 
(2017): 
375–86. 
https://doi.org/​10.1016/​
j.epsl.2017.06.023.
Kant, Immanuel. Universal Natural History and Theory of the Heavens. Translated by Ian Johnston.
Arlington, Va.: Richer Resources Publications, 2009.
Kempenaers, Bart, et al. “Artificial Night Lighting Affects Dawn Song, Extra-Pair Siring Success, and
Lay Date in Songbirds.” Current Biology 20, no. 19 (October 12, 2010): 1735–39. https://doi.org/​
10.1016/​J.CUB.2010.08.028.
Kepler, Johannes. Conversation with Galileo’s Sidereal Messenger. Translated and edited by Edward
Rosen. New York: Johnson, 1965.
Kershaw, Alex. The First Wave: The D-Day Warriors Who Led the Way to Victory in World War II.
New York: Dutton Caliber, 2019.
King, David A. “Astronomy in the Service of Islam.” In Handbook of Archaeoastronomy and
Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 181–96. New York: Springer, 2015. https://doi.org/​10.1007/​
978-1-4614-6141-8_13.
Koestler, Arthur. The Sleepwalkers: A History of Man’s Changing Vision of the Universe. 1959; reprint
London: Hutchinson, 1968.
———. Watershed: A Biography of Johannes Kepler. New York: Doubleday Anchor, 1960.
Krauss, Rolf. “Astronomy and Chronology—Babylonia, Assyria, and Egypt.” In Handbook of
Archaeoastronomy and Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 31–41. New York: Springer, 2015.
https://doi.org/​10.1007/​978-1-4614-6141-8_3.
Kriwaczek, Paul. Babylon: Mesopotamia and the Birth of Civilization. New York: St. Martin’s Griffin,
2012.
Krupp, Edwin C. “Archaeoastronomical Concepts in Popular Culture.” In Handbook of
Archaeoastronomy and Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 263–85. New York: Springer, 2015.
https://doi.org/​10.1007/​978-1-4614-6141-8_20.
———. “Astronomy and Power.” In Handbook of Archaeoastronomy and Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N.
Ruggles, 67–91. New York: Springer, 2015. https://doi.org/​10.1007/​978-1-4614-6141-8_5.
———. Beyond the Blue Horizon: Myths and Legends of the Sun, Moon, Stars, and Planets. New York:
HarperCollins, 1991.
———. Echoes of the Ancient Skies: The Astronomy of Lost Civilizations. Dover Books on Astro ed.
Mineola, N.Y.: Dover, 2003.
———. “Rock Art of the Greater Southwest.” In Handbook of Archaeoastronomy and Ethnoastronomy,
ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 593–606. New York: Springer, 2015. https://doi.org/​10.1007/​978-1-4614-
6141-8_45.
Last, Kim S., et al. “Moonlight Drives Ocean-Scale Mass Vertical Migration of Zooplankton During
the Arctic Winter.” Current Biology 26, no. 2 (January 25, 2016): 244–51. https://doi.org/​10.1016/​
j.cub.2015.11.038.
Launius, Roger D. Apollo’s Legacy: Perspectives on the Moon Landings. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian
Books, 2019.
Lear, John. Kepler’s Dream. With the Full Text and Notes of “Somnium, Sive Astronomia Lunaris,”
Joannis Kepleri. Translated by Patricia Frueh Kirkwood. Berkeley: University of California Press,
1965.
Leick, Gwendolyn. Mesopotamia: The Invention of the City. London: Penguin Books, 2003.

López, Alejandro Martín. “Cultural Interpretation of Ethnographic Evidence Relating to Astronomy.”
In Handbook of Archaeoastronomy and Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 341–52. New York:
Springer, 2015. https://doi.org/​10.1007/​978-1-4614-6141-8_14.
———. “Interactions Between ‘Indigenous’ and ‘Colonial’ Astronomies: Adaptation of Indigenous
Astronomies in the Modern World.” In Handbook of Archaeoastronomy and Ethnoastronomy, ed.
C. L. N. Ruggles, 197–212. New York: Springer, 2015. https://doi.org/​10.1007/​978-1-4614-6141-
8_30.
Love, David K. Kepler and the Universe: How One Man Revolutionized Astronomy. Essex, Connecticut:
Prometheus, 2015.
MacDonald, John. “Inuit Astronomy.” In Handbook of Archaeoastronomy and Ethnoastronomy, ed. C.
L. N. Ruggles, 533–39. New York: Springer, 2015. https://doi.org/​10.1007/​978-1-4614-6141-
8_40.
MacPherson, Hector, Jr. “Kant as an Astronomical Thinker.” Popular Astronomy 21 (August 1, 1913):
424–27. https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/​abs/​1913PA….. 21..424M/abstract.
Maher, Neil M. Apollo in the Age of Aquarius. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2017.
Mailer, Norman. Of a Fire on the Moon. Reprint ed. New York: Random House, 2014.
Makishima, Akio. Origins of the Earth, Moon, and Life: An Interdisciplinary Approach. Elsevier, 2017.
Malville, J. McKim, and Andrew Munro. “Great Houses and the Sun—Astronomy of Chaco Canyon.”
In Handbook of Archaeoastronomy and Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 577–91. New York:
Springer, 2015. https://doi.org/​10.1007/​978-1-4614-6141-8_47.
Marshack, Alexander. The Roots of Civilization: The Cognitive Beginnings of Man’s First Art, Symbol
and Notation. Rev. ed. Mount Kisco, N.Y.: Moyer Bell, 1991.
McCluskey, 
Stephen 
C. 
“Analyzing 
Light-and-Shadow 
Interactions.” 
In 
Handbook 
of
Archaeoastronomy and Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 427–44. New York: Springer, 2015.
https://doi.org/​10.1007/​978-1-4614-6141-8_27.
———. “Astronomy in the Service of Christianity.” In Handbook of Archaeoastronomy and
Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 165–79. New York: Springer, 2015. https://doi.org/​10.1007/​
978-1-4614-6141-8_15.
———. “Cultural Interpretation of Historical Evidence Relating to Astronomy.” In Handbook of
Archaeoastronomy and Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 325–39. New York: Springer, 2015.
https://doi.org/​10.1007/​978-1-4614-6141-8_29.
———. “Disciplinary Perspectives on Archaeoastronomy.” In Handbook of Archaeoastronomy and
Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 227–37. New York: Springer, 2015. https://doi.org/​10.1007/​
978-1-4614-6141-8_23.
———. “Hopi and Puebloan Ethnoastronomy and Ethnoscience.” In Handbook of Archaeoastronomy
and Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 649–58. New York: Springer, 2015. https://doi.org/​
10.1007/​978-1-4614-6141-8_48.
McDougall, Walter…. the Heavens and the Earth: A Political History of the Space Age. New York: Basic
Books, 1985.
Meador, Betty De Shong, and Judy Grahn. Inanna, Lady of Largest Heart: Poems of the Sumerian High
Priestess. Austin: University of Texas Press, 2001.
Meador, Betty De Shong, and John Maier. Princess, Priestess, Poet: The Sumerian Temple Hymns of
Enheduanna. Austin: University of Texas Press, 2009.

Messeri, Lisa. Placing Outer Space: An Earthly Ethnography of Other Worlds. Durham, N.C.: Duke
University Press, 2016.
Milosavljevic, Nina. “How Does Light Regulate Mood and Behavioral State?” Clocks and Sleep 1, no. 3
(July 12, 2019): 319–31. https://doi.org/​10.3390/​CLOCKSSLEEP1030027.
Moller, Violet. The Map of Knowledge: How Classical Ideas Were Lost and Found; A History in Seven
Cities. London: Picador, 2020.
Montgomery, Scott L. The Moon and the Western Imagination. Tucson: University of Arizona Press,
1999.
Muir-Harmony, Teasel. Operation Moonglow: A Political History of Project Apollo. New York: Basic
Books, 2020.
Munson, Gregory E. “Mesa Verde Archaeoastronomy.” In Handbook of Archaeoastronomy and
Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 565–75. New York: Springer, 2015. https://doi.org/​10.1007/​
978-1-4614-6141-8_49.
Murray, Hilary K., J. C. Murray, and Caroline Fraser. A Tale of the Unknown Unknowns: A Mesolithic
Pit Alignment and a Neolithic Timber Hall at Warren Field, Crathes, Aberdeenshire. Oxford: Oxbow
Books, 2009.
Murray, William Breen. “Astronomy and Rock Art Studies.” In Handbook of Archaeoastronomy and
Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 239–49. New York: Springer, 2015. https://doi.org/​10.1007/​
978-1-4614-6141-8_10.
Nabonidus. The Abu Habba Cylinder of Nabuna’id, v. Rawlinson pl. 64. Classic Reprint, 2009.
Nakajima, Miki, and David J. Stevenson. “Inefficient Volatile Loss from the Moon-Forming Disk:
Reconciling the Giant Impact Hypothesis and a Wet Moon.” Earth and Planetary Science Letters
487 (April 1, 2018): 117–26. https://doi.org/​10.1016/​J.EPSL.2018.01.026.
Naylor, Ernest. Moonstruck: How Lunar Cycles Affect Life. Reprint ed. New York: Oxford University
Press, 2018.
Neufeld, Michael. Von Braun: Dreamer of Space, Engineer of War. Reprint ed. New York: Vintage,
2008.
Neugebauer, Otto. The Exact Sciences in Antiquity. 2nd ed. Providence, R.I.: Brown University Press,
1957.
Newitz, Annalee. Four Lost Cities: A Secret History of the Urban Age. New York: W. W. Norton, 2021.
Oates, Joan. Babylon. London: Thames & Hudson, 1986.
Olson, Don. Celestial Sleuth: Using Astronomy to Solve Mysteries in Art, History and Literature. New
York: Springer Praxis Books, 2014.
Ordway, Frederick I., III, and Randy Liebermann, eds. Blueprint for Space: Science Fiction to Science
Fact. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1992.
Packer, Craig, Alexandra Swanson, Dennis Ikanda, and Hadas Kushnir. “Fear of Darkness, the Full
Moon and the Nocturnal Ecology of African Lions.” PLoS One 6, no. 7 (2011): e22285.
https://doi.org/​10.1371/​JOURNAL.PONE.0022285.
Palmer, M. S., et al. “A ‘Dynamic’ Landscape of Fear: Prey Responses to Spatiotemporal Variations in
Predation Risk Across the Lunar Cycle.” Ecology Letters 20, no. 11 (November 1, 2017): 1364–73.
https://doi.org/​10.1111/​ele.12832.
Pankenier, David W. Astrology and Cosmology in Early China: Conforming Earth to Heaven. New ed.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2015.

———. “The Cosmo-Political Background of Heaven’s Mandate.” Early China 20 (1995): 121–76.
https://www.jstor.org/​stable/​23351765.
Pimenta, Fernando. “Astronomy and Navigation.” In Handbook of Archaeoastronomy and
Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 43–65. New York: Springer, 2015. https://doi.org/​10.1007/​
978-1-4614-6141-8_7.
Pliny the Elder. Natural History: A Selection. Translated with an introduction and notes by John F.
Healy. Penguin Classics. New York: Penguin Books, 1991.
Plutarch. Lives, with an English Translation by Bernadotte Perrin. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1916.
———. Moralia. Translated by Harold Cherniss and William C. Helmbold. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1957.
———. Roman Lives: A Selection of Eight Roman Lives. Translated by Robin Waterfield. 1999; reissued
New York: Oxford University Press, 2009.
Prendergast, Frank. “Techniques of Field Survey.” In Handbook of Archaeoastronomy and
Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 389–409. New York: Springer, 2015. https://doi.org/​
10.1007/​978-1-4614-6141-8_31.
Pumfrey, Stephen. “Harriot’s Maps of the Moon: New Interpretations.” Notes and Records of the Royal
Society of London. Royal Society. https://doi.org/​10.2307/​40647255 [inactive].
Rahman, Shahid, Tony Street, and Hassan Tahiri. The Unity of Science in the Arabic Tradition.
Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, 2008.
Riva, M. A., et al. “The Disease of the Moon: The Linguistic and Pathological Evolution of the English
Term ‘Lunatic.’ ” Journal of the History of the Neurosciences 20, no. 1 (January 7, 2011): 65–73.
https://doi.org/​10.1080/​0964704X.2010.481101.
Rochberg, Francesca. The Heavenly Writing: Divination, Horoscopy, and Astronomy in Mesopotamian
Culture. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007.
Roenneberg, Till, et al. “A Marker for the End of Adolescence.” Current Biology 14, no. 24 (December
29, 2004). https://doi.org/​10.1016/​J.CUB.2004.11.039.
Rose, Sarah. D-Day Girls: The Spies Who Armed the Resistance, Sabotaged the Nazis, and Helped Win
World War II. 2019; reprint New York: Crown, 2020.
Rovelli, Carlo. The First Scientist: Anaximander and His Legacy. Translated by Marion Lignana
Rosenberg. Yardley, Pa.: Westholme Publishing, 2011.
Rowland, Wade. Galileo’s Mistake: A New Look at the Epic Confrontation Between Galileo and the
Church. New York: Arcade, 2012.
Ruggles, Clive L. N. “Analyzing Orientations.” In Handbook of Archaeoastronomy and
Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 411–25. New York: Springer, 2015. https://doi.org/​10.1007/​
978-1-4614-6141-8_26.
———. “Basic Concepts of Positional Astronomy.” In Handbook of Archaeoastronomy and
Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 459–72. New York: Springer, 2015. https://doi.org/​10.1007/​
978-1-4614-6141-8_33.
———. “Best Practice for Evaluating the Astronomical Significance of Archaeological Sites.” In
Handbook of Archaeoastronomy and Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 373–88. New York:
Springer, 2015. https://doi.org/​10.1007/​978-1-4614-6141-8_25.
———. “Calendars and Astronomy.” In Handbook of Archaeoastronomy and Ethnoastronomy, ed. C.
L. N. Ruggles, 15–30. New York: Springer, 2015. https://doi.org/​10.1007/​978-1-4614-6141-8_4.

———. ed. Handbook of Archaeoastronomy and Ethnoastronomy. New York: Springer, 2015.
https://doi.org/​10.1007/​978-1-4614-6141-8.
———. “Long-Term Changes in the Appearance of the Sky.” In Handbook of Archaeoastronomy and
Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 473–82. New York: Springer, 2015. https://doi.org/​10.1007/​
978-1-4614-6141-8_35.
———. “Nature and Analysis of Material Evidence Relevant to Archaeoastronomy.” In Handbook of
Archaeoastronomy and Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 353–72. New York: Springer, 2015.
https://doi.org/​10.1007/​978-1-4614-6141-8_22.
———. “Stellar Alignments—Identification and Analysis.” In Handbook of Archaeoastronomy and
Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 517–30. New York: Springer, 2015. https://doi.org/​10.1007/​
978-1-4614-6141-8_39.
Ruggles, Clive L. N., and Gary Urton, eds. Skywatching in the Ancient World: New Perspectives in
Cultural Astronomy. Boulder: University Press of Colorado, 2007.
“Rummaging Through Earth’s Attic for Remains of Ancient Life.” Nature News, November 2, 2002.
https://doi.org/​10.1038/​news021028-13.
Russell, Bertrand. A History of Western Philosophy. 1967; reprint New York: Simon &
Schuster/Touchstone, 2007.
Salt, Alun. “Development of Archaeoastronomy in the English-Speaking World.” In Handbook of
Archaeoastronomy and Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 213–26. New York: Springer, 2015.
https://doi.org/​10.1007/​978-1-4614-6141-8_17.
Samson, David R., et al. “Does the Moon Influence Sleep in Small-Scale Societies?” Sleep Health 4, no.
6 (2018): 509–14. https://doi.org/​10.1016/​j.sleh.2018.08.004.
Shakespeare, William. Julius Caesar. Edited by Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine. New York:
Simon & Schuster, 2004.
Sherrod, Robert. Tarawa: The Incredible Story of One of World War II’s Bloodiest Battles. New York:
Skyhorse, 2013.
Shubin, Neil. Your Inner Fish: A Journey into the 3.5-Billion-Year History of the Human Body. Reprint
ed. New York: Vintage, 2009.
Smith, Holland M., and Percy Finch. Coral and Brass. New York: C. Scribner’s Sons, 1949.
Sobel, Dava. Galileo’s Daughter. New York: Penguin Books, 2000.
———. A More Perfect Heaven: How Copernicus Revolutionized the Cosmos. New York: Walker Books,
2011.
———. The Planets. Reprint ed. New York: Penguin Books, 2006.
Solms, Juerg. “Taste of Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins.” Journal of Agricultural and Food
Chemistry 17, no. 4 (July 1, 1969): 686–88. https://doi.org/​10.1021/​jf60164a016.
Somervill, Barbara A. Nicolaus Copernicus: Father of Modern Astronomy. Compass Point Books, 2005.
Sordello, Romain, et al. “A Plea for a Worldwide Development of Dark Infrastructure for Biodiversity
—Practical Examples and Ways to Go Forward.” Landscape and Urban Planning 219 (March 1,
2022): 104332. https://doi.org/​10.1016/​J.LANDURBPLAN.2021.104332.
Šprajc, Ivan. “Alignments upon Venus (and Other Planets)—Identification and Analysis.” In Handbook
of Archaeoastronomy and Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 507–16. New York: Springer,
2015. https://doi.org/​10.1007/​978-1-4614-6141-8_38.
Spudis, Paul D. The Once and Future Moon. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Books, 1998.

———. The Value of the Moon: How to Explore, Live, and Prosper in Space Using the Moon’s Resources.
Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Books, 2022.
Steele, John M. “Astronomy and Politics.” In Handbook of Archaeoastronomy and Ethnoastronomy, ed.
C. L. N. Ruggles, 93–101. New York: Springer, 2015. https://doi.org/​10.1007/​978-1-4614-6141-
8_6.
Stewart, Thomas A., et al. “Fin Ray Patterns at the Fin-to-Limb Transition.” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 117, no. 3 (December 30, 2019): 1612–20. https://doi.org/​10.1073/​
pnas.1915983117.
Stone, Robert, and Alan Andres. Chasing the Moon: The People, the Politics, and the Promise That
Launched America into the Space Age. New York: Ballantine Books, 2019.
Strano, Giorgio. “The Marāgha School and Copernicus: Scientific Heritage or Independent
Elaboration?” In Circolazione dei saperi nel Mediterraneo: Filosofia e scienze…Florence: Cadmo,
2012. https://doi.org/​10.1400/​206551.
Stuhlinger, Ernst, and Michael J. Neufeld. “Wernher von Braun and Concentration Camp Labor: An
Exchange.” German Studies Review 26, no. 1 (2003): 121–26. https://doi.org/​10.2307/​1432905.
Suetonius. The Twelve Caesars. Translated by Robert Graves. London: Penguin Books, 1989.
Sullivan, S., P. Mažeika, Katie Hossler, and Lars A. Meyer. “Artificial Lighting at Night Alters
Aquatic-Riparian Invertebrate Food Webs.” Ecological Applications 29, no. 1 (January 2019):
e01821. https://doi.org/​10.1002/​eap.1821.
Thomson, William. Tides and the Ocean: Water’s Movement Around the World, from Waves to
Whirlpools. New York: Black Dog & Leventhal, 2018.
Tidau, Svenja, et al. “Marine Artificial Light at Night: An Empirical and Technical Guide.” Methods in
Ecology and Evolution 12, no. 9 (September 1, 2021): 1588–601. https://doi.org/​10.1111/​2041-
210X.13653.
Timberlake, Todd, and Paul Wallace. Finding Our Place in the Solar System: The Scientific Story of the
Copernican Revolution. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2019.
Verne, Jules. From the Earth to the Moon. Translated by Lowell Bair. New York: Bantam Classic, 1993.
Vogt, David. “Medicine Wheels of the Great Plains.” In Handbook of Archaeoastronomy and
Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 541–50. New York: Springer, 2015. https://doi.org/​10.1007/​
978-1-4614-6141-8_41.
Vyazovskiy, Vladyslav V., and Russell G. Foster. “Sleep: A Biological Stimulus from Our Nearest
Celestial Neighbor?” Current Biology 24, no. 12 (June 16, 2014): R557–60. https://doi.org/​
10.1016/​J.CUB.2014.05.027.
Waltham, David. “Is Earth Special?,” Earth-Science Reviews 192 (May 1, 2019): 445–70.
https://doi.org/​10.1016/​J.EARSCIREV.2019.02.008.
Ward, Bob, and John Glenn. Dr. Space: The Life of Wernher von Braun. Reissue ed. Annapolis, Md.:
Naval Institute Press, 2009.
Ward, Peter D., and Donald Brownlee. Rare Earth: Why Complex Life Is Uncommon in the Universe.
New York: Copernicus, 2003.
White, Jonathan. Tides: The Science and Spirit of the Ocean. San Antonio, Tex.: Trinity University
Press, 2017.
Williamson, Ray. “Pueblo Ethnoastronomy.” In Handbook of Archaeoastronomy and Ethnoastronomy,
ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 641–48. New York: Springer, 2015. https://doi.org/​10.1007/​978-1-4614-
6141-8_248.

———. “Sun-Dagger Sites.” In Handbook of Archaeoastronomy and Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N.
Ruggles, 621–28. New York: Springer, 2015. https://doi.org/​10.1007/​978-1-4614-6141-8_247.
Wood, A. “Asymmetry of the Moon,” Abstracts of the Lunar and Planetary Science  Conference 4
(March 1, 1973): 790. https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/​abs/​1973LPI…..4..790W.
Woolley, Leonard. Excavations at Ur: A Record of Twelve Years’ Work. New York: Thomas Y. Crowell,
1965.
———. Ur of the Chaldees. Rev. ed. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1982.
Zantke, Juliane, Heinrich Oberlerchner, and Kristin Tessmar-Raible. “Circadian and Circalunar Clock
Interactions and the Impact of Light in Platynereis dumerilii.” In Annual, Lunar, and Tidal Clocks:
Patterns and Mechanisms of Nature’s Enigmatic Rhythms, ed. Hideharu Numata and Barbara Helm,
143–62. Tokyo: Springer Japan, 2014. https://doi.org/​10.1007/​978-4-431-55261-1_8.
Zettler, Richard L., and Lee Horne, eds. Treasures from the Royal Tombs of Ur. Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology, 1998.
Zotti, Georg. “Visualization Tools and Techniques.” In Handbook of Archaeoastronomy and
Ethnoastronomy, ed. C. L. N. Ruggles, 445–57. New York: Springer, 2015. https://doi.org/​10.1007/​
978-1-4614-6141-8_32.
—
For additional references, please see the author’s website at rebeccaboyle.com/​moon.

NOTES
Introduction
1. Sherrod, Tarawa, 42.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 1
2. Alexander, Across the Reef, 8.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 2
3. The term “spring tide” has nothing to do with the season, but rather the idea of the tide “springing
forth.” The term “neap tide” comes from the Middle English word neep, which meant “scant” or
“lacking.”
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 3
4. Ambrose, D-Day, 71–73.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 4
5. Eisenhower, Crusade in Europe, 239.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 5
6. Churchill, Second World War, 591; and Olson, Celestial Sleuth, 254.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 6
7. Gavin, Aerial Warfare, 57.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 7

Part I: How the Moon Was Made
Chapter One: A World Apart
1. Collins, Carrying the Fire, 393.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 1
2. Aldrin and Abraham, Magnificent Desolation, 34.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 2
3. Collins, Carrying the Fire, 392.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 3
4. “Vacuuming Equipment,” vol. 2, sec. 12.41, The Apollo 11 Technical Crew Debriefing, July 31,
1969, https://history.nasa.gov/​alsj/​a11/​a11tcdb.html#120.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 4
5. Hansen, First Man, 532.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 5
6. Harrison “Jack” Schmitt is a regular attendee at the Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, an
annual meeting of selenographers and geologists, where he frequently answers questions and
contributes to scientific publications. He likened the Moon’s smell to gunpowder at a meeting I
attended in 2019.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 6
7. David Schleicher, ed., Interagency Report: Astrogeology 21; Paraphrased Geologic Excerpts from
Apollo 12 Mission, Geological Survey for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration,
June 1970, https://www.lpi.usra.edu/​resources/​USGS-Reports/​Astro-0021.pdf.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 7
8. Apollo 17 Technical Air-to-Ground Voice Transcription (Houston: Manned Spacecraft Center,
1972), Tape 94A/2, EVA 3, December 13, 1972, 1126–27, https://www.hq.nasa.gov/​alsj/​a17/​
AS17_TEC.PDF. See also Rebecca Boyle, “Apollo-Era Tremors Reveal a Dynamic, Active
Moon,” Scientific American, May 13, 2019.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 8
9. Thomas R. Watters et al., “Shallow Seismic Activity and Young Thrust Faults on the Moon,”
Nature Geoscience 12 (2019): 411–17, https://doi.org/​10.1038/​s41561-019-0362-2.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 9

10. Yosio Nakamura, Gary V. Latham, and H. James Dorman, “Apollo Lunar Seismic Experiment—
Final Summary,” Journal of Geophysical Research 87 (1982): A117–23, https://doi.org/​10.1029/​
jb087is01p0a117.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 10
11. J. P. Williams et al., “The Global Surface Temperatures of the Moon as Measured by the Diviner
Lunar Radiometer Experiment,” Icarus 283 (2017): 300–25, https://doi.org/​10.1016/​
j.icarus.2016.08.012.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 11
12. Laurence R. Harris et al., “How Much Gravity Is Needed to Establish the Perceptual Upright?”
PLoS One 9 (2014): e106207, https://doi.org/​10.1371/​journal.pone.0106207.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 12
13. Philip T. Metzger, “Dust Transport and Its Effects Due to Landing Spacecraft,” in The Impact of
Lunar Dust on Human Exploration, ed. Joel S. Levine (Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2021).
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 13
14. Collins, Carrying the Fire, 402.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 14
Chapter Two: The Creation
1. Dalley, Myths from Mesopotamia, 233–55.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 1
2. Angular momentum is a quantity that describes the movement and mass of a rotating object or a
system of rotating objects: the spinning Earth, the spinning Moon revolving around the spinning
Earth, and so forth. The rotation of an object remains constant unless it is acted upon by an
external force. Plato talks about this paradoxical pairing of rest and motion in his Republic. Sir
Isaac Newton was the first Western thinker to lay out the mathematics behind angular
momentum, in his Principia. The proof for conservation of angular momentum is attributed to
both Daniel Bernoulli and Leonhard Euler, who described it in 1746.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 2
3. Darwin, Tides and Kindred Phenomena, 282.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 3
4. Daly, “Origin of the Moon,” 104–19.

BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 4
5. Kant, Universal Natural History, pt. 1, sec. 1, 46.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 5
6. U. Wiechert et al., “Oxygen Isotopes and the Moon-Forming Giant Impact,” Science 294, no.
5541 (2001): 345–48, https://doi.org/​10.1126/​science.106303 [inactive].
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 6
7. Matija Ćuk and Sarah T. Stewart, “Making the Moon from a Fast-Spinning Earth: A Giant
Impact Followed by Resonant Despinning,” Science 338, no. 6110 (2012): 1047–52,
https://doi.org/​10.1126/​science.1225542.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 7
8. J. A. Kegerreis et al., “Immediate Origin of the Moon as a Post-impact Satellite,” Astrophysical
Journal Letters 937, no. 2 (2022), https://doi.org/​10.3847/​2041-8213/​ac8d96.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 8
9. Mott T. Greene, “Alfred Wegener and the Origin of Lunar Craters,” Earth Sciences History 17,
no. 2 (1998): 111–38, https://www.jstor.org/​stable/​24138636.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 9
10. Alfred Wegener, “The Origin of Lunar Craters,” trans. A. M. Celâl Şengör, Moon 14 (October
1975): 211–36, https://doi.org/​10.1007/​BF00565323.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 10
11. Qian Yuan, “Giant Impact Origin for the Large Low Shear Velocity Provinces,” paper presented
at the 52nd Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, March 2021, Houston, Tex.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 11
12. Jialong Lai et al., “First Look by the Yutu-2 Rover at the Deep Subsurface Structure at the Lunar
Farside,” Nature Communications 11, no. 1 (2020): 3426, https://doi.org/​10.1038/​s41467-020-
17262-w.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 12
Chapter Three: The Biographer of Earth
1. Cullen, Heavenly Numbers, 152.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 1

2. Plato, Timaeus, in Timaeus and Critias, trans. Desmond Lee (London: Penguin Books, 1965), 54.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 2
3. Ibid.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 3
4. J. Laskar, F. Joutel, and P. Robutel, “Stabilization of the Earth’s Obliquity by the Moon,” Nature
361 (1993): 615–17, https://doi.org/​10.1038/​361615a0.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 4
5. V. Gysembergh, P. J. Williams, and E. Zingg, “New Evidence for Hipparchus’ Star Catalogue
Revealed by Multispectral Imaging,” Journal for the History of Astronomy 53, no. 4 (2022): 383–
93, https://doi.org/​10.1177/​00218286221128289.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 5
6. David Waltham, “Testing Anthropic Selection: A Climate Change Example,” Astrobiology 11
(2011): 105–14, https://doi.org/​10.1089/​ast.2010.0475.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 6
7. Christoph Sens-Schönfelder and Tom Eulenfeld, “Probing the in situ Elastic Nonlinearity of
Rocks with Earth Tides and Seismic Noise,” Physical Review Letters 122 (2019): 138501,
https://doi.org/​10.1103/​PhysRevLett.122.138501.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 7
8. Denis Andrault et al., “The Deep Earth May Not Be Cooling Down,” Earth and Planetary Science
Letters 443 (2016): 195–203, https://doi.org/​10.1016/​j.epsl.2016.03.020.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 8
9. Fouad Tera et al., “A Lunar Cataclysm at ~3.95AE and the Structure of the Lunar Crust,” in
Lunar Science IV: Abstracts of Papers Presented at the Fourth Lunar Science Conference, ed. J. W.
Chamberlain and Carolyn Watkins (Houston: Lunar Science Institute, 1972), 725.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 9
10. Emerson Speyerer et al., “Quantifying Crater Production and Regolith Overturn on the Moon
with Temporal Imaging,” Nature 538 (2016): 215–18, https://doi.org/​10.1038/​nature19829.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 10
11. Prabal Saxena et al., “Was the Sun a Slow Rotator? Sodium and Potassium Constraints from the
Lunar Regolith,” Astrophysical Journal Letters 876 (2019): L16, https://doi.org/​10.3847/​2041-
8213/​ab18fb.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 11

12. Alex Teachey and David Kipping, “Evidence for a Large Exomoon Orbiting Kepler-1625b,”
Science Advances 5 (2018): 10, https://doi.org/​10.1126/​sciadv.aav1784.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 12
13. David Ferreira et al., “Climate at High-Obliquity,” Icarus 243 (November 15, 2014): 236–48,
https://doi.org/​10.1016/​J.ICARUS.2014.09.015.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 13

Part II: How the Moon Made Us
Chapter Four: The Moon and the Origin of Species
1. In 2022 the paleontologists who discovered Tiktaalik found a relative, dubbed Qikiqtania wakei,
that left the land life behind and went back to living in open water. Its paddle-like upper arm
seems to have evolved from earlier forms that walked on land, indicating that its more recent
ancestors had returned to the sea. See T. A. Stewart et al., “A New Elpistostegalian from the Late
Devonian of the Canadian Arctic,” Nature 608 (2022): 563–68, https://doi.org/​10.1038/​s41586-
022-04990-w.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 1
2. A day in the Lower Devonian, four hundred million years ago, lasted 21.4 hours. By the Upper
Devonian and the beginning of land-based vertebrates, the day had lengthened to 22 hours.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 2
3. L. Sallan et al., “The Nearshore Cradle of Early Vertebrate Diversification,” Science 362, no.
6413 (2018): 460–64, https://doi.org/​10.1126/​science.aar3689.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 3
4. Steven A. Balbus, “Dynamical, Biological and Anthropic Consequences of Equal Lunar and Solar
Angular Radii,” Proceedings of the Royal Society A 470, no. 2168 (2014), https://doi.org/​
10.1098/​rspa.2014.0263.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 4
5. H. M. Byrne et al., “Tides: A Key Environmental Driver of Osteichthyan Evolution and the Fish-
Tetrapod Transition?” Proceedings of the Royal Society A 476 (2020): 20200355, https://doi.org/​
10.1098/​rspa.2020.0355.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 5
6. P. W. Barlow, “Leaf Movements and Their Relationship with the Lunisolar Gravitational Force,”
Annals of Botany 116, no. 2 (2015): 149–87, https://doi.org/​10.1093/​aob/​mcv096.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 6
7. Aristotle, On the Parts of Animals, trans. William Ogle (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1911),
https://wellcomecollection.org/​works/​swtts8b7.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 7
8. Che-Hung Lin et al., “Moonrise Timing Is Key for Synchronized Spawning in Coral Dipsastraea
speciosa,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118, no. 34 (2021): e2101985118,
https://doi.org/​10.1073/​pnas.2101985118.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 8

9. Lin Zhang et al., “Dissociation of Circadian and Circatidal Timekeeping in the Marine
Crustacean Eurydice pulchra,” Current Biology 23, no. 19 (2013): 1863–73, https://doi.org/​
10.1016/​j.cub.2013.08.038.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 9
10. Luis M. San-Jose et al., “Differential Fitness Effects of Moonlight on Plumage Colour Morphs in
Barn Owls,” Nature Ecology and Evolution 3 (2019): 1331–40, https://doi.org/​10.1038/​s41559-
019-0967-2.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 10
11. Peter W. Barlow et al., “Leaf Movements of Bean Plants and Lunar Gravity,” Plant Signaling and
Behavior 3 (2008), 1083–90, https://doi.org/​10.4161/​psb.3.12.6906.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 11
12. Joachim Fisahn, Emile Klingelé, and Peter Barlow, “Lunar Gravity Affects Leaf Movement of
Arabidopsis thaliana in the International Space Station,” Planta 241 (2015): 1509–18,
https://doi.org/​10.1007/​s00425-015-2280-x.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 12
13. Marshack, Roots of Civilization, 45.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 13
14. C. Helfrich-Förster et al., “Women Temporarily Synchronize Their Menstrual Cycles with the
Luminance and Gravimetric Cycles of the Moon,” Science Advances 7, no. 5 (2021),
https://doi.org/​10.1126/​sciadv.abe1358.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 14
15. Michael Rappenglück, “A Palaeolithic Planetarium Underground—The Cave of Lascaux,”
Migration and Diffusion 5, no. 18 (2004): 93–119.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 15
16. David E. Vance, “Belief in Lunar Effects on Human Behavior,” Psychological Reports 76 (1995):
32–34, https://doi.org/​10.2466/​pr0.1995.76.1 [inactive].
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 16
17. Jillian C. Banfield, Mohamed Abdolell, and Jai S. Shankar, “Secular Pattern of Aneurismal
Rupture with the Lunar Cycle and Season,” Interventional Neuroradiology 23, no. 1 (2017): 60–
63. https://doi.org/​10.1177/​1591019916675632.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 17

18. T. A. Wehr, “Bipolar Mood Cycles Associated with Lunar Entrainment of a Circadian Rhythm,”
Translational Psychiatry 8, no. 151 (2018), https://doi.org/​10.1038/​s41398-018-0203-x.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 18
19. Christian Cajochen et al., “Evidence That the Lunar Cycle Influences Human Sleep,” Current
Biology 23 (2013), https://doi.org/​10.1016/​j.cub.2013.06.029.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 19
20. Historian of religion Mircea Eliade argues that lunar symbolism, even a metaphysics of the Moon,
allowed humans to relate to a slew of otherwise impenetrable concepts like “birth, becoming,
death, and resurrection; the waters, plants, woman, fecundity, and immortality; the cosmic
darkness, prenatal existence, and life after death, followed by a rebirth of lunar type (‘light
coming out of darkness’); weaving, the symbol of the ‘thread of life,’ fate, temporality, and death;
and yet others.” Eliade, Sacred and Profane, 156.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 20
21. Bennett Bacon et al., “An Upper Palaeolithic Proto-writing System and Phenological Calendar,”
Cambridge Archaeological Journal (2023): 1–19, https://doi.org/​10.1017/​S0959774322000415;
cf. Michael A. Rappenglück, “A Palaeolithic Planetarium Underground.”
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 21
Chapter Five: The Beginning of Time
1. Gordon S. Maxwell, “Air Photography and the Work of the Royal Commission on the Ancient
and Historical Monuments of Scotland,” Aerial Archaeology 2 (1978): 37–44.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 1
2. Murray, Murray, and Fraser, Tale of Unknown Unknowns, 22.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 2
3. M. G. L. Baillie and M. A. R. Munro, “Irish Tree Rings, Santorini and Volcanic Dust Veils,”
Nature 332 (1988): 344–46, https://doi.org/​10.1038/​332344a0.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 3
4. M. G. L. Baillie, “Hekla 3: How Big Was It?” Endeavour 13, no. 2 (1989): 78–81, https://doi.org/​
10.1016/​0160-9327(89)90006-9.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 4
5. David Keys, “Cloud of Volcanic Dust Blighted Northern Britain 3000 Years Ago,” Wat on Earth,
August 16, 1988, https://uwaterloo.ca/​wat-on-earth/​news/​cloud-volcanic-dust-blighted-northern-

britain-3000-years-ago.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 5
6. Stone circles broadly echo the movements of the Sun and Moon across the sky. If you stood at
the Easter Aquhorthies recumbent and followed the circle toward the northeast, you would mirror
the Sun’s direction across the sky after the winter solstice, when the Sun grows stronger and life
on Earth experiences a time of birth and renewal. The stone pillar opposite the recumbent stone
represents the summer solstice. If you kept moving back toward the recumbent, still tracing the
circle, you would walk toward the winter solstice as the Sun falls lower in the sky and life on
Earth experiences death and decay. But beyond these meanings, the stone circles of northeastern
Scotland are also uniquely attuned to the periodic cycles of the Moon.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 6
7. Richard Bradley, The Significance of Monuments: On the Shaping of Human Experience in
Neolithic and Bronze Age Europe (Abingdon, U.K.: Routledge, 1998), 29–30, 90.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 7
8. Bradley, Moon and Bonfire, 112.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 8
9. Scholars have long wondered whether Stonehenge, probably the most famous megalithic
monument, was erected someplace else, such as Wales, and later moved to its current home in
south-central England. According to the historian Geoffrey of Monmouth, who wrote The History
of the Kings of Britain in 1136 c.e., the great wizard Merlin’s Druid army stole the Stonehenge
monoliths from a mythical Irish stone circle called the Giants’ Dance. In 2020 a British
archaeologist and colleagues published evidence that this may have been true and that Stonehenge
was erected in Wales, at a site called Waun Mawn, sometime before 3000 b.c.e. But later research
in 2022 showed no link between Waun Mawn and Stonehenge. See Mike Parker Pearson et al.,
“The Original Stonehenge? A Dismantled Stone Circle in the Preseli Hills of West Wales,”
Antiquity 95, no. 379 (2021): 85–103, https://doi.org/​10.15184/​aqy.2020.239, and R. E. Bevins
et al., “Identification of the Source of Dolerites Used at the Waun Mawn Stone Circle in the
Mynydd Preseli, West Wales and Implications for the Proposed Link with Stonehenge,” Journal
of Archaeological Science: Reports 45 (2022): 103556, https://doi.org/​10.1016/​
j.jasrep.2022.103556.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 9
Chapter Six: Early Civilization and the Compass of Time
1. A small number of archaeologists remain unconvinced the Nebra sky disk is evidence of an
advanced civilization. In September 2020, Rupert Gebhard of the University of Munich and

Rüdiger Krause of the University of Frankfurt argued that the sky disk was probably not of the
same origin as the hoard with which Renner and Westphal found it. They say its findspot on the
Mittelberg shows evidence of an Iron Age fort, but nothing older, nothing dating to the Bronze
Age. They disputed interpretations of soil samples where the disk was found, too. Scientists who
studied the dirt said it contained trace amounts of gold and copper, suggesting metals from the
disk leached into the earth over thousands of years. But Gebhard and Krause were unconvinced
that those bits of gold and copper were related to the disk. Meller and colleagues shot back with
detailed data, including court findings. Other scientists dispute Gebhard and Krause’s disputation.
In an interview, the British archaeologist Alison Sheridan told me the argument was unseemly
and chalked the whole thing up to sour grapes. See Rupert Gebhard and Rüdiger Krause,
“Critical Comments on the Find Complex of the So-Called Nebra Sky Disk,” Archäologische
Informationen 43 (2020): 325–46.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 1
2. Hermann Hunger and Erica Reiner, “A Scheme for Intercalary Months from Babylonia,” Wiener
Zeitschrift für die Kunde des Morgenlandes 67 (1975): 21–28, https://www.jstor.org/​stable/​
23868339.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 2
3. Hermann Hunger and David Edwin Pingree, MUL.APIN: An Astronomical Compendium in
Cuneiform (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1989), II:ii:5–6. See also Eshbal Ratzon,
“Early Mesopotamian Intercalation Schemes and the Sidereal Month,” Mediterranean
Archaeology and Archaeometry 16, no. 4 (2016): 143–51, https://doi.org/​10.5281/​
zenodo.220913.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 3
4. By 1177 b.c.e., large empires and small kingdoms in the Aegean region, Egypt, and the Near East
fell apart in dramatic fashion. The Egyptians, Babylonians, Minoans, Mycenaeans, Hittites, and
other civilizations plunged into a centuries-long dark age. Historian Eric Cline argues that the
simultaneous demise of so many ancient civilizations was brought about by multiple stressors,
especially drought and famine that led to marauding invasions. Cline, 1177 B.C.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 4
5. The deliberate destruction of Warren Field’s timber hall is just one example. At Çatalhöyük in
Turkey, some of the earliest known dwellings in human history were ritualistically burned and
sealed off. The same thing occurred in the Cahokia civilization, remains of which are located east
of St. Louis. For a more thorough discussion of these practices, see Newitz, Four Lost Cities. See
also R. Hadad, “Ruin Dynamics: Architectural Destruction and the Production of Sedentary
Space at the Dawn of the Neolithic Revolution,” Journal of Social Archaeology 19, no. 1 (2019):
3–26, https://doi.org/​10.1177/​1469605318794241.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 5

Chapter Seven: The Ornament of the Sky
1. This translation is found in Oates, Babylon, 132. An alternate translation appears in Beaulieu,
Reign of Nabonidus, as “I am Nabonidus, the only son, who has nobody. In my mind there was no
thought of kingship.”
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 1
2. “Before Woolley,” Ur Online, n.d., http://www.ur-online.org/​about/​5/.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 2
3. Woolley, Ur of the Chaldees, 203.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 3
4. Woolley, Excavations at Ur, 115. Woolley and his contemporaries transliterated the name
Ennigaldi-Nanna, written in cuneiform letters, as Bel-Shalti Nannar, but modern scholars have
modified the Latinized spelling. She is also commonly just called “Ennigaldi.”
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 4
5. “The Herds of Nanna,” Electronic Text Corpus of Sumerian Literature,
https://etcsl.orinst.ox.ac.uk/​section4/​tr41306.htm.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 5
6. “The Temple Hymns” (c.4.80.1), line c4801.173, Electronic Text Corpus of Sumerian Literature,
https://etcsl.orinst.ox.ac.uk/​edition2/​etcslgloss.php?lookup=c4801.173.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 6
7. “Ur,” Open Richly Annotated Cuneiform Corpus, http://oracc.iaas.upenn.edu/​epsd2/​cbd/​sux/​
o0048262.html.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 7
8. Bauer, History of the Ancient World, 98.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 8
9. A description of Enheduanna’s life and her role in Sargon’s court can be found in Meador and
Maier, Princess, Priestess, Poet, 5, 78, 245.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 9
10. Support for this analysis is found in Kriwaczek, Babylon, 120.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 10
11. Ibid., 122.

BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 11
12. Enheduanna, “A Hymn to Inanna,” trans. t.4.07.3, Electronic Text Corpus of Sumerian
Literature, https://etcsl.orinst.ox.ac.uk/​cgi-bin/​etcsl.cgi?text=t.4.07.3#.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 12
13. Woolley, Ur of the Chaldees, 206.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 13
14. 2 Corinthians 5:17 (King James Version).
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 14
15. “The Lament for Urim,” trans. t.2.2.2, Electronic Text Corpus of Sumerian Literature,
https://etcsl.orinst.ox.ac.uk/​cgi-bin/​etcsl.cgi?text=t.2.2.2#. See also Bauer, History of the Ancient
World, 143–44.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 15
16. Genesis 17:5, 17:15 (New International Version).
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 16
17. Beaulieu, “Nabonidus the Mad King: A Reconsideration of His Steles from Harran and Babylon,”
in Representations of Political Power: Case Histories from Times of Change and Dissolving Order
in the Ancient Near East (University Park: Penn State University Press, 2007), 138–140,
https://doi.org/​10.1515/​9781575065830-010.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 17
18. Ibid.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 18
19. Francesca Minen, “Touched by the Moon: Lunar Influences on Human Health in Ancient
Mesopotamia,” in La luna nell’immaginario umano, ed. Lara Nicolini, Luca Beltrami, and Lara
Pagani (Genoa: Genoa University Press, 2019), 48.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 19
20. Beaulieu, Reign of Nabonidus, 208. Alternate translation in C. J. Gadd, “The Harran Inscriptions
of Nabonidus,” Anatolian Studies 8 (1958): 35–92.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 20
21. Gadd, “Harran Inscriptions of Nabonidus,” 47.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 21

22. Ibid.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 22
23. Al Wolters, “Belshazzar’s Feast and the Cult of the Moon God Sîn,” Bulletin for Biblical Research
5 (1995): 199–206, https://www.jstor.org/​stable/​26422134.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 23
24. Scholars say the feast may have been an Akitu (New Year’s) festival in honor of the Moon God
Sin. The dates, the sixteenth and seventeenth day of Tišritum, would always have followed the
October full Moon, the harvest moon. Other evidence backs this up. A papyrus manuscript from
the third century b.c.e. found in Thebes, Egypt, called Papyrus Amherst 63, also describes a
Mesopotamian festival dedicated to the Moon God. The papyrus (in the Morgan Library &
Museum in New York) is written in Aramaic and contains Israelite psalms not found in the Bible
corpus. “Crescent, be a bow in heaven!” one psalm reads. “Our Bull shall be with us.” Given the
religious politics of Nabonidus’s reign, it seems reasonable to guess that a festival worshipping the
Moon God Sin, not Marduk, was taking place when Babylon fell. As far as the Moon phase itself,
retired astrophysicist and solar eclipse chaser Fred Espenak maintains a searchable record of
Moon phases dating to 2000 b.c.e., and shows a full Moon on the night of October 24, 539 b.c.e.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 24
25. William H. Shea, “Nabonidus, Belshazzar, and the Book of Daniel: An Update,” Andrews
University Seminary Studies 20, no. 2 (Summer 1982): 133–49.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 25
26. By 539 b.c.e., so many societies were literate, and Babylon was so powerful and so renowned, that
its fall was documented in numerous places. For example, the narrative here comes from the
Cyrus Cylinder; the Verse Account of Nabonidus, which was written later by the enemies of the
Friend of Sin; Cyropaedia: The Education of Cyrus, by the Greek historian Xenophon and
translated by Henry Graham Dakyns; The History of Herodotus, translated by G. C. Macaulay;
and the Book of Daniel (New American Bible).
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 26
27. Aristotle, Politics, vol. 21 of Aristotle in 23 Volumes, trans. H. Rackham (Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1944), 3.1276a.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 27
28. Rochberg, Heavenly Writing, 78.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 28
29. Ibid., 40.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 29

30. Campion, Astrology and Popular Religion, 13. See also the nationally representative YouGov poll,
conducted April 21–22, 2022, https://today.yougov.com/​topics/​lifestyle/​survey-results/​daily/​
2022/​04/​22/​5ad3f/​1.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 30
Chapter Eight: The Voyage of Discovery Begins with the Moon
1. Plutarch, On the Apparent Face in the Moon, in Moralia.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 1
2. “The problem is that for all their fecundity in theorizing, the Presocratics fail to provide any way
to test their theories. So in the end every theory is equally plausible and equally unprovable and
unproved,” as the Brigham Young University philosopher Daniel W. Graham explains in Science
Before Socrates, 10. Graham has long been a voice in the wilderness extolling the work of pre-
Socratic thinkers, especially Anaxagoras. See also Graham, Explaining the Cosmos.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 2
3. Plato, Phaedo, vol. 1 of Plato in Twelve Volumes, trans. Harold North Fowler (Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1966).
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 3
4. Graham, Science Before Socrates, 91.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 4
5. Plutarch, Lysander, in Lives, with Translation by Perrin, 12.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 5
6. “Anaxagoras,” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, November 11, 2019,
https://plato.stanford.edu/​entries/​anaxagoras/.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 6
7. Translation in Graham, Science Before Socrates, 7.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 7
8. Plato, Euthyphro, Apology, and Crito: With the Death Scene from Phaedo, trans. F. J. Church, rev.
Robert D. Cumming (1956; reprint New York: Macmillan, 1985), 32.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 8
9. Russell, History of Western Philosophy, 145.

BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 9
10. Suetonius, Twelve Caesars, 16.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 10
11. Beard, SPQR, 285.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 11
12. Fitzpatrick and Haselgrove, Caesar’s Battle for Gaul, 135–158.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 12
13. Caesar, Seven Commentaries, 82.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 13
14. Appian, Civil Wars, 78.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 14
15. Ibid., 88.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 15
16. Matthew 22:20–22 (King James Version).
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 16
17. Paul Coones, “The Geographical Significance of Plutarch’s Dialogue, Concerning the Face Which
Appears in the Orb of the Moon,” Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 8, no. 3
(1983): 361–72, https://doi.org/​10.2307/​622050. See also Johannes Kepler, Somnium, seu Opus
posthumum de astronomia lunari, ed. Ludovico Kepler (Frankfurt, 1634).
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 17
18. Plutarch, On the Apparent Face in the Orb of the Moon, in Moralia, 24:1–3.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 18

Part III: How We Made the Moon
Chapter Nine: The Moon in Our Eyes
1. Quoted in Rowland, Galileo’s Mistake.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 1
2. Ptolemy does not address these inaccuracies. “This discrepancy is silently ignored by Ptolemy,
though he could not have doubted that the actual geocentric distances of the moon were very
different from what his model required,” wrote Otto Neugebauer, a historian of science who sets
the bar for all others, in Exact Sciences in Antiquity, 195.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 2
3. Hassan Tahiri, “The Birth of Scientific Controversies, the Dynamics of the Arabic Tradition and
Its Impact on the Development of Science: Ibn al-Haytham’s Challenge of Ptolemy’s Almagest,”
in Rahman, Street, and Tahiri, Unity of Science in Arabic Tradition, 208.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 3
4. Ibid., 209.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 4
5. Moller, Map of Knowledge, 227.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 5
6. Nicolaus Copernicus, Commentariolus, quoted in Bauer, Story of Western Science, 47.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 6
7. Sobel, More Perfect Heaven, 50.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 7
8. Nicolaus Copernicus, De Revolutionibus Orbium Cœlestium, Libri VI, trans. Edward Rosen
(Warsaw: Polish Scientific Publications, 1978), 173. Additional quotes in this section are from
this translation.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 8
9. Modern scholars have found evidence that al-Tusi’s geometry was translated into both Greek and
Hebrew in the thirteenth century, suggesting widespread transmission. The geometrical concept
known as the Tusi couple in particular seems to have made its way from Maragha Observatory
into Europe two centuries before Almagest. This mathematical device describes how a small circle
can rotate quickly within a larger circle whose diameter is twice the size of the small one. This
arrangement of circles is superior to epicycles in explaining the motions of the planets. Nasir al-
Din al-Tusi sketched this concept in 1247, and scholars say his drawing is remarkably similar to

one by Copernicus in De Revolutionibus. See Willy Hartner, “Copernicus, the Man, the Work,
and Its History,” Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 117, no. 6 (December 31,
1973): 413–22.
In 1957, Otto Neugebauer found a Greek-language manuscript in Oxford’s Bodleian Library
that contains a diagram of the Tusi couple and al-Tusi’s lunar model, and this has also been used
to suggest that Copernicus might have known of al-Tusi’s work. For a detailed overview of this
history and how Almagest was transmitted to Europe, see Kevin Krisciunas and Belén Bistué,
“Notes on the Transmission of Ptolemy’s Almagest to the Era of Copernicus,” Journal of
Astronomical History and Heritage 22, no. 3 (2019): 492–502. For a discussion of how
Copernicus might have learned from Islamic astronomers, see F. Jamil Ragep, “Copernicus and
His Islamic Predecessors: Some Historical Remarks,” History of Science 45, no. 1 (2007): 65–81,
https://doi.org/​10.1177/​007327530704500103.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 9
10. Russell, History of Western Philosophy, 582.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 10
11. Quotes from Kepler and from Harriot’s contemporaries are in Fox, Thomas Harriot and His
World, and Arianrhod, Thomas Harriot, 213.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 11
12. Arianrhod, Thomas Harriot, 146.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 12
13. This is from the first stanza of the poem “High Flight,” by John Gillespie Magee Jr., which my
pilot father had framed and hung in my childhood home. John Gillespie Magee, “Letter to
Parents,” September 3, 1941. John Magee Papers, Library of Congress, Washington, D.C.
Manuscript. In Respectfully Quoted: A Dictionary of Quotations Requested from the Congressional
Research Service, ed. Suzy Platt (Washington, D.C.: Library of Congress, 1989): 117–18.
Accessed via Poetry Foundation, http://www.poetryfoundation.org/​poems/​157986/​high-fight-
627d3cfb1e9b7.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 13
14. Arianrhod, Thomas Harriot, 218.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 14
15. These quotes, taken from the margins of Harriot’s drawings, were deciphered by the author at
Petworth House.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 15
16. For a thorough discussion of the mathematical, cartographic renderings Harriot produced, see
Montgomery, Moon and Western Imagination, 108.

BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 16
17. Koestler, Watershed, 50.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 17
18. Kepler, Conversation with Galileo’s Sidereal Messenger, 25.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 18
19. Galilei, Sidereus nuncius, 22. Passage translated by the author.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 19
20. Ibid., 20. Passage translated by the author.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 20
21. Kepler, Conversation with Galileo’s Sidereal Messenger, 18.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 21
22. Galilei, Dialogue Concerning World Systems, 77.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 22
23. Ibid. This quotation is part of the same conversation about the “horns” of the crescent Moon.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 23
24. Steven F. Ostrow, “Cigoli’s Immacolata and Galileo’s Moon: Astronomy and the Virgin in Early
Seicento Rome,” Art Bulletin 78, no. 2 (1996): 218–35, https://doi.org/​10.2307/​3046173. See
also Montgomery, Moon and Western Imagination, 129.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 24
25. Kepler, Conversation with Galileo’s Sidereal Messenger, 42.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 25
26. Council of Trent, Fourth Session, The Canons and Decrees of the Sacred and Ecumenical Council
of Trent, trans. J. Waterworth (London: Dolman, 1848), 17–21.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 26
Chapter Ten: Journeys of the Mind
1. Koestler, Sleepwalkers, 343; cf. Kepler’s introduction to Astronomia Nova, New Revised Edition,
trans. William H. Donahue (Santa Fe: Green Lion Press, 2020), 25.

BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 1
2. Koestler, Watershed, 195.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 2
3. Somervill, Nicolaus Copernicus, 13.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 3
4. Lear, Kepler’s Dream, 136.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 4
5. Kepler, Conversation with Galileo’s Sidereal Messenger, 46. See also Guthke, Last Frontier, 108.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 5
6. Koestler, Watershed, 39.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 6
7. Marjorie Nicolson, “Kepler, the Somnium, and John Donne,” Journal of the History of Ideas 1,
no. 3 (1940): 259–80, https://doi.org/​10.2307/​2707087.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 7
8. Connor, Kepler’s Witch, 9.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 8
9. Lear, Kepler’s Dream, 77.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 9
10. Irving, Knickerbocker’s History, 14.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 10
11. Ibid.; cf. Irving, History of New York, 50.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 11
12. Verne, From Earth to Moon, 213.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 12
13. Hurt, For All Mankind.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 13
14. Neufeld, Von Braun, 4.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 14

15. Several biographies tell von Braun’s life story, including his involvement with Nazi politics, use of
prisoner labor at concentration camps, and his ultimate success in landing Americans on the
Moon. He was a complicated man. For two excellent accounts, see Neufeld, Von Braun, and
Bergaust, Wernher von Braun.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 15
16. Neufeld, Von Braun, 5. See also Bergaust, Wernher von Braun, 60.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 16
17. McDougall,…Heavens and Earth, 100.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 17
18. Launius, Apollo’s Legacy, 160.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 18
19. Randy Liebermann, “The Collier’s and Disney Series,” in Ordway and Lieberman, Blueprint for
Space, 146.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 19
Chapter Eleven: The Eagle and the Reliquary
1. Borman and Serling, Countdown, 212.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 1
2. Muir-Harmony, Operation Moonglow, 159.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 2
3. Launius, Apollo’s Legacy, 215.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 3
4. Muir-Harmony, Operation Moonglow, 127.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 4
5. Maher, Apollo in Age of Aquarius, 11–12.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 5
6. Barbree and Glenn, Neil Armstrong, 156.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 6

7. Ibid., 209.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 7
8. Collins, Carrying the Fire, 361.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 8
9. Verne, From Earth to Moon, 203.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 9
10. The Apollo 11 landing recordings and accompanying technical transcript are some of the most
important records in human history, I would argue. It’s worth reading them unvarnished, or even
better, listening to them, which I did for the first time when I was about ten years old. This
section is taken from the Apollo Technical Air-to-Ground Voice Transmission transcript,
available through NASA’s website, at https://www.hq.nasa.gov/​alsj/​a11/​a11transcript_tec.html.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 10
11. Collins, Carrying the Fire, 406.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 11
12. Some of the Apollo 11 transmissions were somewhat garbled, which should be unsurprising,
given the distance the radio waves had to travel and the limited technology of 1969. Numerous
experts have reviewed the recordings over the years and still argue about transcript writers’
interpretation of individual words. Most of the time, this is inconsequential, but the passage
referenced here is one example of a transcription decision that can change the recording’s
meaning. Aldrin and Armstrong were out of the lunar lander, and Armstrong read aloud the
words on the lander’s plaque, which showed the two hemispheres of Earth and the words “Here
men from the planet Earth first set foot upon the Moon.” Aldrin then started talking about the TV
camera’s lens and worried that it was smudged with fine Moon dust. He described the dust, called
regolith, as “very finely powdered carbon, but really [garbled] looking.” Some transcript writers
heard “sooty-looking,” while others heard “dirty-looking.” The official edited transcript, which is
protected by copyright, has Aldrin saying “pretty-looking.” See Eric M. Jones, “One Small Step,”
Apollo 11 Lunar Surface Journal, https://history.nasa.gov/​alsj/​a11/​a11.step.html. See also
“Apollo 11 Technical Air-to-Ground Transcript,” Apollo 11 Lunar Surface Journal,
https://www.hq.nasa.gov/​alsj/​a11/​a11trans.html. This is the raw transcript as it was provided to
the news media in 1969.
Another, even better example is the most famous utterance ever made on the Moon. Some
experts still debate whether Neil Armstrong said, or at least meant to say, “That’s one small step
for a man,” versus “one small step for man.” After returning to Earth, Armstrong said he actually
spoke the words “a man,” although most people do not hear it that way. It makes a difference,
because without the indefinite article “a,” Armstrong was using “man” as an abstract reference to
all of humanity. It’s like saying, “That’s one small step for mankind, one giant leap for mankind.”
But a generation of listeners still does not hear the “a,” and it is almost never conveyed this way in

museum exhibits or, as it happens, in most books. I hear a slight wobble in his voice as he speaks,
but I have never heard the indefinite article either, no matter how much I wish I could.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 12
13. Jones, “One Small Step.”
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 13
14. Tony Phillips, “Wide Awake in the Sea of Tranquillity,” NASA Science, July 20, 1969,
https://science.nasa.gov/​science-news/​science-at-nasa/​2006/​19jul_seaoftranquillity [inactive].
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 14
15. Collins, Carrying the Fire, 54.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 15
16. This quote is often repeated by evangelical Christians, and comes from Irwin’s autobiography. See
Irwin, More Than Earthlings, 10.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 16
17. Aldrin told this story many times after returning to Earth, including in multiple books and
magazine articles. The account here is taken from Aldrin and Abraham, Magnificent Desolation,
26.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 17
18. “Day 8, Part 2: More Television and Stowage for Re-entry,” Apollo 11 Flight Journal,
https://history.nasa.gov/​afj/​ap11fj/​25day8-reentry-stowage.html.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 18
19. Among people born in the “Silent Generation,” from 1928 to 1945, a whopping 84 percent of
Americans identified as Christian, according to the Pew Research Center. See “In U.S., Decline
of Christianity Continues at Rapid Pace,” Pew Research Center, October 17, 2019,
https://www.pewresearch.org/​religion/​2019/​10/​17/​in-u-s-decline-of-christianity-continues-at-
rapid-pace/.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 19
20. This is probably one of the most famous, and frameable, quotes from the Apollo era. The best
source I can find is from a 1974 feature in People magazine, though it is not clear whether
Mitchell gave this quote during an interview, or whether the magazine was reprinting it. See
“Edgar Mitchell’s Strange Voyage,” People, April 4, 1974, https://people.com/​archive/​edgar-
mitchells-strange-voyage-vol-1-no-6/.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 20

21. Eric M. Jones, “The Genesis Rock,” Apollo 15 Lunar Surface Journal, https://www.hq.nasa.gov/​
alsj/​a15/​a15.spur.html. See also Rebecca Boyle, “To See the Moon Anew in Its Primordial
Crust,” New York Times, July 14, 2019.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 21
Chapter Twelve: Our Eighth Continent
1. Ecclesiastes 1:9–10 (King James Version).
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 1
2. Martin Elvis, “The Peaks of Eternal Light: A Near-Term Property Issue on the Moon,” Space
Policy 38 (2016): 30–38.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 2
3. Vera Assis Fernandes, “Ethical and Social Aspects of a Return to the Moon—A Geological
Perspective,” Geosciences 9, no. 1 (2019): 12, https://doi.org/​10.3390/​geosciences9010012.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 3
4. Enric Volante, “Navajos Upset After Ashes Sent to Moon; Nasa Apologizes,” Arizona Daily Star,
January 15, 1998, https://www.spokesman.com/​stories/​1998/​jan/​15/​navajos-upset-after-ashes-
sent-to-moon-nasa/. See also Virgiliu Pop, “Lunar Exploration and the Social Dimension,” in
Earth-Like Planets and Moons: Proceedings of the 36th ESLAB Symposium, June 3–8, 2002,
ESTEC, Noordwijk, Netherlands, 299–301.
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 4

INDEX
The page numbers in this index refer to the printed version of the book. Each
link will take you to the beginning of the corresponding print page. You may
need to scroll forward from that location to find the corresponding reference
on your e-reader.
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X
Y Z
A
Aberdeenshire, 83–86, 89, 95–97
Abernathy, Ralph, 224–25
Abraham, 135–36
Abri Blanchard, 74
acoustic properties, of stone circles, 96–97, 103
Adad-guppi, 139–40
Aegospotami, 153
African Humid Period, 47
Age of Fishes, 62

“the Age of Wonder,” 205
Ahlberg, Per, 62
Akitu festival, 286n24
Akkad, 130, 131–34
Akkadian dynasty, 133–34
Aldrin, Buzz, 4, 5, 10–11, 227, 233–35. See also Apollo 11 mission
Alexander the Great, 159, 160
algebra, 184
Allies, xi, xv–xvii
Almagest (Ptolemy), 149–50, 179–80
al-Tusi, Nasir al-Din, 181–82, 288n9
amino acids, 60–61, 60n
Anasazi peoples, 240–45
Anaxagoras
about, 151
Earth-centered universe, belief in, 159
evidence for his theories, 153, 183
fixated on astronomy, 151
heresy charges against, 156
ideas considered heretical, 155–56

investigating eclipses, 149–51
Irving’s views of, 206
meteorite prediction, 153–54
on Moon as three-dimensional place, 175
on Moon’s illumination, 151–52
on Nous controlling the cosmos, 154
Plato’s views of, 156–57
Anaximander, 152–53
Ancestral Puebloans, 240–45
Anders, Bill, 221–22, 227
angular momentum, 18, 278–79n2
annular eclipse, 148–49
anorthosite, 237–38
anthropic principle, 48
antlion larvae, 72
Antony, Mark, 164
aphelion, 47
Aphrodite, 131
Apis, 128
apogee, xiv–xv, 47, 148–49, 178

Apollo 11 mission
Abernathy on, 224–25
Armstrong’s famous utterance, 291n12
command ship Columbia, 229
commemorative plaque, 245
emblem, 229
first steps on the moon, 231
landing recordings, 290n10
lunar lander descent, 229–30
lunar lander Eagle, 229
lunar orbit, 229
moon landing, 230–31
morning of the launch, 227–29
Saturn V rocket, 228
sleep attempts, 232
transmissions, 291n12
U.S. tour following, 232–33
Apollo missions. See also astronauts
Apollo 1 tragedy, 226
Apollo 7, 226–27

Apollo 8, 220–22, 227
Apollo 9, 227
Apollo 10, 227
Apollo 11 (See Apollo 11 mission)
Apollo 15, 238
command module, 226
cost of, 223
crater shadows, 7–9
as culmination of uncountable dreams, 222–23
lunar module, 227
as Manifest Destiny incarnate, 223
meeting Kennedy’s deadline, 227
Moon rocks from, 18–20, 50
on near side of the Moon, 37
quarantining crew members, 215
religion-soaked commentary and ritual, 234–35
reorienting ideas about the universe, 239
retroreflector experiment, 55
rewriting Moon’s origins, 16
using Moon as a tool, 239

as the whole world’s achievement, 246
Apology (Plato), 156
Appalachian Mountains, 66
Appian (Roman historian), 163–64
Apsu, 15, 132n
archaeoastronomy, 76, 80, 244
Arche Nebra, 118
Aristarchus of Samos, 159, 181n
Aristotle
credit for modern science, 150
De Caelo, 157–58
Earth-centered universe, belief in, 159
on fall of Babylon, 142
founding his own school, 158
Galileo doubting teachings of, 191
on lunar cadence to an animal’s daily life, 71
Moon-centric cosmology, 158
On the Parts of Animals, 68
on perfection, 157–58
studying natural processes, 157

views on science, 157
Arizona State University, 51
Ark of the Covenant, 141n
armalcolite, 216
Armstrong, Neil, 5, 10–11, 18, 226, 227, 291n12. See also Apollo 11
mission
Artemis missions, 246–47
artifacts
Avanton Golden Cone, 116–17
Babylonian civilization, 126–27
Berlin Gold Hat, 116
Cyrus Cylinder, 286n26
Ezelsdorf-Buch Golden Cone, 116–17
meanings of, 122
Nebra sky disk (See Nebra sky disk)
stela of Nabonidus, 123
Asimov, Isaac, 200
astrolabe, 44
astrological omen tablets, 146
astrology

as an intellectual project, 145
Kepler practicing, 203
as monkey-play, 203
recognizing patterns through, 145, 150–51
treatment of disease and, 195
Astromaterials Acquisition and Curation Office, 213–14
astronauts. See also individual astronauts by name
Apollo missions (See Apollo missions)
crater shadows fooling, 7–9
displacement, experiencing, 13–14
having fun, 234
as pious people, 234–35
reacting to Moon dust, 5, 232
religiosity of, 234–35
sleep difficulties, 10–11
struggle to enter regular world, 233–34
astronomy, as scientific discipline, 158
Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA), 29
Athens, 143
atoms, 23

Attic calendar, 159
Augustine of Hippo, Saint, 179
aurora australis, 49
aurora borealis, 49
Avanton Golden Cone, 116–17
Aveni, Anthony, 76, 80–81
axial precession, 45, 45n
axial tilt, 42–44
B
Babylonian civilization, 126, 131, 140–42, 144, 173, 284n4. See also 
Mesopotamia; sky priests
Bacon, Francis, 185
Bacon, Roger, 179n
Balbus, Steven, 64, 65–66
Barnes, Geneva “Gennie,” 232–33
barycenter, 39
Battle of Carrhae, 163
Battle of Normandy, xv–xvii, 65
Battle of Tarawa, xi–xiii, xv, 47

Battle of the Bulge, xvii
Battle of Yorktown, 205
Bay of Fundy, 65
Bean, Alan, 7–8, 9, 13, 233–34
Beaulieu, Paul-Alain, 137, 143
Belshazzar, 137, 138, 141
Berlin Gold Hat, 116
Berlin Institute of Technology, 210
Bernegger, Matthias, 204
Bessarion, Basilios, 180
Bezos, Jeff, 245, 249
Bible
Book of Daniel, 136, 141
Book of Genesis, 129, 135–36, 221–22
Book of Revelation, 194
King Nabonidus’s story, 136
“Big Bertha” Moon rock, 53
Bighorn Medicine Wheel, 253–54
biology, Moon’s effects on, 77–79
bipedal mammals, 63–64

Blanchard bone, 74–75
Book of Daniel, 136, 141
Book of Genesis, 129, 135–36, 221–22
Book of Revelation, 194
Borman, Frank, 221–22, 227
Bourgeois, Waltine, 214
Bradley, Richard, 101, 102, 103
Brahe, Tycho, 197, 203
bristle worms, 70–71
British Museum, 122, 123, 126, 136
Bronze Age, 80, 106–7, 112, 115, 118, 120, 132
bubble hypothesis, 32
building blocks of life, 60–61
bulging effect, xiii–xiv, 40, 64–65
bull motif, 128–29
Byrne, Hannah, 64, 65–67
C
Caesar, Julius

about, 160–61
declaring war on Egypt, 164
as dictator in Rome, 164
England invasion attempt, xvi, 162–63
military victories, 161
remaking the calendar, 164
successors of, 166
Caesar Augustus, 166
Cahokia civilization, 284n4
Cahokia Mounds, 252–53
Cairngorm Mountains, 100
calendaring systems. See also time/timekeeping
Attic calendar, 159
Caesar’s remaking of, 164
Callippus’s proposal, 160
Egyptian calendar, 165
Gregorian calendar, 166
Haab’ calendar, 46
intercalary month, 164
Julian calendar, 166

Long Count calendar, 46
lunisolar calendar, 166n
MUL.APIN calibrating scheme, 114–15
renaming Quintilis, 166
in Republican Rome, 164–66
Calends, 46, 164
Callanish (megalithic site), 99–100
Callippus, 160
Canyon de Chelly, 253
carbon dating, 85
carbon-14, 24n, 85
Carlos, John, 222
Carrhae (city), 163
Carrying the Fire (Collins), 228
“The Caspian,” 190
Cassius, 166
Catholic faith, 195–96
The Cave and the Light (Herman), 158
cave art, 75–76, 77–78, 81, 128–29. See also rock art
celestial bodies. See also solar system

deviating from predicted positions, 114
evolving study of, 150–51
grasping time with, 112
as harmonic perfect spheres, 167
in Mesopotamian societies, 173
Outer Space Treaty on, 247–48
producing music and harmonies, 196
in relation to Earth-centered universe theory, 175–77
as rocks, 154
stars, early stories of, 38
travel in an ellipse, xiv
celestial catalog, 44–46
Chaco Canyon, 244
Chacoan Great Houses, 241–42
Chaffee, Roger, 226
Chang’e 4 spacecraft, 7, 251
Chimney Rock, 240–44, 254–55
Chimney Rock Great House, 241–42
Chimney Rock National Monument, 241
China, 7, 145, 249, 250–51

China Manned Space Agency, 250–51
Chinle, Arizona, 253
Christian God. See God of Abraham
Christianity, rise of the age of, 169
chronobiologists, 67, 69–70
Churchill, Winston, xvi
Cigoli, Lodovico, 194
circadian rhythm, 67
circalunar clock, 67, 73
Civilian Conservation Corps, 243
Clarke, Arthur C., 222
Cleopatra, 164
climate change, 47
Cline, Eric, 284n4
Cold War, 246
Collins, Michael, 3–4, 13–14, 216, 227–28, 233. See also Apollo 11
mission
Colorado Plateau, 240
comets, 153–54
Commercial Lunar Payload Services program, 249

Companion Rock, 240–42
Conference on the Origin of the Moon, 21
Conrad, Charles “Pete,” 7–8, 9
Constantinople, Turks’ siege to, 180
continental drift, 31–34
continents, formation of, 31
Conversation with the Starry Messenger (Kepler), 202–3
Copernican system, 181, 191, 195–96, 198–99, 204
Copernicus, Nicolaus
heliocentric theory, 174, 181–82, 193
learning from Islamic astronomers, 288–89n9
Maragha School’s work and, 182
in medical school, 195
On the Revolutions, 181, 191
skeptical of Ptolemy’s cosmology, 180–81
corals, spawning behavior, 68–69
Corcoran, John J., xii, xiii, xv, xvii
corotation limit, 27
The Cosmographic Mystery (Kepler), 203
Council of Trent, 195–96

Crassus, Marcus Licinius, 161, 163
craters. See lunar craters
Crathes Castle, 83
Cronkite, Walter, 239
Ćuk, Matija, 26
cuneiform writing, 117–18, 127–30, 131n, 136–39, 145, 244
Cursus ditch, 87
cylinders. See Nabonidus cylinder
Cyrus, 140–42
Cyrus Cylinder, 286n26
D
daily life on land, Moon’s rhythms playing role in, 71–73
Daly, Reginald, 20
dark matter, 38
Darwin, Charles, 18, 60n
Darwin, George Howard, 17–18, 31, 40
days, Moon shaping length of, 41–42. See also time/timekeeping
D-Day, xvii

De Caelo (Aristotle), 157–58
De Facie (Plutarch), 168–69, 187, 191, 200, 204
Dead Sea Scrolls, 138
Deep Space Climate Observatory satellite, 218
deferent, 177
Democratic National Convention, 222
Devonian period, 41, 61–62, 64, 66, 73, 280n2
Dine peoples, 253
disease, phases of the Moon and, 195
Disney, Walt, 211
displacement, astronauts experiencing, 13–14
dodging tide, xiv–xv
Donne, John, 203
doodlebugs, 72
Duke, Charlie, 230
Duracotus dream, 197–98
E
Earth

axis wobble, 42–45, 47, 165
continents, formation of, 31
creation of, 27, 38–39, 59
elliptical orbit, 47
mantle, 34
orbit, 39
rotation, 21
Theia’s collision with, 19–21, 26–27, 49
view from the Moon, 217–18
Earth dust, 5
Earth-centered universe, 159, 175–77
Earth-Moon-Sun rotational tidal engine, 48–49
earthshine, on the Moon, 4, 186, 192–93
Easter Aquhorthies, 96–99, 282–83n6
eclipse shadow, 149
eclipses
Anaxagoras’s investigations of, 149–51
annular, 148–49
corona, 147
described, 113

diamond ring effect, 148
forecasting, 143–44
lunar, 143–44, 149, 177–79, 181
predicting, 143–44
sky priests figuring out cycles of, 146
totality, 148
visible in United States, 147–48
ecliptic plane, 41–42
Egremont, Max, 183, 189
Egyptian calendar, 165
Ein es-Sultan, 129
Eisenhower, Dwight D., xvii, 211, 224
electromagnetic spectrum, 29
Eliade, Mircea, 282n20
Elizabeth I, Queen of England, 184, 189
Ellesmere Island, 63–64
Elvis, Martin, 248
Empire of Japan, xi
English Channel, xvi, 162
Enheduanna, 127, 129, 131–34, 217

Enki, 15, 132
Enlightenment, 205
Ennigaldi, 127, 134, 137, 217, 255
Ennigaldi-Nanna, 125–26
entropy, law of, 34
Epic of Gilgamesh, 132, 229
epicycle, 176–77
Epitome of the Almagest, 180
equant, 177
equatorial bulge, 33
equinoxes, 12
Espenak, Fred, 286n24
ethnicity, allegorical treatment of, 205n
Eugene IV (pope), 180
European Space Agency, 249
Eurydice pulchra, 70
evolution
bipedal mammals, 63–64
complex life, 61–62
fishes, 62–63

land-based life, 61, 280n2
plants, 62
tidal pools, 18, 59–61
“The Exaltation of Inanna” (poem), 131
exomoons, 54
exoplanets, 54
experiment-based science, origin of, 185
extrasolar planets, 54
Ezelsdorf-Buch Golden Cone, 116–17
F
facts, as illustrative of truth, 179
Fajada Butte, 244
FarView telescope, 251
Fawkes, Guy, 189
Fayetteville State University, 202
feldspar, 19
Fernandes, Vera Assis, 252
Fertile Crescent, 124, 124n

fertility, lunar cycles and, 76–78
figurines, 255
First Triumvirate, 161
Fisher, Osmond, 31
fishes, evolution of, 62–63
fission formation, 18
Fitch, Simon, 87–88
France, 74–76
French Museum of National Antiquities, 74
French Resistance, xv
From the Earth to the Moon (Verne), 207–9
full moons, French Resistance’s reliance on, xv
G
Gaffney, Vince, 87–89, 90–91
Gagarin, Yuri, 223
galaxies, 38, 195
Galilean moons, 194–95
Galilei, Galileo

denying heliocentrism, 193
describing shadows of the Moon, 192
doubting Aristotle’s teachings, 150
gravity and motion studies, 191
Harriot and, 186
heresy charges against, 193
Kepler and, 192, 195
Moon illustrations, 187, 190–91, 193–94
on nature of earthshine, 192–93
on nature of sunspots, 192
persecuted for his work, 199–200
proving Copernican principles, 195–96
Starry Messenger, 187, 191–92
writing his argument as a conversation, 193
Gallipoli, 153
Gallipoli meteor, 153–55
gardening process, 6
Gavin, James, xvii
Gebhard, Rupert, 283–84n1
Gemini program, 226

Genesis. See Book of Genesis
Genesis Rock, 238
geocentric model, 174
Geoffrey of Monmouth, 283n9
Germany
looting laws, 105
Mittelberg, 106, 117–18
Nebra sky disk (See Nebra sky disk)
Saxony-Anhalt, 105–6
Ziegelroda Forest, 105
giant-impact theory, 20–21, 23–24
Giant’s Dance stone circle, 283n9
Gilgamesh, 124
God of Abraham, 135, 142, 234
goddess of love, 131–32
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 201
Gold, Thomas, 215
golden hats, 116–17
Goldilocks zone, 20
Goseck Circle, 115–16

Graham, Daniel W., 154, 287n2
Grampian Mountains, 88, 95
gravity, xiv, 39, 191, 219–20n. See also magnetic attraction
Great House Foundation, 254–55
Great Houses, Chacoan, 241–42
Great Wall of China, 86
Great Ziggurat of Ur, 125–26, 255
“The Great-Hearted Mistress,” 133
Greek culture, 173–74
Greene, Mott, 32
Greenland, 43
Gregorian calendar, 166
Grissom, Virgil “Gus,” 226
Gunpowder Plot, 189
H
Haab’ calendar, 46
hafnium, 24
Hale, Albert, 253

Halley’s comet, 155
Harran (city), 125, 163
Harriot, Thomas
about, 184
“The Caspian” drawing, 190
as father of modern algebra, 184
as gainfully employed, 189
Kepler and, 185
law of refraction, 185, 208
lung cancer, suffering from, 189n
Moon illustrations, 183, 185–88
Roanoke Colony diary notes, 188
on Sun’s rotation period, 185
Harvard–Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, 248
Hebrew Bible. See Bible
Hekla volcano, 93
Helfrich-Förster, Charlotte, 77
heliacal rise, 78
heliocentric theory, 174, 181–82, 193
Helios, 155–56

Heraclitus, 153
“The Herds of Nanna” (poem), 128
Herman, Arthur, 158
Herschel, William, 22, 205
Higgins boats, xi–xii
high tide, xiv
Hill sphere, 220n
Hipparchus of Nicaea, 44–45, 176
Hippocrates, 79
Hitler, Adolf, 210
Holmes, Richard, 205
Homo sapiens, 73–74. See also Neanderthals
Hopi peoples, 253
Howe of Cromar, 102
Hubble Space Telescope, 54
human behavior, 79–80
human consciousness, 80
humans
astronomical thinking of, 74–75
cognitive abilities of, 112

Moon’s affects on, 79, 80
Humphrey, Hubert, 224
“The Hundred-Handed Ones,” 156
hunter-gatherers, 83, 89–93, 99–100, 104, 128–30
Hussein, Saddam, 126n
I
Ibbi-Sin, 134
Ibn al-Haytham, 178
Ides, 46, 164
illness, phases of the Moon and, 195
immigration, 205–6
Inanna, 131–32
India, 249
intercalary month, 164
International Space Station, 72, 73
interplanetary travel, 209, 211–12
Iraq, 143
Irving, Washington, 206–7

Irwin, Jim, 233, 234, 238
Ishtar, 131
Islamic Arabs, 178–79
Islamic astronomers, 288–89n9
isotopes, 23, 24n
J
Jade Rabbit (Chinese rover), 35–36
James VI, King of Scotland, 189
Japan, 249
Jeffreys, Harold, 33
Jericho, 129–30
Jericho’s spring, 129
Johnson, Lyndon, 224
Johnson Space Center, 213–14
Joyce, James, 239
Judea, Cyrus freeing people of, 142
Julian calendar, 166
Juno spacecraft, 28

Jupiter, 28, 32n, 194–95
K
Kaaba, 142
Kant, Immanuel, 21–22, 32, 36n
Kelvin-Helmholtz cloud, 219n
Kennedy, John F., 222–23
Kennedy, Robert F., 222
Kennedy Space Center, 224–25
Kepler, Johannes
as bridge between old and new science, 202
coining the word “satellite,” 195
confirmation in the Lutheran Church, 210
Conversation with the Starry Messenger, 202–3
as Copernican system believer, 191, 198
The Cosmographic Mystery, 203
Duracotus dream, 197–98
Galileo and, 192, 195
Harriot and, 185

on heavenly bodies producing music and harmonies, 196
as Moon-obsessed, 198–99
on Moon’s hemispheres, 201
on Moon’s spiritual properties, 200–201, 202–3
mother Katharina, 203–4
New Astronomy, 199
practicing astrology, 203
Somnium, 32–33, 198, 200–205, 207, 246–47
on tides, 199
translating Plutarch’s De Facie, 168, 204
Kepler, Ludwig, 205
Kepler 1625-b exoplanet, 54
Kepler Space Telescope, 54
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 222
Kintore churchyard, 95–96
Kipping, David, 54
knowledge
Augustine’s path to, 179
observation as main source of, 158, 182
philosophy as study of, 157

as power, 118, 151
Kopernik, Mikołaj, 175
Krause, Rüdiger, 283–84n1
KREEP rocks, 37
Krishna, 128–29
L
Laërtius, Diogenes, 154
land-based life, 61, 63–64, 280n2
Laplace, Pierre-Simon, 22
Lascaux Cave, 81, 128
Laskar, Jacques, 43
Late Heavy Bombardment, 50–52
Launius, Roger D., 223
law of refraction, 185, 185n, 208
Leonberg Senate, 204
Leonov, Alexei, 233, 233n
Levy, Oren, 68–69
Library of Alexandria, 175

life. See evolution
Lippershey, Hans, 185
lobe-finned fishes, 62–63
Lock, Simon, 26–27
Long Count calendar, 46
Long Xiao, 7
Longinus, Gaius Cassius, 163
Longs Peak, Colorado, 208
Lovell, Jim, 221–22, 227
low tides, xiv
Lower, William, 185, 187
Lower Devonian, 280n2
low-shear-velocity provinces, 34–35
Lucian (poet), 200
lunar clock, 68–71, 90–91
Lunar Crater Radio Telescope, 251
lunar craters
bubble hypothesis, 32
Darwinian tidal model, 32
home experiment, 33n

as impact craters, 32–33
light and shadows, 7–9
Surveyor Crater, 8–9
Wegener’s theory on, 32–33
lunar day. See tidal day
lunar dust, 5–6, 11, 13, 51–52, 215, 248–50
lunar eclipse. See also eclipses
in the Akkadian language, 143
Anaxagoras’s investigations of, 149
calculating Moon’s distance from Earth, 177–79
as a celestial compass, 181
protective rituals against, 144
lunar escape velocity, 13
lunar fission theory, 31
lunar geology, 9–10
lunar landscape, 3
lunar month, 46
Lunar Orbiter I, 218
Lunar Prospector mission, 253
Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO), 51

lunar regolith. See lunar dust
Lunar Sample Lab, 213–15, 236–37
lunar standstill, 99, 242–43
lunar symbolism, 80, 108, 282n20
lunar water, 7
lunar year, syncing with solar year, 90–91, 98–99, 113–14
lunates, 129
lunisolar calendar, 166n
lunistice, 98–99
Lutheran Reformation, 195–96
Lyceum school, 158
M
Maccone, Claudio, 251
Maestlin, Michael, 198
magma structures, 34–35
magnetic attraction, 199, 199n, 219n. See also gravity
magnetic field, 48–49
Magnus, Gnaeus Pompeius. See Pompey, the Great

Maiden Stone, 95
Man in the Moon, 168
Manifest Destiny, Apollo missions continuing, 223
mantle-atmosphere-disk (MAD) structure, 27
Maragha School, 181–82, 288n9
Marduk, 138, 140
Mare Crisium, 190
Mare Imbrium, 51, 168n, 238
Marine Aircraft Group-31, xiii
marine bristle worm, 70–71
Mars, 17, 23, 42, 211–12
Marshack, Alexander, 74–75, 90
Marshall Space Flight Center, 210
Mary, Queen of Scots, 184
Maxwell, Gordon, 83
Maya civilization, 46
McCann, Alison, 183–84, 187, 189–90
McDougall, Walter, 210–11
megaliths, 95, 98n, 99, 283n9
Meletus, 156

Meller, Harald, 106–11, 117–18, 284n1
menstrual cycles, 76–78
mental health, Moon’s affects on, 79–80
Mercury, 17, 22, 41n, 221
Mercury program, 226
Mesopotamia
Akkad, 130, 131–34
city-states of, 130
divinely bestowed power and, 113
festivals dedicated to the Moon God, 286n24
Moon worship, 124–25, 173
sky priests of, 45, 114–15, 117, 144–46, 158, 183
Ur, 15, 125–26, 130
Uruk, 124–25
Messeri, Lisa, 252
meteorites, 153–55, 156
Meton of Athens, 98n, 159
Metonic cycle, 159, 198
Metzger, Phil, 13
micromoon, xiv

Milanković, Milutin, 47
Milankovitch cycles, 47
Miller, Stanley, 60n
mining the Moon, 249, 250
Minister-Regulators of Shangdi, 41n
Mississippian culture, 252–53
Mitchell, Edgar, 236
Mittelberg, Germany, 106, 117–18
Mittelberg hill, 119
modern science
credit for, 150
religious schism as mark of, 195–96
storytelling used to advance, 201
modern scientists. See Galilei, Galileo; Harriot, Thomas; Kepler, Johannes
Monroe, Willis, 145
month, origin of the word, 10n
Moon
acrid aroma of, 5–6, 231
colors of, 231–32, 233–34

controlling life on Earth, 4
demoted to a satellite, 195
devoid of sensory experience, 4–5
dryness of, 6
early stories of, 38
far side of (See Moon’s far side)
as geologically active, 9–10
giant-impact theory, 20–21
gravity on, 11
illumination of, 151–52
illustrations of, 183, 185–88, 190, 193–94
mining on, 249, 250
modern nomenclature, 6
mysticism, 247
orbit, 10, 39
origin of, 20–21
origins of, 20–21
phases of, 76–77, 79, 195, 286n24 (See also Warren Field pits)
as purposefully made, 17
Sea of Tranquility, 6

serving as a mirror, 3–4
solstices and equinoxes, 12
as soundless, 12–13
spiraling away from Earth, 55
temperature extremes on, 11
terminal lunar cataclysm, 50–52
as a time-piece, 17
walking on, 11
Moon clock. See lunar clock
Moon dust. See lunar dust
Moon God. See also Nanna; Sin
early odes to, 128
festivals dedicated to, 286n24
High Priestess of (See Ennigaldi)
influences of, 123–24, 137
laying groundwork for all other faiths, 124
in the Quran, 135
temple, 126
Moon rocks
anorthosite, 237–38

armalcolite, 216
at Astromaterials Acquisition and Curation Office, 213–14
“Big Bertha,” 53
described, 18–19
flecks of color in, 231–32
Genesis Rock, 238
physical description of, 216
stored in their original orientation, 236–37
troctolite 76535, 18, 24, 51–52, 216–17
Moon Village, 249
Moon year. See lunar clock
Moon-based economy, 249–50
moonlight, 103
Moon’s far side. See also South Pole–Aitken Basin
Chang’e 4 landing, 7, 251
China’s focus on, 7, 250–51
craters, 221
evolution of, 36
feelings of displacement on, 13–14
first images of, 218

foreign government’s interest in, 250–51
geological discrepancy between near and, 36
is not dark side, 36n
shielded from Earth’s emissions, 29n, 251
strange geology of, 35
surface of, 36
Yutu-2 on, 35
Morabito, Linda, 32n
Mosie, Andrea, 213–14
Muhammad, 142
Muir-Harmony, Teasel, 222
MUL.APIN, 114–15, 144
multistage rockets. See rockets
Murray, Hilary and Charles, 83–85, 92, 104. See also Warren Field pits
Musk, Elon, 218n
N
NAACP, 225
Nabonidus

ascending the throne, 138
disgust with Marduk cult, 138
fate of, 141
honoring his mother, 139–40
Moon God’s influence on, 137
Moon studies, 143–44
as Nebuchadnezzar’s successor, 136
prayer written on behalf of, 137–38
restoring Temple of Sin, 139
son (See Belshazzar)
on walkabout in Arabia, 138–39
Nabonidus cylinder, 125, 127, 136, 137, 140, 143
Nanna, 127, 128–29. See also Moon God; Sin
Nanomea Island, xii
Naram-Sin, 132
NASA (National Aeronautics and Space Administration)
Apollo missions (See Apollo missions)
Artemis missions, 246–47
Astromaterials Acquisition and Curation Office, 213–14
astronauts (See individual astronauts by name)

bilateral agreements, 248–49
civil rights protests at, 224–25
Commercial Lunar Payload Services program, 249
Gemini program, 226
Johnson Space Center, 213–14
Kennedy Space Center, 224–25
Lunar Prospector mission, 253
Lunar Sample Lab, 213–15, 236–37
Lunar Sample Laboratory, 6
Mercury program, 226
opposition to government-funded Moon missions, 224
return to the Moon, 246–47
National Institute for Astrophysics, 251
Natufians, 129–30
natural phenomena, 144–45, 151
nature gods, 128, 142
Navajo peoples, 17, 253
Neal, Clive, 250
Neanderthals, cognitive abilities of, 108
neap tide, xiv–xv, 277n3

Nebra sky disk
alterations to, 118
belonging to Únětice culture, 112
burial of, 117–18
findspot, 118, 119, 283–84n1
looting of, 106–7
Meller’s attempt to purchase, 110–11
on museum display, 109–10
solar boat represented on, 113
Nebra’s Ark, 118
Nebuchadnezzar, 136, 137
nebular hypothesis (Kant), 21–22
Neolithic structures, destruction of, 93, 284n4
Neoplatonic Christian philosophy, 179
Neufeld, Michael J., 210
Neugebauer, Otto, 288n9
Neues Museum, 116
New Astronomy (Kepler), 199
Newton, Isaac, 199n, 278n2

Ningal, 123
Nisannu, 114
Nixon, Richard, 215, 222, 245
Nones, 164
Normandy invasion, xv–xvi, 65
North Massif, 9
North Star, 45
Northumberland, 184n
Notre-Dame Cathedral, 86
Nous, 154
nuclides, 24n
O
Oberth, Hermann, 209, 249
ocean mixing, 56
oceans. See tides
Octavian. See Caesar Augustus
O’Hair, Madalyn Murray, 234
Omaha Beach, xvii

On the Apparent Face in the Orb of the Moon. See De Facie (Plutarch)
On the Parts of Animals (Aristotle), 68
On the Revolutions (Copernicus), 181
The Once and Future Moon (Spudis), 250
Operation Paperclip, 210
optical telescopes, 186, 208. See also Galilei, Galileo; Harriot, Thomas
optics, laws of, 28–30
orbital oddities, 47
origin of life, 18, 52. See also evolution
Ortelius, Abraham, 31
otherness, fear of, 205–6, 205n
Outer Space Treaty, 247–49, 251–52
overview effect, 235–36
oxygen, 53
P
pacers, 38, 41n
Pacific Theater, xi–xii
Pagosa Springs, Colorado, 241

Paine, Thomas, 224–25
Pangea, 66–67
Papyrus Amherst, 286n24
Paris Observatory, 43
Parmenides, 152
Parthenon Marbles, 122
Parthian Empire, 163
Paul V (pope), 194n
Pauline Chapel, 194n
Pax Romana, 167
Peaks of Eternal Light, 248
Pegwell Bay, 162
Percy, Henry, 184, 189
Percy, Thomas, 189
Pericles, 156
perigee, xiv
perihelion, 47
Persian Empire, 136, 140–42, 146, 151
petroglyphs, 244, 253
Petworth House, 183, 189, 190

Pfaff, Bettina, 118–19
Phaedo (Plato), 150
physical health, Moon’s affects on, 79
Pickering, William, 31
Piedra River, 240, 241
Plains Indians, 253–54
planets. See also solar system
Earth (See Earth)
exoplanets, 54
extrasolar, 54
Jupiter, 28, 32n, 194–95
Mars, 17, 23, 42, 211–12
Mercury, 17, 22, 41n, 221
process of becoming, 59
rocky, 16–17
Theia, 16, 19–21, 23, 25–27, 34
Uranus, 42, 205
Venus, 17, 42, 181
plant life, xviii, 3, 53, 62, 72–73
plate tectonics, 31, 34, 49

Plato, 17, 38, 40, 150, 156–57, 200, 278n2
Platynereis dumerilii, 70–71
Pleiades “the Seven Sisters,” 106, 110, 120
Pliny the Elder, 161, 165
Plutarch of Chaeronea, 153, 167–69, 175, 187
Pognon, Henri, 139
Polaris, 45
polymerization, 60
Pompey, the Great, 161, 164
Pontius Pilate, 166–67
pre-scientific era, 150
Presocratics, 287n2
Principia (Newton), 199n
printing press, 187n
Privolva, 201
psychology, 79–80
Ptolemy, Claudius
about, 176
Almagest, 149–50, 179–80
Anaxagoras’s story recorded by, 149–50

calculating Moon’s distance from Earth, 177, 288n2
Copernicus skeptical of, 180–81
on geocentrism, 175–76
lunar eclipses, use of, 177–79
model of the heavens, 176–78
Ptolemy XIII, 164
Puebla transport ship, xii
Q
Qian Yuan, 35
Qikiqtania wakei, 280n1
Qumran Caves, 138
Quran, 135
R
radio telescopes, 29
radioactive decay, 24n
radiocarbon dating, 24
Raleigh, Walter, 184, 189

Rappenglück, Michael, 77–78
Rassam, Hormuzd, 137
ray-finned fishes, 62–63
recumbent stone circles. See stone circles
refraction, 185, 185n, 208
Regiomontanus, 180
regolith. See lunar dust
Renner, Mario, 105–6
resonance, 64
retrograde motion, 177
retroreflector experiment, 55
Rheic Ocean, 66
Riccioli, Giovanni Battista, 6
ritual centers. See stone circles
Roanoke Colony, 188
Robert the Bruce, 83
Rochberg, Francesca, 144
rock art, 244, 253. See also cave art
rockets, 201, 208–10, 218n, 224, 228–29, 247–48, 249. See also Apollo
missions

Roman Colosseum, 86
Rome, 164–66
The Roots of Civilization (Marshack), 74
Rosetta Stone, 122
Royal Academy of Sciences at Berlin, 21
Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland, 
83
Rudolph II, Holy Roman Emperor, 203
Russell, Bertrand, 157, 182–83
Russian cosmonauts, 233
Russian spacecraft, 218
S
Sagan, Carl, 200
Saint Mary Major Basilica, 194
salmon fishing, 96
Salviati, 193
San Juan mountain range, 240
Sargon the Great, 127, 130–31
Saros cycle, 146, 147

Saturn V rocket, 228
Saxony-Anhalt, Germany, 105–6
Schifferstadt hat, 116
Schmitt, Harrison “Jack,” 6, 37, 168n, 216, 237–38, 277–78n6
science fiction
revealing society’s ignorance, 206–7
Somnium as first work of, 200
space-related, 210–11
Verne as forefather of, 207
science fiction allegories, 205–7
Scotland
Aberdeenshire, 83–86, 89, 95–97
Grampian Mountains, 88, 95
Moon-watching memorials, 95
Warren Field (See Warren Field pits)
Scott, Dave, 238
sea lice, 70
Sea of Crises, 190
Sea of Rains, 51, 168n
Sea of Tranquility, 6, 186, 187–88

seafloor spreading, 33–34
seasons, time markers for. See solstices; time/timekeeping
seismic activity on the Moon, 9–10
seismographic measuring stations, 9
Selene, 155
selenic discomfort, 5
sensory experience, 4–5
Serengeti, 78–79
Seven Sisters. See Pleiades “the Seven Sisters”
Seven Tablets of Creation. See Sumerian Seven Tablets of Creation
Shamaness of Bad Dürrenberg, 108–9
Shangdi, 41n
Sharkey, Katherine, 77
Shea, William, 141
Sheridan, Alison, 284n1
Sherrod, Robert, xii
Shiva, 128
Shoemaker, Eugene, 253
Shoup, David, xi–xii
sidereal month, 10

sidereal year, 45
Sidereus nuncius (Galileo), 187
Silurian period, 40–41
Sin. See also Moon God; Nanna
Akitu festival in honor of, 286n24
devastating blow to, 142
as “father of the gods,” 129
as first archaeologist, 125
as Moon God, 123
Sippar ruins, 125
Sirius, 46
Sistine Chapel, 194n
Sixtus V (pope), 194n
sky priests, 45, 114–15, 117, 144–46, 158, 183
skyward thinking, 91, 167
skywatchers, 44, 117, 144
sleep, lunar cycles and, 80
Smith, Julian, xii
Smith, Tommie, 222
Snellius, Willebrord, 185n

Socrates, 150, 154, 156
solar boat, 113
solar day, 40
solar eclipses, 44, 149
solar observatory, Goseck Circle as, 115–16
solar system. See also celestial bodies; planets
interplanetary travel, 209, 211–12
origin story, 21–23, 28
streaming instability, 22–23
solar year, 41, 75–76, 90–91, 98–99, 113–15, 160, 164–65
solitude, sense of, 13–14
solstices
at Chaco Canyon, 244
at Chimney Rock, 242
Goseck Circle, 115–16
at Grampian range, 92
midwinter, 93
Moon’s version of, 12, 98–99
in Nebra, 113
Nebra sky disk and, 119

origin of the word, 98
summer, 87–88, 92, 113–15, 242–44, 253, 283n6
Twelve Days of Christmas and, 91
at Warren Field, 87–91, 101, 113–14, 117
winter, 81, 88–91, 97–98, 114–15, 242, 283n6
Woodhenge, 253
Somnium (Kepler), 32–33, 198, 200–205, 207, 246–47
Sosigenes, 165
soul, Moon and the, 167–68
South Pole–Aitken Basin, 35–36, 51–52, 248, 251
Southern Christian Leadership Conference, 224
space exploration, 246–48
space launches by private companies, 247–48
space race, 223
spacewalk, 233n
SpaceX, 247
SpaceX rocket, 218n
speckled sea louse, 70
Speyerer, Emerson, 51
spring tides, xiv, 64, 277n3

Spudis, Paul, 250, 252
Spur crater, 238
Sputnik 1, 211
Square Kilometre Array, 29
Starry Messenger (Galileo), 187, 191–92
stars. See celestial bodies
State Museum of Prehistory, Saxony-Anhalt, 107–10
Steichen, Edward, 231
stela of Nabonidus, 123
Stevenson, Dave, 21
Stewart, Sarah, 25–27, 30
Stone Age humans, portrayals of, 109
Stone Age relics, 84
stone artwork, 95
stone circles
acoustic properties of, 96–97, 103
Easter Aquhorthies, 96–99, 282–83n6
Giant’s Dance stone circle, 283n9
Goseck Circle, 115–16
moonlight highlighting texture of, 103

as Moon-watching memorials, 95–96
orientation of, 101
as ritual centers, 97
sense of mysticism, 103
Stonehenge, 87, 95
Tomnaverie, 100–103
Stonehenge, 87, 95, 283n9
strain, 48
streaming instability, 22–23
Subvolva, 201
Suetonius, Gaius, 160–61, 163
Sumerian King List, 134
Sumerian Seven Tablets of Creation, 15, 38
Sumerian Temple Hymns, 132–33
Sumerians, 131
summer solstice, 92, 113–15, 242–44, 253, 283n6
Sun
eclipses (See eclipses)
rotation period, 185
spin history, 52

sunlight on the moon, 3
sunspots, 185, 192
supermoon, xiv
Surveyor 3, 8
Surveyor Crater, 8–9
swim bladder, 62
Swinford, Dean, 202
synestia, 27, 30
synodic month, 10, 98
synodic year, 46
syzygy, 46
T
Tahiri, Hassan, 178–79
Tarawa Atoll, xi–xiii, 47
Taurus-Littrow valley, 9, 216
Taylor, Frank, 31
Teachey, Alex, 54
telescope. See optical telescopes

Tell al-Muqayyar “mound of pitch,” 126
Temple of Shamash, 137
Temple of Sin, 139
Temple of Solomon, 141n
Tera, Fouad, 50
terminal lunar cataclysm, 50–52
Tessmar-Raible, Kristin, 70–71
Tet Offensive, 222
tetrapod evolution, 62, 64, 65–66
Tewa Pueblo song, 243
thale cress, 73
Thales of Miletus, 151
Theia
adding veneer to Earth’s mantle, 34
Earth’s collision with, 19–21, 25–27
the Moon as rebirth of, 23
as primeval planet, 16
Stewart’s theory on, 25–27
Theogony (Hesiod), 156
Thom, Alexander, 99

Tiamat, 15
Tiberius Caesar, 166
tidal bulges, xiii–xiv, 40, 64–65
tidal clocks, 70
tidal day, 40
tidal locking, 36
tidal pools, 18, 59–60, 63
tidal pressure, 32n
tides
bulging effect, xiv, 40, 64–65
daily changes to, xiii
Earth’s geography, role of, xiv
English Channel, xvi
fish evolution and, 64
flow of, xiv
high-tide amplifier, 65
Kepler on, 199
mechanism of, 64–65
Moon’s control of, 18, 199
pushing fish to walk, 64

required for ocean mixing, 56
tetrapod evolution influenced by, 65–66
Tiktaalik, 64, 280n1
Timaeus (Plato), 38, 40, 157
time reckoner, Moon as, 120
time/timekeeping. See also solstices
animals creating calendar, 71
circadian rhythm and, 67
circalunar clock, 67, 73
confers power, 159–60
control of, 159, 244–45
golden hats, 116–17
lunar clock, 68–71, 90–91
lunar month, 46
lunar year, 90–91, 98–99, 113–14
Maya civilization, 46
Moon as separated from, 165–66
Nebra sky disk (See Nebra sky disk)
orientation of, 91–92
as originator of philosophy, 157

passage of, 11–12
perception of, 11–12
by sunlight and moonlight, 67–68
synchronizing, 46
Warren Field pits (See Warren Field pits)
Tomnaverie stone circle, 100–103
tortoises, in space, 218–19, 220
treasure hunters, 105–6
trigonometry, 44
troctolite 76535 Moon rock, 18, 24, 51–52, 216–17
tropical year, 45, 165
truth, facts as illustrative of, 179
Tsiolkovsky, Konstantin, 209, 249
tungsten, 24
Turks, 180
Turner, J. M. W., 183
Tusi couple, 288n9
Twelve Days of Christmas, 91
Tzolk’in calendar, 46

U
umbra, 149
Únětice culture, 112–13, 115, 117–18
United Arab Emirates, 211–12, 249
University of British Columbia, 145
University of Tübingen, 198
Upper Devonian, 280n2
Ur, 15, 125–26, 130, 134–35, 255. See also Great Ziggurat of Ur
Uranus, 42, 205
Urey, Harold, 60n
Uruk, 124–25
V
Van Allen radiation belts, 219–20n
Venus, 17, 42, 181
Venus (goddess), 131
Venus of Laussel, 75–76
Vermilion Bird, 41n
Verne, Jules, 201, 207–9

von Braun, Wernher
about, 210
aggressive spaceflight program, 210–11
as Disney films technical advisor, 211
imagining interplanetary travel, 209
as Marshall Space Flight Center director, 210
as Nazi Party member, 210
surrendering to the Americans, 210
Verne’s writings as influence on, 201
von Humboldt, Alexander, 32
W
Warren Field pits
carbon dating, 85–86
cognitive abilities of humans and, 112
destruction of, 284n4
as evolution in skyward thinking, 91
Gaffney’s examination of, 88–89
intentional destruction of, 93

Murrays excavation of, 84–87
pit alignment, 85–86, 88
as time marker, 89–90
today’s view of, 94–95
Warren Field timber hall, 84, 85–86, 88, 93–94, 284n4
water, on the Moon, 7
water cycle, 12
Waun Mawn, 283n9
Wegener, Alfred, 32–34, 49, 66
West Bank, 138
West Sussex, 183
Westphal, Henry, 105–6
White, Ed, 226
winter solstice, 81, 88–91, 114–15, 242, 283n6
wobble of Earth’s axis, 42–45, 47, 165
women’s menstrual cycles, 76–78
wooden circle, 253
Woodhenge, 253
Woolley, Leonard, 126–27, 134, 285n4
World War II, xi–xiii, xv–xvii

X
Xenophanes, 153
Xenophon, 140–42
Y
Yale University, 252
Yarikh, 130
Younger Dryas, 43, 129
Yutu-2 (Chinese rover), 35–36, 251
Z
Ziegelroda bounty, 106–7
Ziegelroda Forest, 105
Zond 5, 218, 219, 220, 220n
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X
Y Z

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Rebecca Boyle is a contributing editor at Scientific American, a contributing writer for
Quanta Magazine and The Atlantic, and a frequent contributor at the New York Times,
Popular Science, Smithsonian’s Air & Space Magazine, and many other publications.
She is a member of the group science blog The Last Word on Nothing. Boyle was a
Knight Science Journalism Fellow at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and is
the recipient of numerous writing awards throughout her career. Her work has been
anthologized three times in The Best American Science and Nature Writing. Boyle is a
former newspaper reporter, a former Space Camp attendee, and a lifelong Moon
enthusiast. She lives on a mountain in Colorado with her husband, their two daughters,
their golden retriever, and several neighboring black bears. This is her first book.
rebeccaboyle.com
Instagram: @by.rebecca.boyle
Twitter: @rboyle31

What’s next on
your reading list?
Discover your next
great read!
 
Get personalized book picks and up-to-date news about this
author.
Sign up now.

