The Pit-Yakker
by Brian Lumley
Born in Harden, Durham on December 2, 1937, Brian Lumley began selling
short fiction in the late 1960s, and throughout the 1970s he was chiefly known for
a series of books based on the Cthulhu Mythos of H.P. Lovecraft: The Caller of the
Black, The Burrowers Beneath, Beneath the Moors, The Transition of Titus  Crow,
and others. While Lumley still likes to muck about with the Cthulhu Mythos, during
the  1980s  he  concentrated  on  massive  novels  of  contemporary  horror,  most
notably his Psychomech and Necroscope sagas. Lumley's latest novels include The
House  of  Doors  and  Necroscope  IV:  Deadspeak.  He  has  just  completed  the  fifth
and  final  Necroscope  novel,  Deadspawn,  and  is  now  putting  together  two
collections  of  his  short  stories,  "to  be  titled  Fruiting  Bodies  & Other  Fungi,  and
(some other silly title)." Tor Books will be bringing out Psychomech  I and  II  as  a
single volume, to be followed by Psychamok.
Retired from the army after twenty-two years, Brian Lumley now lives with
his  wife,  Dorothy,  in  Devon.  Like  "Fruiting  Bodies"  in  last  year's  Year's  Best
Horror,  "The  Pit-Yakker"  makes  strong  and  effective  use  of  the  sort  of  English
locales that won't be included in your tour package.
When I was sixteen, my father used to say to me: "Watch  what you're  doing
with the girls; you're an idiot to smoke,  for  it's  expensive and  unhealthy; stay  away
from Raymond  Maddison!"  My  mother  had  died  two  years  earlier,  so  he'd  taken
over her share of the nagging, too.
The  girls?  Watch  what  I  was  doing?  At  sixteen  I  barely  knew  what  I  was
doing! I knew what I wanted to do, but the how of it was a different matter entirely.
Cigarettes?  I  enjoyed  them;  at  the  five-a-day  stage,  they  still  gave  me  that
occasionally sweet taste and made my head spin.  Raymond  Maddison?  I had  gone
to school  with him, and  because  he lived so  close  to  us  we'd  used  to  walk  home
together. But his mother was  a little weak-minded,  his  older  brother  had  been  put
away  for  molesting  or  something,  and  Raymond  himself  was  thick  as  two  short
planks, hulking and unlovely, and a very shadowy character in general. Or at least he
gave that impression.
Girls didn't  like him:  he  smelled  of  bread  and  dripping  and  didn't  clean  his
teeth  too  well,  and  for  two  years  now  he'd  been  wearing  the  same  jacket  and
trousers,  which had  grown pretty  tight on  him. His short  hair and  little  piggy  eyes
made him look bristly, and there was that looseness about his lips, which you find in
certain  idiots.  If  you  were  told  that  ladies'  underwear  was  disappearing  from  the
washing-lines, you'd  perhaps  think  of  Raymond.  If  someone  was  jumping  out  on
small girls at dusk and shouting boo!, he was  the one  who'd  spring  to  mind. If the
little-boy-up-the-road's kitten got strangled...

Not that that sort of thing happened a lot in Harden, for it didn't. Up there on
the  northeast  coast  in  those  days,  the  Bobbies  on  the  beat  were  still  Bobbies,
unhampered by modern "ethics" and other humane restrictions. Catch a kid drawing
red, hairy, diamond-shaped designs on the school wall, and wallop!, he'd get a clout
round the earhole, dragged  off  home to  his parents,  and  doubtless  another wallop.
Also,  in  the  schools,  the  cane  was  still  in  force.  Young  people  were  still  being
"brought up," were made or at least encouraged to grow up straight and strong, and
not allowed to bolt and run wild. Most  of  them, anyway. But it wasn't  easy,  not  in
that environment.
Harden  lay  well  outside  the  fringes  of  "Geordie-land"  --  Newcastle  and
environs  --  but  real  outsiders  termed  us  all  Geordies  anyway.  It  was  the  way  we
spoke;  our  near-Geordie  accents  leaped  between  soft  and  harsh  as  readily  as  the
Welsh tongue soars up and down the scales; a dialect which at once identified us as
"pit-yakkers,"  grimy-black shambling colliers, coal-miners.  The  fact  that  my  father
was a Harden green-grocer made no difference: I came from the colliery and so was
a pit-yakker. I was an apprentice  woodcutting  machinist in Hartlepool? -- so  what?
My collar was grimy, wasn't it? With coal dust? And no matter how much I tried to
disguise it I had that accent, didn't I? Pit-yakker!
But  at  sixteen  I  was  escaping  from  the  image.  One  must,  or  sex  remains
forever a mystery.  The  girls -- the better  girls, anyway -- in the big towns,  even in
Harden, Easingham, Blackhill and the other colliery villages, weren't much impressed
by  or  interested  in  pit-yakkers.  Which  must  have  left  Raymond  Maddison  in  an
entirely hopeless position. Everything about him literally shrieked of his origin, made
worse  by  the fact  that his father, a miner, was  already grooming Raymond  for  the
mine, too. You think I have a down on them, the colliers? No, for they were the salt
of the earth. They still are. I merely give you the background.
As for my own opinion of  Raymond:  I thought I knew him and  didn't  for  a
moment consider him a bad sort. He loved John Wayne like I did, and liked to think
of himself as a tough egg, as I did. But Nature and the world in general hadn't been
so kind to him, and being a bit of a dunce didn't help much either. He was like a big
scruffy  dog  who sits  at the corner  of  the street  grinning at everyone going by  and
wagging his tail, whom nobody ever pats for fear of fleas or mange or whatever, and
who you're sure pees on the front wheel of your car every time you park it there. He
probably  doesn't,  but  somebody  has  to  take  the  blame.  That  was  how  I  saw
Raymond.
So I was sixteen and some months, and Raymond Maddison about the same,
and it was a Saturday in July. Normally when we met we'd pass the time of day. Just
a few words: what was on at the cinema (in Harden there were two of them, the Ritz
and the Empress -- for this was before Bingo closed most of them down), when was
the next dance at the Old Victoria Hall, how many pints we'd downed last Friday at
the  British  Legion.  Dancing,  drinking,  smoking,  and  girls:  it  was  a  time  of
experimentation. Life had many flavors other than those that wafted out from the pit

and the coke-ovens. On this Saturday, however, he was the last person I wanted to
see, and the very last I wanted to be seen with.
I was waiting for Moira, sitting on the recreation ground wall where the stumps
of the old iron railings showed through, which they'd taken away thirteen years earlier
for the war effort and never replaced. I had been a baby then but  it was  one  of  the
memories I had: of the men in the helmets with the glass faceplates cutting down all
the iron things to melt for the war. It had left only the low wall, which was ideal to sit
on.  In the summer the flat-capped  miners would sit  there  to  watch  the  kids  flying
kites in the recreation ground or playing on the swings, or just to sit and talk. There
was a group of old-timers there that Saturday,  too,  all looking out  across  the dark,
fuming colliery toward the sea; so when I saw Raymond hunching my way with his
hands in his pockets, I turned and looked in the same direction, hoping he wouldn't
notice me. But he already had.
"Hi, Joshua!" he said in his mumbling fashion, touching my arm. I don't know
why I was christened Joshua: I wasn't Jewish or a Catholic or  anything. I do  know
why; my father told me his father had been called Joshua, so that was it. Usually they
called me Josh, which I liked because it sounded  like a wild-western name. I could
imagine John Wayne being called Josh. But Raymond occasionally forgot and called
me Joshua.
"Hello,  Raymond!"  I  said.  I  usually  called  him  Ray,  but  if  he  noticed  the
difference he didn't say anything.
"Game of snooker?" It was an invitation.
"No," I shook my head. "I'm, er, waiting for someone."
"Who?"
"Mind your own business."
"Girl?" he said. "Moira? Saw you with her at the Ritz. Back row."
"Look, Ray, I -- "
"It's OK," he said, sitting down  beside  me on  the wall. "We're  jus'  talking. I
can go any time."
I groaned inside. He was bound to follow us. He did stupid things like that. I
decided to make the best of it, glanced at him. "So, what are you doing? Have you
found a job yet?"
He pulled a face. "Naw."
"Are you going to?"
"Pit. Next spring. My dad says."

"Uh-huh," I nodded. "Plenty of work there." I looked along the wall past  the
groundkeeper's house. That's the way Moira would come.
"Hey, look!" said Raymond. He took out a brand  new Swiss  Army penknife
and handed  it over  for  my  inspection.  As  my  eyes  widened  he  beamed.  "Beauty,
eh?"
And it was. "Where'd you get it?" I asked him, opening it up. It was fitted with
every sort of blade and attachment you could imagine. Three  or  four  years  earlier I
would have loved a knife like that. But right now I couldn't see why I'd need it. OK
for woodcarving or the Boy Scouts, or  even the Boys'  Brigade, but  I'd  left all that
stuff behind. And anyway, the machines I was learning to use in my trade paled this
thing to insignificance and made it look like a very primitive toy. Like a rasp beside a
circular saw. I couldn't see why Raymond would want it either.
"Saved  up  for  it," he said.  "See,  a saw.  Two  saws!  One  for  metal,  one  for
wood. Knives -- careful! -- sharp. Gouge -- "
"That's an auger," I said, "not a gouge. But... this one's a gouge, right enough.
Look," and I eased the tool from its housing to show him.
"Corkscrew," he went on. "Scissors, file, hook..."
"Hook?"
"For hooking things. Magnetic. You can pick up screws."
"It's a good knife," I told him, giving it back. "How do you use it?"
"I haven't," he said, " -- yet."
I was getting desperate. "Ray, do me a favor.  Look,  I have to  stay  here and
wait for her. And I'm short of cigs." I forked  out  a florin. "Bring me a packet,  will
you? Twenty? And I'll give you a few."
He took the coin. "You'll be here?"
I nodded, lying without saying anything. I had an unopened packet  of  twenty
in my pocket. He said no more but loped off across the road, disappearing into one
of the back streets leading to Harden's main road and shopping area. I let him get out
of sight, then set off briskly past the groundskeeper’s house, heading north.
Now, I know I've  stated  that in my opinion he was  OK; but  even  so,  still  I
knew he wasn't to be trusted. He just might follow us, if he could -- out of curiosity,
perversity, don't ask me. You just couldn't  be  sure  what he was  thinking, that's  all.
And I didn't want him peeping on us.
It  dawns  on  me  now  that  in  his  "innocence"  Raymond  was  anything  but
innocent. There are two sides to each of us, and in someone like him, a little lacking
in basic understanding... well, who is to say that the dark side shouldn't on occasion

be just a shade darker? For illustration, there'd been that time when we were, oh, nine
or ten years  old?  I had  two  white mice who lived in their box  in the  garden  shed.
They had  their own swimming pool,  too,  made out  of  an old  baking tray just  two
and a half inches deep. I'd trained them to swim to a floating tin lid for bits of bacon
rind.
One day,  playing with Raymond  and  the mice in the garden,  I'd  been  called
indoors about something or other.  I was  only inside a moment or  two,  but  when I
came back out he'd gone. Looking over the garden wall and down the street, I'd seen
him tip-toeing off into the distance! A great hulk like him, slinking off like a cartoon
cat!
Then I'd shrugged and returned to my game -- and just in time. The tin lid raft
was upside-down, with Peter and Pan trapped underneath, paddling for all they were
worth to keep their snouts up in the air trapped under there with them. It was only a
small thing, I suppose, but it had given me bad dreams for a long time. So... instead
of the hard nut I considered myself, maybe I was just a big softy  after all. In some
things.
But... did Raymond do it deliberately or was it an accident? And if the latter,
then why was he slinking off like that? If he had tried to drown them, why? Jealousy?
Something I had which he didn't have? Or sheer, downright nastiness? When I'd later
tackled him about it, he'd just said: "Eh? Eh?" and  looked  dumb.  That's  the way it
was with him. I could never figure out what went on in there.
Moira lived down by the high colliery wall, beyond which stood vast cones of
coal, piled there, waiting to fuel the coke ovens. And as  a backdrop  to  these  black
foothills, the wheelhouse  towers  rising  like  sooty  sentinels,  coming  into  view  as  I
hurried  through  the  grimy  sunlit  streets;  a  colliery  in  the  summer  seems  strangely
opposed to itself. In one of the towers  a massive spoked  wheel was  spinning even
now, raising or lowering a cage in its claustrophobic shaft. Miners, some still in their
"pit black," even wearing their helmets and  lamps,  drew  deep  on  cigarettes as  they
came  away  from  the  place.  My  father  would  have  said:  "As  if  their  lungs  aren't
suffering enough already!"
I knew the exact route Moira would take from  her gritty colliery street  house
to the recreation ground, but at each junction in its turn I scanned the streets this way
and that, making sure I didn't miss  her. By now Raymond  would have brought  the
cigarettes and be on his way back to the wall.
"Hello,  Josh!"  she  said,  breathlessly  surprised  --  almost  as  if  she  hadn't
expected to see me today -- appearing like a ray of extra bright sunlight from behind
the freshly creosoted fencing of garden allotments. She  stood  back  and  looked  me
up and down. "So, you're all impatient to see me, eh? Or... maybe I was late?" She
looked at me anxiously.
I  had  been  hurrying  and  so  was  breathing  heavily.  I  smiled,  wiped  my

forehead,  said:  "It's...  just  that  there  was  someone  I  knew  back  there,  at  the
recreation ground, and -- "
" -- You didn't want to be seen with me?" She frowned. She was mocking me,
but I didn't know it.
"No, not that," I hurriedly denied it, "but -- "
And then she laughed and I knew she'd been teasing. "It's all right, Josh," she
said. "I understand." She linked my arm. "Where are we going?"
"Walking," I said, turning her into the maze of allotments, trying to control my
breathing, my heartbeat.
"I know that]" she said. "But where?"
"Down to the beach, and up again in Blackhill?"
"The beach is very dirty. Not very kind to good clothes." She was wearing a
short blue skirt, white blouse, and a smart white jacket across her arm.
"The beach banks, then," I gulped. "And along the cliff paths to Easingham."
"You only want to get me where it's  lonely," she  said,  but  with a smile. "All
right, then." And a moment later, "May I have a cigarette?"
I brought  out  my  fresh  pack  and  started  to  open  it,  but  looking  nervously
around she said: "Not just yet. When we're farther into the allotments." She was six
months my junior and lived close by; if someone saw her smoking it was likely to be
reported to her father. But a few minutes later we shared  a cigarette and  she  kissed
me, blowing smoke into my mouth. I wondered where she'd learned to do that. Also,
it took me by surprise -- the kiss, I mean. She was impulsive like that.
In retrospect,  I  suppose  Moira  was  my  first  love.  And  they  say  you  never
forget the first one. Well, they mean you never forget the first time -- but I think your
first  love  is  the  same,  even  if  there's  nothing  physical.  But  she  was  the  first  one
who'd kept me awake at night thinking of her, the first one who made me ache.
She  was  maybe  five  feet  six  or  seven,  had  a  heart-shaped  face,  huge  dark
come-to-bed  eyes  which  I  suspected  and  hoped  hadn't  yet  kept  their  promise,  a
mouth maybe a fraction too wide, so that her face seemed to break  open  when she
laughed, and  hair that bounced  on  her shoulders  entirely  of  its  own  accord.  They
didn't have stuff to make it bounce in those days.
Her figure was fully formed and she  looked  wonderful in a bathing costume,
and her legs were long and  tapering. Also,  I  had  a  thing  about  teeth,  and  Moira's
were perfect and very, very white. Since meeting her the first time I'd  scrubbed  the
inside of my mouth and my gums raw trying to match the whiteness of her teeth.
Since meeting her...

That had been, oh, maybe three months ago. I mean, I'd always known her, or
known of  her. You can't  live all  your  life  in  a  small  colliery  village  and  not  know
everyone, at least by sight. But when she'd left school and got her first job at a salon
in  Hartlepool,  and  we'd  started  catching  the  same  bus  in  the  morning,  that  had
opened it up for us.
After that there'd  been  a lot of  talk, then the cinema, eventually the beach  at
Seaton, which the debris  from  the pits  hadn't  ruined yet, and  now we were "going
together." It hadn't meant much to me before, that phrase, "going together," but now
I understood it. We went places together, and  we went well together.  I thought so,
anyway.
The  garden  allotments  started  properly  at  the  end  of  the  colliery  wall  and
sprawled  over  many  acres  along  the  coast  road  on  the  northern  extreme  of  the
village. The access  paths,  which divided them, were dusty,  mazy, meandering. But
behind the fences people were at work, and they came to and fro along the paths, so
that it wasn't really private there. I had  returned Moira's  kiss,  and  in several quieter
places had tried to draw her closer once or twice.
Invariably  she  held  me  at  arm's  length,  saying:  "Not  here!"  And  her
nervousness  made  me  nervous,  too,  so  that  I'd  look  here  and  there  all  about,  to
make sure we were unobserved.  And it was  at such  a time, glancing back  the way
we'd come, that I thought I saw a face hastily snatched back around the corner of a
fence. The thought didn't occur to me that it might be  Raymond.  By now I'd  quite
forgotten about him.
Where  the  allotments  ended  the  open  fields  began,  gradually  declining  to  a
dene and  a stream that ran down  to  the sea.  A second  cigarette had  been  smoked
down to its tip and discarded by the time we crossed  the fields along a hedgerow,
and we'd  fallen silent where we strolled  through the long summer grass.  But I was
aware of my arm, linked with hers,  and  hugged close  against her right breast.  And
that  was  a  thought  which  made  me  dizzy,  for  through  a  heady  half-hour  I  had
actually held that breast in my hand, had known how warm it was, with its little hard
tip that felt rough against the parent softness.
Oh,  the back  row  love-seats  in  the  local  cinema  were  worthy  of  an  award;
whoever  designed  them  deserves  an  accolade  from  all  the  world's  lovers.  Two
people  on  a  single,  softly  upholstered  seat,  thigh-to-thigh  and  hip-to-hip,  with  no
ghastly armrest divider, no obstruction to the slow, breathless, tender and timid first
invasion.
In the dark with only the cinema's wall behind us, and  the smoky  beam from
the projector  turning all else to  pitch,  I was  sure  she  wasn't  aware of  my progress
with the top button of her blouse, and I considered myself incredibly fortunate to be
able to disguise my fumblings with the second of those small obstacles.  But after a
while, when for all my efforts it appeared I'd  get no  further and  my frustration was
mounting as  the tingling seconds  ticked  by,  then she'd  gently taken my hand  away

and effortlessly completed  the job  for  me. She  had  known --  which,  while  it  took
something of the edge off my triumph, nevertheless increased the frisson to new and
previously unexplored heights.
Was I innocent? I don't know. Others, younger by a year, had said they knew
everything there was to know. Everything! That was a thought.
But in opening that button and making way for my hand, Moira had invited me
in, as it were; cuddled up together there in the back row, my hand had molded itself
to  the  shape  of  her  breast  and  learned  every  contour  better  than  any  actor  ever
memorized his lines. Even now, a week later, I could form my hand  into a cup  and
feel her flesh filling it again. And desired to feel her filling it again.
Where  the  hedgerow  met  a  fence  at  right-angles,  we  crossed  a  stile;  I  was
across  first  and  helped  Moira  down.  While  I  held  one  hand  to  steady  her,  she
hitched  her  short  skirt  a  little  to  step  down  from  the  stile's  high  platform.  It  was
funny,  but  I  found  Moira's  legs  more  fascinating  in  that  skirt  than  in  her  bathing
costume.  And I'd  started  to  notice  the heat of  my ears  -- that they  were  hot  quite
apart from the heat of the sun,  with a sort  of  internal burning -- as  we more nearly
approached our destination. My destination,  anyway, where if her feelings matched
mine she'd succumb a little more to my seductions.
As we left the stile to  take the path  down  into the dene  and  toward  the  sea
cliffs, I glanced back the way we'd come. I don't know why. It was just that I had a
feeling.  And  back  there,  across  the  fields,  but  hurrying,  I  thought...  a  figure.
Raymond?  If it  was,  and  if  he  were  to  bother  us  today  of  all  days...  I  promised
myself  he'd  pay  for  it  with  a  bloody  nose.  But  on  the  other  hand  it  could  be
anybody. Saying nothing of it to Moira, I hurried her through the dene.  Cool  under
the trees, where the sunlight dappled the rough cobbled path, she said:
"What on earth's the hurry, Josh? Are you that eager?"
The  way  I  took  her  up  in  my  arms  and  kissed  her  till  I  reeled  must  have
answered her question for me; but there were voices  here and  there along the path,
and the place echoed like a tunnel. No, I knew where I wanted to take her.
Toward the bottom of the dene, where it narrowed to a bottleneck  of  woods
and water scooped through the beach banks and tunneled toward the sea, we turned
north across  an  old  wooden  bridge  over  the  scummy  stream  and  began  climbing
toward  the  cliff  paths,  open  fields,  and  sand  holes  that  lay  between  us  and
Easingham Colliery. Up there, in the long grasses of those summer fields, we could
be quite alone and Moira would let me make love to  her, I hoped.  She'd  hinted as
much, anyway, the last time I walked her home.
Toiling steeply  up  an earth track,  where white sand  spilled down  from  sand
holes up ahead, we looked down on the beach -- or what had  been  a beach  before
the pit-yakkers came -- and remembered a time when it was almost completely white
from the banks and cliffs to the sea. On a palmy summer day like this the sea should

be blue, but it was gray. Its waves broke in a gray froth  of  scum  on  a black  shore
that looked ravaged by cancer -- the cancer of the pits.
The landscape  down  there could  be  that of  an alien  planet:  the  black  beach
scarred by streamlets of dully glinting slurry gurgling seaward; concentric  tidemarks
of congealed  froth,  with the sick,  wallowing sea  seeming eager  to  escape  from  its
own vomit; a dozen sea-coal lorries scattered here and there like ticks on a carcass,
their crews  shoveling pebble-sized  nuggets of  the wet, filthy black  gold  in  through
open tail-gates, while other vehicles trundled like lice over the rotting black corpse of
a moonscape. Sucked up by the sun, gray mists wreathed the whole scene.
"It's  worse  than I remembered  it," I said.  "And  you  were  right:  we  couldn't
have walked down  there, not  even along the foot  of  the banks.  It's  just  too  filthy!
And to think: all of that was pure white sand just, oh -- "
" -- Ten years ago?" she said. "Well, maybe not pure white, but  it was  still a
nice beach then, anyway. Yes,  I remember.  I've  seen  that beach  full of  people,  the
sea bobbing with their heads. My father used to swim there, with me on his chest! I
remember it. I can remember things from all the way back to when I was a baby. It's
a shame they've done this to it."
"It's  actually  unsafe,"  I  told  her.  "There  are  places  they've  flagged,  where
they've  put  up  warning  notices.  Quicksands  of  slag  and  slop  and  slurry  --  gritty
black sludge from the pits. And just look at that skyline!"
South  lay the colliery at Harden,  the perimeter of  its works  coming close  to
the banks  where they rolled down  to  the sea,  with half-a-dozen of  its black  spider
legs straddling out farther yet. These were the aerial trip-dumpers: conveyor-belts or
ski-lifts of slag, endlessly swaying to  the rim and  tripped  there, to  tip the refuse  of
the  coke-ovens  down  onto  the  smoking  wasteland  of  foreshore;  and  these  were,
directly, the culprits  of  all this desolation.  Twenty-four  hours  a day  for  fifty  years
they'd crawled on  their high cables,  between their spindly towers,  great buckets  of
muck  depositing  the  pus  of  the  earth  to  corrode  a  coast.  And  behind  this  lower
intestine of the works lay the greater pulsating mass of the spider itself: the pit, with
its  wheel-towers  and  soaring  black  chimneys,  its  mastaba  cooling  towers  and
mausoleum  coke-ovens.  Yellow  smoke,  gray  and  black  smoke,  belching
continuously into the blue sky  -- or  into a sky  which  looked  blue  but  was  in  fact
polluted, as any rainy day would testify, when white washing on garden lines would
turn a streaky gray with the first patter of raindrops.
On the  southern  horizon,  Blackhill  was  a  spiky  smudge  under  a  gray  haze;
north, but closer, Easingham was the same. Viewed from this same position at night,
the glow of the coke-ovens,  the flare-up and  gouting orange steam when white hot
coke was hosed down, would turn the entire region into a scene  straight from  Hell!
Satanic mills?  They  have  nothing  on  a  nest  of  well-established  coal  mines  by  the
sea....

We reached the top of the banks and passed warning notices telling how from
here  on  they  rolled  down  to  sheer  cliffs.  When  I'd  been  a  child,  miners  used  to
clamber down  the banks  to  the cliff-edge, hammer stakes  into the earth  and  lower
themselves on ropes with baskets to collect gull eggs. Inland, however, the land was
flat, where deep  grass  pasture  roved  wild all the way from  here to  the coast  road.
There were a few farms, but that was all.
We walked half a mile along the cliff path until the fields began to  be  fenced;
where a hedgerow inside the fence, there split the first true field. I paused and turned
to Moira. We  hadn't  seen  anyone,  hadn't  spoken  for  some  time but  I suppose  her
heart, like mine, had been speeding up a little. Not from our efforts, for walking here
was easy.
"We  can  climb  the  fence,  cut  along  the  hedgerow,"  I  suggested,  a  little
breathlessly.
"Why?" Her eyes were wide, naive and yet questioning.
I shrugged. "A... shortcut to the main road?" But I'd made it a question, and I
knew I shouldn't  leave the initiative to  her. Gathering my courage,  I  added:  "Also,
we'll -- "
" -- Find a bit of privacy?" Her face was flushed.
I climbed the rough three-bar fence;  she  followed my example and  I  helped
her down,  and  knew she'd  seen  where I could  hardly help looking.  But  she  didn't
seem  to  mind.  We  stayed  close  to  the  hedgerow,  which  was  punctuated  every
twenty-five paces or so with great oaks, and struck inland. It was only when we were
away from the fence that I remembered, just before jumping down, that I'd paused a
second to scan the land about -- and how for a moment I thought I'd seen someone
back along the path. Raymond, I wondered? But in any case, he should lose our trail
now.
After some two hundred yards there was a lone elder tree growing in the field
a little way apart  from  the hedge,  its branches  shading the lush grass  underneath.  I
led  Moira  away  from  the  hedge  and  into  the  shade  of  the  elder,  and  she  came
unresisting. And there I spread my jacket for her to sit on, and for  a minute or  two
we  just  sprawled.  The  grass  hid  us  almost  completely  in  our  first  private  place.
Seated, we could just see the topmost twigs of the hedgerow, and of course the bole
and spreading canopy of the nearest oak.
Now, I don't  intend to  go  into  details.  Anyone  who  was  ever  young,  alone
with his girl, will know the details anyway. Let it suffice to say that there were things
I wanted, some of which she was willing to  give. And some  she  wasn't.  "No,"  she
said.  And more positively: "No!"  when I persisted.  But she  panted  and  moaned  a
little all the same, and her voice  was  almost desperate,  suggesting: "But I can  do  it
for you this way, if you like." Ah, but her hands set me on fire! I burned for her, and
she felt the strength of the flame rising in me. "Josh, no!" she said again. "What if...

if..."
She looked  away from  me, froze  for  a moment -- and  her  mouth  fell  open.
She drew air hissingly and expelled it in a gasp. "Josh!" And without pause she was
doing up  buttons,  scrambling to  her  feet,  brushing  away  wisps  of  grass  from  her
skirt and blouse.
"Eh?" I said, astonished. "What is it?"
"He saw us!" she gasped. "He saw  you  -- me -- like that!" Her voice  shook
with a mixture of outrage and fear.
"Who?"  I  said,  mouth  dry,  looking  this  way  and  that  and  seeing  no  one.
"Where?"
"By the oak tree," she said. "Half-way up it. A face, peering out from behind.
Someone was watching us."
Someone? Only one  someone  it could  possibly  be!  But be  sure  that when I
was done with him he'd never peep on anyone again! Flushed and furious I sprinted
through  the  grass  for  the  oak  tree.  The  hedge  hid  a  rotting  fence;  I  went  over,
through it, came to a panting halt in fragments of brown, broken timber. No sign of
anyone. You could hide an army in that long grass. But the fence where it was nailed
to  the  oak  bore  the  scuffmarks  of  booted  feet,  and  the  tree's  bark  was  freshly
bruised some six feet up the bole.
"You...  dog!"  I  growled  to  myself.  "God,  but  I'll  get  you,  Raymond
Maddison!"
"Josh!"  I  heard  Moira  on  the  other  side  of  the  "hedge.  "Josh,  I'm  so  --
ashamed!"
"What?" I called out. "Of what? He won't dare say anything -- whoever he is.
There are laws against -- ". But she was no longer there. Forcing myself through soft
wooden  jaws and  freeing myself from  the tangle  of  the  hedge,  I  saw  her  hurrying
back  the  way  we'd  come.  "Moira!"  I  called,  but  she  was  already  halfway  to  the
three-bar fence. "Moira!" I called again, and then ran after her. By the time I reached
the fence she'd climbed it and was starting back along the path.
I finally caught up  with her, took  her  arm.  "Moira,  we  can  find  some  other
place. I mean, just because -- "
She shook me off, turned on me. "Is that all you want, Josh Peters?" Her face
was angry now, eyes flashing. "Well if it is, there are plenty of other girls in Harden
who'll be more than happy to... to..."
"Moira, I -- " I shook my head. It wasn't like that. We were going together.
"I thought you liked me\" she snapped. "The real me!"

My jaw fell open.  Why was  she  talking to  me like this? She  knew  I  liked  --
more than liked -- the real Moira. She was the real Moira! It was a tiff, brought on by
excitement, fear, frustration; we'd  never before  had  to  deal  with  anything  like  this,
and we didn't  know how.  Hers  heightened  my  emotions,  and  now  my  pride  took
over. I thrust my jaw out, turned on my heel and strode rapidly away from her.
"If that's what you think of  me,"  I called back,  "  -- if that's  as  much as  you
think of me -- then maybe this is for the best..."
"Josh?"  I heard  her small voice  behind me. But I didn't  answer,  didn't  look
back.
Furious,  I  hurried,  almost  trotted  back  the  way  we'd  come:  along  the  cliff
path, scrambling steeply down through the grass-rimmed, crumbling sand pits to the
dene.  But at the bottom  I deliberately turned  left and  headed  for  the beach.  Dirty?
Oh, the beach would be dirty -- sufficiently dirty so that she  surely wouldn't  follow
me. I didn't want her to. I wanted nothing of her. Oh, I did, I did! -- But I wouldn't
admit  it,  not  even  to  myself,  not  then.  But  if  she  did  try  to  follow  me,  it  would
mean... it would mean...
Moira, Moira! Did I love her? Possibly, but I couldn't handle the emotion. So
many emotions; and inside I was still on fire from what had nearly been, still aching
from the retention of fluids my young body had so desired to be rid of. Raymond?
Raymond Maddison? By God, but I'd bloody him! I'd let some of his damned fluids
out!
"Josh!"  I seemed  to  hear Moira's  voice  from  a  long  way  back,  but  I  could
have been mistaken. In any case it didn't slow me down. Time and space flashed by
in a blur; I was down onto  the beach;  I walked south  under  the cliffs on  sand  that
was still sand, however blackened; I trekked grimy sand dunes up and down, kicking
at  withered  tufts  of  crabgrass  which  reminded  me  of  the  gray  and  yellow  hairs
sprouting from the blemishes of old men. Until finally I had burned something of the
anger and frustration out of myself.
Then I turned toward the sea, cut a path between the sickly dunes down to the
no-man's land of black slag and stinking slurry, and  found  a place  to  sit on  a rock
etched by chemical reaction into an anomalous hump. It was one of a line of rocks I
remembered from my childhood, reaching out half a mile to the sea, from which the
men had  crabbed  and  cast  their lines. But none  of  that now.  Beyond  where  I  sat,
only the tips of the lifeless, once limpet- and mussel-festooned rocks stuck up above
the slurry; a leaning, blackened signpost warned:
DANGER! QUICKSAND!
Do Not Proceed Beyond This Point.

Quicksand? Quag, certainly, but not sand...
I don't  know  how  long  I  sat  there.  The  sea  was  advancing  and  gray  gulls
wheeled on high, crying on a rising breeze that blew their plaintive voices inland.
Scummy waves broke  in feathers  of  gray froth  less  than one  hundred  yards
down  the  beach.  Down  what  had  been  a  beach  before  the  invasion  of  the
pit-yakkers. It was summer but down here there were no  seasons.  Steam curled  up
from the slag and misted a pitted, alien landscape.
I became lulled by the sound of the birds, the hissing throb of foamy waters,
and,  strangely,  from  some  little  distance  away,  the  periodic  clatter  of  an  aerial
dumper  tilting  its  buckets  and  hurling  more  mineral  debris  down  from  on  high,
creating a mound which the advancing ocean would spread out in a new layer to coat
and further contaminate the beach.
I sat there glumly, with my chin like lead in my hands and all of these sounds
dull on  the periphery  of  my  consciousness,  and  thought  nothing  in  particular  and
certainly nothing of any importance. From time to time a gull's cry would sound like
Moira's  voice,  but  too  shrill,  high,  frightened,  or  desperate.  She  wasn't  coming,
wouldn't come, and I had lost her. We had lost each other.
I became aware of time trickling by, but again I state: I don't know how long I
sat there. An hour? Maybe.
Then something broke through to me. Something other than the voices of the
gulls, the waves, the near-distant rain of stony rubble. A new sound? A presence?  I
looked up, turned  my head  to  scan  north  along the dead  and  rotting beach.  And I
saw him -- though as yet he had not seen me.
My eyes narrowed and I felt my brows  come  together in a frown.  Raymond
Maddison. The pit-yakker himself. And this probably as good a place as any, maybe
better than most,  to  teach  him a well-deserved lesson.  I stood  up,  and  keeping  as
low a profile as possible made my way round the back of the tarry dunes  to  where
he was standing. In less than two  minutes I was  there, behind him, creeping up  on
where  he  stood  wind-blown  and  almost  forlorn-seeming,  staring  out  to  sea.  And
there I paused.
It  seemed  his  large,  rounded  shoulders  were  heaving.  Was  he  crying?
Catching  his  breath?  Gulping  at  the  warm,  reeking  air?  Had  he  been  running?
Searching for me? Following me as  earlier he'd  followed us?  My feelings hardened
against him. It was because he wasn't entirely all there that people tolerated him. But
I more than suspected he was all there. Not really a dummy, more a scummy.
And I had him trapped. In front of him the rocks  receding into pits  of  black
filth, where a second  warning  notice  leaned  like  a  scarecrow  on  a  battlefield,  and
behind him... only myself behind him. Me and my tightly clenched fists.

Then, as I watched, he took something out of his pocket. His new knife, as I
saw now. He stared down at it for  a moment,  and  then drew  back  his arm as  if to
hurl it away from him, out into the black wilderness of quag.  But he froze  like that,
with the knife still in his hand, and I saw that his shoulders had stopped shuddering.
He became alert; I guessed that he'd sensed I was there, watching him.
He turned  his head  and  saw  me, and  his eyes  opened  wide  in  a  pale,  slack
face. I'd never seen him so pale. Then he fell to one knee, dipped his knife into the
slurry at his feet, and commenced wiping at it with a rag of  a handkerchief.  Caught
unawares he was childlike, tending to do meaningless things.
"Raymond," I said, my voice grimmer than I'd intended. "Raymond, I want a
word with you!"  And he looked  for  somewhere  to  run as  I advanced  on  him. But
there was nowhere.
"I didn't -- " he suddenly blurted. "I didn't -- "
"But you did!" I was only a few paces away.
"I... I..."
"You followed us, peeped on us, and messed it all up."
And again he seemed  to  freeze, while his brain turned  over  what I'd  said  to
him. Lines creased his brow, vanishing as quickly as they'd come. "What?"
"What?!" I shouted, stepping closer still. "You bloody well know what! Now
Moira and me, we're finished. And it's your fault."
He backed off into the black  mire, which at once  covered  his boots  and  the
cuffs  of  his  too-short  trousers.  And  there  he  stood,  lifting  and  lowering  his  feet,
which  went  glop,  glop  with  each  up  and  down  movement.  He  reminded  me  of
nothing so much as a fly caught on the sticky paper they used at that time. And his
mouth  kept  opening  and  closing,  stupidly,  because  he  had  nothing  to  say  and
nowhere to run, and he knew I was angry.
Finally he said: "I didn't mean to... follow you. But I -- " And he reached into
a pocket and brought out a packet of cigarettes. "Your cigarettes."
I had known that would be his excuse. "Throw them to me, Ray," I said. For
I wasn't about to go stepping in there after him. He tossed me the packet but stayed
right where he was, "You may as well come on out," I told him, lighting up, "for you
know I'm going to settle with you."
"Josh," he said, still mouthing like a fish. "Josh...."
"Yes,  Josh,  Josh,"  I told  him, nodding.  "But you've  really done  it this  time,
and we have to have it out."
He still had his knife. He showed it to me, opened the main blade. He took  a

pace forward out of the slurry and I took a pace back. There was a sick grin on his
face.  Except...  he  wasn't  threatening  me.  "For  you,"  he  said,  snapping  the  blade
shut. "I don't... don't want it no more." He stepped  from  the quag  onto  a flat rock
and stood there facing me, not  quite within arm's  reach.  He tossed  the knife and  I
automatically caught it. It weighed heavy in my hand where I clenched  my knuckles
round it.
"A bribe?" I said. "So  that I won't  tell what you  did?  How many friends  do
you have, Ray? And how many left if I tell what a dirty, sneaky, spying -- "
But he was still grinning his sick, nervous grin. "You won't tell," he shook his
head. "Not what I seen."
I made a lunging grab for him and the grin slipped from his face.  He hopped
to a second  rock  farther out  in the liquid slag, teetered  there for  a moment  before
finding his balance. And he looked anxiously all about for  more stepping-stones,  in
case I should follow.
There were two  or  three  more  rocks,  all  of  them  deeper  into  the  coal  dust
quicksand, but beyond them only a bubbly, oozy black surface streaked with oil and
yellow mineral swirls.
Raymond's predicament was a bad one. Not because of me. I would only hit
him. Once or twice, depending how long it took to bloody him. But this stuff would
murder him. If he fell in. And the black slime was dripping from the bottoms of  his
trousers, making the surface of his rock slippery. Raymond's balance wasn't  much,
neither mentally nor physically. He began to slither this way and that, wind-milled his
arms in an effort to stay put.
"Ray!" I was alarmed. "Come out of there!"
He leaped, desperately, tried to  find purchase  on  the next rock,  slipped!  His
feet shot up in the air and he came down on his back in the quag. The stuff quivered
like  thick  black  porridge  and  put  out  slow-motion  ripples.  He  flailed  his  arms,
yelping  like  a  dog,  as  the  lower  part  of  his  body  started  to  sink.  His  trousers
ballooned with the air in them, but the stuff's suck was strong. Raymond was going
down.
Before  I  could  even  start  to  think  straight  he  was  in  chest  deep,  the  filth
inching  higher  every  second.  But  he'd  stopped  yelping  and  had  started  thinking.
Thinking desperate thoughts. "Josh... Josh!" he gasped.
I stepped forward ankle-deep, got  up  onto  the first rock.  I made to  jump to
the second rock but he stopped me. "No, Josh," he whispered. "Or we'll both go."
"You're sinking," I said, for once as stupid as him.
"Listen,"  he  answered  with  a  gasp.  "Up  between  the  dunes,  some  cable,
half-buried. I saw it on my way down  here. Tough,  'lectric  wire, in the muck.  You

can pull me out with that."
I remembered. I had seen it, too. Several lengths of discarded cable, buried in
the  scummy  dunes.  All  my  limbs  were  trembling  as  I  got  back  to  solid  ground,
setting out  up  the beach  between the dunes.  "Josh!"  his voice  reached  out  harshly
after me. "Hurry!" And a moment later: "The first bit of wire you see, that'll do it...."
I  hurried,  ran,  raced.  But  my  heart  was  pounding,  the  air  rasping  like
sandpaper in my lungs. Fear.  But...  I couldn't  find the cable.  Then there was  a tall
dune, a great heap of black-streaked, slag-crusted sand. A lookout place! I went up
it,  my  feet  breaking  through  the  crust,  letting  rivulets  of  sand  cascade,  thrusting
myself to  the top.  Now I could  get directions,  scan  the area all about.  Over  there,
between low humps  of  diseased  sand,  I  could  see  what  might  be  a  cable:  a  thin,
frozen black snake of the stuff.
But beyond the cable I could see something else: colors, anomalous, strewn in
a clump of dead crabgrass.
I tumbled down the side of the great dune, ran for the cable, and tore a length
free of the sand and muck. I had maybe fifteen, twenty feet of the stuff. Coiling it, I
looked back. Raymond was there in the quag, going down black and  sticky.  But in
the  other  direction  --  just  over  there,  no  more  than  a  dozen  loping  paces  away,
hidden in the crabgrass and low humps  of  sand  -- something blue and  white and...
and red.
Something about it made my skin prickle. Quickly, I went to see. And I saw...
After a while I  heard  Raymond's  voice  over  the  crying  of  the  gulls.  "Josh!
Josh\"
I walked back, the cable looped in my lifeless hands, made my way to where
he hung crucified in the quag; his arms  formed  the cross,  palms pressing  down  on
the belching surface,  his head  thrown back  and  the  slop  ringing  his  throat.  And  I
stood looking at him. He saw me; saw the cable in my limp hands,  looked  into my
eyes. And he knew. He knew I wasn't going to let him have the cable.
Instead  I  gave  him  back  his  terrible  knife  with  all  its  terrible  attachments  --
which he'd been waiting to use, and which I'd seen no use for -- tossing it so that it
landed in front of him and splashed a blob of slime into his right eye.
He pleaded with me for a little while then, but there was no excuse.  I sat  and
smoked,  without  even  remembering  lighting  my  fresh  cigarette,  until  he  began  to
gurgle. The  black  filth flooded  his mouth,  nostrils,  and  the circles  of  his  eyes.  He
went down, his sputtering mouth forming a ring in the muck,  which slowly filled in
when he was gone. Big shiny bubbles came bursting to the surface....
When my cigarette went out I began to cry, and crying staggered back up the
beach between the dunes. To Moira.

Moira. Something I'd had -- almost -- which he didn't  have. Which he could
never have, except like this. Jealousy, or  just sheer  evil? And was  I any better  than
him, now? I didn't know then, and I don't know to this day. He was just a pit-yakker,
born  for  the  pit.  Him  and  roe  both,  I  suppose,  but  I  had  been  lucky  enough  to
escape it.
And he hadn't....

