OUT OF TOUCH
Brian Stableford
 
 
“Out of Touch” appeared in the October 1995 issue of Asimov’s, with an
illustration by Dell Harris. Brian Stableford has made many sales to the
magazine since his first sale here in 1990, becoming, in fact, one of our
most frequent and prolific contribu-tors throughout the decade of the
nineties.
 
Like Ursula K. Le Guin, Stableford has done a great deal of
thinking about what a future Utopian society might be like—and what
problems the people living in such a society might still have to face.
Here, for instance, he escorts us to a rich and tranquil fu-ture society that
would seem wonderful to most of us—unless we happened to be one of
those unfort-unate souls who were born just late enough that we were
doomed to spend our lives with our noses pressed up against the glass,
watching the glittering forever-young immortals on the other side. . . .
 
Critically acclaimed British “hard science” writer Brian Stableford is
the author of more than thirty books, including Cradle of the Sun, The
Blind Worm, Days of Glory, In the Kingdom of the Beasts, Day of Wrath,
The Halcyon Drift, The Paradox of the Sets, The Realms of Tartarus, and
the renowned tril-ogy consisting of The Empire of Fear, The Angel of
Pain, and The Carnival of Destruction. His short fic-tion has been
collected in Sexual Chemistry: Sar-donic Tales of the Genetic Revolution.
His nonfiction books include The Sociology of Science Fiction and, with
David Longford, The Third Millennium: A His-tory of the World AD.
2000-3000. His most recent novel is Serpent’s Blood, which is the start of
another projected trilogy. His acclaimed novella “Les Fleurs Du Mai,” an 
Asimov’s story, was a finalist for the Hugo Award in 1994. A biologist and
sociologist by training, Stableford lives in Reading, England.
 
* * * *
 
When he’d moved the cases out on to the roadway and locked the door
behind him, Jake went around to the back— or, as he’d always thought of it,
the front—of the house, so that he could watch the breakers rolling up the
deserted beach. The sea was on the retreat, having delivered the usual
cargo of rubbish to the ragged tideline. When he and Martha had first
moved into the village, there had been bits of kelp and dead crabs mixed in

with the beached flotsam, but nowadays the waste was all man-made. Red
plastic bottle-tops stood out like warning lights.
 
While he stood there watching the dull gray waves, Peterson, the
caretaker, came to say good-bye. “Your kids comin’ to pick you up?” he
asked, although he knew per-fectly well that they were.
 
“Sam and Doreen,” Jake said, although Peterson could hardly be
interested in knowing their names. “Sam’s my son. They’ve been married
twenty years, but there are no grandchildren. Kids don’t seem to have kids
of their own anymore.”
 
“Comes of expectin’ to live forever,” Peterson said, la-conically.
“Guess you won’t be seein’ no old people any-more. Quite a change. Never
figured on endin’ up as one of an endangered species!”
 
“There are old people in the cities,” Jake told him. “Lots of them.”

 
“I warn’t includin’ the Third Worlders.”
 
“Neither was I.”
 
“Well, there won’t be lots of ‘em for long,” Peterson said, with a sigh.
“What’d you give to have been born twenty years later, hey?”
 
“I’d give a lot not to have been born thirty years sooner,” Jake
countered, trying his damnedest to look on the bright side. “We missed the
worst of the wars, you and I. We missed the worst of a lot of things.”
 
“An’ the best of everythin’,” Peterson added, sourly. The closing of
the Village had only cost the residents their so-called retirement homes, but
it had cost the caretaker a living. Peterson had managed to avoid
accumulating enough social credits to qualify for the full welfare
hand-out—which presumably meant that he’d spent time in jail, although
Jake had never asked and Martha’s gossip grape-vine had never picked up
a reliable rumor—and he didn’t seem to have any kids to help him out. Who
could blame the old misery for being bitter, when he had cause to be
envious not merely of the younger generations, who had been granted
permission to drink at the fountain of youth, but also of his own peers?
 
“I’m going to miss this place,” Jake said, softly, as he heard the
sound of a car drawing up out front—or out back, the way he preferred to
figure it.
 
“It was allus just a waiting room for the graveyard,” Peterson assured
him, his voice grating like an old hinge. “Have everything you need and
more where you’re goin’, includin’ ocean views.”
 
I won’t have Martha, Jake thought, suffering the now-familiar pang
whenever that particular thought resounded in his head. All he said out loud
was: “It’s not the same when you can only see, and not touch.”
 
* * * *
 
“It’s not the same,” Jake said, while Sam’s nimble fingers ran through
twenty or thirty of the most popular outlooks to which the window had
access.
 
“Yes, it is, Dad,” Sam said, patiently. “The image is optically
perfect—parallax-shifts and everything. It’s ex-actly like looking through a

real window, except that you have the choice of a million different windows
to look through. Sure, some of them are taped and edited and some are
digitally synthesized, but there are more than two hundred that are relayed
live. You see exactly what you’d see if the house were really there: South
Sea atolls, Alaska, the Himalayas ... even fifteen fathoms deep off the
Great Barrier Reef! With the remote control in your hand, you can surf the
whole world. This is everywhere.”
 
By way of illustration, Sam summoned the Great Bar-rier
Reef—which, by virtue of being entirely artificial, was abundantly stocked
with pretty fish and virtually litter-free. Apparently, there really were
dwellings on the ocean floor, which could be picked up relatively cheaply
now that the wave of fashion had passed them by.
 
“It’s downtown Brownsville,” Jake insisted, stubbornly. “There’s
nothing on the other side of that wall but another wall. If there really were a
window cut there, there’d be nothing to see but bricks.”
 
“We don’t have bricks anymore. Dad,” Sam reminded him. “The outer
tegument of the house is overlaid with plates of reinforced dextrochitin.”
 
“I’ll try to forget that,” Jake replied. “It makes it sound like we’re living
inside a giant cockroach. The point is, Sam, that it’s not a real window. It’s a
fake. You can look through, but you can’t open it to breathe the air.
There’s nothing to touch.”
 
“You can touch if you use the VR set,” Doreen put in, helpfully. “It’s
only a headset and a pair of gloves, I know, but you really do get the
sensation of moving through the environments, and the tactile simulators in
the gloves are really very good. You don’t have the same range as the
window, of course, but they’re developing so fast... every week there’s a
dozen new scenarios available.”
 
“And you don’t have to worry about the cable bill,” Sam added. “You
can call up what you want when you want—no limit. Honestly, Dad, we want
you to be happy here. We want you to be free.”
 
“That’s the modern way of looking at things, is it?” Jake said,
awkwardly conscious of the depth of his in-gratitude. “With a window and a
fancy flying-helmet, you can be free, even in a prison. Anyplace is
everyplace, just as long as you have the right gadgets.”
 
“Hell, Dad, you had a VR set in the Village, and a cable hook-up for

space-sharing. It’s not like you were living in some mud hut compared to
which this is Disneyland. You’re only twenty-seven years older than I am,
and you worked all your life with robots and spy-eyes. Okay, you were a
hardware man, a real engineer, but you’re no dirt-farmer sucked into the
twenty-first century wilderness through some time warp. You understand all
this stuff just fine. We’re trying to make a home for you here and we’re
doing the best we can, okay?”
 
“Sure it’s okay,” Jake said, sitting down on the bed and tiredly laying
out his trump card—the one they’d never be able to beat or face down.
“After all, I’m not going to be here for long, am I?”
 
Sam switched the window to a starry night, so dark and so very starry
that it had to be on the moon. Doreen picked an invisible speck of dirt off
one of the roses that were growing out of the wall around the bathroom-unit.
They didn’t bother with the customary reassurances; they thought he was
behaving too badly to deserve even that. Maybe he was, but the fact
remained that although Sam was only twenty-seven years younger than his
father, Sam didn’t look a day over twenty-five, and would never look any
older—whereas every one of Jake’s sixty-seven years was indelibly marked
on his face and his hands and his irredeemably spoiled heart.
 
If he were lucky, Jake thought, he might get to occupy this plush cell
for twenty or thirty years. Nobody could tell how long Sam might outlive him;
perhaps a hundred years, perhaps a thousand. There was insufficient data,
as yet, on which to base an estimate of the life expectancy of the eternally
young, and the data was likely to remain insufficient for a very long time.
 
“We’ll leave you to unpack and get settled in,” Sam said, probably as
gently as he could. “You have your own dispenser, of course, but if you’d
like to join us for dinner, you’d be more than welcome. We generally eat at
seven-thirty. If there’s anything you need that you don’t have, you only have
to ask.”
 
“Thanks,” Jake said, as sincerely as he could. “Thanks for everything.
You too, Doreen.”
 
“It’s okay,” Doreen said, as she followed Sam out of the door. “We
do understand.”
 
They thought that they did understand. They under-stood that he’d
been set in his ways long before he went to the Village, but was set no
longer now that he’d lost both Martha and the Village. They understood that

he was an old man, who didn’t have their adaptability, their pa-tience, their
confidence. They understood that he was a member of a species that was
soon to be extinct, who had to be treated with the utmost care and
consideration and kindness. Unfortunately, that still left an awful lot to be
understood.
 
“I should be in a zoo” Jake whispered, so softly that no one could
have heard him even if the room had been crowded. “People with windows
should be tuning in to watch me. Maybe I should call Peterson and suggest
that he should hire himself out as a specimen for twenty-four-hour-a-day
surveillance. Maybe they’d pay him enough to get a window of his own, so
that people all over the world could watch him peering myopically out into
infinity.”
 
He picked up the remote control and switched off the staring stars.
He tried, unsuccessfully, to get a blank screen, or a brick wall, but he had to
settle for a beach scene. He could tell that it wasn’t an American beach
because the dark wrack marking the tideline was all sea-weed and
driftwood, without a red bottle-top in sight, but he figured that it would have
to do—for now.
 
There wasn’t much to unpack—which was perhaps as well, given that
there wasn’t a vast amount of space in which to put it. Every square meter
of wall that wasn’t host to biomachinery of some kind was fitted out with
cupboards and drawers, but they filled up in no time at all with clothes and
antique junk. There were books and tapes and photographs and other
similarly useless things: things that had been Martha’s and that she wouldn’t
have wanted him to throw away; things that had been his and that Martha
would have kept if she’d been here instead of him; things that were his own
personal museum of the life he’d led, and that—given that he was fated to
be one of the last of his kind—he felt he ought to keep.
 
In the end, after some sifting and rearranging, he man-aged to find a
place for everything. He wasn’t entirely sure whether that was a good sign
or not.
 
* * * *
 
“It’s really very easy to make friends,” Doreen assured him.
 
“It’s very easy to make virtual friends,” Jake corrected her.
 
“The people you meet in virtual space are just as real as you are,”

she said, allowing a hint of exasperation to creep into her voice, “and they
can be real friends, too. Yes, you only see their simulacra, not them, but
when you think about it, what do you ever see of people you meet in the
flesh except the masks they put on for the sake of politeness? Really, you
know, all social space is virtual space. There’s no real difference between
putting your headset on and logging on to a network and putting your coat
on to go walking in the neighborhood, except that the scenery’s nicer and
nobody ever got mugged in virtual space.”
 
Doreen and Sam both worked in virtual space. Doreen was some kind
of trader dealing in futures; she made more money than Sam, who
reprogrammed neurotic AIs, al-though his seemed more like real work to
Jake. Because they both worked in virtual space, Sam and Doreen thought
it entirely natural to socialize there. If they could have moved there lock,
stock, and barrel, they probably would have. Jake, by contrast, always felt
like a stranger in a strange land, like some Third World migrant in the
Jersey Sprawl.
 
“The only people who never get mugged in virtual space are the ones
who never tune in to the shopping channels,” Jake told his daughter-in-law,
tartly. It seemed a more pertinent comment than pointing out that hardly
anyone ever got mugged in the neighborhood either be-cause the
surveillance bugs were far too good at seeing in the dark. The Third World
might have come to camp on the doorstep of the First, as the newstapes
were forever assuring the nervous citizens of America, but the migrants
tended to steer clear of streets where they were under constant
observation by thousands of electronic eyes. In any case, Brownsville had
far less than its fair share of migrants. It was only just over the border, much
too close to home.
 
Doreen flopped down on the bed, lay supine, and threw her arms
back in an exaggerated gesture of defeat.
 
“Okay,” she said. “You win. If you’re that determined to be miserable,
there’s absolutely nothing Sam or I can do about it. If you’re absolutely
dead set on not having a moment’s pleasure between now and the moment
you finally kick the bucket, nobody in the world can prevent you. But why,
Jake? Why are you doing it? Is it yourself you’re intent on hurting, or are
you trying to make Sam and I feel guilty about something? About what?
About giving you a room in our house? About not getting older? Tell me,
Jake—what would you have done if you’d been in Sam’s shoes? Would
you have said ‘No! I won’t take the treatment unless my dear old Dad can
benefit from it too’? Would you have said ‘No! I can’t insult the wrinkly old

curmudgeon by inviting him to come live in my house’? Just tell me what
you want, will you?”
 
Jake stood over her, extending a helping hand. When she finally
condescended to take it, he hauled her back to her feet—or tried to. He no
longer had the strength he had once been able to take for granted.
 
“I’m sorry,” he said. “I’m really not criticizing. I’m grateful to Sam and
to you. I ought to be more cheerful, if only for your sakes, because I
certainly don’t want to make you miserable. I wish I could be cheerful,
but...”
 
There was a long pause before she said: “But what, Jake?” She
honestly didn’t know. How could she?
 
“I really miss Martha,” he said, simply, knowing that it would go down
better than the truth. Not that it wasn‘t true, of course. He did miss Martha. It
just wasn’t the whole truth, or anything like.
 
Doreen’s face softened, as he’d known it would. “I know,” she said,
reaching out to hug him. He let her, because he knew how much better it
would make her feel. At least she didn’t launch into a speech about life
having to go on, and what Martha would have wanted.

 
What Martha would have wanted, if she’d had a choice, was still to be
alive. Maybe she’d have settled for a win-dow in her grave, but only as
second best. She was always ready to compromise, always ready to split
the difference. She’d have had an easier life if she’d married a more
generous haggler than Jake had ever been.
 
“I miss lots of things,” Jake added, as Doreen released him.
 
“Of course you do,” she said. She could probably have made a list.
He missed his youth, and his health, and the world in which he’d been a
force to be reckoned with— inasmuch as any fairly mediocre human being
could be a force to be reckoned with, in a world that had come storm-ing
back from the edge of the ecocatastrophic abyss, even-tually to win the
greatest prize imaginable.
 
“I honestly don’t want to make friends,” he told her, when the tension
seemed to have unwound and they were no longer at odds. “People kept
urging me to make friends in the Village, but I wouldn’t. Martha always
wanted me to be more sociable—I think she’d have been happier if her
friends had been ours—but I never really saw the need, or the point. I don’t
want to spend my days jabber-ing away to other old men about the past
we’ve all lost but never really shared, and I certainly don’t want to while away
my time playing games. I was never one for games, ever. I suppose I was
never one for people, much. Martha used to say that I spent so much time
with robots that I could only relate to disembodied arms and freaky hands,
and then only if they weren’t working properly.”
 
“That’s okay,” Doreen said. “It’s fine. Sam and I don’t want you to do
anything you don’t want to do, or anything you’re not comfortable with. But
what do you want to do, Jake? What will it take to make the life you’ve got
left worthwhile?”
 
A miracle, he thought. Another breakthrough just like the one you
got. A way not simply to put the brakes on the aging process but to throw
the bastard into reverse gear, to undo the damage that’s already been
done, to turn back the clock. . . .
 
“I don’t know,” he said, truthfully. “I’m trying. It may not look like it
sometimes, but I am trying.”
 
“If you want to join us for dinner,” she said, “we’ll be eating about
seven-thirty.”

 
She and Sam always ate at about seven-thirty. There was never any
possibility of either of them being late home from work, and they never had
anywhere to go ex-cept the further reaches of the virtual universe.
 
“It’s okay,” Jake said. “I’m not that hungry. I’ll get something from my
own unit a little later.”
 
“That’s fine,” she said, stoutly refusing to be offended. “If you change
your mind, you know where we are.”
 
When Doreen closed the door behind her, Jake felt a perverse urge
to lock it, but he wasn’t even sure that the door had a locking function, and if
it had, he didn’t know how to operate it. There was so much to learn, and so
little time to learn it. His room was no more than four meters square, and yet
there was so much to be done within its boundaries and barriers that even
an eternal youth like Sam couldn’t be expected to exhaust its pos-sibilities
in the space of a single lifetime.
 
For a man like me, Jake thought, it’s just a cell on Death Row. No
use making myself too much at home. He opened a cupboard and took
out one of his old paperback books—a book printed before he’d been
born—and sat down on the bed to read. He gave up before he reached the
third page, wondering what on earth he was trying to prove. I’ll be chipping
flints next, he thought.
 
Outside the window, a brontosaurus whose enormous body was
half-submerged in swamp water was patiently and methodically chewing its
way through the lush foliage of a huge gymnosperm. Jake tried to catch its
eye, but he couldn’t. He could look out easily enough, but there was no way
the brontosaurus could have looked in, even if it had been real.
 
* * * *
 
Jake didn’t warn Sam and Doreen that he’d bought the tamarin, so they
were somewhat disconcerted when it ar-rived at the door. He hadn’t
consciously planned to lay down a challenge to their insistence that he
could treat their home as his own, but he was interested to see their
reactions nevertheless.
 
“It’s okay,” he assured them. “It’s engineered for maxi-mum tidiness
and programmed for social responsibility. It won’t make any dirty messes,
and it won’t press any but-tons it isn’t supposed to.”

 
“I don’t doubt that,” Sam said, although he evidently did feel uneasy
on both scores. “I’m just surprised, that’s all. Why do you think you need it?
I wouldn’t have thought cute and fluffy was quite your style.”
 
“It’s just a sophisticated biochip that does the talking,” Doreen chimed
in. “It’s exactly like talking to a conver-sational program on the net. It’s not
really an animal— just an organic robot.”
 
“It won’t give you any trouble,” Jake insisted, dog-gedly. “It’ll live in my
room. It won’t bother you at all.”
 
This turned out not to be entirely true. The pet’s pro-gramming had to
be open-ended to allow it to adapt to its owner’s conversational habits, and
it did tend to wander if Jake wasn’t paying attention. If it wasn’t authentically
curious, it gave a very good impression, and its restless fingers did
occasionally push buttons that would have been better unpushed. It caused
no disasters, but it did produce a measure of exasperating inconvenience.
Per-haps it was all Sam’s fault for making too much of an effort in the first
couple of weeks; he only had to speak to the creature a few times to be
included in its rapidly evolving response-system as an honorary co-owner,
and thus to be pestered whenever he was available for pester-ing and Jake
was otherwise occupied. Even though Doreen never said much more to the
creature than “Go away!” she too was awarded a special place in its
scheme of things, and its constant craven apologies to her quickly became
as much of an annoyance as jeers and insults would have been.
 
Jake could not have liked the creature half as much had it not been so
subtly and insistently wayward.
 
In the early days of their relationship, the tamarin’s conversation left
much to be desired. It had a memory chip which carried a potential
vocabulary far larger than Jake’s, but it was programmed to limit its
competence to match his, so he had to spend time telling it elaborate
stories using as many words as he could squeeze in. For a time, this
educative process was enjoyable. It injected new purpose into such
activities as looking out of the window and watching the TV news, because
Jake was able—indeed, required—to deliver a running commen-tary on
everything that could be seen, so that the tamarin could be familiarized with
his descriptive powers and his attitudes. After a while, however, the whole
thing began to seem like a chore, and the increasingly prolific contri-butions
made by the pet came to seem like mockingly convoluted echoes of his
own thought processes.
 

“The trouble with you, little monkey,” Jake said to the tamarin, as they
looked out of the window on to a busy street in the market quarter of some
tropical city, watching the crowds go by, “is that you’re too good to be true.
You’re the whole goddam world in a nutshell: bland, obliging, and
fundamentally mechanical.”
 
“The trouble with you, Jake,” the tamarin replied, airily, “is that you
don’t know what you want from me. You change your mind from one day to
the next, or one minute to the next! I could have had a nice kid for an owner,
you know—a lovely little girl, full of hope and excitement and curiosity. You
think this is an easy ride for me? Believe me, it isn’t.”
 
“There you go again,” Jake said. “I call you bland, you immediately
start compensating. Too goddam obliging.”
 
On the other side of the window, a young street-arab made an
obscene gesture. He was looking straight at Jake and the monkey, but Jake
knew that it was just a perfor-mance—something he probably did in front of
every spy-eye he passed, on the off chance that someone might be
watching. Jake wished that there was some way that the kid could have
known for sure that he was there, so that the gesture could have been
personal instead of merely ritual.
 
“Why did he do that?” the tamarin asked, almost as if it had read
Jake’s secret wish. “It’s not as if he can see us.”
 
“That program of yours is too clever by half,” Jake complained. “It’s
better at reading people than people are. Heaven help us if your kind ever
get the all clear to run for office! On the other hand, you’ll probably run the
world a lot better than we do, at least until you master the Machiavellian arts
of greed and corruption. He did that because he’s saying up yours! to the
entire First World— because he knows that the things we have today, he’ll
have tomorrow. He knows that his time is coming, and that he’ll have all the
time he needs to get what he wants. The treatment’s too easy and too
cheap, you see. It can’t be hoarded or controlled. It’s spreading like an
epidemic, and the only people who can’t benefit from it are the people who
are already old, already damaged. He knows that he won’t always be on the
outside being looked at from within, no matter how many rich folks
hereabouts are screaming blue murder about population problems and
social utility.”
 
‘There are a lot of old people out there,” the tamarin observed,
scanning the street scene with his little, dark eyes. “A lot of old people. And

a lot of people so very nearly old that they can’t wait long.”
 
“That’s right,” Jake said. “But they’re going about their business in a
quiet and orderly way, because they don’t dare to do otherwise. All their
fear and resentment is held in check, because this is one cause it wouldn’t
make sense to risk death for. They all believe that their time is com-ing, if
only they’ll be patient, and they’re right. All except the ones who’ve already
missed out.”
 
“I’ll die too,” the tamarin. said. “Artificial flesh is de-signed to be
mortal.”
 
“I know,” Jake said. “I read the specs.”
 
“Is that why you bought me? Because I’m in the same boat as you,
and Sam and Doreen aren’t? Is that why you needed me?”
 
“I wish I knew,” Jake said, tiredly. “I wish I knew.”
 
* * * *
 
The tamarin was designed for indoor life; it didn’t need space or exercise.
Even so, Jake began to take it out for “walks.” It clung to his shoulder,
ducking low to get under the wide brim of his hat; when he talked to it out of
the corner of his mouth, its replies were discreetly murmur-ous. He took it
to places where there were trees, so that he could watch it playing in the
branches. It was quite an athlete. Sometimes, he wished it would take the
oppor-tunity to make a dash for freedom, but it never did. It had its inbuilt
limitations.
 
On occasion, when the sun was at full blast in a cloud-less sky and
the temperature was over a hundred in the shade, the tamarin complained
that it would rather stay home, but Jake was never quite sure whether it was
protesting on its own behalf or being protective of him.
 
“The species on which you’re modeled used to live way down south,”
he told it, on one occasion. “I never could understand why natural selection
handed out fur coats to tropical monkeys, but it can’t have been an
accident. By rights, you ought to like the hot weather.”
 
“The species on which you‘re modeled evolved on the plains of
equatorial Africa,” the tamarin pointed out, “but that didn’t stop you from
inventing air-conditioning.”
 

“The monkey’s right,” Sam told him, as he stepped out the door.
“Neither of you is fitted by nature for wandering around under the noonday
sun. It’s not as if you were mad dogs or Englishmen!”
 
“I wear a hat,” Jake retorted, pausing in order to make an argument of
it. “Anyway, I’m not primed for skin can-cer. My weak spot is the heart. You
know that. Congenital weakness emphasized by wear and tear. That’s the
way I’ll be going.”
 
“I wish you ‘d talk some sense into him,” Sam said to the tamarin. “He
never listens to me.”
 
“He always listens,” the tamarin riposted, loyally. “He just doesn’t take
any notice. He’s old enough to make up his own mind.”
 
“He sounds more like you than you do,” Sam said, wearily—to Jake,
not the monkey.
 
“Better buy one for Doreen,” Jake suggested. “Pretty soon it’d have
everything she’s got and good looks too.” But that was uncalled-for, and
they both knew it. He cleared out without further delay.
 
He didn’t enjoy the outing. Sam and the monkey were right, as usual; it
was far too hot outdoors for anything that moved. Even the trees seemed to
be wilting under the sun’s relentless assault. The tamarin put on its usual
acrobatic display, with all possible zest, but it wasn’t re-ally having fun. It
was only pretending. Everything it did—everything it was or might
become—was mere pre-tense.
 
On the way back to the house, they passed thirty-three beggars—four
more than the previous record count—but they weren’t menaced in any way
whatsoever. There was nothing in the dark and silent eyes that watched
them go by but reproach ... and perhaps, in the younger ones, a little pity.
 
“So much for trying to make the migrants stay home by promising to
give full-aid priority to long-established populations,” Jake said. “They don’t
believe us anymore. Time was when the word of our politicians was our
bond.”
 
“Would that be Lincoln you’re thinking of, or George Washington?”
the tamarin inquired.
 
“Saint Thomas More,” Jake answered.
 

“He wasn’t an American.”
 
“In spirit he was.”
 
“In spirit,” the tamarin told him, “so are they. For that matter, so am I.”
 
“I was myself, once,” Jake was quick to add, always desirous of
claiming the last word. “But that was a long time ago.”
 
The tamarin politely conceded the game. It always did, but Jake never
felt that he’d won. Time after time after time, come blazing heat or pouring
rain, he claimed the last line—but he never felt that he’d proved anything.
 
* * * *
 
They’d been walking for a long time, but it wasn’t until they got to the head
of the sliproad leading up to the highway that the tamarin finally asked him,
wearily, where they were going this time!
 
“I don’t know,” Jake replied, truthfully. “I thought we might hitch a ride
someplace. Anyplace would do.”
 
“Do you think that’s wise?” the tamarin asked.
 
“No,” Jake said. “If it was wise. I wouldn’t want to do it.”
 
“I can understand that,” the tamarin assured him, “but isn’t it just a
little too haphazard? You might count it a bonus that Sam won’t like it, but he
really will be worried if you go missing and turn up three days later in New
York or Vancouver.”
 
“Nobody drives from Brownsville to Vancouver,” was all Jake said in
reply. “We’ll be lucky to get as far as Corpus Christi.” He had already noted
that at least nine out of every ten vehicles that passed them were on
auto-matic, and that the few manual drivers tended to stare at his
outstretched thumb as if he were out of his mind.
 
“There’s nothing out there, Jake,” the monkey said, very softly, as it
plucked at the lobe of his ear with its tiny hand. “You know that. We’ve
looked at the whole goddam world through your window, and a thousand
places more. We know there’s no rainbow’s end, don’t we?”
 
“That kind of window is just a wall with delusions of grandeur,” Jake

said, knowing that he was repeating him-self. “You can look, but you can’t 
touch. The road is real. It goes to someplace real.”
 
“What is it you want to touch, Jake?”
 
“I don’t know. Maybe I’ll know when I see it, maybe I won’t. Either way,
I don’t want to sit around the rest of my life just watching. Just for once, I
want to go some-where. Just for once, I want to be somewhere. Anywhere.
Nowhere. You can go home if you want to. You can spill the beans to Sam if
you want to.”
 
That was unfair, not least because it was untrue. The tamarin couldn’t
go home, unless he gave it a definite order properly confirmed—but Jake
wasn’t about to com-promise the perversity of his mood by being fair.
 
The car that finally skidded to a halt thirty meters beyond them was
just about the oldest model Jake had seen all day. So was the driver, who
must have been seventy-five if he were a day. The driver didn’t ask Jake
where he was headed; as soon as the door was closed, he put his foot right
down and roared off.
 
The car’s dashboard was an absolute mess, with circuit boards
exposed here, there, and everywhere. The top of the windshield, where all
the virtual displays should have been, was quite blank.
 
“I guess you like tinkering,” Jake said. “My name’s Jake, by the way.”
 
“Never ride in a car that can be hijacked by remote control,” the other
advised him. “I’m Conor O’Callaghan. That’s Irish. Family goes right back to
the great potato famine. Much better class of immigrant in those days. Not
like now. Country’s going to hell.”
 
The vehicle jagged from lane to lane in the same stac-cato style as
his speech, out to the fastest track and then halfway in again. Most of the
traffic on the highway con-sisted of disciplined convoys of robotrucks,
which Conor seemed to take a profound delight in disrupting. A forlorn red
light was blinking in the center of the steering column like a stranded
bottle-top.
 
“I believe that’s a police warning, Mr. O’Callaghan,” the tamarin
remarked. It was the first time the creature had ever displayed knowledge
that Jake didn’t have, and it was that rather than the red light itself that
belatedly alerted Jake to the fact that all was not well.

 
“That monkey of yours a fink?” the driver asked. “If it is, I’d be obliged
if it’d get the hell out before the sirens start screeching.”
 
“This is a stolen car?” Jake said, wonderingly.
 
“Well hell, a man wouldn’t want to do all that to his own car, would
he?” the driver said, presumably meaning the exposed circuit boards and
the various kinds of sabotage that had doubtless been worked upon them.
“Don’t worry—she might be old, but she’s got all the safety features. I don’t
think I could kill us if I were to throw her off a bridge. Course, that thing on
your shoulder ain’t belted in, so it might bounce around a bit when we cut to
the chase.”
 
In the distance, Jake heard the wailing of sirens. They seemed to be
getting closer with remarkable rapidity.
 
“They’re fast,” Conor conceded, as if he’d caught the thought
crossing Jake’s mind, “but they ain’t allowed to be reckless. Gettin’ on our
tail is one thing—catchin’ us is somethin’ else!”
 
Again the car began to zigzag from lane to lane. Conor recklessly
hurled the vehicle at the wheels of mammoth robotrucks, which dutifully
swerved and altered pace with lumbering grace. The juggernauts always
managed to avoid the car, if only by a seeming thumb’s-width. Jake
remembered, though, that nearly one in ten of the vehicles that had passed
him on the sliproad had had human driv-ers. He wondered how many of
those drivers had failed to switch to automatic after filtering into the highway
traf-fic, and how many had been messing around with their own circuit
boards.
 
“Do you do this often?” he inquired, astonished by the mildness of his
tone. He was afraid, but the fear didn’t seem to hurt. Thus far, it was just a
kind of excitement.
 
“Not as often as I’d like,” Conor confessed.
 
“Do you always pick up hitchhikers when you do?”
 
“Don’t usually see any. Wouldn’t pick up a Third Worlder, of course,
or anyone under the age of irresponsi-bility, but I figured you might be
grateful. Am I wrong?”
 

Jake wasn’t sure what the answer to that question was, but he was
saved from the necessity of offering one by the nervous tamarin, which
leapt down onto the dashboard to stare through the windshield with evident
alarm.
 
“Central Traffic Control is slowing the traffic down,” the monkey said,
in a decidedly officious tone. “It would be dangerous in the extreme to
maintain our present speed.”
 
“Naw,” said the driver. “It gets even more exciting when they turn the
road into an obstacle course!”
 
Jake saw that the rest of the traffic was indeed being brought to a
gradual standstill. Soon theirs would be the only vehicle on the move,
except for the pursuing police vehicles. The robotrucks were drawing
inward by careful degrees, leaving the outermost lanes of the highway
empty, but Conor didn’t immediately move out there; he continued weaving
in and out of the middle lanes, cutting across other vehicles with reckless
abandon. They contin-ued to avoid him with marvelous agility and patience.
 
Jake realized, somewhat to his disappointment, that the experience
wasn’t so very different from a VR “ride,” and that his familiarity with such
rides, although limited, was determining the oddly qualified and carefully
muffled ter-ror of his responses.
 
I’m so out of touch with reality that I can’t even grasp it anymore, he
thought. This is what it’s come to. I’m going to die, and it’s just another
virtual experience.
 
“Do you have any idea how many people you’re in-conveniencing, Mr.
O’Callaghan?” the tamarin asked, in a censorious manner that was certainly
no reflection of Jake’s personality.
 
“Sure do” Conor said, enthusiastically. “Putting a road-block across a
twelve-lane superhighway is one hell of an operation. Snarls up twenty,
maybe twenty-five thousand vehicles. Last lot of fines bankrupted
me—from now on, I’m dying on credit!”
 
“They’ll put you under house arrest,” Jake said, wonderingly. “You’ll
never be able to go out again, ever.”
 
“Depends how good their locks are,” Conor replied.
 

“I’ve been a cracker since I was so high. Takes solid walls and heavy
bolts to keep me inside—software won’t do it. Nice day trip, hey?”
 
Jake laughed, feeling a strange wave of relief pass through him as
the car was forced back into the empty outer lanes. There was now a solid
wall of robotrucks to their right, and nothing ahead of them for at least a
kil-ometer. As the wave passed, though, Jake began to eye the barrier
protecting the grassy median, wondering just how crazy the old man was.
 
He turned in his seat. The pursuing police cars were coming up fast.
Conor began to jiggle the wheel from side to side so that the car veered
from one empty lane to another. The pursuers’ safety mechanisms held
them back; they couldn’t overtake unless he left them an adequate gap, and
he was a very good judge of adequate gaps.
 
“I strongly advise you to slow down, sir,” the tamarin said, leaping
back onto Jake’s shoulder and then slipping down behind the seats. It was
taking protective action; it had seen the roadblock that was looming up
ahead of them.
 
Conor didn’t slow down. He just drove full tilt at the roadblock.
 
The distance separating the car from the block disap-peared with
terrifying fluidity, and Jake felt his heart— his weak, unstable
heart—pounding in his chest like an earth-breaking drill of a type he hadn’t
seen in fifty years. The terror inside him back-flipped out of its virtual mode
and became suddenly, overwhelmingly forceful. It was mortal terror now;
he knew that they were going to crash, that the car and the whole damn
world were going to be torn apart.
 
The only thing he didn’t know was why.
 
In spite of his authentic terror, that was the thought that seized hold of
him as they hurtled toward the barrier: Why is the crazy man doing this?
Because he knows that he won’t die, or because he hopes that he
might?
 
Conor had obviously done this before. For him, it was just a joyride,
just a day out—but it was Jake’s first time, and he had never been in a crash
of any kind. As the barrier hurtled toward them like the black horizon of
death itself, Jake’s poor heart leaped and lurched and tried with all its
pathetic might to explode.
 

He never felt the impact. He saw it, but he never felt a thing.
 
* * * *
 
Jake woke up in his own bed, feeling dreadful.
 
Sam was stationed to the right, Doreen to the left. Sam was pale,
exhausted, and anxious; Doreen was flushed, agitated, and solicitous. It
didn’t take long for their tender inquiries to give way to harsh recriminations.
 
“You could have been killed,” Sam said. “You very nearly were.”
 
“The car had safety features,” Jake muttered. “Crazy Conor
bypassed all the software checks, but the hardware was still in place.”
 
“That’s not the point,” Sam persisted. “You had a major heart attack,
Dad. If there hadn’t been an ambulance wait-ing behind the barrier, you’d
be stone dead. As it is, you might have lost five or ten years. It wasn’t trivial,
Dad— nothing is, at your age.”
 
No, Jake thought. At my age, nothing is.
 
“Where did you think you were going, Jake?” Doreen wanted to know.
She was fussing over him, fluffing the pillows, checking the many wires and
catheters which connected various parts of his prone body to the house
physician, reading the various displays which were moni-toring his
all-too-frail flesh. Somehow, she gave the im-pression of being in her
element—which was odd, given her actual vocation.
 
They’ve got me where they want me now, he thought, uncharitably.
“Nowhere,” he said out loud.
 
“Well,” said Sam, “you nearly made it. You won’t be going out again
for quite some time. Fortunately, that lunatic you were with won’t be going
out for the rest of his life. Why on earth did you hitch a ride with a maniac
like that?”
 
“He offered,” Jake said. “Where’s the tamarin?”
 
They had both been bending over him, but now they straightened up
like twin pillars. He felt as if he were somehow suspended between them
and drawn unnaturally taut.
 

“The monkey didn’t have a belt or an airbag,” Sam said, reluctantly. “It
must have tried to use the back of your seat as a cushion. It would have
been okay if only the back seat hadn’t been sheared from its moorings.
That’s why your back hurts—you bruised several verte-brae. The monkey
was caught and crushed. There was nothing the medical team could do.”
 
“I’m sorry,” Doreen was quick to say, as if someone might have
suspected her of being glad if she hadn’t said it.
 
“Oh shit,” said Jake.
 
The silence was hard to bear, but not as hard to bear as the things
they were too diplomatic to say out loud. Things like it was only a kind of
robot, not really alive at all; or you can get another one if you want; or, it
was your own stupid fault you stupid, senile old fool. He no-ticed, for the
first time, that his back really was in a bad way. He’d be walking stiffly for
some time, if and when he was able to get up again.
 
He tried to twist himself around so that he could look at the monitors
that were collating an objective record of his distress, but his spine wouldn’t
tolerate the torque and the displays were too high up on the wall.
 
“It’s my data,” he said, sourly. “I ought to be able to read it.”
 
“You can,” Doreen told him, in matronly fashion. “All you have to do is
put the VR helmet on. It’ll put a full display right before your eyes. You can
watch your insides churning away through a fleet of internal cameras if you
want to.”
 
Suddenly, it didn’t seem like such a good idea.
 
“No charges have been filed against you,” Sam said, obviously
thinking that there was safer conversational ground in that direction, “but we
had to extradite you from Mexico as an illegal alien. There’s a certain irony
in that, I suppose.”
 
“I didn’t even know we were heading south,” Jake told him, bitterly. “I
guess I’ll be forgetting which way’s up next. But I can still die with a clean
sheet. You can put that on my tombstone if you like. Here lies Jake, died
with a clean sheet. Better set up a spy-eye so you can look out of your
window at it any time you like. Show your kid, if you ever get around to
having one. One’s still the ration, I suppose, for all right-thinking immortals?”
 

He didn’t add We could’ve had two, if we’d wanted to. It was true; he
and Martha could have, if they hadn’t had a conscience about Third World
overcrowding. Nobody had known way back then that the next generation
wouldn’t have to bother with dying, or that the surplus personnel of the Third
World would simply come and set up house in the interstices of the First.
 
“Don’t be like that, Dad,” Sam said. His voice was light, but he meant
it.
 
“I am like that,” Jake retorted, stubbornly. “Always was, always will
be.”
 
* * * *
 
Doreen finally had to get back to work; however uncertain they might be, the
world’s futures still had to be bought and sold. Sam stayed for a while
longer.
 
“You had a bad shock, I guess,” Sam said.
 
“Let that be a lesson to me,” Jake countered. “It’s dangerous out
there, what with all these crazy old people. A man can lose his best friend
as easy as snapping his fingers.”
 
“Was the monkey really your best friend?” Sam asked,
skeptically—displaying a perspicacity of which even the tamarin’s clever
biochip might have been incapable.
 
“No,” Jake admitted. “I’ve spent too much time with smart machines
to start grieving for one. It’s not like los-ing Martha was, not in a million
years. Don’t say I won’t miss him, mind. Hard to find people I have that
much in common with.”
 
“Doesn’t it get a little claustrophobic, talking all the time with an
echo?”
 
“About as claustrophobic as a cell on Death Row with a million
windows and a doorway to a thousand virtual worlds. Okay, so he wasn’t
really as smart as he sounded—who is?”
 
“You never used to call it he when it was alive,” Sam observed. “You
never even gave it a name.”
 

“Maybe they ought to make them with sexual organs,” Jake said. “Just
for decoration, of course. It’d be easier to give them names if they were
one thing or the other. It’d be easier to think of them as real animals. I
mean, that’s the idea, isn’t it? We’re supposed to be able to think of them
as real animals, just like us. That way, we really might be able to make
friends with them, the way we sometimes can with one another.”
 
“Someone called from the Village,” Sam told him. “Saw the news,
wanted to know if you were okay. Name of Peterson. Was he a friend?”
 
“Not really.”
 
“Good of him to call, though.”
 
“Not really.”
 
Sam sat down on the bed and looked his father right in the eye. “If
you want to die, Dad, you can” he said, very soberly. “It’s easy enough. If
you want to live and get nothing out of it, that’s even easier. It must be hell,
having fallen through a trapdoor that was sealed and made safe a few years
after it caught you. I ask the same question, you know: Why you? I hear the
same answer: Why any-body? Whenever it came along, someone was
bound to miss out: a whole generation. I won’t try to fan the flames by
saying that they might still discover a way to undo damage already done,
although they might. All I’ll say is that I’d feel a lot happier and a lot prouder
if my father was one of the guys who did his level best to make the most of
the time he had, even though he’d lost almost everything that made what he
had seem worth having. But then, I always was a selfish little toad, wasn’t I?
Comes of being an only child, I guess. In the future, there’ll only be only
children. What a world, hey?”
 
Jake said nothing, because there was nothing he could say that
wouldn’t make him seem like an old fool. He wriggled and writhed a bit,
knowing that the physician would read it as a sign of increasing discomfort
and up the endorphin input. He figured that it was time to float for a while,
and to feel sensibly detached.
 
“I’ll come in and see how you are in a little while,” Sam said. “Doreen’ll
pop in and out when she can. You want peace and quiet and all those wires
out, you’ll have to recover. Okay?”
 
“Sure,” said Jake. “I’ll be fine. Back on my feet in no time.”
 

“I’ve moved the window nearer the bed,” Sam pointed out, as he
paused in the doorway, “so you can see out.”
 
“Thanks,” Jake said, lukewarmly.
 
At first, he turned away from the window, and even shut his eyes for a
while, but he couldn’t go to sleep. In the end, he turned back again, to face
the reconfigured wall. Beyond the imaginary windowpane, snow was gen-tly
falling on a meadow.
 
After watching the scene for a few tedious minutes, Jake found the
remote control and switched off the snow. Then he switched off the
meadow. Idly, he started surfing through the channels.
 
Worlds came and went, each one flaring up in a blaze of light and
then dying. Some of them were here and now, others elsewhere and
anywhere, in the present or the dis-tant past or possible futures or pasts
that might have been but never were. Jake couldn’t tell the real ones from
the unreal at this sort of pace; they were all whirled in to-gether, all part and
parcel of the same infinitely confused and infinitely confusing whole.
 
What an old fool I am, Jake thought, trying to go any-where and
nowhere on the highway, when all the any-wheres and nowheres anyone
could ever want to see are right outside my window. But he knew, even as
he thought it, that the window was really a wall, just like the one Central
Traffic Control had thrown across the highway: a wall to keep him from
getting out, no matter how fast or how far he decided to go.
 
He could see everything—a world of infinite possibil-ity, full of
people, young and old—but he couldn’t actu-ally go there. He wriggled
around a bit, to remind the invisible physician’s programs that he was still
there, still in distress.
 
It could be worse, he reminded himself, sternly. It could be a great
deal worse, and a man my age should be wise enough to count his
blessings. At least I have a son, and a home, and a few more heartbeats
to count—and I have a window right next to my bed.
 
He waited, numbly, for the brave words to take effect. He was sure
that they would, if he only gave them enough time and cajoled enough
endorphins from the systems hidden in the wall. They had to. What else
was there to take comfort from but words, shaped and given life by
bravery?

 
By slow degrees, the caress of the clean sheets on his bruised and
careworn skin became breathtakingly and lux-uriously soft. Somehow, it
reminded him of Martha, of fine sand wanned and glittered by the sun, and
of the tenderness of youth.
 
For the moment, at least, it was something he didn’t want to lose.
 
* * * *

