Bricklayers Tool Kit  
The bricklayer's tool kit must be used with great care and properly maintained, firstly, because 
of the safety aspect arid secondly, because the tools can be of great expense.  
When purchasing tools, consideration must be taken on how often the tools will be used. With 
every day use, the tools have to be made to be able to withstand the work. Often this is not 
the case with less expensive tools.  
Below is a list of the tools, how they should be used and properly maintained:  
 
 
Brick Trowel  
These came various sizes and shape ranging 
between ten and fourteen inches. One side of the 
trowel has a more rounded edge, this being for rough 
cutting, however, this use is not advised for the 
beginner. The measurements are the actual blade 
size, the width of trowel also varies and beginners 
will find a narrower trowel easier to use. The rounded 
side on the trowel makes it suitable for both left and 
right handed operators. When the trowel is not in use for a period of time, clean it off dry and 
apply a light coat of oil to avoid rusting.  
 
 
Pointing Trowel  
A smaller version of the brick trowel but with both edges being straight, these 
are used for certain types of pointing or to add a finish to the brick work and 
should be maintained as the Brick trowel.  
 
 
Spirit Level  
This will be the most expensive part of 
the tool kit, thus keeping the bricklayers 
work 
level 
(horizontal) 
and 
plumb 
(vertical). These also come in various sizes. The main size for everyday work is nine hundred 
millimetres or twelve hundred millimetres.  
 
 
Boat Level  
Like the Spirit Level above, it has two bubbles, (one for 
levelling, the other for plumbing) but is smaller. It is very 

handy for decorative panels and soldier courses.  
 
 
Line and Pins  
These are used when corners of the building have to be built to run in the 
bricks between. The pins are tapered at the ends to allow for inserting 
into joints. It is important that the line is kept free of knots and clean of 
mortar.  
 
 
Corner Blocks  
These are used in pairs as an easy method of holding the line up. These are 
inexpensive as you can make your own.  
 
 
Tingle Plate  
Another less expansive tool but of great use. II is used for holding the line up 
over long lengths of walling to remove any sagging.  
 
 
Club (or lump) Hammer  
Used with either a bolster or chisel. It is essential that the head is secure and 
checked regularly to ensure it never comes loose.  
Always wear eye protection goggles.  
 
 
Bolster  
Used for cutting bricks. Eye protection must be used at all times it is used. The 
end should never be allowed to burr over. This is known as a mushroom and 
can splinter when being hit. The end should be kept free from mushrooms by a 
grinding wheel which also allows the culling edge to be kept sharp.  
 

 
Cold Chisel  
Similar to a bolster but with a smaller blade, used more for cutting into brickwork after it 
has been laid e.g. for letting in services. Again maintenance and safely procedures should 
be followed the same as for the bolster.  
 
 
Hawk 
A small hawk is used when pointing a lot, and makes it easier 
to hold the mortar.  
 
 
Gauge Rod  
Inexpensive as you make it yourself. A length of timber with the vertical spacing of the bricks 
marked along one edge. Used when working from both ends of a wall to ensure that the 
courses are equal.  
 
 
Brick Bat Gauge  
Another inexpensive tool which is able to be made. Easy to use when a lot 
of cutting is required and maintains a regular size to the cuts. The one 
illustrated is made for the three most basic cuts used. Half bat, three 
quarter bat and closer.  
 
 
Brick Hammer and Comb Hammer  
Two similar types of hammer, one with a fixed head, the other with 
detachable blades. When the teeth have worn down, the blades can be 
renewed. They can be used for a number of jobs:  
i. 
tidying the edges of cuts to leave a clean edge  
ii. 
for what is known as chasing, i.e. letting cables into walls before 
plastering  
Again, safety is of the utmost importance. Goggles must be worn at all 
limes and hands and fingers must be kept clear.  
 
 

Steel Tape  
The types most commonly used by bricklayers these days. Very 
convenient size and is easily transported via the belt or pocket. When 
used in wet conditions it must be wiped after use to prevent rusting.  
 
 
Jointing Tools  
Used for putting a finish to the joints in brick work. A half-round joint which 
is also known as a bucket handle finish. Two types are shown, these can 
now be bought from shops but an old pail or bucket handle can be bent to 
a suitable shape.  
 
 
 

