Brick Bonds  
stretcher - flemish - english - american  
 
Stretcher Bond 
 
 
Stretcher bond is the commonest bond used today and the least interesting in
appearance. It can be made more interesting by laying a course of different coloured
bricks or to lay such bricks to form a pattern on a wall.  
• 
Stretcher bond wall  
• 
Stretcher bond wall with piers  
• 
Stretcher bond piers  
Flemish Bond 
 
 
Flemish bond consists of alternating headers and stretchers along each course with the
headers centred on the stretchers above and below.  
English Bond 
 
 

English bond consists of alternating courses of headers and stretchers, with the
alternative headers centred over and under the vertical joints of the stretchers.  
American common bond  
 
 
American common bond is similar to the English Bond but the courses of headers are
separated by approximately five courses of stretchers.  
 
Stretcher Bond Brick Walls  
English bond - Flemish bond 
Walls built using the traditional Stretcher bond are 
just a half brick wide. As with any wall built of brick, 
no two adjacent vertical joints should be in line.  
With a straight wall this is not a problem, just offset 
each course by half a brick.  
When turning a corner at the end of a straight run 
again causes no problems, just interlock the two runs 
of bricks on every other course.  
When joining into a wall part way along the wall, it's 
necessary to use two 3/4 bats (coloured red - one on 
either side) on the main face of the wall on every 
other course.  
 
 
 

Bricks and Bats 
 
 
Stretcher Bond Walls with Piers  
Walls build using the traditional stretcher bond are just a half brick wide and as such are 
relatively unstable and generally if they are higher than about 40 cm (5 courses), piers are 
required to strengthen them.  
As with any wall built of brick, no two 
adjacent vertical joints should be in line.  
For piers at the ends of a wall, the first (and 
alternate) course should have two full bricks 
placed at right-angles to the run of the wall. 
The second (and alternate) course should 
use two 3/4 bats (coloured red) in the face of 
the wall and a full brick behind.  
For piers in the run of the wall, the first (and 
alternate) course needs a 'Queen Closer' 
(coloured blue) in the face of the all with two 
3/4 bats behind. The second (and alternate) 
course uses full bricks in the face and a full 
brick behind.  
The 
piers 
can 
be 
strengthened 
by 
embedding a piece of mat reinforcement into 
the mortar of alternate courses.  
 
 
 
Bricks and Bats 
 

 
Stretcher Bond for free standing Brick Piers  
A free standing brick pier (or isolated pier as it is sometimes called) is a pillar of brickwork not 
connected to a wall. It can be used to carry the ends of beams to form a pergola, the base of 
a sundial or bird bath, or for hanging garden gates.  
Piers vary in size (both in width and height) 
and types of bond used.  
On this page we show a couple of simple 
stretcher bond piers, Both designs only use 
full bricks so there is no need for the 
bricklayer to cut any bricks.  
The bricks will leave a hollow centre which 
should be filled with concrete once the 
mortar has been allowed to harden (wet 
concrete will exert an internal pressure 
which could cause the brick mortar to fail if 
the concrete is inserted too soon).  
The centre concrete should be inserted in 
one go so that it can form one block of from 
the base of the pier to the top without any 
weak joints within the concrete. If considered 
necessary, steel reinforcing rods can be 
inserted into the centre concrete fill.  
 
 
 
Bricks and Bats 
 

Flemish Bond Brick Walls  
english bond - stretcher bond 
Garden walls built using Flemish bond are one bricks 
wide. As with any wall built of brick, no two adjacent 
vertical joints should be in line.  
With a straight wall this is not a problem, just offset 
each course so that the header bricks are centred on 
the stretcher bricks on the course below.  
When turning a corner at the end of a straight run, a 
Queen Closer (coloured blue) is required on each 
course.  
Joining into a wall part way along the wall, is the 
same as for the end turn except that a Queen Closer 
is only needed on every other course.  
 
 
 
Use Flemish bond for a half brick width wall can give 
a decorative finish but does require the use of quite a 
few half bats (coloured green) and three quarter bats 
(coloured red).  
 
 
 

Bricks and Bats  
 
 
 
English Bond Brick Walls  
stretcher bond - flemish bond 
Garden walls built using English bond are one brick 
wide. As with any wall built of brick, no two adjacent 
vertical joints should be in line.  
With a straight wall this is not a problem, it's just 
alternate courses of headers and stretchers with 
each joint on the stretcher course centred on a 
header brick on the course below.  
When turning a corner at the end of a straight run 
needs the use of a Queen Closer (coloured blue) on 
each course.  
Joining into a wall part way along the wall, is the 
same as for the end turn except that a Queen Closer 
is only needed on every other course.  
 
 
 
Bricks and Bats  

 
 
 

