
Build an HTPC
Introduction
Building an HTPC is fun. It is a learning experience. It can also save you money as time
passes. When you build your own PC, you gain knowledge that will help you troubleshoot
problems in the future. By learning what each and every component does, you will find
that your comfort level with the computer increases and issues are less likely to stop you
in your tracks. You will also learn to fix these problems yourself instead of paying
someone else to do it for you. While there are many reputable PC repair shops out there,
there are just as many unscrupulous ones ready to take you for a ride. Learn to do it
yourself.
Before buying a ready-made PC, take a few things into consideration. You most likely will
get a warranty, especially from the “big three” vendors. Service varies from company to
company. Upgrading, in many cases, may not be easy. Most of the readymade PCs use
non-standard brackets that require additional expense when it comes time to expand. Also,
they typically do not have the same upgrade paths that a PC you build will have. The
biggest tradeoff is support. If you learn to do it yourself, then you rarely need support
anyway. The biggest expense is up front when you purchase your components. Upgrades
are typically easy, and the only cost is what you spend on the upgrade and the time it takes
to do it.
I am going to walk you through the steps I use time and time again to build my PCs. There
are many components and many vendors. I will make recommendations only on those I
have used and I am confident with. My overall goal will be to assist you in building a cost
effective PC for whatever purpose you have in mind. Get ready to start choosing your
“target” components.
Distributor and Vendor Selection
Distributor and vendor selection is pretty straightforward. Obviously, you want to pay the
lowest price you can find but you also have an expectation of excellent service and
reasonable shipping prices. I purchase all of my PC components from one of four different
vendors. I can vouch for all of them and rarely have I had a bad experience.
2


special touches such as rubberized drive mounting grommets and tool free bay options.
The Silverstone LC17 shown above is a great case for a media center. It blends right in
with other AV components and is of great quality. The Corsair Carbide, while a bit
larger/wider than a typical tower, is my favorite case. It has tremendous expandability and
I really like the black/gray finish. This is also by far my quietest case. This is my high-

performance PC and I have to put my ear up to it to check if it is running. The
CoolerMaster HAF is my most recent addition. It is quite a bit larger than I thought it
would be from the picture, but I have an office cabinet that it fits in perfectly. It has a very
open air design and many expansion and cooling options given its size.
After selecting a case, there are two important options to keep in mind for other
component purchases. What form factor does it support and what fan sizes does it take?
When I say form factor, I am referring to the size of the mainboard. Typical sizes include,
AT, ATX, MicroATX, and Mini-ATX. These are also the most common. Fans typically
come in the following sizes: 80mm, 120mm, and 140mm, though they can be much
smaller and some even larger. Other cooling options exist (liquid), but for the purpose of
this tutorial they will not be covered.
TIP: Additional fans are always much better than stock cooling options at keeping your
PC running at acceptable temps. Use the largest fan size your case will support and when
selecting fans, pay attention to the RPM, CFM and dBA. RPM is revolutions per minute
and determines how fast the blades rotate.
CFM is cubic feet per minute and determine how much air is
moved by the fans. Finally, dBA is A-weighted decibels or how
loud the fan is. I always try to find fans that have the highest
RPM and highest CFM with a dBA < 25. There are many
discussions on how best to mount case fans. I will share what I
have found. I prefer to use a push-pull configuration where fans from
the front and side of the case take air in, and fans in the back or the top of the case exhaust
the air. In this configuration, you should always calculate CFM so that slightly more air is
entering the case than is being exhausted from it.
The next component to choose will be the mainboard. This is where the rubber meets the
road. All data that is moved from one component to another, memory, video, sound, etc.
must travel across the mainboard via channels. The faster the channels, the faster your
data moves across them. An example is the video bus. Many mainboards have built-in
video ports and typically, they are the slowest at drawing graphics. AGP (Accelerated
Graphics Port) is an older video bus standard and while still in use today, has for the most
part been replaced by the PCI-E (peripheral Component Interconnect Express) bus. Look

for a mainboard that supports PCI-E if you are into gaming or need to support multiple
monitor options. For HTPCs, you may just be able to get away with built-in video,
depending on the processor you choose.
If you are into gaming and want your PC to serve in multiple capacities, SLI (Scalable

Link Interface - Nvidia) or Crossfire (ATI Radeon) is something to consider. These
multiple GPU technologies require specific mainboards in order use multiple video cards.
Essentially, it doubles your video processing power by allowing the use of two or more
video cards on the same board, preferably from the same vendor and of the same type.
For the decoding of high definition content, if you do not have a strong
enough processor, you will need a video card. Look for an ATI Radeon HD5450, Radeon
HD6450 or better to decode HD. On the Nvidia side, look for a GeForce 8400GS or better
to decode HD. Also, use HDCP as an indicator of video card capabilities. HDCP stands
for High-bandwidth Digital Content
Protection) and is typically an indicator that the video card supports streaming HD content
“out of the box.” There are many video card options available. Nvidia and Radeon both
make excellent cards. I have both and really
don’t prefer any one over the other. Take a look at what type of PC you are building and
buy the right card for it. Make sure you go with PCI-E as the
interface as that will account for most all mainboards that are
offered today. Note that several lower end cards are fanless,
run silent and are offered in a low profile form factor. These are
ideal for HTPCs. Once again, I prefer to go with a reputable vendor
when it comes to video cards. I use MSI, EVGA, ATI, Galaxy, XFX,
Asus, and Gigabyte.

Memory is the next item on your shopping list. Make sure the memory you go with is
compatible with your mainboard. There is a number associated with the speed of the
memory, typically DDR3 1066, 1333, 1600, 1866 and onward up to
2800. Today’s memory standard will most likely fall somewhere between 1066 and 1600,
unless you are into overclocking. For the purpose of this tutorial, we will not be covering
overclocking. At this time, unless your board absolutely requires it, older DDR memory
should not be an option. DDR stands for Double Data Rate and refers to the speed at
which the memory can process data. Get the best memory that you can afford and your
mainboard will support. No other component has as much of an impact on PC 
performance as memory. When buying memory, always buy it in matched pairs. 4GB is
the absolute minimum you should
consider today and this amount will work well for simple
HTPCs. If you are doing much more than just simpe decoding
and movie playback, get 8GB, 16GB is even better. Make
sure your mainboard will support the amount of memory you
are getting in addition to the speed. Most boards today have
two to four memory slots. Shop around to get the best price

Now that all of your other components have been chosen,

it is time to pick one of the most important components of any PC, the power supply. Why
did I save it for last, you ask? Well, you can just about spend as much money as you want
on a power supply. The big question is, how much juice do you need. By selecting all of
your other components, you now have a workable list. We
can run this against a power calculator to determine how much power you really need.
There is no reason to spend money on more power than you need, unless
you know for sure that you will be upgrading at some point. If this will be a static HTPC 
build that has little to no change, buy just what you need. Spend that extra money on
upgrading memory, video, mainboard or drives.
Here are several links to some great online power calculators that can tell you exactly how
much power you need for a list of given components:
http://www.thermaltake.outervision.com/Power
http://images10.newegg.com/BizIntell/tool/psucalc/index.html
http://support.asus.com/powersupply.aspx
http://extreme.outervision.com/psucalculatorlite.jsp
My recommendation is take the wattage the calculator provides and add 20% for a little
overhead. When it comes to HTPCs, in most cases you want to get the most perfomance
with the least hardware at the lowest price. I find that 430-460 watt power supplies are
more than enough for typical HTPCs.
Before starting, there are several tools you will need. It helps to have several sizes of
phillips and flathead screwdrivers. I really like the magnetic tip wratcheting multi drivers,
as they allow you to change your driver bits as needed. You will also need a pair of needle
nose pliers and wire cutters. Several other items, while optional, are handy to have.
Locking cable ties of varying sizes, black electrical tape, and gloves or an antistatic wrist
strap are all useful.
If you do not have an antistatic wrist strap, there are several other options. The strap is
designed to prevent ESD (electrostatic discharge) which can be harmful to computer

components. After mounting the power supply in the case, you can plug the power cord
into the wall, attach it to the power supply, make sure the power supply is turned off, and
keep your hand in contact with the metal of the case (not a painted surface), while






Testing The PC
The first step in testing the PC is to power it on and see if it will post (power-on selftest).
If you recall, we only installed those components which are absolutely required in order to

get the power to come on. No drives have been installed at this point. Let’s review what is 
absolutely necessary.
• The mainboard has to have the correct power cables attached. 
• The case connectors have to be connected to the mainboard. 
• The processor and heat sink have to be installed.
• Memory has to be installed. 
• Either install a video card or use built-in video.
Connect a mouse, keyboard and monitor to the case. These are clearly labeled on the back
of the PC on the I/O shield where all of the ports are located. Make sure AC adapters are
connected to both the PC power supply and the monitor. Power the monitor on. A small
light should appear on the front of the monitor indicating power. Press the power button
on the front of the PC. What happens?
If you don’t see any smoke, things are looking good. Do you hear any beeps? Does an
image appear on the monitor? Is the power supply fan and the processor fan spinning? If
the board powers on but the processor fan is not spinning, power it off immediately as this
could damage the CPU! Look for power on LEDs somewhere on the mainboard. Few
today come without an LED to indicate a power-on state.
You should see the PC post on the screen. If nothing happens, quickly power the PC off,
unplug it and check all your connections again. Verify that if the power supply has an
on/off toggle switch, it’s in the on position, usually indicated by a small I - O is the off
position. Check your case connectors once again and make sure they are properly
connected to the mainboard.
If the PC didn’t post, did you hear any beep codes? These will typically tell you where the
problem lies. Check your manual to determine which vendor makes the BIOS for your
mainboard. Several common vendors include Phoenix, Award, and AMI. Here is a website
you can check for specific beep codes and their meaning:
http://www.computerhope.com/beep.htm
If you do get beep codes, often all it takes to resolve the problem is to remove and reseat
the ofending component. If you are troubleshooting issues with memory and have multiple
sticks, remove all but one or two. If you have onboard video, remove any
16




Small Form Factor PCs
I would like to add one final word on building an HTPC. In recent years, the footprint has
gotten smaller and smaller on HTPCs. As technology improves and size is reduced, there

are many small form factor PCs that are considered “build your own,” and I think they are
worth mentioning in this article. They usually require the additional purchase of memory,
hard drive and operating system.
I have experimented with several of them and I will share what I have
found. The Foxconn Nettop A3700 is a great little PC. It is extremely small, quiet and
yields good performance, though it has a tendency to run a little hot. It will stream 1080p
movies though the speed in navigating the XBMC menus might be considered slow for
some. 
It does come with a small bracket that makes this small form factor PC “VESA mount
ready” for the back of a flat screen TV.
The Acer Aspire Revo is another great small form factor PC with good performance. It too
will stream 1080p video with no dropouts. Like other HTPCs, I recommend adding 4GB 
memory as a minimum if possible. though 2GB is all you can use on some of
these. I also recommend using SSD SATA drives in these to quicken them up and reduce
the heat as it can be an issue. I
have heard and read good things about Zotac but I have not had an opportunity to test
them yet. Most of these fall into the $300 price point with all required options. When
shopping for one of these small form factor PCs, look for the Nvidia Ion or Atom chipsets
as they tend to do very well with XBMC.
I have also experimented with the Raspberry Pi, a micro PC that is capable of running a
custom linux-based build of XBMC. This PC will fit in the palm of your hand and makes
no noise. The operating system runs on a SD memory card. It has a video, HDMI and

USB ports only. While amazing for its size, I find the speed in the XBMC menus to be a
little too slow to be usable. I have tried other skins to see if any would yield better
performance, but none do. It is really amazing to
see this micro PC decode 1080p HD video with crystal clear
clarity, but for usability, it needs a faster skin or perhaps some
code optimization. Still, at less than $100 price point, you
may be able to deal with the limitations. This niche
product really has a strong following and I expect the
functionality to only get better with time.
21
Digitally signed by TheGeeksGuides

TheGeeksGuides
DN: cn=TheGeeksGuides, 
o=TheGeeksGuides, ou=TheGeeksGuides, email=thegeek@thegeeksguides.com, c=US
Date: 2013.06.03 22:56:39 -04‘00’


