Ace
Shopping Cart [0 items]  | Track My Order  |  My Account  |  Help  |  Store Locator  |  Contact Us
  
Search by keyword or item # 
 
 
ANSWERS @ ACE
FAQ's
Project How-To's
Solution Source
What's Bugging You?
The Helpful Hardware Man's 
Corner
Vendor Directory
Home  > Answers @ Ace
 
Building Storage Areas 
Read these tips and instructions carefully on how to build additonal storage areas in your home. Following the 
procedures outlined in this document will help you end up with a more satisfactory job with less waste and effort. Inside 
this document you will find information about:
G     Storage Drawers for bed Linens and Blankets 
G     Constructing and Installing the Drawers 
G     Finishing the Job 
G     Building Handy Storage Closet for Area Under Sloped Roof 
G     Construction Details on Inset Pieces for Storage Closet 
G     Building a Linen Closet with Sliding Drawers 
G     Creating Closet Space with Folding Doors 
 
STORAGE DRAWERS FOR BED LINERS AND BLANKETS
G     Wasted attic space under the slope of the roof in many homes can be 
converted to valuable storage space for linens, blankets, pillows, etc. 
You can add as many drawers as needed or as space permits. 
G     To install drawers, first nail 2x6 plates on the rafters at the locations 
where the studs will connect when mounted from the floor to the 
ceiling (see image, part A). 
G     Next, nail a 2x4 plate (B) on the floor at a position exactly plumb 
below the plates (A) which you have nailed to the rafter (see image). 
G     Insert as many studs at the desired locations as required to provide adequate support to create the number of 
drawers needed. 
G     Be sure the studs, both front and back, are exactly plumb in all directions. The studs can be plumbed with 
either a long level or a plumb bob. The level is probably easier to read and use. 
G     The front 2x4 studs are usually set at the position where the floor-to-rafter height is approximately 4'. All space 
under the slope beyond this point is usually wasted. When this space is framed in, it makes an ideal storage 
area. 
G     Now place a 2x4 header (C) between the front studs at the top edge of the top drawer. This header provides a 
nailing edge for the base of the face panel between the top edge of the top drawer and the ceiling. It also 
provides support for the entire structure. 
http://www.acehardware.com/info/index.jsp?categoryId=1283872&clickid=rightnav_answers_txt (1 of 5)12/03/2005 20:16:43
Bakeware  |  Cookware  |  Small Appliances  |  Vacuums  |  More in Housewares

Ace
G     Insert a 3/16" base just above the 2x4 floor plate to provide a bottom for the lower drawer. Place 1" boards cut 
to the proper length between two sections of drawers as dividers (see image). 
G     Finally, divide the area for the drawers into two equal parts, and place a 3/16" piece of plywood as a dividing 
piece between the two drawer spaces. Be sure the piece of plywood is exactly level and square in all corners. 
This provides the base for the top drawer in the finished storage area. 
 
CONSTRUCTING AND INSTALLINGTHE DRAWERS
G     Make a framework for the bottom of each drawer from a 1x4. Cut the 1x4 pieces to the proper length and 
fasten at each corner. 
G     Cover the framework for the bottom of each drawer with a piece of 3/16" plywood cut to proper size. 
G     Cut the front and back of each drawer from 1" boards and attach the front and back to the base of the drawer 
as illustrated. Nail these boards to the 1x4 frame with 6-penny box nails. 
G     Sand the top, bottom and edges of both the front and back of the drawer for a neat finish. You may want to use 
a nail set and wood putty to hide the nail heads. Attach a drawer pull to the board that forms the face of each 
drawer. 
G     Insert a 1/2" wood dowel on each side of the drawer from the back to the front. These can be glued into place. 
The dowels provide extra support for heavily loaded drawers. 
 
FINISHING THE JOB
G     Place the drawers into position. Finish the ceiling, the area above the drawers, and the room area on each side 
of the drawers with 1/4" plywood or paneling. 
G     If plywood is used, you can use stain, wallpaper, or paint for a finished look. 
G     Place strips over the rafters 16" apart on the center for the finishing touch. 
 
STORAGE CLOSET FOR AREA UNDER SLOPED ROOF
http://www.acehardware.com/info/index.jsp?categoryId=1283872&clickid=rightnav_answers_txt (2 of 5)12/03/2005 20:16:43

Ace
G     The image above illustrates a storage cabinet and built-in desk that can easily be built under the sloped area of 
an attic in a story-and-a-half home. The major part of the cabinet has shelves, drawers and a hanging area. 
The rear section is used for bulk storage. 
G     Study it carefully and make any necessary changes in dimensions to create a similar storage area to fit under 
the sloped area in your home. 
G     This image illustrates the basic parts of the storage area, as well as the shelves and the overall dimensions of 
the major components in the rear section of the cabinet. Again, you may need to make slight adjustments in the 
dimensions shown to conform to the slope of your roof and other variations in size or shape. 
G     Study the dimensions of each part of the structure carefully, and cut and mount each shelf and support as 
illustrated. 
G     The first image below shows how the front section of the storage cabinet is fitted into place. Note the 
dimensions and the construction materials used to create a bulk storage area at the rear of the closet. This 
space, ordinarily lost, is now converted to valuable storage for bulky items. 
G     The second image below shows the final overall construction details for the entire unit when the front and back 
sections are placed together. Carefully study the materials used and the dimension of each storage area to 
construct a storage closet and desk of similar design with little effort. 
 
 
 
CONSTRUCTION DETAILS ON INSET PIECES FOR STORAGE CLOSE
G     See the image to the right for construction details on the drawers used in this storage closet. See the image 
above for location of these drawers in the finished storage closet. 
G     No. 3 drawers are used in the finished storage closet. 
http://www.acehardware.com/info/index.jsp?categoryId=1283872&clickid=rightnav_answers_txt (3 of 5)12/03/2005 20:16:43

Ace
G     This image indicates using plywood and other framing materials for constructing the drawers. You can follow 
these directions or use different materials if you'd like. 
G     You can create your own pattern for the doors of the closet as long as they are cut to the proper size. 
G     The table below lists the number and grade of plywood and framing pieces needed to construct the storage 
closet. Other hardware items are also listed. You will need to make adjustments in this list if you vary the size 
and shape. Otherwise, the list provides all materials required for the job. 
Plywood Needed to Construct Closet
Number, Size
Grade
Where Used
7 panels 4' x 8' x 3/4"
Interior A-A
Partitions,doors, front, sides, shelves, drawer 
sides and back, desk front
2 panels 4' x 8' x 1/2"
Interior A-D
Interior partitions, back, shelves
1 piece 4' x 4' x 1/4"
Interior A-D
Drawer bottoms
Framing Pieces and Other Lumber
1-1/2" diameter
3 ft.
Clothes pole
1" x 2"
90 ft.
Alternate handles, trim shelf cleats, drawer 
guides, miscellaneous
Hardware Items Needed
Item
Qty.
Where Used
1-1/2" x 3" butt hinges
12 pairs
doors
bullet catches
10
doors
pulls
10
doors
metal chains
2
drop shelf
1/2" x 1-1/2" x 1-1/2" angle irons 3
to anchor unit
 
 
 
BUILDING A LINEN CLOSET WITH SLIDING DRAWERS
G     This image shows how any closet can be converted to a linen closet 
with sliding drawers. The dimensions must be adjusted to fit the closet 
in your own home. Fig. 9 shows a typical closet arrangement, so only 
minor adjustments in dimensions should be required. 
G     Details on mounting the drawer supports and lining inside the closet 
are shown in the first image below. Remember, the edge of the new 
closet must be flush with the outer edge of the door casing, so use 
care in our measurements at this point. 
G     The second image below provides construction details and 
dimensions for drawers. Drawers at the bottom of the closet are 
normally 7" high, while the two drawers at the top of the closet are 
normally 5" high. Again, these heights must be adjusted to fit the 
closet space you are filling. 
G     Notches are cut out in the front of the drawers instead of adding 
drawer pulls. Add drawer pulls, if you prefer. 
G     The third image below shows the construction details and dimensions for the rolling hamper in the bottom of 
the closet. Again, make adjustments in the dimensions if the space you are using varies from the one shown. 
http://www.acehardware.com/info/index.jsp?categoryId=1283872&clickid=rightnav_answers_txt (4 of 5)12/03/2005 20:16:43

Ace
 
 
 
CREATING CLOSET SPACE WITH FOLDING DOORS
G     You can often create extra closet space in rooms by simply adding folding doors that hang from the ceiling. 
These folding doors are made of many materials and are available in different styles and patterns. 
G     Using this method, you can create storage areas in family rooms, mud rooms, garages and even bedrooms 
without any major construction. 
G     The entire end of a room can be converted into a closet area with folding doors. 
G     A small section of any wall can be converted into a closet area. Use either curved overhead corners or straight 
overhead corners for making these closets. 
G     Corners can be converted into storage areas by using overhead tracks. Use either curved overhead track or 
straight overhead track for constructing corner closets. 
 
 
TOOL AND MATERIAL CHECKLIST
Handsaw
Wood Glue
Angle Irons
Pegboard Panel
Hinges
Cabinet Catches
Folding Doors
Shelf Brackets
Nails
Power Saw
Screws
Dowels
Plywood and Framing
Casters
Drawer Pulls
Overhead Door Track
Toggle Bolts
Boards for Shelves
back to top 
Check your state and local codes before starting any project. Follow all safety precautions. Information in this document 
has been furnished by the National Retail Hardware Association (NRHA) and associated contributors. Every effort has 
been made to ensure accuracy and safety. Neither NRHA, any contributor nor the retailer can be held responsible for 
damages or injuries resulting from the use of the information in this document.
© Copyright 2005.   
Home  |  Store Locator  |  Careers@Ace  |  Helpful Hardware Club  |  About Us  |  HelpDesk  |  Privacy Policy  |  Affiliate
**See product page for details
http://www.acehardware.com/info/index.jsp?categoryId=1283872&clickid=rightnav_answers_txt (5 of 5)12/03/2005 20:16:43

