BUILD A SHOWER CUBICLE 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Building a shower cubicle requires some experience in 
carpentry and tiling. You also need a degree of expertise in 
wiring and plumbing in order to install a shower unit. 
  
 
 
By all means construct the shower cubicle yourself, but it is 
safer to hire professionals if you are not competent to install 
electrical wiring and plumbing. 
  
 
 
A second shower is almost a necessity in a busy household. 
  
It is rare to find a home these days that does not boast at 
least one shower, but if you have a large family or 
frequently entertain house guests, a second shower will take 
the pressure off the bathroom. You could build a shower 
cubicle into the corner of a bedroom, in a downstairs toilet 
or utility room, or even under the stairs. And if space is 
limited, there's no need to install a purpose-built cubicle - 
just screen off the bath and fit a shower unit to the wall 
above. 
 
2  -  Fitting a shower screen  
The simplest way to screen 
off a bath shower is to hang a
simple waterproof curtain 
that is long enough to drape 
inside the bath rim. However, 
unless you remember t
the curtain against the w
each time you take a shower, 
you always seem to end up 
spraying the bathroom w
water. A rigid shower screen 
overcomes the problem. 
 choose from. Some are 
designed to shield just the end of the bath where the showe
is located (1). Others enclose the entire bath. To provide 
access, complete screens have hinged or sliding doors (2).
Hinged screens take up space when open and need good 
flexible seals.  
 
o tuck 
all 
ith 
There are various screen kits to
r
 
 
o erect a fixed screen, fasten the channel to the wall with 
 
t a hinged or sliding screen following the manufacturer's 
 
T
screws. Apply sealant behind the channel before tightening 
up the screws, or run a bead of sealant down the joint after 
fixing. Fit the glazed panel and seal between it and the bath 
rim.  
 
 
Fi
instructions, making sure you correctly install the seals 
provided with the screen.  
 

3  -  Shower cubicles  
Shower-cubicle components 
m
come in practically every 
combination imaginable, fro
 
self-contained cabinets to 
screen panels for enclosing 
alcoves, building into 
or against a flat wall (3).  
a corner
 
 
A range of sliding, hinged and 
o 
 
 
shower cubicle, fitted in a bedroom or some other part of 
cide on the most convenient position for your shower, 
te.
 
bi-fold doors are available t
fit all the various shaped 
shower trays on the market 
(4). 
 
 
A
the house, must be at least 2.5m (8ft) from the nearest 
electrical socket - move the socket if necessary. 
 
 
 
e
D
taking into consideration the pipe runs for supply and was
 
Check also on the electrical-wiring requirements for 
instantaneous electric showers and pumped power showers. 
 
4  - Building a stud partition 
to your shower 
amic 
 is easy to construct an alcove in the corner of your room 
You can incorporate any existing wall in
cubicle, provided it is sound enough to be lined with cer
tiles.  
 
 
 
It
by building a stud partition to enclose the third side. 
Measure your shower tray carefully to ensure you can make 
a good fit all round. It is usually best to remove the skirtings 
and, if necessary, hack off some of the plaster from the 
existing walls. This will enable you to set the rim of the tray 
into the walls to make a waterproof seal after tiling.  
 
 
 
A stud partition provides a convenient wall on which to 
un 
onstruct the partition from 100 x 50mm (4 x 2in) softwood 
mount the shower unit, because all the services can be r
within the frame.  
 
 
 
C

treated with preservative. Erect four uprights nailed to a 
h preservative. Erect four uprights nailed to a 
d wit
similar-size piece of wood, known as a sole plate, screwed to
the floor. Nail them at the top to a head plate screwed to the
ceiling. Screw into the joists whenever possible. If need be, 
fit timber bearers between the joists to provide fixing points.
similar-size piece of wood, known as a sole plate, screwed to
the floor. Nail them at the top to a head plate screwed to the
ceiling. Screw into the joists whenever possible. If need be, 
fit timber bearers between the joists to provide fixing points. 
 
 
 
Fix noggings between the 
uprights to stiffen the frame, 
e 
 
 
 
 - Fitting the shower tray  
Shower trays are usually 
om moulded plastic or
st 
but leave a clear path for th
plumbing (and wiring) down 
the centre (5).  
 
5 
made fr
are cast with a gel coat. Mo
trays have an integral side 
skirt that is made to stand on 
the floor. Others have a 
wooden or metal underframe 
fitted with adjustable feet 
(6). A separate plinth panel 
fitted to this type of showe
tray to conceal the 
to the waste system.  
 
 
The most imp
is
r 
underframe and provide access 
 
ortant aspect when fitting a tray is to ensure 
at the tray is level and that it is correctly bedded down. 
anufacturers generally suggest a sand/cement mix of 5:1. 
ress is whether or not the tray will 
eed raising off the floor. This will depend on w
er 
stallation is onto a timber or solid/restricted access floor. If
w 
th
M
This is to ensure that the tray is fully supported and also 
helps with levelling.  
 
 
 
The next issue to add
n
heth
in
it is a timber floor, there should be sufficient room to allo
for the waste, trap and pipework. If the floor is solid or there
is restricted access, a plinth will need to be constructed 
which is capable of accommodating the trap which is to be 
used.  

 
 
 
e wast
Th
to
epipe must have sufficient fall (slope) for the water 
roperly. Access must be provided in order to clean 
ut the shower trap.  
You can fit a shallow-seal 
trap (7) when draining into a 
two-pipe waste system, but if 
 to 
 
 
 
If this gives you problems with clearance under
e shower 
fit a deep-seal running trap in the pipe run. Cut an 
ccess hatch in the floor.  
 a 
s.  
. The 
ged into 
waste system, or you can 
epipe between the floor joist
roviding 
fficient fall - 6mm (1/4in) for every 300mm (1ft) run - 
therwise you may have to build a support frame to raise 
 
ished the exit point for the wastep
e, use a 
ower drill fitted with a core bit to bore a hole t
ugh the 
all of the house.  
 the end of the pipe to discharge water 
to a hopper. Use a pipe boss to join the waste
 to a 
lastic soil pipe. Mark where the shower waste meets the 
 drain p
o
 
 
 
you are connecting directly
a soil pipe you must use a 
deep-seal trap.  
 th
tray, 
a
 
Some traps have a twist-out grille that provides access to
detachable chamber for removing blockage
 
6 - The waste system 
 
ttach a 40mm (1.5in) plastic wastepipe to the trap
A
wastepipe can be run through the wall and dischar
he hopper head of a two-pipe 
t
connect the pipe directly to the soil pipe of a single-stack 
drainage system.  
 
 
 
Try to run the wast
s, p
su
o
the shower tray to a higher level. If this results in the rim of 
the shower tray being more than 225mm (9in) above the 
floor, you should construct a step to provide safe access to
the cubicle.  
 
 
 
Having establ
ip
hro
p
w
 
 
 
Connect an elbow to
in
pipe
p
soil pipe and cut a hole of the appropriate size, using a hole 
saw. Smooth the edge of the hole with abrasive paper.  
 
 
 

Following the manufacturer's 
instructions, apply solvent 
cement to the joint and strap 
the boss in place (8).  
 
 
 
When the cement has set, push the rubber seal into the boss
and insert the wastepipe.  
 
7  - Joining plastic wastepipes 
Domestic wastepipe systems are lightweight and easy to 
assemble. The pipes come in standard lengths and in three 
sizes - 32mm (1.25in) diameter for washbasins, and 40mm 
(1.5in) for sink, bath and shower wastes. A 21mm (3/4in) 
pipe is also made for cistern overflows. The metric sizes 
refer to outside diameters, the imperial sizes to inside.  
 
 
When buying plastic pipes and fittings make sure they are 
compatible - there may be slight variations in size between 
the ranges. For even the simplest run of wastepipe, you will 
have to fit joints that enable the pipe to change direction. A 
range of straight connectors, bends or elbows, T-joints and 
adapters are available for joining straight lengths of 
wastepipe and for connecting pipe to appliances.  
 
 
Joints are connected to the pipe using various methods:  
 
 
 
 
A welded joint (9) is made by applying a solvent cement to 
the mating parts just before the joint is assembled. The 
solvent softens the plastic, causing it to fuse together and 
create a waterproof seal. Welded joints are best for 
inaccessible pipe runs.  
 
 

Compression joints (10) are often used to connect the 
wastepipe to the shower trap. A large threaded cap 
compresses a rubber washer into the neck of the joint, 
forming a seal. The joint can be dismantled by unscrewing 
the cap. This type of joint can be used to join pipes of 
slightly different diameters.  
 
 
Push-fit joints (11) are quick and easy to assemble. When 
the wastepipe, which must be cut square, is pushed into the 
joint, a rubber O-ring inside the socket grips the end of the 
pipe, forming an instant watertight seal.  
 
 
Smear petroleum jelly on the cut ends of the wastepipe to 
act as a lubricant when assembling push-fit joints. 
 
 
8  - The final stages  
Having installed the tray and run the wastepipe, you can 
now line the inside face of the partition with 9mm (3/8in) 
exterior-grade plywood. Seal all joints with silicone sealant 
and prime the panels. Cut holes for the plumbing (and 
electrical wiring if required), run the services and make the 
initial connections. Panel the outside of the partition after 
you have tested the plumbing for leaks. You can use 
plywood or plasterboard. Finish the edge of the partition 
with softwood mouldings, or line it with a strip of plywood as 
a base for tiling.  
 
 
 
Tile the interior of the cubicle, using waterproof tile adhesive 
and grout. Refit skirting boards on the outside. Make the 
final connections to the shower unit and fit the sprayhead. 
 
One last but important job is to seal the joints between the 
tiling and shower tray. Grout is too inflexible, so use a 
silicone sealant to waterproof the joints. Some shower trays 
are made with a raised lip to allow the tiles to overlap the 
rim in order to improve the seal.  
 
 
 
Clear sealant and a range of colours are available in tubes 
that fit into a dispenser. Cut the tip off the pointed nozzle to 
a slight angle.  
 
 
 
Clean the surfaces with methylated spirit, then run a bead of 
sealant along each joint. Smooth the sealant with your 
fingertip dipped in a 50/50 solution of washing-up liquid and 
water.  
 
 
 

Having fitted the shower 
cubicle panels, following the 
manufacturer's instructions, 
seal the joints between the 
framework, the walls and tr
with sealant (12).  
ay
 
 
 
 

