
Build a Security Culture
Kai Roer

Build a Security Culture
KAI ROER

Every possible effort has been made to ensure that the information contained in this book is accurate at the time of going
to press, and the publisher and the author cannot accept responsibility for any errors or omissions, however caused. Any
opinions expressed in this book are those of the author, not the publisher. Websites identified are for reference only, not
endorsement, and any website visits are at the reader’s own risk. No responsibility for loss or damage occasioned to any
person acting, or refraining from action, as a result of the material in this publication can be accepted by the publisher or
the author.
Apart from any fair dealing for the purposes of research or private study, or criticism or review, as permitted under the
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, this publication may only be reproduced, stored or transmitted, in any form, or
by any means, with the prior permission in writing of the publisher or, in the case of reprographic reproduction, in
accordance with the terms of licences issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency. Enquiries concerning reproduction
outside those terms should be sent to the publisher at the following address:
IT Governance Publishing
IT Governance Limited
Unit 3, Clive Court
Bartholomew’s Walk
Cambridgeshire Business Park
Ely, Cambridgeshire
CB7 4EA
United Kingdom
www.itgovernance.co.uk
© Kai Roer 2015
The authors have asserted the rights of the author under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act, 1988, to be identified as
the author of this work.
First published in the United Kingdom in 2015
by IT Governance Publishing
ISBN 978-1-84928-719-7

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This book is the direct result of my engagement and development of the Security Culture
Framework. All the people who have been involved in the development and use of the
framework are my inspiration to write this book.
The Security Culture Framework is something that evolved in my mind after many years
of watching security awareness training programmes being run seemingly without control,
metrics and proper planning. Discussing the topic with Lars Haug, we quickly came up
with the concept of a holistic framework to help build and maintain security culture. The
framework gained interest in both the USA and Europe, within both the public and private
sectors. Financial institutions, universities and many others use the framework today.
Roar Thon, at the Norwegian National Security Agency, is one of the very few experts on
security culture. His input, questions and support are always helpful, and his generosity is
out of this world. Mo Amin, a London-based security consultant, dedicated many hours of
his precious time to review the manuscript and concept for the book. Amin is also a key
resource on the Security Culture Framework community, and an inspiration to follow. My
thanks also to Wolfgang Goerlich for his helpful comments and feedback during the
review process.
A special note to Michael Santarcangelo, who provided deep insights through his
questions and ideas. I thank you, sir!
Numerous discussions about security awareness and culture with fine folks such as Javvad
Malik, Thom Langford, Quentyn Taylor, Trond Sundby, Rune Ask, Troy Hunt, Joshua
Corman, Per Thorsheim and Brian Honan helped me gain an understanding of what
security culture is, and how to best bring it about. We may not always agree, but we
certainly do learn!
This book would never have been were it not for Joe Pettit at Informationsecurity Buzz.
His introductions and continued support has been vital. Vicki Utting at IT Governance has
been a great asset when I tore my hair out over writing this book.
To the information security community worldwide: thank you for keeping me on the edge,
for challenging my assumptions and for keeping me safe!
Most importantly, thank you to my dear wife, Karolina, and Leo, my son. You are the
light.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Kai Roer is a management and security consultant and trainer with extensive international
experience from more than 30 countries around the world. He is a guest lecturer at several
universities, and the founder of The Roer Group, a European management consulting
group focusing on security culture.
Kai has authored a number of books on leadership and cybersecurity, and has been
published extensively in print and online, and has appeared on radio, television and
featured in printed media. He is a columnist at Help Net Security and is the Cloud Security
Alliance Norway Chapter President since 2012.
Kai is a passionate public speaker who engages his audience with his entertaining style
and deep topic knowledge of human behaviours, psychology and cybersecurity. He is a
Fellow of the National Cybersecurity Institute and runs a blog on information security and
culture (roer.com). Kai is the host of Security Culture TV, a monthly video and podcast.

FOREWORD
“May you live in interesting times” is an old saying and one that is certainly applicable to
cyber security today. As the unfolding events of the past few years have shown us, we are
indeed living in interesting cyber times. The evolving cyber breaches of every sector, be it
retail, government, education, financial or others, have been the main focus of the
technology conversation this entire year. Big box retailers have been hacked, sensitive
data at banks breached, and nation states stand ready to wage cyber warfare.
We have developed computers and the Internet and attached many of the most important
aspects of our lives to it. Now we find those connections are at risk due to the activities of
‘bad actors’ bent on malicious activity. We try to defend our digital systems with properly
configured soft and hardware, but in the end it is often a ‘people’ problem that permits a
large portion of the breaches we read about. People are just not following appropriate
procedures thereby allowing improper access to systems. As many are aware, the best way
to reduce human errors we encounter is through effective education and training. Sadly
such education and training around the globe is spotty at best and often wholly inadequate.
With this book, Kai Roer has taken his many years of cyber experience and provided those
with a vested interest in cyber security a firm basis on which to build an effective cyber
security training programme. This requires change, and understanding how the culture of
an organisation needs to change to be effective is vital for cyber success. Each chapter is
filled with valuable insights, examples and intuitive thoughts based on his experiences that
can easily be transferred to the workplace. As system administrators scramble to harden
their respective defences, this work couldn’t have come at a better time. Anyone obtaining
this book will find it a valuable and informative read.
Dr. Jane LeClair
Chief Operating Officer
National Cybersecurity Institute, Washington, D.C.

CONTENTS
Introduction
Culture: Does it have to be so hard?
Chapter 1: What Is Security Culture?
Chapter 2: The Elements of Security Culture
Chapter 3: How Does Security Culture Relate to Security Awareness?
Attention
Retention
Reproduction
Motivation
Chapter 4: Asking for Help Raises Your Chances of Success
Chapter 5: The Psychology of Groups, And How to Use It to Your Benefit
Chapter 6: Measuring Culture
Chapter 7: Building Security Culture
Metrics
Using SMART goals
The Organisation part
Topics
Planner
Setting up your organisation to use the Security Culture Framework
Chapter 8: Time Is on Your Side
ITG Resources

INTRODUCTION
Culture: Does it have to be so hard?
In this book, I look at organisational culture with information security glasses. In my years
of working in the information security industry, I have come across a number of
challenges: technical, compliance, and increasingly awareness and security behaviour.
Through my travels and company activities, I have learned that a lot of security behaviour
challenges are universal: preparing information security information in such a way that it
resonates and makes sense for non-security people is a challenge no matter which country
or organisation you work in.
I have also learned that some organisations are better at creating the security behaviour
they want. Looking at what they do differently, I found that they approach the work with
security awareness as a process. They also respect that security competence is exactly that
– a competence that must be learned, not just something you tell.
From more than two decades of professional training and consulting in more than 30
different countries, I have also come to learn that if we want people to learn, we need to
facilitate learning together with them. Lecturing alone is not creating results. Reading
alone makes for very little change. The saying of the Association for Talent Development
(ATD1) that “Telling ain’t Training” is very true. It took me some time to realise that I too
had to learn how to train people properly, a realisation that took me on a rollercoaster of
learning, exploration and self-development, leading me to develop my training and
communication skills across both language barriers and cultural barriers.
The most important thing I learned in these years was to be humble. Humble about my
own perspectives – I may think I am right, and I may have all the experience to tell me I
am right, but implant me in Tunisia or Japan and most of my perspectives and experience
in treating and communicating with people no longer hold. I learned this the hard way,
leading me to realise that there are more ways of doing things than I first accounted for,
and that others may achieve great success by choosing a different path than the one I
chose.
The same is true with organisational culture. There are many ways of building, changing
and maintaining organisational culture. It is one of those areas where scientists and
practitioners still argue about the right approach2. My experience is that the right approach
depends on each case. Every organisation is unique and comes with its own culture and
subcultures. Some are great, some really poor. All of them impact the behaviour, ideas and
thoughts of the employees. The question becomes: how do we take control of that culture?
As luck has it, there are processes and methods to apply when you want to build and
manage culture. Instead of trying to come up with everything yourself, you can learn from
frameworks like the Security Culture Framework3. Using a framework gives you a clear
path with checkpoints and actions that ensure your efforts are moving in the right

direction. This is not to say that changing culture is easy, nor fast: it may require many
small steps iterated over time. Using a structured approach helps you to do the right things
at the right time, making success more likely.
The book consists of eight chapters, each looking at a different aspect of security culture.
Chapter one introduces the concept of security culture, provides a definition and sets the
stage. In chapter two, I look at the three building bricks of culture: technology, policy and
people. I also bind the three together and show how they impact one another.
In chapter three, I look at how security culture relates to security awareness, and I will
show how awareness is only one of the elements that is required to change behaviour and
culture. Next, in chapter four, I explain why we as security professionals are not the
people who should build culture – at least not alone – and who you should involve in your
organisation. In chapter five, I point to social psychology and research on how we interact
with other people. You will also learn how you can use the knowledge of how groups
impact our lives to increase your chances of improving security culture.
In chapter six, I make the case for why we need to measure our security culture efforts,
and point to some ways to do just that. Finally, in chapter 7, I introduce the Security
Culture Framework, and walk you through how it is built. This chapter also includes some
templates you can use in your own security culture programmes.
Depending on your perspective, I may provide new insights and ideas on how to build
security culture. I hope I can inspire you to take a structured approach to building and
maintaining good security culture. Even if you do choose a structured approach, you will
experience that it takes time to get the results you want. Small steps, iterated over time, is
the key. Knowing where you are, and where you want to be, is vital, and one of the key
elements in a structured approach.
1 Formerly the American Society for Training and Development (ASTD).
2 A quick search through academic papers via Google will amply demonstrate the variety of approaches within academia
alone, while a similar review of the titles available on Amazon reveals a similar breadth among practitioners. For a
comprehensive review of the topic (and many other topics!), read Bernard Bass’ The Bass Handbook of Leadership:
Theory, Research, and Managerial Applications.
3 The Security Culture Framework describes a structured approach to developing an effective and consistent security
culture within an organisation. Read more about it here: https://scf.roer.com.

CHAPTER 1: WHAT IS SECURITY CULTURE?
An introduction to the topic, with an introduction to the definition of culture
(based on sociology) and how it relates to security.
Humans are animals who live in groups; we flock. In any group of animals there exists a
hierarchy, levels that every animal in the group follows. Each of these levels comes with
rules to abide by, including understanding who is above you, who is below you and what
your particular level allows you to do.
Consider a wolf pack4. They show the hierarchy very clearly, with the Alpha couple on the
top, giving them the right to rule as they please. Below them are sergeants, animals in the
pack with more power than most and which police the group if necessary. Below the
sergeants are normal members, workers if you like, and below these again are one or a few
of lesser rights – the one or two wolves that are constantly being picked on. Every animal
in the pack has the right to food, shelter, safety and protection – as long as they abide by
the rules and accept their level. A wolf on the lower levels will quickly and effectively be
controlled by the other wolves if he or she dares to step out of line.
Even the poorest wolf in the pack is entitled to the pack’s protection against external
threat. They are also entitled to love and care, even if they are expected to give more than
they receive.
The wolves in the pack accept the hierarchy, rules and domestic violence because they
receive protection from external threat, they get to eat and they may even enjoy the sense
of belonging. It makes sense for the wolves to stick together, even if the price an
individual wolf pays is a certain loss of personal freedom.
We see similar tendencies and mechanisms play out in human society. The first rule of
living in a society is to accept the rules. To do that, we also need to understand the rules,
how they are constituted and how they are playing out.
Consider the wolf pack again. Let us imagine a new wolf is in the pack (it could be a
puppy becoming an adult, or adoption, or anything else). This new wolf is entering the
pack at the second-to-lowest level, so he is accepted as a worker, someone with little
status. However, this particular wolf cannot understand the rules at play, and imagines
himself as the leader of the pack. At first, the other wolves just mock him a bit, to remind
him of his place. Then, when he clearly does not get the message, they become more
violent, with the Alphas and their sergeants leading the punishment. The violence
continues until the wolf rolls over on his back and surrenders. He gets the message, he
understands that there is someone else above him in the chain of command, and that if he
wants to survive and be a part of the pack, he must accept his role, his place.
Just like the wolf, we need a basic understanding of authority if we want to succeed in life.
Thankfully, luck is with us. According to some scientists, the human brain is hardwired to
understand the power structure of the people in a room5, and to automatically identify with
our own level. This particular science is based on babies, too young to communicate

verbally, who still recognise the power levels and authorities in a room.
Why does this matter to us? This kind of research suggests that the need for policies, rules
and laws is part of the basic functioning of the human mind. It suggests that although the
way we currently organise our societies can be considered social constructs, we humans
(social animals) come pre-programmed with the ability to form, abide by and live in
groups based on different levels and authorities.
It basically tells us that our ability to live together in small and large groups is a
biologically developed ability. We are meant to form groups and find ways of living
together.
This is an important backdrop to understanding what culture is. According to the Oxford
English Dictionary, culture is:
“The ideas, customs and social behaviours of a particular people or group.”6
Part of the behaviours we see in culture can be traced back to basic human biology as I
showed earlier. It is good to know that culture is such a base need in us, as it shows the
importance of living, working and functioning together.
Most of culture may not be so basic, and it is certainly not traced to biology alone. Most
culture is learned7. One of my favourite examples is how people walk. “How can the way
people walk be culture?” you may ask.
That is a fair question, considering that we all walk the same way. We all put one foot in
front of the other. So far, I agree.
What is different is how we put one foot in front of the other.
In the western world, where I grew up and lived most of my life, we wear shoes. Mostly
comfortable shoes, enabling us to thump our heels onto the ground without being hurt (at
least not right away). We also wear high heels, which is not exactly a natural way of
walking, even if walking on your toe-balls and mid-foot is considered the natural way of
walking.
Unconvinced? Come with me to Africa, then. Here, many people walk barefoot, which
means they walk differently from you. Go to Kenya, where some tribes run because they
consider walking a waste of their time. Am I getting there? Not yet? Well, my last
example is from Asia.
In Japan, traditional shoes are made of a plank, with two wooden pieces underneath.
Walking with these shoes dictates a particular walking style – instead of lifting your feet,
you slide them along the ground, sort of.
Still not following me? Wear high heels one day, and I promise you will get the idea. How
we walk is learned behaviour. A behaviour dictated by the culture we live in. Your ability
to recognise what I mean by my claim about walking, is cultural: it is a learned behaviour.
It depends mostly on your exposure to different cultures, different people and different
places.

The definition of culture is the same: ideas, customs and social behaviour of a particular
people or group
As we have seen in the preceding example, ideas, customs and social behaviour are
collections of many things – from how we walk, to how we speak, to how we think and
interact. Instead of thinking about culture across borders, let us look closer to where we
work. Consider your workplace. Culture is not one thing only; it is the accumulation of
many groups of people: the sales department, the accounting department, the IT
department, the developers, the builders, testers and so on. Each of these departments has
its own more or less distinct culture – ideas, customs and social behaviours that belong to
that particular department. Together, these subcultures form the company culture. And
some of these departments are also subdivided into other subcultures: smokers, the high
achievers, the slackers, the coffee drinkers, the problem solvers and so on (I am sure you
can think of others more fitting to your organisation).
You, as an individual, are a member of many different groups, and more or less abide by
each group’s cultural rules. In your workplace, you may be working as a mid-level
manager, drinking coffee, placed in the IT division and be a high achiever. Each of these
groups comes with a cultural attachment.
Outside your workspace, you also belong to different groups, each with different
characteristics: your family, your extended family, perhaps you are a parent, you may be
playing sports (each team/group you belong to has different subcultures), you are a
community member and so on.
Each of the groups you belong to follows the same basic principles. They consist of
People: the members; Policies: the rules this particular group follow, sometimes written
and always the unwritten ones; and Technology: the tools, methods and models used by
this group. You can read more about these three elements, and how they come together to
form and change culture, in Chapter Two.
Now that we have a quick introduction to culture, let us examine it from a security
perspective.
According to the Oxford dictionary, security can be defined as:
“The state of being free from danger or threat.”
Using this definition helps us understand what we as security professionals do: our job is
to create an environment where our colleagues can work in a state of being free from
danger and threat; they can do what they are supposed to, knowing that they will be taken
good care of, that external threats and dangers are being kept outside.
In the image of the wolf pack, this becomes very clear: as a member of the pack, each of
the wolves are entitled to food, to protection from external threat and to know their place.
They get security by living in the pack. The same strategy is used by a number of different
creatures, and has proved very successful.
One way of being free from danger is to know the social structure, and your own place in

it. Understanding where you are in the organisation, and what is expected of you is crucial
to properly functioning in a group. This is one of the reasons it is important to
communicate clearly, and to express the security behaviour you want in your organisation
in a way that employees can relate to.
Since culture and social behaviour is so engraved in us by nature, it makes perfect sense to
understand how to use nature’s own strategies to enhance security in our organisations.
Enter Security Culture.
Think of security culture as one subculture of your organisation’s culture. The security
culture is the part of your organisation’s culture that focuses on security, to help people
into the state of being free from threat or danger, and you can apply the same techniques
used by organisational theorists, transformational theory, sociology and psychology to
understand and enhance your organisation’s security culture.
Using the two preceding definitions, we can define security culture as
“The ideas, customs and social behaviours of a particular people or group that
helps them be free from threat and danger.”
Security culture is the ideas, customs and social behaviour that your organisation, and its
subgroups, have, use and act upon to create a state of being free from threat and danger.
The way your organisation treats passwords is part of security culture. How your
employees detect and act upon a stranger in the building is part of security culture. How
you define policies, implement them and train employees in security behaviour all impact
your security culture.
In fact, all the social behaviours in your organisation impact your security culture.
Security culture also impacts all social behaviour in your organisation: it becomes a
question of who is in charge of the social behaviour, You or the Culture.
Sometimes I hear that changing culture is impossible, or at least very hard to do. As with
security awareness, who some find very hard to teach successfully, cultural change is
possible. It is, in fact, a given. Culture is, according to sociology, plastic8. It adapts to its
members.
Think of it like this: without a group of people, there would be no culture. Culture
demands at least two people. These two people, together, form the ideas, customs and
social behaviour of this particular group, by their actions and activities. The culture is
likely highly influenced by the larger culture that formed the two members in the first
place – including language, social belief and so on. Even so, the group will form a distinct
subculture, with its own rules, ideas and customs.
Then, some time later, the group welcomes a third member. This new member brings her
own ideas, customs and social behaviours. Let us say that the group’s initial members met
at a pub and drank beer once a week. The new member meets them too, but starts drinking
wine instead. Just by drinking wine instead of beer, the culture of the group has changed:
it can no longer say “we drink only beer.” We may even imagine that six months later, the

whole group moved from the pub to a restaurant and they are all drinking wine while
enjoying fine dining. The group is the same three members, but the culture has changed a
lot!
This example shows how quickly, and easily, culture can change if the majority of the
members, or the ones with the right authority, set out to do so. It also shows that culture
can change regardless of original intent. In this particular group, a stranger created enough
impact to change the whole group culture.
Another example is the coffee-machine example where someone begins working at a new
employer. The new employee is a coffee drinker, and quickly figures out where the coffee
machine is. As soon as she knows where it is, she only takes a few days to adapt her
behaviour to the coffee culture at the location, no matter how they do their coffee-machine
ritual.
This example shows how quickly we as individuals adopt a new culture when we are
correctly incentivised9.
The impact of individuals in a group is very important. Think of a group of people, say a
team at work. This group has no strong culture, and are a loosely knit team of people
working together. Without a strong culture, a group like this is more vulnerable to outside
pressure, and to uncontrolled cultural change.
Into this group comes a new team member. This person is very negative. He sees problems
everywhere, and is a specialist in killing enthusiasm. Suggesting an idea to this guy is a
sure-fire way to be shot down, publicly humiliated and buried under a pile of sarcastic
rocks. And no, it does not matter who approaches him with suggestions, ideas and
opportunities: he immediately says things like, “No, it’s never gonna happen” or “I saw
this before, it failed.” On particularly bad days, he may even say “Are you stupid, or
what?”
What happens to a group when such a person is introduced? It depends on the group’s
culture. A group with a strong culture is more likely to change the newcomer into
conforming with the culture (or force him out), whereas a group with no strong culture is
more likely formed by the new member. In this case, since the group has no strong culture,
they quickly become a gang of grumps. Their production rate deteriorates, and their
problem solving is replaced with problem focus: instead of finding solutions, they only see
problems. The group adopts the newcomer’s attitude.
In this example, a productive and functioning team was destroyed by just one person.
Imagine the cost for the organisation that this cultural change has. Then consider the
personal and interpersonal costs involved in this cultural change: people in the group are
no longer happy to go to work, and they may even change their social behaviour towards
their friends and families!
That is the kind of impact culture has on people, and the impact people have on culture.
Since I choose to be a positive force wherever I go, I will end this chapter on a positive
note.

Consider the same group as before, a team of people working together. There is no strong
culture in the group, and their social behaviours, as before, are neutral and flexible. This
time, the team member we introduce is a positive person, one who sees opportunities
where others see problems, and one who helps people succeed instead of killing every
idea.
Since the culture in the group is neutral, our new group member can easily change it, just
like we saw with the negative example before. Just like the negative influencer, positivity
is contagious too. At first, one or two of the other team members will enforce their
positive traits, and after some time, the positivity spreads throughout the whole team.
Other teams in the organisation will notice too, and may want to join the team – after all,
who does not want to be a part of a success?
These examples show us how culture can be a vulnerability to your organisation too.
When it comes to changing culture, going from a neutral, weak culture is easy. To change
a strong culture may not be so simple. Understanding the cultural impact on your
organisation, and to your security programme, is vital if you want to create a human
stronghold to fence off external threat.
In the next chapter we will look at the building blocks of human culture:
People/Competence, Policies and Technology.
Case Study: Introducing John, chief information security officer
A case for Culture
John is a chief information security officer (CISO) in a large bank. He is, as most
CISOs are, a very busy man, juggling strategic planning with tactic reporting, and
trying to make his team of three do every task they need to, while also securing
budgets to improve security around the bank.
For a long time, John has tried to train the employees on awareness. To ensure
compliance, he runs security awareness training for all new hires, a part of the bank’s
employee on-boarding programme. He also has at least one awareness training
campaign running throughout the bank every year. In his reports to the directors, he
states that 95% of new hires have successfully completed the on-boarding training
programme, and he also reports an 87% open rate and a 64% completion rate of the
annual awareness programme.
John is not confident that his reports are meaningful, and he is not sure if the
numbers are showing the bank’s actual awareness level. In fact, John is uncertain if
his ongoing efforts are creating any results at all, as successful phishing attempts
have risen during the past 12 months, and a steadily growing number of password
reset requests is a concern. In addition, he has a hard time motivating any of his team
members to do any awareness work at all, even when he gives them direct orders.
In a recent board meeting, where he presented his numbers on awareness, Jillian, one

of the directors, asked him if the numbers meant that the bank was in a secure state,
and she also wanted to know how their bank compares to other banks in the industry.
Puzzled by Jillian’s questions, he said he was confident in his numbers, and that as
far as he knew they were doing ok. Only after the meeting did he realise that he did
not really know. He decided to look into the matter.
Over the next month, John spent his time researching. What he found was alarming.
The more he looked at his numbers, the more he realised they were vanity metrics – a
term coined by Eric Ries in his book The Lean Startup, a book John was told by one
of his friends to read. Vanity metrics are numbers that looks good, and seemingly
provide value, but in reality do not provide any answers. John realised that his
reports for the past few years did not give him or his bank any real measurement of
their progress, nor the reality of their security culture and behaviours.
He also realised there were very few benchmarks on security awareness, and that he
had no clue whether or not his bank was as good as the others.
As part of his research, John also stumbled upon the Security Culture Framework. He
approached me, and together we created a three-year plan to change the approach of
his security awareness efforts: we created a plan to build security culture. We devised
a plan for John to create a metric that allowed him to understand his landscape. We
also defined a series of goals, which he described in a way that ensured he would
know when he hit, or by how far he missed, his targets.
Another challenge that surfaced in our talks was the lack of strategic cooperation
between the security team and the rest of the organisation. John and his team would
do their configurations, implement policies, put out fires and so on, and most of their
communications with other departments were perceived by the organisation as being
negative. Many saw John and his team as naysayers. Using the organisation module,
John learned to adapt a few strategic communication tools, and to build rapport with
people and managers around the bank. I also urged him to build a deep and
meaningful relationship with Human Resources.
Finally, John needed a way to handle his team’s negativity towards awareness work.
When asked, a team member would reluctantly accept an awareness-related task, but
it was very clear that none of the team members found that kind of work interesting.
John had to tackle this challenge, and quickly!
Throughout this book we will follow John as he endeavours to build security culture, by
digging into each of the preceding cases.
4 It should be noted that the traditional view of a wolf pack as led by an Alpha and his mate is a grand simplification,
and many biologists prefer to refer to ‘breeder wolves’ (note the plural) as the centre of the pack. This does not
undermine my point here, however, as the broader structure of the pack as a unit offering its members protection and
belonging in exchange for acceptance of the rules and hierarchy is undoubted.
5 In the study “Big and Mighty: Preverbal Infants Mentally Represent Social Dominance” (L. Thomsen, W.E.
Frankenhuis, M. Ingold-Smith and S. Carey), it was found that babies expect larger individuals to win in a conflict. For a

baby to make that prediction, they must have some comprehension that individuals have goals, and that these goals can
conflict with other individuals’ goals. Furthermore, they must understand that these conflicts have winners and losers.
6 There are a number of different definitions of culture, including security culture. I have chosen the ones I use in this
book based on the premise that they describe what I discuss in layman’s terms, which makes it accessible for people
outside of academia.
7 This is also debated – behaviorists take this stand, while naturalists believe behavior (and thus culture) to be inherited,
more similarly to genetic inheritance. The truth is likely somewhere between those extremes. Richerson and Boyd
describe the naturalists’ position: “Cultural variants are more like genes than are ordinary learned variants. Like genes,
they are inherited and transmitted in a potentially endless chain, while variants acquired by individual learning are lost
with the death of the learner.” (“Cultural Inheritence and Evolutionary Ecology”, Evolutionary Ecology and Human
Behaviour, 1992.)
8 The other characteristics of culture are generally given in the following statements: culture is learned and acquired;
culture is shared and transmitted; culture is social; culture is ideational; culture gratifies human needs; culture tends
towards integration; and culture is cumulative. (E. Palispis, Introduction to Sociology and Anthropology, 2007.)
9 According to motivational theory, there are two broad forms of incentive: intrinsic and extrinsic. An intrinsic incentive
is derived internally – the individual is motivated to perform because they enjoy the work or the challenge, for instance.
An extrinsic motivation is applied from without – the employer offers a cash bonus if the employee completes a task
quickly, for instance. It should be noted that there are negative forms of both types of incentive, such as the threat of
being fired, etc.

CHAPTER 2: THE ELEMENTS OF SECURITY
CULTURE
We will look at the elements that together make security culture: technology,
policies/rules and people/competence, and how they work together to form
culture.
Social behaviour, ideas and customs are to a large degree based upon rules. Some rules are
written into laws, regulations and standards. Other rules, most of them in fact, are
unwritten and come in the form of ethics, moral codes and our mutual ideas of what is
acceptable behaviour in the different groups we belong to.
In this chapter I refer to all rules, laws, regulations, ethics, moral codes and so on as
policies. To make it absolutely clear: policies in this context is more than just written
policies in your organisation. In this context, policies comprise the written and unwritten
rules that regulate our ideas, customs and social behaviours.
Technology is also a wide area. From the Mars Rover, to your phone and car, to the
glasses some people use to help see – these are all technology. In this context, I will use
the word technology to describe any tool – made or not – that we use in a determined way.
A rock you use to crack open a coconut is considered technology by this definition. A club
our forefathers used to go hunting, to protect themselves or to look cool is a tool. The bow
and arrow is a tool.
Evidently, technology is a wide area, one that goes back to the origins of man.
Interestingly, man is not the only one who uses tools to a means. Some birds use sticks, at
least one type of octopus uses tools to get food and different kinds of apes use rocks to
crack open nuts.
Technology is not only about tangible things like computers, cars, hammers and so on, but
also models: mental models (patterns and schemas in our mind) as well as patterns,
standards and models used as templates and starting points.
The third part of the triangle is people. It is people who use the technology, and it is
people who form and inform the policies. The society you are brought up in determines
your policies and your use of tools. As described in Chapter 1, social behaviour is learned
behaviour. We can think of culture as competence, the knowledge and understanding of
how to function properly in a social group. This competence includes how to use
technology, and at least the basic rules of engagement in our society.
These three elements – People, Policies and Technology – give us perspectives to the
world. The more we understand their formation and their continued interaction, the easier
it is to understand how we can use them to build and maintain security culture.
Each of these elements directly impacts the other two. No matter where the change
happens, the other two elements are changed too.

Imagine Thor. He lived in long-forgotten times, back when phones and cars and even
horseback riding were unheard of. Thor learned from his mother that he could use a rock
to crack open nuts. One day, Thor saw a small deer nearby and threw a rock at it. It was a
lucky hit, and the deer fell to the ground, to the amazement of Thor’s tribe. Soon after,
every member of the tribe started experimenting with throwing rocks, sticks and so on at
animals.
Thor took a known technology, the rock, and repurposed it to do something new. In
modern language we call this innovation. Back then, they were just happy to eat fresh
meat.
This example shows us how people can use technology, and through their use, create new
opportunities. It is similar to what Apple did with the iPod: MP3 players already let you
store your whole collection of CDs on the device, but what did not exist was a
commercially viable ecosystem for the sale and distribution of electronic music – from
artists to consumer in one easy step.
Another example is the development of firewalls from its initial start as a port master, into
highly advanced filtering devices capable of looking for malicious content during transit.
Let us go back to Thor.
As the use of throwing rocks grew, another tribal member threw a large rock at a fellow
tribe member, killing him. The rock had changed from nut cracker, to a hunting tool, and
finally a murder weapon.
At this point, the tribe had to consider the use of the rock. Some folks advocated the need
to only accept the rock as a nut cracker, whereas the hunters argued strongly that the need
for fresh meat meant they should be allowed to continue using the rock too. After many
talks, discussion and debate, the tribe finally agreed that rocks, and any similar tools, were
only allowed to be used as intended, in this case crushing nuts and hunting food, but not to
kill people.
Everyone rejoiced and the party lasted for many days.
For the tribe, and for mankind, this was one of the first formal policies adopted. The
policy was created based on how people used the technology: the policy was initiated by
technology. Throughout history we see the same scenario: a technological innovation
enables both positive (hunting for food) and negative (killing tribe members) possibilities.
As we learn of the consequences, we adapt our social behaviour, customs and ideas and
form policies. Some are written, and some are not.
You can of course substitute Thor’s rock with any other tool ever used by mankind. The
point remains the same: the use of tools is regulated by our ideas, customs and social
behaviours, which are strongly informed by policies.
Just as technology creates policies, policies can create technology. By creating standards
and regulatory laws, our lawmakers not only can change how we use a particular
technology but also require us to come up with new technology. One example is the
environmental regulations in California, demanding a steep reduction in car emissions.

Similar acts are enforced in the EU too. When these regulations were made into law, low-
emission car engine technology was not available, and the global car industry was forced
into creating new technology. A number of innovations were made in a relatively short
period of time – from hybrid electric cars to fuel additives.
Similar examples apply to other industries. Anti-pollution regulations have been enforced
in most of Europe and North America, providing a large number of innovations10.
The general consensus in the western world that the death toll from traffic accidents is
way too high, has resulted in new policies about speed, safety and driving behaviour.
These in turn have led to a number of security-related innovations: streetlights, physically
separated driving lanes, airbags, electronic monitoring and alerts, and distance meters to
name but a few. Without policies, many of these innovations may not have been around.
In security, we also see how policies spur innovation. Privacy regulations in Europe, and
increasingly around the world, create new technology: assessment tools to see how “our
system” compares to the regulation, forget-me tools to allow people to be forgotten by the
system, information security management systems to monitor and control our
implementation of privacy controls, and so on.
Just like Thor’s tribe mate who forced a policy change, technology and our use of it forces
changes in our policies. The changes in the policies then change the way people use
technology, and it also may change the technology itself as we have just seen.
Since culture is defined as the ideas, customs and social behaviours of a particular people
or group, we now understand that our surroundings are important factors to consider when
we want to work with security culture. Although changing only one part of the triangle
will change culture, it makes sense to analyse just how that change will impact the other
two. It also makes sense to set out to use all three elements: when implementing a new
policy, make sure you teach the people in your organisation to understand the change and
the reason for it, and use technology to help enforce the change.
In the next chapter I take a closer look at security awareness, and how it relates to security
culture.
10 Since the introduction of modern anti-pollution regulations, for instance, we’ve seen an astonishing increase in green
technologies, including more efficient solar cells, whole windfarms, more powerful electric and hybrid cars, and so on.
Even traditionally non-green technologies like car engines have improved efficiency in order to compete as a ‘greener
alternative’.

CHAPTER 3: HOW DOES SECURITY CULTURE
RELATE TO SECURITY AWARENESS?
In this chapter, we look at how security culture comprises security awareness,
and how security culture succeeds where awareness alone is doomed.
In the previous chapter I discussed how security culture is more than people and
competence; culture includes the rules, laws and regulations, as well as the technology we
use. Security awareness belongs in the people and competence part of the triangle.
Security awareness is a limited area, as well as a poorly defined one. There is no
commonly agreed upon definition of security awareness, which in turn means that a
common understanding of what security awareness really is, is non-existent. Almost
everyone I talk to has their own idea of what security awareness is, and how to create
awareness.
The range of ideas for building security awareness goes from using baseball bats to
enforce a certain behaviour on one side, via running boring, generic and non-yielding
security awareness trainings, to not doing anything at all. What is even worse is the fact
that very few of these efforts are being measured; they are at best measured by anecdotal
proof: “I did this, and it did/did not work.” Metrics are simply being waved off as
“impossible to measure awareness”.
Because measuring your progress is important when working with culture, Chapter 6
looks deeper into the topic.
For the sake of clarity, I will use the following definition of awareness in this book:
“Knowledge or perception of a situation or fact.”
(Oxford dictionary)
What does it mean to have knowledge or perception of a situation or fact? It boils down to
two things: the right competence, and the ability to apply said competence in a particular
situation.
So far, so good. Building competence can be done; we see that all around us where we
learn new skills and information almost daily. The human mind is an amazing machine
when it comes to collecting, analysing and using new information and skills. The more we
know, the easier it is for our brain to do even more, which is truly amazing11.
The flipside is that if you learn the wrong skills, outdated information and erroneous
mental patterns, your brain still does a great job but just turns out the wrong answers and
responses.
Let us quickly visit the brain and how it works. Take a look around you. Chances are that
there is a cup of coffee, tea or other beverage nearby. For the sake of simplicity, I will call
it a cup of coffee.

Take a look at the cup. The light that reflects on the object is caught by light-receptors in
your eyes. The receptors pick up the wavelengths of the light, and different receptors pick
up different wavelengths. The receptors trigger events that are sent down nerve paths into
your brain. The light has been transformed into chemical signals.
When the different chemicals reach your brain, your brain recreates an image of the object
(that cup of coffee) using one of two methods12:
–    Slow: You have never seen anything like a cup of coffee before, and your brain does
not know what it sees. Your brain slows down and starts to create a mental image, a
pattern – what we call a mental pattern – of the object and its significance. Since this is
a new observation, your brain may or may not register important properties of the
object, such as it has black content, it is hot, it carries liquid, there is only one opening,
the handle is there to hold the cup, the liquid is drinkable, the liquid is a drug and so
on. To make your brain understand all of these details, it must be taught. You must
teach it the significance of the properties, and help it eliminate the non-important ones
like the colour of the cup, the size of the table and the form of the room. This slow
processing and learning that takes place in your brain requires a large amount of
energy (viewed from your brain’s perspective), and so it prefers a quicker, faster and
less expensive way of processing information.
–    Fast: Most of the time, your brain interprets information using a fast method. In this
scenario, the object that your brain receives of the coffee cup is matched to an already
existing mental pattern in your brain. Your brain recognises the object as a cup and
automagically interprets that cup to mean hot, black liquid that helps you (your brain)
to be sharper and quicker. This processing takes very little energy (again, from the
perspective of your brain), and is lightning fast (compared to the slow function
before). No wonder your brain prefers this one!
Now that we have taken a very shallow crash-course in human sensing, perception and
information handling, it is time to look at how this functioning also works against us.
Growing up in Europe, I have a thing for ice-cream. During summer holidays, I love to
cool down with a cone, or on special occasions a soft ice fresh from the counter. A soft ice
in Europe is usually white, tastes of vanilla and you can have it dipped into a variety of
powders, colours and liquids. Personally, I prefer a topping of chocolate powder. I observe
others who have rainbow sprinkles, some have strawberry sprinkles and others again
choose liquid chocolate that turns into a hard shell on their soft ice.
Imagine a hot summer day. The sun is burning, and you are walking through a city centre
as a tourist. You see a shop promoting soft ice, and you watch happy, smiling people
licking their soft ices as they pass you on the street. “The perfect day for a soft ice,” you
think, and head to the counter.
Suddenly you discover there are three choices of soft ice. You can have the white soft ice.
You can have the brown soft ice. Or you can choose the green soft ice. Let the drooling
begin!
Before you choose, keep the image in your mind and tell me: what taste do the different

coloured soft ice have? The white one is vanilla, right?
A brown-coloured soft ice-cream. What taste is that? Chocolate? Or sweet beans?
What taste does the green one have? Pistachio nuts (either chemical or real)? Or is it
green-tea taste?
Write your answer on a piece of paper. Your answer depends on a lot of things, all learned!
Firstly, your mental image of a soft ice-cream was stored in your brain, and was brought
out just by thinking about it. Along with the image, you may also have felt the summer
heat, you may have recalled the smells and taste from that memory, and possibly you
heard the noises and sounds that you experienced when you had that soft ice. This is your
brain going on fast mode. It has learned what soft ice is and the surroundings that go
together with it. Every time you think of soft ice, it brings these memories out.
This processing is really good, because you can recall, recognise and act upon a particular
situation: summer, vacation, soft ice. Properly trained, this could be you recognising a
phishing scam, a Trojan or a threatening situation.
Secondly, your mental image of the soft ice represents what we can call acquired taste.
Your answers to the question of colours and the taste each colour must represent are
dependent on your culture. If, like me, you are a westerner who grew up and spent most of
your time in Europe, Australia or North America, you have learned that when it comes to
sweets, and ice-cream in particular, white is likely to mean vanilla, brown to be chocolate
and green to be pistachio nut flavour.
Now recall the scenario of me in front of that counter, having the choice of vanilla,
chocolate or pistachio. Of those, I would choose chocolate first, pistachio second and
vanilla third. So what do I order?
This is where context matters. Am I about to order a soft ice in Europe? Australia? Or in
North America? Or am I somewhere else? And if I am somewhere else, do the rules I
know, the mental patterns I have learned, still apply?
In fact, I am in Kyoto in Japan. I had a one-day excursion to this fantastic city during my
first visit to Japan some years ago. Since I had been in Japan for a few days already, I had
picked up on their different idea of sweets. Some I loved, and some I found very hard to
understand. So, before I ordered, I asked what kind of flavours they had, and was given
the answer: plain (vanilla), sweet beans and green tea.
I probably did look surprised, because I was really expecting the answer to be vanilla,
chocolate and pistachio. I expected these particular answers due to one of the
characteristics of mental patterns: they get stronger every time we use them. So every time
I have seen brown ice cream with the taste of chocolate, that particular mental pattern
grew stronger in my mind until the pattern became so strong that anything that no longer
fitted into the pattern surely must have been wrong, impossible, or both.
This is sometimes referred to as the Expert Bias13. Experts are experts in their particular
field because they have had the opportunity to narrow their area of focus, and work mainly
in that field so long that their mental patterns are strong and efficient. The flipside they

(and those around experts) may experience is the expert’s lack of ability to see things from
other perspectives – their mental patterns are so strong that they can no longer review their
position.
Similar mechanisms apply to people who are not given the opportunity to have their
current mental patterns challenged. If you grow up in a particular culture, and you are not
exposed to other cultures, it becomes very hard for you to understand that other people
may behave differently from you, and that their behaviour may not be malintent or even
wrong.
There I was in Kyoto, by this time knowing that brown is sweet beans and not chocolate.
My brain, craving for the chocolate flavour, quickly convinced me that sweet bean flavour
cannot be that bad and is probably almost as good as chocolate. I ordered a brown soft-ice
cone without toppings.
Still expecting chocolate, my brain almost shut down when my taste buds sent the taste
from my mouth to my brain. I could not believe what I had. I tried several times, and each
time the same happened: my brain expected a different taste, and the difference was too
great to conceive. All my brain could do was tell me that this did not fit the pattern, this
was not right, this was wrong!
I experienced a strong case of cognitive dissonance, a psychological phenomenon that
happens when your brain expects something particular to happen, and something else
happens instead. It is like your brain just says, “This cannot be. I don’t believe this.” And
then it just denies any of the novelty.
Cognitive dissonance14 is important in awareness too. If your security awareness
programmes are not properly aligned to your organisation’s particular needs, they are
more likely to create similar responses in your participants that I had in Kyoto. More
importantly, I understood the context, and I knew about these effects. Even then, I fell
victim to this mental process. We all do, more often than we like to admit.
Part of our job as security officers is to help our colleagues understand risk and teach them
appropriate responses. To do that, we need to understand how our human mind functions,
so that we can adapt our training efforts to build knowledge and perception to deal with
security issues in the correct manner.
Understanding our brain’s shortcuts and mishaps should also help you to understand that it
is not your employees who are stupid, it is a question of how we communicate with them
that matters.
The main difference between security awareness and security culture is that culture is
more than just awareness. If you recall from Chapter Two, security culture is a
combination of people, policy and technology. Awareness is only about people, and only a
subset of the people: it is knowledge only. This does not mean we do not need awareness.
Awareness, or competence as I prefer to call it, is vital for people to have to do the right
thing. The key is to consider competence as one way of building culture, not an end in
itself.

Security awareness in itself only helps people know about, or be aware of, the security
issue you are training in. Knowing something is not the same as changing a behaviour,
which is usually what we want to do when we train people about phishing attempts,
password security or clean-desk policies. Knowing about an issue is only one of the steps
towards changing that behaviour. Using the Social learning theory15, we discover that
there is a four-step cognitive process people use to learn:
1.  Attention
2.  Retention
3.  Reproduction
4.  Motivation.
Each of these steps is important, and awareness is often mostly about the first two.
What does this mean in practice? Let us take a closer look at each of the four elements:
Attention
Attention is about the learner paying attention to the activity to learn. The one who is
learning must be present, pay attention and take an interest in what is going on. As in life
in general, there are things that impact this step: the learner himself, as well as the training
and content.
To enhance attention, we can provide relevance to the learner by explaining why this
training behaviour is important. We can also provide an environment where the behaviour
we want is already modelled, and show this modelled behaviour.
Security awareness programmes that stop at this level are recognised by measuring
attendance only; they report on the number of people taking a particular course.
Retention
Retention is about the learner’s ability to retain information. Again, the learner’s abilities
are at play, and we can help them retain the knowledge by creating an environment that
enables easy learning, adapting the content to the level of knowledge of the learner as well
as repeating as necessary.
With security culture in mind, we can adapt our programmes and their content to the needs
of the learner by analysing the audience before we develop the actual training content.
People are different, and may need different approaches to learn best.
Security awareness programmes that stop at this level are recognised by measuring
attendance, and repeating the same training programme at some intervals, like a yearly
phishing training programme.
Reproduction
Reproduction is about showing that the behaviour is learned. In this stage, the learner will
reproduce the learned behaviour and show that they know what to do and how to do it.

Many awareness programmes stop at this level. They use skill tests, questionnaires and
other quality-assessment tools during and right after the training programme, showing
some level of reproduction. An example is a phishing training programme where you
measure how many learners click on a link during the training and not after.
Motivation
The final step, the target to reach for, is to motivate the learner to reproduce the behaviour
consistently outside of the learning situation. The learner is taking into account both
formal and informal information to decide whether or not to reproduce a behaviour. Both
technology and policies play important roles to motivate the learner. If, for example, you
want people to discover and report phishing emails, and your reporting system requires
them to file a three-page form, their motivation will be lower. They may very well be
aware of the problem and know how to handle it, yet the technology to do so is too much
of a burden for them to commit to the behaviour.
Security awareness programmes at this level measure behaviour on a number of levels.
They may look at attendance of training courses, but will use that number only as an
indicator that there is activity. They will implement tests to measure actual competence, or
the ability to reproduce. They also implement other metrics to measure the impact of
behaviour on their systems using logs and data analysis.
Organisations that implement programmes at this level use a structural approach that helps
them focus on improving their security culture. They may still call what they do security
awareness trainings, when in practice they are running successful security culture
programmes, building and maintaining the kind of security culture they want.
Looking at the definition of culture again – the ideas, customs and behaviour of a society
or group – it becomes clear that having knowledge or perception of a situation or a fact is
not enough if we want to change culture. What we need to do is to identify the ideas, the
customs and the behaviour that reside in our organisation today, and consider what ideas,
customs and behaviours we want in our organisation. Bridging that gap is what our efforts
should be all about.
By now you may be wondering if I expect you to do all of this by yourself. I don’t. Nor
should anybody else. Changing culture is a task done by a number of people, and your job
is to be part of that force. In the next chapter I will give you some pointers as to whom to
ally with.
Building bridges
Building Bridges
John, the CISO of a large, multinational bank, learned that his colleagues in other
parts of the organisation viewed his work and team as a nuisance, a distraction to
their own work and a hassle that was forced upon them. “They just don’t get it,”
complained John, “I’m here to secure the business so that we can avoid breaches and

downtime, and all they give me are complaints and negativity.” John is not alone in
facing this challenge. The challenge is to demonstrate a clear business value that
resonates with the rest of the organisation, even if plans must be changed along the
way.
The first step in this direction is to understand the business, and how business in
general functions. As part of that understanding, John realised that security secures
the business and reduces risk. The purpose of security is not to remove all risk, nor is
it a question of getting in the way of business. “I understood that there cannot be
security without business,” he told me, “but it very well may be business without
security!” After this revelation, John toured the different departments and locations,
discussing security issues with department managers, country managers and many
more. His focus was not on selling security, but to learn about the challenges each
department faced, and to learn how he could change the communication within the
bank. He set out to build bridges instead of burning them.
John also learned that he could use help to build his security culture message and to
spread it throughout the bank. He reached out to the HR department and involved
them in his security culture programme. The HR department are a key resource when
working with culture in any organisation, and they are also the specialists when it
comes to training programmes. Next, he asked the bank’s marketing department if
they would help craft a message and the needed collateral to empower his security
culture campaigns. At first, he was more than a little sceptical to involve creative
people who had no understanding of security. Using arguments like “they are trained
in communication”, and “by working with you, they will learn security”, I convinced
him to try it on one campaign at first.
By reaching out and building bridges, John set up a core security culture team with
members from his own team, from HR and from marketing. He also invited key
people from around the bank to be on an advisory board, who were asked to test
campaign ideas, comment on materials and give feedback to enhance the overall
performance of the security culture programme.
11 The psychologists Gigerenzer, Kahneman and Pinker (among others) have developed a variety of models that reflect
how humans make decisions, learn new things, and so on. For instance, Kahneman received the Nobel Prize for his work
on Prospect Theory, which describes how humans make decisions where the probabilities of certain outcomes are
known. Using heuristic processes, humans combine disparate data in order to refine their decisions, even where the
individual is unaware or oblivious to the fact that they have this information. (Kahneman and Tversky, “Prospect
Theory: An Analysis of Decision Under Risk”, 1979.)
12 This example is derived from Kahneman’s Thinking Fast and Slow.
13 This is also called the ‘Curse of Knowledge’, and extends beyond expertise and into the difficulties of reasoning with
someone else’s beliefs. In the words of Birch and Bloom, “adults’ own knowledge of an event’s outcome can
compromise their ability to reason about another person’s beliefs about that event.” (Susan Birch and Paul Bloom, “The
Curse of Knowledge in Reasoning About False Beliefs”, 2007.)
14 Cognitive dissonance can be described as the state of having inconsistent thoughts, beliefs or attitudes. In general, it is
a mechanism by which a person rationalises conflicting experiences or knowledge, without having to accept that these
are, in fact, at odds. (Leon Festinger, A theory of cognitive dissonance, 1957.)

15 Bandura and Walters, 1963

CHAPTER 4: ASKING FOR HELP RAISES YOUR
CHANCES OF SUCCESS
In this chapter I will discuss who to involve, and why, when working with
security culture – HR, marketing, management and so on.
Humans are impressive when we consider what we can learn to stay on top of our game.
History is a clear tell-tale of what may happen when bright minds bring their heads
together to evolve their ideas. Consider people such as Edison, Einstein, Marie Curie and
Michelangelo. Look at people such as Sun Tzu, Napoleon and Churchill.
It is easy to think of such bright minds as people who did everything by themselves. When
looking at their achievements it quickly becomes clear that they were not alone – they had
help. They worked with other people. In fact, they knew how to involve the right kind of
people, at the right time, to create the impact they needed.
They owe their success to other people.
When analysing security culture programmes that create success, it quickly becomes clear
that such programmes are not one-man shows. Successful security culture is built by
involving competence from around the organisation to leverage the competence available.
Sometimes it also makes sense to look outside the organisation for inspiration,
competence and help.
Asking for help may feel like failure. Especially if you are considered the subject matter
expert, the one other people come to for answers. Being the expert may mean being used
to having all the answers and that being right is expected. What do you do then, when the
landscape changes and your experience no longer seems to apply?
You learn to ask for help. Instead of being the know-all, you become the hub who
connects the different kinds of knowledge needed in a modern-day security culture
programme. You focus on finding the people who have, or can come up with, the right
answers. And you bring these people together in a project to build the culture you want to
create.
Success today is like success yesterday: a result of the combined efforts of one or several
teams. Building a successful team means understanding how to ask for help, and whom to
ask it from.
Building security culture requires a lot more than just information security competence.
Technology and policies are a part of security culture, just like people and competence.
Your security culture team needs to reflect all the areas of security culture, not only those
areas you are confident with.
Security culture is a subculture of the organisational culture, your company culture. As
such, security culture should be designed and built together with those in the organisation
who deal with organisational culture. In most organisations the responsibility of culture
lies with HR. HR in turn receives instructions and direction from management through the

company employment policies, the company mission and vision, as well as the existing
company culture.
HR knows culture. Setting out to create a new security culture in your organisation
requires the involvement of HR, and preferably you want them to actively support and
work with you. Your goal is to have HR embrace the security culture programme and
implement it as a part of the existing company culture programmes.
Many organisations already have HR involved in security. Many employee on-boarding
programmes come with “Read and Sign” security policies, mandatory IT security
trainings, and distribution of keys and credentials. Organisations also have off-boarding
programmes to ensure the handing off of employee keys, credentials and so on.
Security awareness trainings may also be included in HR-controlled trainings. Awareness
trainings under HR are often motivated by compliance more than conformity, and often
such training efforts are delegated to the security department.
And here is the challenge: unless the security department has dedicated resources who
themselves are dedicated to awareness and culture, the training efforts delivered miss the
target. Developing and delivering trainings itself is a specialist field, one sometimes
referred to as Instructional Design.
The Association of Training and Development (ATD) has great experience in creating
trainers and trainings for workforce development, and they provide their members with a
special certification in instructional design. You can think of it as the training industry’s
Certified Information Systems Security Professional (CISSP). There is a reason for that:
developing training programmes for adults, programmes that yield the kind of results you
want, is a skill and competence that requires training and practice. Just like working with
security is a demanding sector that has its own requirements, creating and delivering
trainings is a specialist field.
Working closely with HR will provide you with important insights to how culture is
currently built and maintained. Piggybacking on the activities with smart messages to
enhance security may be a successful strategy. Only by working with HR can you do that.
HR may also run and manage the security culture programme themselves, freeing up
precious time and resources from the security team. Keep in mind your goal: to build and
maintain security culture. There is nothing in that goal that does not let HR manage the
security culture programme itself!
In addition to competence within areas such as training, security and culture, a successful
security culture programme must also be communicated in a way that resonates with the
audience. Our security messages must be presented using words, images and anecdotes16
that make sense to those we are trying to teach. Most of the time, they are not subject-
matter experts on security – they do other things like sales, accounting, production,
strategy and management. If we are to make them understand, we need to adjust the way
we communicate with them.
We must learn how to communicate. Or, we can ask for help from those who know how to

communicate.
Many organisations have a marketing or communication department. The names vary
depending on sector and industry, but what you are looking for are those people who
create information that explains what your organisation does, where the value lies and why
others should care. If your organisation does not have a separate department that does this,
find the team that does. Or look outside the organisation. Many companies prefer to buy
external marketing services.
The kind of help you are looking for from this resource is divided into two parts:
1.  Audience analysis
2.  Message crafting.
Any great presenter adapts their presentation style, words and content to the audience.
They understand that different people have different needs, focus and interests, and make
great efforts forming their message to make it stick with that particular audience. To
understand their audience, they will ask the organiser who the target audience is, what
level of skills they have, as well as other relevant information like sector, industry,
language, age, sex and so on17.
For an inexperienced organiser and speaker, these questions may seem strange and
irrelevant, but it helps the speaker to adjust their content and delivery to ensure as many
participants as possible take home their message. And that is what is important: hit home
with as many as possible.
Analysing your target audience for your security culture programme follows the same
principle: the more you understand your audience, the easier it is to ensure they
understand your message. Target audience analysis is also something that marketing
departments and advertising companies do for a living. To make the most out of the
marketing budgets, the market is segmented into user groups with similar traits, who are
then documented and analysed according to their demographics. Depending on the
products and/or services sold, psychographics may also be applied. When building
security culture, you want to consider both demographics and psychographics when
analysing your audience.
Segmentation, or the art of dividing your market into subgroups, in your security culture
programme can be done by using departments as segments. You may also choose to
segment using other borders: countries, companies, teams, locations, language and so on.
Each organisation is different, and may need a different approach.
When you have segmented your organisation, selected which segment to work with and
analysed it, it is time to craft your message.
The second area where your marketing department may help in building and maintaining
security culture, is crafting the message you want to send. Their expertise and creativity is
a great asset in any programme that needs to communicate a clear message. By asking
them to join your security culture workgroup, you can bring their skill-sets to your table,
helping you create content that makes sense.

Remember that you are the subject-matter expert on security, and they are brought in as
experts on communication. This implies that you need to trust their ideas and instincts,
even if their ideas may be outside of your comfort zone. You are not the target audience,
someone else is.
With all that said, a word of caution. Being creative and communicators, the marketing
department does not know much about security, especially in the beginning of your
security culture programme. You are the security expert, and as such you must ensure the
message conveyed is correct and aligned with the security culture goals. Creativity is
great, as long as it moves the programme in the right direction.
Working with creative people may introduce conflicts. The easiest way to involve creative
people is by having a clearly defined scope. Narrow it down early on, and help them stay
within the defined boundaries of your scope. Your job is not to say “NO!”, but rather to
ask them nicely, “So how do you see this idea bringing us closer to our goal?”
If you experience a situation where the communication people have one idea and you have
a different one, you may consider testing what works. Set up an A/B test with both ideas,
using a subset of your target segment as a testing group. You may have to resort to one-on-
one testing and interviews, unless your segment is large enough to create a true blind test.
Testing campaigns before you roll them out to a larger part of the organisation can be done
using the 12-week campaign of the Security Culture Framework. Use one campaign to test
the content, and the following 12-week period to run the content that gave the best results
to the larger audience.
I have also had the not so pleasant task of working with someone creative who never
accepted my boundaries. In meetings she would be fine with my objections, whereas later
I would receive long emails explaining why I was wrong and she was right. She would
also disregard my change requests. It became obvious that this could not continue, and she
was quickly replaced. Unfortunately, there is no easy way to tell when to replace someone
on your team; it is a call that must be made on a case-by-case basis. Ask yourself if the
person is really that annoying, or if it is you who is creating the situation.
Knowing when to ask for help is a skill we all can develop. Knowing whom to ask may be
a bit tougher. And knowing how to ask can be tricky too!
Table 1
What
Where
Training
Culture
Recruiting
On-boarding
Off-boarding
Employee data
Organisational overview
HR
Communication

Design
Audience analysis
Marketing
PR
Crafting messages
Analysing results
A/B testing
Marketing/communication dept
Finance
Sponsor/ambassador
Visibility
Anchoring
Policy sign-off
Reporting
Strategic planning
C-level management
How to ask for help is dependent on what you need and whom you ask. Asking your chief
executive officer to support your security culture programme is different from asking your
colleague to patch a server.
To enhance your chance to receive the answer you want, it is helpful to understand the
other person’s perspective and focus. The more you can help them connect their own dots,
the easier it will be for them to understand your question, your needs and therefore their
interest in helping you. Think of it as audience analysis, where you look at what is
important to this person and their role. Ask yourself questions like:
•    what are the major challenges this role/person faces?
•    how will my idea/challenge/programme be received?
•    how can I adapt my idea/challenge/programme to help the role/person?
•    how is my idea/challenge/programme fitting in with their major challenge?
Sometimes it also proves valuable to consider how the other person perceives you as a
person: we are more likely to help people we like and connect well with.
The next chapter is dedicated to the psychology of how we are influenced by other people.
Use that chapter to better understand other tactics you can apply to build the support you
require to build and maintain security culture in your organisation.
Building your team
John, the CISO of a large, multinational bank, had a team of cyber security
professionals to help him tackle incidents and run their security operations. His team
was highly skilled, from networking engineering to intrusion detection system
tuning, from security data analytics to incident response. And they all seemed to love
their work. Except when the task of security awareness landed on their table. John
thought it had turned into a game within his team to avoid any work with security

awareness. He understood that his team’s lack of interest in awareness could be due
to a number of things:
•    Awareness is not considered sexy enough (i.e. not technical).
•    A team member not having enough knowledge of awareness.
•    Awareness work seems to never be successful, turning anyone working with it
into a failure.
•    A lack of funding to buy the coolest trainings or content available.
Most of these things can be handled easily enough – as soon as they are recognised.
Let’s take each point by itself:
•    Not considered sexy is a common excuse we receive from technical staff. There
are several ways to deal with this issue, including hiring a security culture
manager, as is increasingly being done in the Nordic countries (Norway, Sweden
and Denmark), who will build, implement and manage a security culture
programme. Another option is to use technical tools such as the Social
Engineering Toolkit, a tool most techies will relate to and like. Communicating
the importance and value of security culture work will also help motivate your
team to take it on.
•    A team not having enough knowledge of awareness is another challenge we see.
Of course, if you do not have enough knowledge of a topic, it is hard to realise
just how cool it is, right? To tackle this challenge, training your team in security
culture is vital. The aforementioned Security Engineering Toolkit is an excellent
way to raise knowledge and build interest. Other ways to show how critical and
exciting awareness work can be, is to join or design a Social Engineering Capture
the Flag (CTF) event with your team. Also, create an environment where it is easy
to plan and execute security culture activities.
•    The argument about security awareness never being successful is easily combated
with good metrics, and an understanding of human behaviours. Use Metrics
module to design and build goals and metrics that matters.
•    A lack of funding is a challenge in all work – not just security. To get the funding
you want, you will have to fight other departments and projects that may be more
business aligned and better at communicating direct and indirect value. Again,
metrics matter. And when it comes to securing budgets, communicating business
value is critical. Do not expect a huge fund from day one. What is more common
is that you must demonstrate results and value over time. Again, Metrics module
is your friend. Also, a thinking out of the box, low-cost, use-what-we-have
mentality will take you a long way when funding is low.
John had very little funding, and could not hire a full-time security culture officer.
Instead, he asked his team for two volunteers to spend 40% of their time over the
next three months on security awareness. He offered training in the Social
Engineering Toolkit, as well as in the Security Culture Framework, and the three

would evaluate the progress after the three months. John was hoping that he would
motivate the two members who volunteered to take on the security culture work after
the initial three-month trial, yet he had not anticipated just what he would get in
return.
The new CultureCrew, as they quickly became known, fell in love with the Social
Engineering Toolkit and used it immediately. They set up a Capture-the-Flag event of
the security team, an event that became so successful people from outside of security
wanted to join and asked when the next event would take place. When the review
meeting with John and CultureCrew took place at the end of the three-month
evaluation period, John was surprised to hear that both team members would like to
go on; they even presented an 18-month plan on how to build security culture
company-wide. They explained that the Security Culture Framework offered
templates they had used to develop campaigns they could implement easily and with
little extra effort, and they had all the resources they needed to start.
After a review and some minor adjustments, John signed off CultureCrew’s plan to
get their security culture going, knowing that the heart of security operations, his
team, had changed their mind completely about security awareness work.
16 While anecdotes are sneered at by more analytical people, they provide an excellent method of communicating with a
broad audience. Steven Denning presents an excellent discussion of anecdotes as part of his argument for storytelling in
business leadership (“Telling Tales”, Harvard Business Review, 2004).
17 Audience analysis differs subtly between disciplines, but in general recommends a few key features be examined:
demographics (who the audience is – age, gender, culture, and so on), attitudes (disposition, beliefs, values), knowledge
(what does the audience know about the topic) and environment (how is the information being presented, where is the
audience when they receive the information, and so on). Depending on your particular circumstances, these will be more
or less involved, and will enable you to tailor your communication to the audience.

CHAPTER 5: THE PSYCHOLOGY OF GROUPS, AND
HOW TO USE IT TO YOUR BENEFIT
In this chapter, we take a look at one of the important psychological mechanisms
of humans: groups and social interaction. Learn how to use in-groups to build
trust.
A key to success with building and maintaining good (security) culture is to understand
that people are different, and that you need to adapt your efforts to their needs,
backgrounds and knowledge. Successful security culture is built by security professionals
who know their own strengths and include relevant personnel and competence from across
their organisation.
One of the challenges of our human mind is how we are hardwired to relate and interact
with other individuals18. We are, as species, a social creature, designed to live in groups.
Research in psychology strongly suggests that our grouping behaviour is built in in our
basic functions. We, humans, cannot survive alone; we rely on our group to feed us, to
teach us and to support us. You can observe this need easily in babies and small children:
they would not survive without parents or other grown-ups to feed and care for them.
What is interesting from a perspective of building and maintaining security culture is that
as we grow up, we rely as much, perhaps even more, on groups. These groups come in
different shapes and sizes, and form inter-group relationships. All human beings belong to
a number of groups, from your family, extended family, to the school you attended, to the
sports team you support, to the workplace and so on. The groups we belong to, are a
member of, are referred to as in-groups in psychology.19
There are an even larger number of groups that we do not belong to. Examples can be
different families than your own, people in a different workplace, supporters of sports
teams you do not support, political groups, as well as cities and countries around the
world. Groups we do not belong to are referred to as out-groups in psychology20.
Based on in- and out-groups, we can look at how we interact inside our groups, and how
we treat people not from our own groups21.
Think about your workplace. There are a number of people working there. The
organisation where you work is an in-group for everyone who works there. All your
colleagues, across the organisation, share the same in-group. The larger your organisation,
the more complex it becomes, and the more likely it is that smaller groups of people form:
workgroups, teams, departments, locations and so on. Each member of these subgroups
share the common in-group of the organisation, and they create new in-groups based on
the new subgroup.
To use an example: you and your team, and everyone else in your organisation, form one
in-group: the employer. You and your team are also members of a subgroup of that group:
your department. Everyone inside your department shares this in-group with you, and no-
one else in your organisation does. Your department becomes an in-group, and every other

department becomes an out-group. And for all the other departments in your organisation,
your department is an out-group: you are not with them, you are an outsider, possibly even
an enemy.
You can continue to create subgroups inside the department, and you will see that every
team, project and group of people form and take part in a number of different in-groups.
And, consequently, are considered a member of numerous out-groups.
Forming groups is a very good strategy to create greater results than can be achieved
alone, a strategy seen in many other creatures. To make groups effective, each individual
is required to give up some of its own power and resources to the mutual benefit of the
group. We pay a membership due by accepting to obey certain rules, to follow the
commands and so on. In return we are supported by the others, as well as being defended
from outside threat. This is sometimes referred to as a social contract22.
This outside threat is important. Any out-group is considered a potential threat, no matter
how weak we consider the group to be. Also, no matter how weak our affiliation is with
our in-group, our mind is biased when meeting and dealing with people who are not
members of our in-group. It’s almost like we automatically jump into the trenches and
start firing at anything they say or do.
Understanding how strong our social bonding is when it comes to our ability to connect
with others, will help us to change our behaviours when we meet with and try to engage
people in our out-groups. It also helps us understand why some groups of people are
difficult to connect and bond with. As the security professional, it is part of your job to
interact with all the different groups in your organisation. Realising that some of the
difficulties you encounter with other people may be due to how the human mind is wired,
and not about you personally, may help you do a better job.
With the backdrop of in-groups and out-groups, you are now ready to figure out how to
handle the challenges created by these social bonds. Knowing that each department forms
an in-group, effectively enforcing a hostility towards anyone not in that department, will
help you come up with a strategy of using social contracts and group membership to build
security culture.
Knowing about in-groups, and the biases we have, points towards a solution: make
yourself and them members of the same group, turning on the in-group bias for all of you.
The good news is that you already share one such in-group: your employer, the
organisation you all work for. So, the first step towards building security culture is to
create a strong company culture: a common ground for all the employees, an “us”
mentality. Successful enterprises have used this knowledge for decades. Think of brands
like Coca-Cola, IBM and Google. They all share one important thing: they have formed
and cultivated a company-wide identity, forming an in-group of all the employees.
On the start-up scene you see the same strategy applied: by building a strong brand
awareness, first internally, later externally, the employees feel a strong connection to the
business. This connection creates a sense of purpose that enables the company to build a
strong internal culture, an in-group that is used to tackle any challenge and struggle that

comes their way.
Organisational culture is very often the responsibility of HR. Just like any other
department, HR itself forms a subgroup, an in-group sharing all the properties of groups.
You, the security professional, are most likely not part of their in-group. As you just
learned, that means you are more likely to be met with suspicion and hostility when
approaching them. Remember that this is not a deliberate attitude, it is a bias all human
beings succumb to.
In organisations without a strong corporate identity, there is a likelihood of
compartmentalisation: departments, and possibly teams, have formed their own
strong in-group cultures, trumping that of the organisation. In such organisations, all
the in-group biases are being enforced, creating a culture of suspicion, hostility and
change-resistance23.
Working with HR is key to successfully building and maintaining security culture. Your
ultimate goal should be to incorporate security culture as a part of the organisational
culture: you want security culture to be a natural part of the culture in your organisation.
If you do not already have a good relationship with HR, this is the time to start. Using
what you just read about groups, start bonding with HR. There are two main strategies to
apply:
1.   Create a strong company culture, where everybody pulls in the same direction.
2.   Build a new subgroup, where you include people from the relevant groups you want to
interact with.
Most of the time, you will find it easier to start with building a new subgroup, and
leverage that to build organisation-wide change.
There are many tactics you can use to create new subgroups: you can appear at the coffee
machine used by the group you want to influence, forming a new informal group; you can
establish a new project involving people from the department(s) you want to influence,
forming a formal group; you can combine these tactics in mixed-level interactions.
The Security Culture Framework impacts culture on several levels through the way it
leverages in-group biases. Think of the core team as a cross-department group that forms a
new in-group with a group mission to change the culture of the organisation. As the work
progresses, this cross-department project builds new subgroups that create change in how
things are done, effectively impacting the organisational culture. Each training that is
completed by employees form new subgroups comprising the new competence and
expected behaviour your core team set out to create.
Over time, with repeated messages across a number of channels, a new culture is forming,
replacing the existing culture24.
Trying to change culture without understanding the force of group bias is very tough. You

can use the power of groups to build support across departments, and to learn about
particular challenges other groups face in their day-to-day jobs.
Fortunately, we are not supposed to do everything ourselves. We are social creatures,
which enables us to reach out to others for help. The power of groups is profound.
As the Organisation module of the Security Culture Framework states, your core
workgroup should include resources from HR and marketing in addition to security.
Already, you have a new group that bridges the gap between three different departments.
This group also makes it easier for you to succeed in your job, as it will likely introduce
you to other security challenges these departments face.
If your resources allow for it, you can also include other people in your core group.
Another way to use the group bias to build your success is to set up specific taskforces.
Imagine a department that is especially challenging with how they treat you and security.
They have formed a strong, negative opinion towards the services you provide, and do
their best to figure out how to avoid your involvement in their systems and policies.
You have tried to reason with them, and you have tried to apply the organisational-wide
policies. This department is not paying attention, and instead they are doing what they can
to sabotage your security efforts. You are quickly running out of options.
This is a common situation. Often our gut response is aggression – and so is theirs.
Aggression creates stale boundaries, where the trenches form and dialogue stops. Instead
of working towards a common good, we find each other fighting.
It is hard to change this response, which is a manifestation of group bias, yet it is our
responsibility to solve these fights for the good of the organisation. Again, the best
strategy to apply relies on forming new in-groups. Groups you can use to establish
communication, through which you can form an understanding of their side of the story.
Groups you should use to build trust.
You may have to take it slow, and accept their rejection: if the conflict has evolved into the
trenches, building trust and communication may be time consuming25. Your first steps
should be to establish a common ground, where you invite the other party to discuss their
perspective. Do not object, and avoid judgement. Let them talk. Make them talk. Make
them commit to one thing only: agree to meet again!
What you just did was to form a new group. A group you are a member of. A group where
both parties participate and where you are all together. Use this group to form a strong
group identity, an identity you can leverage later in the process.
Understanding group bias, and how we all succumb to it, will make you better at building
and maintaining security culture. Your ultimate goal is to build a company-wide security
culture. As you have seen in this chapter, some of that work must be done through the
active use of groups and projects. Build trust and relationships on all levels throughout
your organisation. Ask for help, ideas and feedback. Most people will gladly talk to you
and share insights. And those bonds you make walking and talking are new groups: in-
groups that give you the power to create better culture and easier change.

People who like you, consider you as part of one or more of their in-groups. The group
bias tells us that members of our groups are more likely to help us. Reach out to them!
In the next chapter, you will learn about measuring culture and how you can see behaviour
in your own systems.
The story of non-functioning awareness
John, the CISO of a large, multinational bank in Europe, had a mounting feeling that
he had forgotten something. He looked through his pockets, found his keys, his
smartphone, a few coins and his access card. Everything was present. He sat in his
office to read the threat reports he received from the computer emergency response
team every morning, and everything seemed fine. John asked his colleague Peter for
an update on the progress of the pushout of the latest patch for the online banking
security system.
The phone rang as Peter entered John’s office to update his boss. There was a blink
of panic in John’s eyes as he suddenly remembered what he had forgotten: a sales
meeting with the awareness training provider they had used the past two years. He
picked up the phone, listened and said, “Yes, thanks, I will be right down.”
Peter smiled, shook his head and said, “John, you really should take some time off!
You could use it!”
John smiled back and replied, “Right, you know what this job is like. When was the
last time you took some time off?” before he rushed out of his office.
A few minutes later, he had installed himself and Sheila, the salesperson he loved for
her easy answers and great service, in one of the meeting rooms with windows
overlooking the city far below. Sheila asked if he had had the time to consider what
kind of awareness focus the bank needed this year, and was not surprised when he
admitted that he had not looked into that yet. She pulled out a glossy brochure, and
told him all about their latest offering. John did not notice anything new since last
year, except a possible change in the colours. Or perhaps it was the same ones. He
could not tell.
Later that day, John was back at his desk wondering if he had made the right choice
when he just reordered the same training programme from Sheila that he had used
the past three years. According to Sheila, there were some additions to the training
programme to reflect the recent password breaches and the new spear phishing
attacks. When asked how he could measure the success of the programme, his
training vendor offered a number of metrics:
•    Total number of trainings distributed.
•    Total number of trainings opened.
•    Total number of successfully completed trainings (here, John wondered if this
was just a record of everyone who had clicked through the slides).

John had the metrics from earlier years, and Sheila said they looked ok. What nagged
John was that even with trainings every year, the number of breaches were on the
rise. His security metrics showed a trend towards more people clicking on phishing
links, and an increasing number of malware being detected in the bank’s systems.
Were the metrics the training company provided simply wrong? Did they show
something else? What do the present metrics really tell me, John pondered. After
some reflection, John realised he needed help.
The challenge John had is one we see with many security awareness programs –
vanity metrics, a coin termed by Eric Ries in his book The Lean Startup. Vanity
metrics are numbers, reports and statistics that seemingly provide value, but on
closer inspection don’t give us any information that we can use to analyse our scope.
Vanity metrics are just nice numbers, with little or no meaning. In other words, the
numbers John got from his training supplier gave no meaning by themselves; they
did not give him any information about the change in behaviour that the trainings
were supposed to give. To solve this challenge, John had to come up with metrics
that would give him real information that was relevant and on target.
We devised a plan where John first had to define a set of target behaviours he wanted
in the employees. Next, we had to translate those behaviours into something he could
measure on his computer systems and networks. Finally, he had to set up a baseline
metric, using the measures defined, so he could compare the results of his security
awareness program.
By following this plan, John decided that he wanted to focus on one behaviour only,
a wise choice if resources are limited or you are setting out to do something new. The
behaviour he chose was phishing detection and avoidance. Later, he also added what
he called “Safe Rescue” to his behaviours, a mechanism in employees that if they
had been breached, they would promptly turn to the information and communications
technology support with their computer, to have it assessed and cleaned. He named
this particular behaviour Safe Rescue because he realised how important it was for
employees to feel safe and secure in the handling of a successful phishing attack.
Now that John knew what behaviour he wanted to change, he could look at how to
measure that particular behaviour. Using his team and their technical knowledge,
they identified existing systems and logs they could use to collect the number of
incoming phishing attempts. A challenge they faced was how to measure successful
phishing attacks. They decided to use the number of compromised systems, and that
10% of compromised computers were due to successful phishing. That definition
allowed them to measure the change in compromised systems, and use the
fluctuation as an indicator of successful phishing.
John and his team came to the understanding that most compromised systems were
not reported by the user, and made the hypothesis that people were afraid of reporting
a successful phishing attack – people were not willing to accept and report that they
had clicked on a malicious link, or opened a bad attachment. This is when John
added Safe Rescue to his behaviour target. He realised that he needed two things: a

metric of actually compromised systems from phishing, and users who were not
afraid of reporting a compromised system. The former would help him better
understand his metrics and provide better reports to management. The latter would
create a culture where compromised computers were quickly reported and managed,
effectively increasing the overall security of the bank. He also realised that users who
approached support with their compromised systems would create a metric that he
could use to learn of trends in phishing as well as measure users’ behaviour.
With the target behaviours defined, John could use the metrics he had devised to
create a baseline. And that is what he did.
18 Group formation has long been studied in psychology and researchers generally recognise two in-built pressures that
provide the impulse to form groups: social cohesion (interpersonal attraction drawing people together) and social
identity (mutual identification of some social class, such as culture, employment, hobbies, and so on).
19 Tajfel, Billig, Bundy and Flament, “Social categorization and intergroup behaviour”, 1971.
20 Ibid.
21 The infamous Stanford Prison Experiment clearly demonstrates how groups can be formed rapidly and coerced into
applying significant pressure against out-groups.
22 Social contract theory extends across a number of disciplines, including psychology, philosophy, political science and
sociology, and describes an implicit agreement within a group that determines the rights and responsibilities of the group
and its members. Notable writers on the topic include Thomas Hobbes, John Locke and Jean-Jacques Rousseau.
23 Neville Symington identifies this form of conflict as a type of narcissism, describing “organizations so riven by
narcissistic currents that […] little creative work was done”. (Symington, Narcissism: A New Theory, 1993.)
24 In sociology, this constant shifting of cultures and the movement of ideas and traits between cultures inevitably results
in the development of new, distinct cultures. It does not describe the origin of a culture, in the sense that no culture
springs up fully-formed – all cultures are adaptations of earlier cultures, and all cultures will inevitably change and
become something else. (Wendy Griswold, Cultures and Societies in a Changing World,1994.)
25 There are a number of valid approaches and strategies for dealing with conflicts; for a more nuanced and detailed
overview, conflict management theory offers a wide range of options applicable to almost any field or industry. The
International Journal of Conflict Management provides a wealth of information and analysis of conflict management,
and is published quarterly.

CHAPTER 6: MEASURING CULTURE
In this chapter I will look at a few ways to measure culture, and how you can
take existing data to use as a baseline.
One thing I often hear from fellow security professionals is that it is impossible to measure
awareness and culture. It is an interesting point of view, and one that is usually based
upon:
•    not knowing how to measure soft skills.
•    previous failures to create results from awareness activities.
It often boils down to not realising that awareness and culture are reflected in the
behaviours of employees. In most organisations today, the heavy use of computer systems
enables us to closely monitor any and all use. An example:
Bob, a salesperson who has been in your organisation for two years in March, uses a
combination of a laptop, a pad and his smartphone to interact with the computer
systems. He reads his emails, he uses customer relationship management software,
he registers his expenses and so on. All of these systems are set up to log every
interaction with users, John’s included. The purpose of the logging is to ensure high-
quality service, backtrack activities to see if there was something a particular user did
to cause problems, and receive early warnings on potentially disastrous changes in
the computer systems.
Every time Bob uses the systems, his data is being recorded: timestamped,
geolocated, device used, system used and so on. These logs show Bob’s current
behaviours, including his habit of eating his lunch at a café down the road. Of course,
you do not know that he is eating his lunch there, what you know is that his device,
using his credentials, is being used almost daily to connect from that location.
What you see is how Bob is using the computer systems. That is what social
scientists call behaviour. Bob is interacting with his surroundings, and you are
logging that interaction. You are measuring his behaviour.
Bob’s employer has a bring your own device (BYOD) policy, stating that connection
to the computer systems must only occur using a virtual private network, and the use
of public Wi-Fi is not allowed. When on the road, Bob should only rely on his
mobile Internet connection.
When you examine the connection logs for the sales team, you discover that most of
John’s colleagues fail to follow the policy. Instead of using their mobile network,
they prefer to connect from Wi-Fi networks on the road.
Using the current log data, you now have a baseline behaviour. You know your
current situation, the “as is”.
The baseline measurement is important when designing change: knowing where you

are makes it possible to navigate to the location you need to be. If you know where
you want to be, that is.
In John’s organisation, the goal state is described in the policy document:
Every worker outside our premises should connect using VPN, and only through
mobile networks or previously accepted networks.
In this case, defining your goal is quite easy: you need employees to connect to the
computer systems with VPN, and from pre-defined networks only. You also know
that Bob and his colleagues are far from this goal; their behaviour is not according to
your goal.
The baseline measurement shows a clear gap from your defined goal. That gap is
what you will bridge with your security culture programme. Using the Security
Culture Framework, you are now ready to take a closer look at Bob and his
colleagues, analysing their behaviour, their current security understanding and their
preferred communication style. Next, you choose activities that will resonate with
Bob, helping him understand why he needs to follow the company policy.
Part of your analysis should be to interview Bob, possibly even going out on the road
with him for a day, so you can better understand the situation from his perspective.
He might tell you that the mobile network is so slow that it makes it impossible to do
his job. Maybe he is unaware of his phone automatically connecting to open Wi-Fi
networks, There are a number of possible explanations for Bob’s current behaviour,
and understanding his side will provide you with a better idea of how to change it.
After creating your baseline and analysing Bob’s current behaviour, you create a
security culture campaign, using the Security Culture Framework, with a selection of
different activities, all directly related to Bob and his team’s needs. Your programme
consists of a six-week nano-learning programme with two five-minute video clips
each week. You also join two sales meetings, one at the start of the programme and
one towards the end, where you use a Pineapple device to demonstrate what a man-
in-the-middle attack may look like, surprising everyone attending at just how easy it
is to intercept traffic. You also distribute a keyring with the text “Lock My Door”.
Before you start the programme, you run a short five-question survey where
employees are asked about their general security knowledge. You rerun the same
survey a week after your programme finishes, giving you another source of
information that you can correlate with your logs.
After your security culture campaign has come to an end, you take another look at
your logs where you discover a steady change in how the sales department connect to
the main systems. Most of the sales force now connect using VPN and the mobile
networks while on the road.
You also notice that Bob no longer seems to have his lunch at that diner. Looking at
the geolocation data your logs collect, you notice he is connecting from one of the
subsidiaries, where he gets access to a high-speed Internet connection without
breaking the company policy.

Comparing the results from your two runs of the survey, you also notice a clear
change in the security knowledge and understanding of the sales team. They show a
clear trend towards understanding why the policies are in place, and that even though
the policies demand a behaviour that to the salespeople seems counterproductive
(getting in the way of their work), they now realise that if they fail to follow the
policies, they effectively put the workplace in danger.
The argument that it is very hard to measure awareness and behaviour change is flawed26.
Just like anything else, it comes down to your current knowledge and skill-set. If you have
never learned how to look for behaviour data in your systems, you are not to blame. I hope
that reading this chapter has spawned a few ideas as to how you can use your own data
sources to look for behavioural data.
Using your current data sources is a great way to look at how behaviour translates into
patterns in your logs. There is usually no need to buy another system or software to create
more data when you want to measure awareness and behaviour change. Most
organisations I work with have more than enough data points and logs are readily
available. Sometimes you need to turn on a logging feature in the system. Most of the
time, however, the challenge is to select just the right data to use from the abundance of
available data.
Another challenge that sometimes arises is the need to do proper analysis on the data. Not
every security professional is also a skilled data analyst. Most security professionals are
not social scientists. We, the security professionals, tend to come from a hard-science
background, where only what we see directly is considered an acceptable truth.
When it comes to understanding people, behaviour, awareness and culture, we need to
learn from the social scientists. There are a number of scientific tools and methods used by
psychologists, sociologists and anthropologists around the world. These include both
quantitative data (think of your logs) and qualitative data (think of an awareness survey or
maturity model). Arguments still rage about which one of these methods is best when
understanding people: the current consensus is that we need both methods to create a more
complete understanding of how we behave and how change can be controlled.
The understanding that we may need both quantitative and qualitative data to create a
wider understanding of behaviour and change is important to notice in security culture.
Your logs tell so much (or so little), and surveys are biased by both the questions and their
wording, as much as by the context and understanding of the participants. Understanding
that both quantitative data and qualitative data can lead you far away from your path will
help you look for ways to assure the quality of the data, and its validity to the real world,
as quickly and early as possible. Correlating quantitative data with qualitative data may
help you discover discrepancies and problems with your hypothesis.
Where do you look for data?
You can use a number of different sources for information on behaviour – either directly
or indirectly. Your budgets may impose limits (as they should), and so may your own

interest and skill-set. A data analyst is a great asset to any security team, and can identify
relevant data sources as well as creating the necessary analysis.
In the book Data-Driven Security, Jay Jacobs and Bob Rudis walk the reader through how
to set up and run your own security analytics using R and Python. In their dashboard
chapter, they include an example of a CISO dashboard on security awareness based on the
SANS awareness maturity survey. I strongly suggest reading that book, even if you are not
a data analyst. Their clear explanations based on real security issues make it very easy to
relate to the topic, making it fun to learn!
Most computer systems today come with immense logging opportunities, giving you vast
amounts of data to analyse your employees’ behaviours on your systems. Often, all it takes
is knowing where to look, and turning the logging on.
Surveys can provide a lot of information. There are also a number of challenges with
surveys, including the fact that it takes some communication skills to create quality
surveys27 that yield the results you need, and not only what you want. My opinion is that
smaller surveys are better than larger ones when it comes to security awareness. Most
people in your organisation are not as passionate about security as you are, so making
them answer a long survey is usually harder than having them answer three or four
questions.
An alternative to surveys are interviews. Interviews require more resources (they take time
and are one-on-one) than surveys. The upside with interviews is that you can pick up other
information from the participant, and you may discover information otherwise kept from
you.
Interviews can be conducted in a number of different ways, depending on your purpose.
You can do the coffee-machine interview with a great number of people, where you will
ask a couple of questions in an informal way to random people you meet. This may help
you discover issues you are not currently aware of, and may be conducted over some time.
These kinds of interviews are cheap (you conduct them when you fetch your coffee), and
are best applied to collecting informal data (i.e. what you learn may not be very useful for
in-depth analysis) that you can use for careful correlation with other data sources.
You may also do formal types of interviews, where you will have a defined set of
questions, and where you select the participants based on what you are setting out to learn.
You may interview department managers to discover discrepancies in culture between
departments, or you may interview all members of a team to learn the team’s combined
understanding of security.
In addition to internal data sources, you may look for information outside your
organisation. Some countries and industries collect security information and create trend
analysis reports that may be used to discover how your organisation compares to the
industry. You may also use breach report data available for download, and compare it with
your own systems and breaches.
Take the opportunity to jump into your own logs and systems. Let the question “How can I
see behaviour of my users in this particular log?” guide you through your quest. You may

end up becoming another great data analyst, or you may decide that you need someone
else to do this job. No matter what you decide, I guarantee you that you will find ways to
track behaviour. Then ask yourself the next question: “What other logs can I combine this
with, and what will I then learn?”
A word of warning: you may find yourself digging deeper and deeper, and forgetting about
why you are looking for a particular dataset. There is so much to be discovered in the
logs!
In the next chapter I introduce the Security Culture Framework, and present one way to set
up a security culture programme that yields results.
26 There are a number of methods, techniques and principles on measuring behaviour and change available to social
scientists. The UK’s Government Social Research office published a report describing models for measuring behavior
change in a report entitled “Reference Report: An overview of behaviour change models and their uses” (2008).
27 Surveys are a common method of conducting research, but need to be carefully composed if they are to provide
meaningful results. Ideally, a statistician will be available to ensure that results can be appropriately derived from the
responses, but this is largely useless unless the correct questions are being asked. Most introductory texts on research
methods should have good advice on composing effective surveys.

CHAPTER 7: BUILDING SECURITY CULTURE
In this chapter we take a look at the Security Culture Framework, and explain
how a methodology helps organisations develop and maintain good security
culture.
Building and maintaining security culture is like any other process you manage:
continuous, planned, controlled and audited. I am sure you are familiar with the PDCA
(Plan, Do, Check, Act) flow of process management from the ISO/IEC and other
standards. What you may not know is that the same pattern of planning, doing, checking
the results and implementing necessary changes (act) also works great when it comes to
working with people.
After many years of listening to frustrated security professionals who felt they had failed
in building security awareness, I analysed what went wrong. I also wanted to see what
successfully implemented programmes had in common. In my travels around the world, I
spoke with a large number of security people in a wide variety of organisations of all
sizes. Two things quickly became apparent:
1.  There are more successful programmes than we realise.
2.  The failures could be easily mended by changing the approach.
The first finding is important because it gives us hope, and proof, that building and
maintaining security culture is possible, and may not require that much from us.
The second finding is important because it points us in the right direction: by changing the
way we design and implement security awareness programmes, we too can be successful.
Next, I looked at what was being done. Again, I found fundamental differences:
•    Successful programmes were designed and implemented in the organisation using
resources from HR, marketing and communication in addition to the security officer
(SO). They leveraged the different competences in the different fields of speciality to
set up programmes that actually worked. They also had long-term perspectives, with
clearly defined goals, milestones and metrics. And finally, they ran their programmes
as projects within a process – following the PDCA cycle.
•    Failed programmes came in two broad categories: those where the SO did everything
himself, and those who only focus on checkbox compliance.
These findings made it easy to pinpoint the mistakes to avoid, and the best practices to
share, and I could create the first iteration of the Security Culture Framework together
with Lars Haug and Mo Amin.
The Security Culture Framework is free and open. You can find it at
securitycultureframework.com, and as with all free and open approaches, it gets better
the more people join the discussion, sharing experiences and working on evolving the
framework itself.

The Security Culture Framework consists of four parts, making a fully repeatable process.
It targets large organisations, and its open and flexible structure makes it easy to adjust to
any organisation and size. It is designed to help you organise your work with building and
maintaining security culture, and will not replace any of your existing tools, suppliers or
materials; you will still need those.
The framework was created to help set up and run your security culture programme – it is
not a programme in itself.
The framework consists of four parts:
1.  Metrics
2.  Organisation
3.  Topics
4.  Planner.
Each of the parts are tied to the other, and they operate together to form a template of a
security culture programme. Depending on where your organisation is today, the starting
point is usually one of two: the Metrics, where you would define goals, or the
Organisation, where you would set up your team. For the sake of simplicity, I run through
each of the parts, and then walk you through one iteration of the programme, starting by
setting up a team.
A security culture programme is the combined activities you do to build and maintain
security culture in your organisation.
Metrics
The Metrics part of the framework helps you understand what you are setting out to do
with your security culture programme.
In this part of the programme you will define your goals – long-term and short-term. You
may have different kinds of goals – from specific results goals like “By the end of this
year, we will have reduced the number of successful phishing attacks by 50%”, to learning
goals like “By the end of this programme, the participant will demonstrate how to discover
and avoid a phishing attempt.”
A question that I get from time to time is “Why do I need to set goals?” The quick answer
is that a goal helps you understand where you are supposed to go.
Considering the two kinds of goals just mentioned, both focus on phishing, which helps
you determine what kind of activities you should implement in your programme. The
result goal is telling you what you want to achieve in the metrics on your systems and
reports: a 50% reduction of successful phishing attempts. A result goal used correctly will
help you understand where you will find supporting data to document your progress
towards your goal.
In this example, there may be a number of different sources in your current system that

may provide the metrics you need.
Another pointer that a result goal gives you is to understand your current situation. To
reduce the number of successful phishing attempts by 50%, you need to know how many
attempts are currently being successful. You use the goal to help you understand where to
find metrics that you can use both to understand your current status and the status of your
future.
You may use this basic template to define result goals:
By …………………………………. (time/date)
we 
will 
have 
……………………….…………..
(reduced/eliminated/increased/created)
the ……………………………. (task/area/topic) by ……………. (#/%/days).
In the ISO/IEC 27000 series, the current state is defined as “as is”, and the future state is
defined as “to be”. Since you are setting out to change the current state of your
organisation, you need a clear understanding of both states. The Metrics module is your
reminder to do just that.
The other kind of goal, the learning goal, is designed to help you consider what you want,
or sometimes need, your participants to learn. The learning goal should be created to
support your result goal, and is defined by asking yourself what participants need to know,
do or understand to move from their current state into the state of your goal.
You can use the following basic template to define learning goals:
By the end of this………………………………… (training/course/programme)
the 
participant 
will 
…………………………………
(demonstrate/know/show/understand)
…………………………………………………… (topic/area of knowledge/skill).
Using SMART goals
When defining results goals for your security culture programme, I advise creating so-
called SMART goals:
•    Specific
•    Measurable
•    Achievable
•    Realistic
•    Timed.
SMART goals use a model that helps you create goals that are more likely to succeed. The

model forces you to be as specific as you can, adding necessary detail and focus to your
goal. By being measurable, a SMART goal helps you know when you have reached the
goal. Achievable is a test to see if it is possible to do what you set out to do with the
current resources available. Realistic is a quality control to remind you that we set out to
do something for real; this is not a dream or a vision. Finally, a SMART goal should have
a clearly defined deadline, so that you have something to help you plan towards, as well as
a period in time where you can say “We did it!”
One of the challenges many security officers share is the need for more funding for their
awareness programmes. Having clearly defined goals, backed by numbers that relate to
the business, is a great help to communicate such needs. The Metrics part of the Security
Culture Framework helps you better understand how to measure your progress, as well as
document your results and needs. It also helps you pinpoint your area of focus, which in
turn makes it easier to implement the right kind of activities in your programme.
The Organisation part
As just mentioned, one of the challenges faced by failed awareness programmes was the
idea that “I have to do it all by myself.” This was in contrast to the successful
programmes, which generally involved a larger team with a broad understanding of
culture, training, communication and security.
The Organisation part of the Security Culture Framework helps you understand what kind
of resources you need in the core security culture workgroup, as well as who else should
be involved.
At a minimum, your core workgroup should have the following competencies on board:
•    Security
•    Communication
•    Culture and training.
This often translates to someone from the security office, someone from
marketing/communication and someone from HR. With the core competencies in place,
you can start planning your programme.
In larger organisations you may want a steering committee who sponsor and govern the
programme, and act as the liaison between the programme and top-level management. In
smaller organisations, you may report directly to the CEO, chief information officer (CIO)
or CISO.
Depending on your chosen goals, you may also include other people in the workgroup.
Competencies that often come in handy include:
•    training design/instructional design
•    graphic design
•    copywriting/editing

•    data analytics.
Some organisations have these resources internally, and others choose to buy external
services.
One point to make is that the core workgroup requires security competence, but that does
not mean that the SO must also be the group manager. One very efficient way to handle
the workgroup is to use a project manager, or at the very least a project administrator to
take the administration, meeting planning and so on off the shoulders of the SO.
Remember that the SO’s primary role in the workgroup is to provide security competence
and guidance, which is not the same as managing the group itself!
Another important aspect of the Organisation is the audience analysis section. People are
different, with different interest and areas of focus. Departments are different – they come
with different tasks, some of which attract people with special competence and different
personality types. Organisations with different locations, including multinationals, may
experience that each location has its own particular subculture.
When you design, plan and implement your security culture programme you must
understand the differences and similarities of these groups, so you can adapt your
activities, goals and expectations to each of the target audiences.
A target audience is the name that we borrow from marketing professionals, set to the
group of people we aim our security culture activities at. Unlike what some awareness
training companies may tell you, there is no such thing as “One Size Fits All” when it
comes to training and communication. To reach your defined goals, you also need to
understand what your audience is like, so you can adapt to their needs.
Using the phishing example from before: instead of running a generic phishing training
campaign towards all the employees in your organisation, you may analyse who are the
most likely targets and who are the most vulnerable targets, and come up with a list of top-
level managers, key business developers, key engineers and a few others whom you
consider the likelier targets for spear phishing attacks. Based on your list, you create two
subgroups: Business Focus and Engineering Focus. Now you have two separate groups,
with different characteristics.
The Business group consists of the top-level (and possibly key mid-level) managers plus
the business developers, whereas the Engineering group consists of a selection of patent
lawyers, key engineers and developers, plus perhaps their assistants.
At this point, it should become clear that although both groups are considered targets for
spear phishing attacks and need training, the groups also differ in their interests, area of
focus, knowledge and understanding.
Your conclusion should be to create two different campaigns, both with the same overall
goal of reducing the total number of successful phishing attacks by 50%, and the content
and the activities of the two campaigns should be different to best communicate with the
people in the groups.
For the Business group, you may focus your example phishing attempts on relevant (and

current) projects and business development focus. You may write the collateral in words
that resonate with their area of focus. For the Engineering group, you will do the same,
focusing on examples and words they can relate directly to.
You will reach your goals faster and easier if you help your target audience to quick and
painless learning. The more you know about your target audience, the easier it will be for
you to adapt the message and content to their particular needs.
Knowing the area of focus and interest of all different target audiences may not be
feasible. One strategy I see implemented with great success is to involve the target
department or audience in the security culture workgroup for the particular goal. In the
preceding example, you could invite someone from the Business target group to advise on
what may or may not work in that group, and you could invite someone from the
Engineering group to do the same for that target audience. By inviting your target
audience into the planning of activities, you are also likely to learn about issues you did
not know about, as well as building relations and bridges to people around your
organisation who may become your sponsors and advocates.
Topics
So far, using the Security Culture Framework, we have defined one or several clear goals,
we understand how to measure them, we have set up a workgroup to organise the
programme and we know that we need to adapt our activities to the people we are training.
The next part of the Security Culture Framework is Topics. Building on your defined goal
and your understanding of the target audience, the Topics are there to help you choose the
kind of activities that ensure a successful security culture programme.
There are no limits to the kind of activities that can be used in building and maintaining
culture, and this is where the marketing department may excel in creating content.
Marketing departments are usually well versed in communicating a message in a way that
the target audience can relate to in a positive way. Let them go crazy with their creativity.
Just a fair bit of warning: marketing people usually know how to build great
communication campaigns, but they may not understand security. You need to be in
control of the overall message, and remind your creative allies what the goal is. One tip is
to ask the following question: “How exactly is this activity taking us closer to the goal?” If
you are happy with their answer, go with it. If not, you may want to follow up with “What
can we change to align it to our goal?”
To help you get going with what can be used as activities, consider this list as a
starting point:
•    e-learning
•    Nano-learning
•    Classroom training
•    Lunch & learn

•    Breakfast sessions
•    Demonstrations (live and recorded)
•    Knowledge Pills
•    Google Hangouts
•    Question and answer sessions
•    FAQ
•    Gamification (done properly!)
•    Posters
•    Stickers
•    Giveaways.
One of the challenges SOs face is to explain complex and abstract security issues in a way
that people without the expertise can understand. Consider spear phishing as an example.
How would you explain that to someone who doesn’t know what it is? What examples
would you use? Which words, taxonomy and context would you use?
Most of us will focus on the terminology we know and use every day, without regard to
the other person’s level of knowledge.
The same is true for the other areas of expertise in the world: most people will use words,
concepts and context they can relate to, and they will think that you understand that
without even asking. Your challenge is that you are the one who must adapt to their needs:
at no point can you assume that a person who does not work in security will understand
what you are talking about. Hiding behind the terminology of your industry only works
against you by alienating your audience.
To help others understand your message, you can change the wording and use concepts
and terminology they relate to and understand. You may also try to convey the message in
an entirely different way, as Mo Amin28 puts it:
“Awareness demonstrated is awareness achieved.”
For the preceding phishing example, you may set up a demonstration using equipment
from your lab, and show in detail what is going on during an attack. Just remember to
avoid the technical terms and instead focus on what is happening from a business point of
view: a person clicks on the link and is taken to a hosted server that installs malware.
Malware scans a computer for files of a particular type/name/date, and sends them to a
different server.
This scenario is not very complicated to set up using a lab, and demonstrating the results
can be done easily too: demonstrate that files of particular names/types are actually moved
from the computer to the server without the person using the laptop knowing.

Just one word of warning: make sure you control the full environment, and let the person
who is being taught use a lab computer, not their own.
This kind of demonstration does not require a large investment, and it can be done in a
board meeting, in the hallway outside the lunchroom, in a coffee area or also virtually.
Similar demonstrations can show general malware, password strength, social media
scraping and so much more. All it takes is a bit of planning.
Activities go better together. Combine a selection of three or more activities to have them
support and strengthen the message you are creating. In our phishing example, you may
consider presenting a series of short video lessons, an “Alert me” phone number to call if
they suspect phishing, and perhaps a selection of stickers in addition to the phishing
demonstrations.
It is important to remember that the activities you choose should be focused on the needs
of the audience. Using your audience analysis in the Organisation module, you can
determine the level of knowledge and interest of your target audience. Use that analysis to
pick the kind of activities that will help your audience to understand and grow their
competence.
The activities are closely tied to your goals, as defined in the Topics module, too.
Activities should be designed and implemented to help you reach your goals. One
question you can use to assess how your chosen activity will help you reach your goal, is:
“How will this activity help me reach my goal?”
Describing your answer is important to control your direction. It also makes sense to note
your answer for later reference. The templates available at securitycultureframework.com
will help you to select your activities, and to ensure your selection will in fact help you
reach your goals.
Planner
The fourth part of the Security Culture Framework is the Planner. The Planner is a
selection of different ways to plan and execute your security culture programme, where
three elements are vital:
1.  When to run activities.
2.  When to do measurements (metrics).
3.  When to revise and assess your progress.
The Planner is not another planning tool like Microsoft Project. Instead, it is a description
of what actions a security culture programme should consist of, and at what interval.
Templates are downloadable at securitycultureframework.com.
One example of a security culture campaign is the Security Culture Framework 12-week
campaign. The 12-week campaign is one full iteration of a security culture programme,

run over the course of 12 weeks. The campaign is divided into three parts, following the
Planner module:
Four weeks of metrics, followed by six weeks of activities, and then two weeks of
measuring progress, analysing results and revising future actions.
A 12-week campaign may look like this:
 
Week
Action
Comment
1
Set up team
Get the core security culture team
1
Define main goal
Set one main goal to work towards
1
Define subgoals
If desirable, define subgoals
2
Create baseline(s)
Using the goal metrics, collect data for baseline (as is)
2
Analyse
Use baseline data and defined goal state to create gap analysis
2
Select activities
Brainstorm a selection of activities to close the gap
3–4
Source activities
Create, develop or buy the preceding activities chosen
3
Plan activities
Plan when to execute each activity
5–10
Run activities
Activities do not have to be run at the same time!
11
Rerun baseline metric
Do the same measure as in week 2, collecting new data
11
Analyse
Use gap analysis: baseline vs. new metric = progress; new metric vs. goal = new gap
12
Revise
Consider your results. Consider what you would do differently. Revise accordingly
A note on the 12-week programme: this is a generic example, which you may have to
change for your own needs. Some organisations need more time to run one iteration, and
this is especially true in larger companies. You may have to adjust it to a six-month
iteration, or even a 12-month cycle depending on your needs, your resources and the
current culture.
The 12-week programme was designed as a bite-sized chunk. By creating a small,
standardised approach, it becomes easy to set up and run security culture campaigns. This
approach also helps you to keep your goals tangible, and to do small and efficient
activities to build and maintain culture. Instead of a “Do it all” approach, the Security
Culture Framework encourages you to take the small steps, each step building on the
previous one, and steering you towards your overall goal of building and maintaining
security culture.
Setting up your organisation to use the Security Culture Framework
With the basic knowledge of the Security Culture Framework, you are now ready to set up

your organisation to use it to build and maintain security culture. You may use these steps
to start.
•    Set up your core security culture workgroup. Using the Organisation Module, set up
your core team with one resource from the security office, one from HR and one from
marketing or communications. If you do not have those resources internally, you may
use external resources.
In addition to your core team, you should create support for your security culture
programme by getting your CEO to sponsor it. One way to get top-tier sponsorship is
to set up a steering committee where you involve the key players, and get their support.
•    Define goals and scope. Defining a long-term goal is a good idea early on, as it will
help you steer your activities in one direction. A long-term goal may be defined using
the SMART method mentioned earlier, or it may be described as a vision. The purpose
of a long-term, overarching goal is to remind you of the direction you are directing
your organisation towards, and to help you prioritise and select milestones and
subgoals. Use this long-term goal to define your scope, resource requirements and
long-term strategy.
•    When you have defined a long-term goal, it is time to break it into bite-sized chunks,
or 12-week campaigns. Start with your first campaign, and decide on one or a few
goals you want to achieve.
•    Define your target audience. Considering your goal, who will benefit most in your
organisation? Are there some departments, locations or groups that stand out as more
beneficial?
•    Analyse your target audience. Who are they? How do they prefer to communicate?
What 
is 
their 
security 
knowledge? 
Use 
the 
template 
available 
at
securitycultureframework.com as well as the experience your marketing department
have in analysing customer segments.
•    Create baseline (as-is) measurement. Using your goal as a guiding light, decide how to
measure your success, and create a baseline measurement to document your current
status. Do a gap analysis to determine the difference between your baseline and your
goal.
•    Identify activities. Using your gap analysis, your defined goal(s) and your analysis of
your target audience, you are ready to choose activities. Remember that learning
activities come in a wide range – from classroom and e-learning sessions, to
giveaways, posters and demos. Be creative, and allow yourself to try out different
activities to see which gives the best results in any given setting and group. As long as
you are confident that your activity is supporting your goal, you should be fine.
•    Source activities. Now that you know what kinds of activities you want to use, it is
time to either create them, buy them or download them. There are many suppliers of
security trainings around, and approaching them with specific requirements of what
you are looking for is a great way to help them supply you with exactly what you need.

If you have in-house expertise, you may produce the content internally. If you do not
have a budget, consider all the free sources of content available. For a growing list of
suppliers, check out the securitycultureframework.com community.
•    Plan and run activities. In your planner, add the different activities, their start, duration
and end times, and any comments you find relevant. Then run the activities as you
planned and watch as your organisation learns.
•    Measure results. After the activities are successfully ran, it is time to do your second
measurement. Using the same data source and method as you used to create your
baseline metrics, collect the new status. If your activities were implemented
successfully, you should notice differences between the baseline and the new metric. If
you don’t, there is no need to panic: there are a number of reasons why your data did
not change:
    they do not show what you try to measure
    the changed behaviour you want to see takes longer to show
    not enough data is available.
•    Analyse results. Using the baseline data, your new data and your defined goals, analyse
any progress you made, and try to understand why you get the results you get.
•    Revise. While analysing your results, make notes of your findings. Consider what you
could have done differently when it comes to activities, goals, timeframes and budgets,
and put them in your report. For your next campaign, use your newfound knowledge to
improve on what you did.
The first time you set up the Security Culture Framework in your organisation, it may
require more time and resources. This is normal. Identifying the key resources for your
core team may take some time, which you do not have to repeat every time you run a
campaign – the team generally stays the same.
It is also normal that doing something new takes more focus than when you do something
you are familiar with. The same is true with the Security Culture Framework. As you run a
few campaigns, you start to get hold of the process, and soon you will notice how the
framework is saving you and your organisation time and resources when building and
maintaining security culture.
If you do find yourself in a squeeze and need help figuring out how to move forward, the
community is only a browser away. You will find both certified Security Culture Coaches,
certified Security Culture Practitioners and a growing number of users of the Security
Culture Framework at securitycultureframework.com. And I did mention it is free and
open, right?
28 Mo Amin is a Certified Security Culture Coach and dedicates himself to building better security culture:
www.moamin.com.

CHAPTER 8: TIME IS ON YOUR SIDE
You have successfully reached the end of this book on security culture. You have learned
what security culture is and how it relates to security awareness. You have tapped into
social sciences with a focus on psychology, so we can better understand how people
interact, behave and inform their actions. This is knowledge that is important to have
when bringing about cultural change. You have also read about security culture metrics
and how to use the Security Culture Framework to build and maintain security culture.
There are a few final things I need to share with you.
Reading this book does not make you an expert on this topic. Even writing this book, I do
not consider myself the one know-it-all – there are so many different aspects of culture,
people and behaviours that we still do not understand. That is one of the reasons I am back
at the University of Oslo where I am reading psychology. I want to help the industry by
building a body of knowledge on security culture. I am dedicating my time and resources
because I believe it is important for us as an industry to understand people for real, if we
want to bring about change.
However, reading this book shows that you, just like me, are interested in this topic.
Hopefully that means you will bring about positive change in your organisation now and
later. I also hope you find it interesting to learn more about culture, diversity, learning and
communication. There is an abundance of topics related to security that is not directly to
do with malware, firewalls and pen testing. These topics are not at all new. Since the dawn
of human existence we have built security culture into our societies. I see no end to the
need for understanding how we can become even better at this.
Changing culture takes time. Sometimes it works, other times it doesn’t. Scientists
disagree about the reasons and the methods. There are an unknown number of unknown
factors that may or may not apply to your success. One thing is for sure, though: if you are
not in charge of the culture yourself, culture will be in charge of you. Set your goals, and
work towards them. Small steps does it.
My experience shows that a structured approach is more likely to yield success than any of
the happy-go-lucky approaches I’ve seen. A programme that brings about change also
plays with all elements of culture: technology, policies and people. Sometimes they
succeed right away, and other times they need a number of tries.
What I see in the programmes we run is that time is an important asset. Have a long
perspective. And by long, I mean 3-5 years’ time. Longer if possible. Create a vision, or
big goals for that period, and break it down into smaller targets you can use as milestones.
Have at least one yearly target, and work to reach that one. Adjust your course as you
learn more. And never settle down!
Building and maintaining culture is not something you do once and then you’re done. It’s
an ongoing, never-ending process. Either you are in charge of it, or it controls you. Think
of culture as a constant feedback loop creating a mutual change-cycle. You are part of the
culture, part of that feedback loop, feeding it with your own behaviours, ideas and

customs. The more of you who join forces and feed it with common behaviour, the more
the culture will impact the others too. Use it to your benefits!
I welcome your insights, ideas and thoughts on the Security Culture Framework
community at securitycultureframework.com. Let us join forces and build better security
culture!

ITG RESOURCES
IT Governance Ltd sources, creates and delivers products and services to meet the real-
world, evolving IT governance needs of today’s organisations, directors, managers and
practitioners.
The ITG website (www.itgovernance.co.uk) is the international one-stop-shop for
corporate and IT governance information, advice, guidance, books, tools, training and
consultancy.
Publishing Services
IT Governance Publishing (ITGP) is the world’s leading IT-GRC publishing imprint that is
wholly owned by IT Governance Ltd.
With books and tools covering all IT governance, risk and compliance frameworks, we are
the publisher of choice for authors and distributors alike, producing unique and practical
publications of the highest quality, in the latest formats available, which readers will find
invaluable.
www.itgovernancepublishing.co.uk is the website dedicated to ITGP. Other titles published
by ITGP that may be of interest include:
•    CyberWar, CyberTerror, CyberCrime
www.itgovernance.co.uk/shop/p-511-cyberwar-cyberterror-cybercrime-and-
cyberactivism-second-edition.aspx
•    Governance and Internal Controls for Cutting Edge IT
www.itgovernance.co.uk/shop/p-1288-governance-and-internal-controls-for-cutting-
edge-it.aspx.
•    The Case for ISO27001: 2013
www.itgovernance.co.uk/shop/p-1158-the-case-for-iso-27001-2013-second-
edition.aspx
We also offer a range of off-the-shelf toolkits that give comprehensive, customisable
documents to help users create the specific documentation they need to properly
implement a management system or standard. Written by experienced practitioners and
based on the latest best practice, ITGP toolkits can save months of work for organisations
working towards compliance with a given standard.
To see the full range of toolkits available please see:
www.itgovernance.co.uk/shop/c-129-toolkits.aspx.
Books and tools published by IT Governance Publishing (ITGP) are available from all
business booksellers and the following websites:
•    www.itgovernance.eu

•    www.itgovernanceusa.com
•    www.itgovernance.in
•    www.itgovernancesa.co.za
•    www.itgovernance.asia
Training Services
Staff training is an essential component of the information security triad of people,
processes and technology, and of building a security culture in an organisation. IT
Governance’s ISO27001 Learning Pathway provides information security courses from
Foundation to Advanced level, with qualifications awarded by IBITGQ.
The ISO27001 Learning Pathway comprises the following courses:
•    Foundation level
    ISO27001 Certified ISMS Foundation course
    ISO27001 Certified Internal Auditor course
    Information Security Foundation based on ISO27002 course.
•    Advanced level
    ISO27001 Certified ISMS Lead Implementer Masterclass
    ISO 27001 Certified ISMS Lead Auditor course
    ISO27005 Certified ISMS Risk Management course
    ISO 27001:2013 ISMS Certified Transition course.
Many courses are available in Live Online as well as classroom formats, so delegates can
learn and achieve essential career progression from the comfort of their own homes and
offices.
Delegates passing the exams associated with out ISO27001 Learning Pathway will gain
qualifications from IBITGQ, including CIS F, CIS IA, CIS LI, CIS LA, CIS RM and CIS
2013 UP).
IT Governance is an acknowledged leader in the world of ISO27001 and information
security management training. Our practical, hands-on approach is delivered by
experienced practitioners, who focus on improving your knowledge, developing your
skills, and awarding relevant, industry-recognised certifications. Our fully integrated and
structured learning paths accommodate delegates with various levels of knowledge, and
our courses can be delivered in a variety of formats to suit all delegates.
For more information about IT Governance’s ISO 27001 learning pathway, please see:
www.itgovernance.co.uk/iso27001-information-security-training.aspx.
For information on any of our many other courses, including PCI DSS compliance,
business continuity, IT governance, service management and professional certification

courses, please see: www.itgovernance.co.uk/training.aspx.
Professional Services and Consultancy
ISO27001, the international standard for information security management, sets out the
requirements of an information security management system (ISMS), a holistic approach
to information security that encompasses people, process, and technology. Only by using
this approach to information security can organisations hope to instil an enterprise-wide
culture of security.
Implementing, maintaining and continually improving an ISMS can, however, be a
daunting task. Fortunately, IT Governance’s consultants offer a comprehensive range of
flexible, practical support packages to help organisations of any size, sector or location to
implement an ISMS and achieve certification to ISO27001.
We have already helped more than 150 organisations to implement an ISMS, and with
project support provided by our consultants, you can implement ISO27001 in your
organisation.
At IT Governance we understand that information security is a business issue, not just an
IT one. Our consultancy services assist organisations in properly managing their
information technology strategies and achieving strategic goals. The benefits of choosing
an IT Governance Consultancy Service are:
•    We speak business, not technology: we are technology literate business consultants.
•    We are vendor neutral, technology independent and framework agnostic, and tailor our
consultancy to your organisation.
•    Our transparent pricing enables you to control your costs.
•    We have over ten years’ consultancy experience.
•    We have a proven track record, working with organisations worldwide.
•    We help you increase internal buy-in to your project by using your resources.
•    We focus on transferring knowledge and skill to the people within your organisation.
For 
more 
information 
on 
our 
ISO27001 
consultancy 
service, 
please 
see:
www.itgovernance.co.uk/iso27001_consultancy.aspx.
For general information about our other consultancy services, including for ISO20000,
ISO22301, Cyber Essentials, the PCI DSS, Data Protection and more, please see:
www.itgovernance.co.uk/consulting.aspx.
Newsletter
IT governance is one of the hottest topics in business today, not least because it is also the
fastest moving.
You can stay up to date with the latest developments across the whole spectrum of IT
governance subject matter, including; risk management, information security, ITIL and IT

service management, project governance, compliance and so much more, by subscribing
to ITG’s core publications and topic alert emails.
Simply visit our subscription centre and select your preferences:
www.itgovernance.co.uk/newsletter.aspx.

