BUILD A BRICK BARBECUE 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Building a barbecue is a relatively easy project, requiring a 
minimum amount of skill and DIY knowledge. 
  
 
 
The main safety factors are the dangers of using sand and 
cement as this contains lime and can cause burns or 
irritation to the skin and eyes. It is important that you 
always wear goggles and gloves when handling cement and 
when cutting bricks. 
  
 
 
More of us are swapping our frying pans and ovens for a 
barbecue. Not only is it the healthy option, but it's also a fun 
way to cook when the sun is shining.  
  
If you want to make the barbecue a more permanent feature
in your garden the ideal solution is to build your own. A well-
built barbecue will provide you with hundreds of char-grilled 
meals, with the obvious advantage of not having to worry 
where to store it every winter. 
  
Our guide provides step-by-step instructions for building a 
basic brick barbecue structure. To ensure that you use your 
barbecue safely we've also included general safety do's and 
don'ts, and the seven golden rules for barbecuing. 
  
 
2  - Building the base 
Begin by digging a small trench, approximately 12 inches 
wide by 9 inches deep, make it in the shape that you want 
your barbecue. Compact the bottom of the trench by 
stamping it down before filling it in with cement; you will 
need to use coarse cement, this can be bought ready-mixed 
so all you have to do is add water. 
 
 
 
Mix the cement on a board measuring at least 3 feet square. 
Pour the dry concrete mix in the centre of the board making 
a hole in the top like a volcano. Pour water from a watering 
can into the centre of the heap. Using a shovel, scoop dry 
mix from the base of the heap and add it to the centre until 
it is full. 
 
 
 
Make another hole in the top and repeat the process until 
the mixture is thoroughly wet and a uniform colour. Using 
the shovel with the face towards you chop into the pile, as if 
you were slicing it, to eliminate air pockets and ensure an 
even mix. 
 
 
 
Shovel the concrete mix into the trench and tamp it down 
using the edge of a small board. Check it is reasonably level 

and leave for a couple of days to harden. Put some sacking 
or similar material over the top to protect it from frost or 
direct sunlight. 
 
 
 
If you are building your barbecue on top of a patio you 
should not need to construct a base, simply build onto it. 
You must however, check that it is level. 
 
3  - Bricklaying 
When the concrete has 
hardened start by mixing up 
the mortar for bricklaying. 
This can be done in a similar 
way as used for mixing the 
concrete. Adding mortar 
plasticiser will give a 
smoother mortar, making it 
easier to use. Use the mortar 
to lay a row of bricks on top 
of your foundation (1), buttering the bottom and edges of 
each brick. Constantly check, using a spirit level, that the 
horizontal and vertical surfaces are level. 
 
 
 
Start with the corners of the 
barbecue structure, building 
them up at first, by three or 
four bricks (2) before 
attempting to build up 
between them. Use a string 
line stretched across the two 
corners to ensure that they 
line up with each other. 
 
 
 
You will need to build brackets into the second and third row 
of bricks from the top of the barbecue. The lower set will 
hold the fuel tray, while the upper set will support the grill - 
it is important that you place the brackets ensuring the tray 
and grill sit comfortably on them, making sure they are 
level. 
 
 
 
After you have completed 
every third row you should 
smooth the mortar (3) 
between the bricks to give a 
flush and pleasant 
appearance - this is called 
pointing. Dry lay a few rows 
at first to make sure you are 
happy with the shape and position before committing 
yourself to proper bricklaying. 
 
 
 
Point the vertical joints before starting the horizontal ones, 
lightly brushing any mortar off the surface of the bricks. 

When you have reached the desired height you may want to 
cap the barbecue wall with either coping stones or hard 
engineering bricks in order to give a more durable finish. 
 
 
 
You should leave the barbecue for at least 48 hours to 
harden before using it. 
 
4  - Lighting a Charcoal barbecue 
Lighting a barbecue looks easy, but the reality is somewhat 
different. However don't be disillusioned, all it takes is 
practice, patience and our easy to follow step-by-step guide.
 
 
 
Stage 1  
• 
To help light the barbecue, arrange some firelighters
in the base of it. 
• 
Arrange the coal over the top, to a depth of 7.5cm. 
• 
Carefully light the firelighters with long matches or a
taper. 
• 
Leave the barbecue to warm up for a while so that 
the heat is evenly spread.  
 
 
 
Stage 2  
• 
Once burning strongly spread the hot coals out 
evenly over the base of the barbecue using tongs. 
• 
When the coals begin to turn into a grey/white ash, 
the barbecue is the right temperature to start your 
cooking.  
 
 
 
Stage 3 
• 
Place a well oiled grid over the coals ready for 
cooking. 
• 
To add more coal, carefully place it around the 
edges of the barbecue with tongs.  
 
5  - Golden Barbecue Rules 
The Seven Golden Rules For Barbecue Bliss  
1. 
Never light or encourage a dying fire with oil, petrol,
paraffin or any flammable fluids. 

2. 
Make sure the barbecue is on level ground, away 
from over-hanging trees, bushes, fences or 
buildings. 
3. 
If the wind is strong, carefully make sure the 
barbecue is in a more sheltered position to prevent 
the smoke from entering your home. 
4. 
If you experience problems lighting the barbecue 
remove the coals with tongs and place in a metal 
container - not plastic, and try to light once more. 
5. 
Keep children and animals away from the barbecue 
and any other hot surfaces, as well as any sharp 
utensils you may be using. 
6. 
Ensure that the coals are cold and have stopped 
smoking once you have finished cooking. 
7. 
Never leave the barbecue unattended.  
 
6  - Food Safety 
Barbecues are great fun, however it is important to pay 
attention to food safety to ensure that you and your guests 
avoid food poisoning. Follow the guidelines to cooking your 
food safely.  
• 
Never mix raw and cooked meat - use separate 
plates and containers. 
• 
Keep all meat in the refrigerator until you are ready 
to cook it. 
• 
Never barbecue frozen meat, always thaw if first, 
especially poultry. 
• 
Keep all utensils clean and use separate utensils for 
raw and cooked meat. 
• 
Try not to over-cook the outside of meat on the 
barbecue as the middle may still be raw - this is 
how you can get food poisoning. If the food is 
cooking too quickly simply move the grid up a little 
further from the coals - this will ensure slower and 
better cooking. 
• 
Enjoy your food!  
 

