BUILDING A BASIC CUPBOARD 
TIMBER FRAMEWORK FOR STORAGE UNITS 
This project contains basic principles for building a frame for a  basic 
cupboard. It can be expanded on by using different designs, the struts can be 
moved to accommodate shelves or simply left open plan. It will give you the 
idea of building storage space onto your home and can even be adapted to 
make a corner cupboard. The timber sizes can be changed and more struts 
can be put in to ensure greater strength if you feel you need it. The structure 
can be fixed to any wall, ceiling or floor using our guides to fixing. Check the 
wall, floor and ceiling area for pipes and cables before you drill anything. 
 
Tape measure, pencil, cross cut saw, tenon saw, carpenters square, bevel edge, adhesive, 
power drill, wall plugs, electric screwdriver, countersink bit, masonry drill bits and hss drill bits, 
spirit level, hammer, filler and applicator gun, screws, chisels, mortice gauge,  
We suggest for this simple cupboard you use 50 x 50mm PSE timber. This 
stands for Planed, Squared Edge and simply means prepared for joinery, as 
opposed to the "sawn" state timber is in when it leaves the timber mill. It is 
also called, in its prepared state, PAR which is Planed All Round. 
With the number of different door designs available from kitchen and DIY 
stores these days we suggest it may be a good idea for you to find the doors 
(if you intend to have them) first. The frame can easily be built around the 
door size and you will have guaranteed matching your existing decor. 
We have deliberately not given any dimensions in the project. Even when 
planed timber can vary by a mm or so and ceiling heights can vary 
considerably. Measure your own timber and other dimensions carefully and 
remember. Measure twice-Cut once. 

Use a carpenters square to make all cuts. Neat joints are impossible without a 
completely square face to begin with. Also if the timber is not square at the 
end, a measurement to the other end will vary, depending on which side you 
measure from. This can make it impossible to get a decent finish. 
 
A variety of joints can be seen in our timber joints projects and some special joints are shown 
here. The principle of cutting them is exactly the same as shown in the timber joints projects. 
Please remember it takes many years to become a carpenter or joiner. If this is your first 
project, or you have not done much carpentry, buy an additional length of timber and practice 
your joints before embarking on a project which will become a feature in your home. An 8 foot 
length of sawn timber to practice on will cost pennies compared to the waste of materials if 
you mess up with the real thing. 
Check your walls are square to each other using our 3, 4 5 method shown below. 
 HOW DO I CHECK MY ROOM IS SQUARE  
Floor tiling, carpets, any number of things around 
the home require a degree of setting out. 
Remember a quarter of an inch out at one end of a 
12 foot room, means about 2 inches out at the 
other end. It is important to start any appropriate 
projects with straight and square lines and it is very 
easy to accomplish. The method is called 3,4,5 and 
for the technically minded is based on Pythagoras's 
theorem which we won't go into now ! Suffice to 
say that if you measure along one wall 3 feet (or 
metres or any other unit), and along the other wall 
4 of the same unit, the diagonal line in between the 
points should measure 5 units. If it does your walls 
are square, if it doesn't, you need to mark some 
points that are square to start your work. 
Draw your plan before you start. 
Error!

 
All joints need to be "made" before any of the frame is fixed to the wall, floor or ceiling. Once cut, fix the 
two uprights absolutely vertically on the walls using the struts as spacers to get them in the right 
position. Fix the struts and the centre upright together using glue and screws. Make sure the screw 
heads are counter sunk into the timber or they will push the cladding out.  Use a tenon saw to cut the 
skirting back if your prefer that to cutting the frame around the skirting. Frame can be fixed to the wall 
using a 7mm masonry bit with red wall plugs and (for 50mm timber) 3 inch, number 8 screws. For fixings 
to plasterboard use our guide. Also fixing to lathe and plaster.
  

                 
  
                                        Floor/ceiling + cross rail joints                             Cross rail to post 
joints 
Mark the position of the struts lightly on the walls when your frame is in place. You will not be 
able to see them when you are attaching the cladding, making fixing to them a bit of a lottery. 
The pencil marks can be rubbed out later.  
Next, cut and fix the shelf or shelves. This can be done more easily when you can get to all 
sides. The side rails which support the cladding should be fixed at no less than 600mm 
centres for 12.5mm cladding and if your cladding is thinner than that, they should be spaced 
at 450mm centres.  
The shelves and cladding material we have left up to you.  

 
We always prefer to use screws to fix the cladding to the frame even if we are using 
plasterboard. Sink screw heads into the cladding and fill over them to get a flush face on 
which to decorate.  

The joints between the cupboard and the wall/ceiling can easily be filled with flexible filler or 
decorators caulk using an sealant or "applicator" gun as shown below. Alternatively you may 
like to fix some coving or a shaped timber moulding.  
  
Use butt, flush or butterfly hinges to hang the doors and either a roller catch or magnetic 
catch to close it. 
 

