
BUILDING THE INTERNET
OF THINGS WITH IPv6
AND MIPv6

BUILDING THE INTERNET
OF THINGS WITH IPv6
AND MIPv6
The Evolving World of
M2M Communications
DANIEL MINOLI

Copyright C⃝2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or
by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as
permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior
written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to
the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400,
fax (978) 750-4470, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission
should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken,
NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permission.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts in
preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or
completeness of the contents of this book and speciﬁcally disclaim any implied warranties of
merchantability or ﬁtness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales
representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable
for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor
author shall be liable for any loss of proﬁt or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to
special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please contact our
Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at
(317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may
not be available in electronic formats. For more information about Wiley products, visit our web site at
www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Minoli, Daniel, 1952–
Building the internet of things (IoT) with IPv6 and MIPv6 / Daniel Minoli.
pages cm
ISBN 978-1-118-47347-4 (hardback)
1. Embedded Internet devices.
2. Internet of things.
3. TCP/IP (Computer network protocol)
4. Mobile computing.
I. Title.
TK7895.E43M56 2013
004.6′2–dc23
2012049072
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

For Anna

CONTENTS
PREFACE
xiii
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
xvii
1 WHAT IS THE INTERNET OF THINGS?
1
1.1
Overview and Motivations / 1
1.2
Examples of Applications / 12
1.3
IPv6 Role / 17
1.4
Areas of Development and Standardization / 20
1.5
Scope of the Present Investigation / 23
Appendix 1.A: Some Related Literature / 25
References / 26
2 INTERNET OF THINGS DEFINITIONS AND FRAMEWORKS
28
2.1
IoT Deﬁnitions / 28
2.1.1
General Observations / 28
2.1.2
ITU-T Views / 31
2.1.3
Working Deﬁnition / 33
2.2
IoT Frameworks / 38
2.3
Basic Nodal Capabilities / 44
References / 46
vii

viii
CONTENTS
3 INTERNET OF THINGS APPLICATION EXAMPLES
48
3.1
Overview / 49
3.2
Smart Metering/Advanced Metering Infrastructure / 52
3.3
e-Health/Body Area Networks / 55
3.4
City Automation / 62
3.5
Automotive Applications / 64
3.6
Home Automation / 67
3.7
Smart Cards / 70
3.8
Tracking (Following and Monitoring Mobile Objects) / 77
3.9
Over-The-Air-Passive Surveillance/Ring of Steel / 79
3.10 Control Application Examples / 86
3.11 Myriad Other Applications / 93
References / 94
4 FUNDAMENTAL IoT MECHANISMS AND KEY
TECHNOLOGIES
97
4.1
Identiﬁcation of IoT Objects and Services / 97
4.2
Structural Aspects of the IoT / 101
4.2.1
Environment Characteristics / 101
4.2.2
Trafﬁc Characteristics / 102
4.2.3
Scalability / 102
4.2.4
Interoperability / 103
4.2.5
Security and Privacy / 103
4.2.6
Open Architecture / 103
4.3
Key IoT Technologies / 103
4.3.1
Device Intelligence / 103
4.3.2
Communication Capabilities / 104
4.3.3
Mobility Support / 104
4.3.4
Device Power / 105
4.3.5
Sensor Technology / 107
4.3.6
RFID Technology / 111
4.3.7
Satellite Technology / 118
References / 119
5 EVOLVING IoT STANDARDS
120
5.1
Overview and Approaches / 120

CONTENTS
ix
5.2
IETF IPv6 Routing Protocol for RPL Roll / 123
5.3
Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP) / 126
5.3.1
Background / 126
5.3.2
Messaging Model / 129
5.3.3
Request/Response Model / 129
5.3.4
Intermediaries and Caching / 129
5.4
Representational State Transfer (REST) / 130
5.5
ETSI M2M / 130
5.6
Third-Generation Partnership Project Service Requirements for
Machine-Type Communications / 131
5.6.1
Approach / 131
5.6.2
Architectural Reference Model for MTC / 134
5.7
CENELEC / 135
5.8
IETF IPv6 Over Lowpower WPAN (6LoWPAN) / 137
5.9
ZigBee IP (ZIP) / 137
5.10 IP in Smart Objects (IPSO) / 138
Appendix 5.A: Legacy Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
(SCADA) Systems / 138
References / 142
6 LAYER 1/2 CONNECTIVITY: WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES
FOR THE IoT
144
6.1
WPAN Technologies for IoT/M2M / 145
6.1.1
Zigbee/IEEE 802.15.4 / 155
6.1.2
Radio Frequency for Consumer Electronics (RF4CE) / 170
6.1.3
Bluetooth and its Low-Energy Proﬁle / 170
6.1.4
IEEE 802.15.6 WBANs / 180
6.1.5
IEEE 802.15 WPAN TG4j MBANs / 181
6.1.6
ETSI TR 101 557 / 184
6.1.7
NFC / 187
6.1.8
Dedicated Short-Range Communications (DSRC)
and Related Protocols / 189
6.1.9
Comparison of WPAN Technologies / 192
6.2
Cellular and Mobile Network Technologies for IoT/M2M / 195
6.2.1
Overview and Motivations / 195
6.2.2
Universal Mobile Telecommunications System / 196
6.2.3
LTE / 197

x
CONTENTS
Appendix 6.A: Non-Wireless Technologies for IoT: Powerline
Communications / 209
References / 216
7 LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY: IPv6 TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
220
7.1
Overview and Motivations / 220
7.2
Address Capabilities / 224
7.2.1
IPv4 Addressing and Issues / 224
7.2.2
IPv6 Address Space / 225
7.3
IPv6 Protocol Overview / 231
7.4
IPv6 Tunneling / 239
7.5
IPsec in IPv6 / 242
7.6
Header Compression Schemes / 242
7.7
Quality of Service in IPv6 / 245
7.8
Migration Strategies to IPv6 / 246
7.8.1
Technical Approaches / 246
7.8.2
Residential Broadband Services in an IPv6 Environment / 250
7.8.3
Deployment Opportunities / 252
References / 254
8 LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY: MOBILE IPv6 TECHNOLOGIES FOR
THE IoT
257
8.1
Overview / 257
8.2
Protocol Details / 266
8.2.1
Generic Mechanisms / 267
8.2.2
New IPv6 Protocol, Message Types, and Destination
Option / 271
8.2.3
Modiﬁcations to IPv6 Neighbor Discovery / 277
8.2.4
Requirements for Various IPv6 Nodes / 278
8.2.5
Correspondent Node Operation / 278
8.2.6
HA Node Operation / 285
8.2.7
Mobile Node Operation / 286
8.2.8
Relationship to IPV4 Mobile IPv4 (MIP) / 291
References / 292
9 IPv6 OVER LOW-POWER WPAN (6LoWPAN)
293
9.1
Background/Introduction / 294

CONTENTS
xi
9.2
6LoWPANs Goals / 296
9.3
Transmission of IPv6 Packets Over IEEE 802.15.4 / 297
References / 301
GLOSSARY
302
INDEX
356

PREFACE
The proliferation of an enlarged gamut of devices able to be directly connected
to the Internet is leading to a new ubiquitous-computing paradigm: the Internet
of Things (IoT). The IoT is a new type of Internet application that endeavors to
make the thing’s information (whatever that may be) available on a global scale.
It has two attributes: (i) being an Internet application, and (ii) dealing with thing’s
information. The IoT is predicated on the expansion of the scope, network reach, and
possibly even architecture of Internet through the inclusion of physical, instrumented
objects. IoT aims at providing smarter services to the environment or the end-user
as more in situ, transferable data becomes available. Thus, the IoT is seen as a new-
generation information network that realizes machine-to-machine communication.
The IoT eliminates time and space isolation between geographical space and virtual
space, forming what proponents label as “smart geographical space,” and creating
new human–environment relationships. The latter implies that the IoT can advance
the goal of integration of human beings and their surroundings. Applications range
from energy efﬁciency to logistics, and many more.
At the “low end” of the spectrum, the thing’s information is typically coded by the
Unique Identiﬁcation (UID) and/or Electronic Product Code (EPC); the information
is (typically) stored in a Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation (RFID) electronic tag; and,
the information is uploaded by noncontact reading using an RFID reader. More
generally, smart cards (SCs) will also play an important role in IoT; SCs typically
incorporate a microprocessor and storage. At the mid-range of the spectrum one ﬁnds
devices with embedded intelligence (microprocessors) and embedded active wireless
capabilities to perform a variety of data gathering and possibly control functions. On-
body biomedical sensors (supporting body area networks), home appliance and power
management, and industrial control are some examples of these applications. At the
xiii

xiv
PREFACE
other end of the spectrum, more sophisticated sensors can be employed in the IoT:
some of these sensor approaches use distributed wireless sensor networks (WSNs)
systems that can collect, process, and forward a wide variety of environmental data
such as temperature, atmospheric and environmental chemical content, or even low
or high resolution ambient video images from geographic dispersed locations; these
objects may span a city, region, or large distribution grid.
The IoT is receiving a large amount of interest on the part of researchers, with
thousands of papers published on this topic in the recent past. While speciﬁc applica-
tions have existed for several years, perhaps supported on private enterprise networks,
Internet-based systems along with system supporting a broader application scope are
now beginning to be deployed. The capabilities offered by IP Version 6 (IPv6) are
critical to the wide-spread deployment of the technology.
This text aims at exploring these evolving trends and offering practical suggestions
of how these technologies can be implemented in the service provider networks to
support cost-effective applications, and how new revenue-generating services could
be brought to the market. All the latest physical layer, MAC layer, and upper layer
IoT and Machine to Machine (M2M) protocols are discussed.
Planners are asking questions such as: What is the Internet of Things? How does
M2M apply? How can it help my speciﬁc operation? What is the cost of deploy-
ing such a system? Will standardization help? What are the security implications?
This text addresses the following IoT aspects: evolving wireless standards, espe-
cially low energy and medical applications; IPv6 technologies; Mobile IPv6 (MIPv6)
technologies; applications; key underlying technologies for IoT applications; imple-
mentation approaches; implementation challenges; and mid-range and long-range
opportunities.
More speciﬁcally, the text reviews the latest technologies, the emerging com-
mercial applications (especially health care), and the recently evolving standards,
including all layers of the protocol stack applicable to IoT/M2M. The text focuses
on extensively IPv6, MIPv6, and 6LowPAN/RPL and argues that the IoT/M2M may
be the killer app for IPv6. It covers the latest standards supporting the IoT and the
M2M applications, including home area networking (HAN), AMI, IEEE 802.15.4,
6LowPAN/RPL, Smart Energy 2.0, ETSI M2M, ZigBee IP (ZIP); ZigBee Personal
Home and Hospital Care (PHHC) Proﬁle; IP in Smart Objects (IPSO); BLE; IEEE
802.15.6 wireless body area networks (WBAN); IEEE 802.15 WPAN Task Group 4j
(TG4j) medical body area networks; ETSI TR 101 557; near ﬁeld communication
(NFC); dedicated short-range communications (DSRC)/WAVE and related protocols;
the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) IPv6 Routing Protocol for Low power and
lossy networks (RPL)/Routing Over Low power and Lossy networks (ROLL); IETF
Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP); IETF Constrained RESTful environments
(CoRE); 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) Machine-Type Communications
(MTC); long term evolution (LTE) cellular systems; and IEEE 1901.
This text covers the latest standards supporting IoT/M2M from the perspective
of Body Area Network/E-health/Assistive Technologies; it also covers over-the-air
surveillance, object tracking, smart grid, smart cards, and home automation.

PREFACE
xv
This is believed to be the ﬁrst book on MIPv6 with applications to the IoT, espe-
cially in a mobile context. This work will be of interest to technology investors;
planners with carriers and service providers; CTOs; logistics professionals; engi-
neers at equipment developers; technology integrators; Internet and Internet Service
Providers (ISP); and telcos, and wireless providers, both domestically and in the rest
of the world.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Among other activities, Mr. Minoli has done extensive work in Internet engineering,
design, and implementation over the years. The results presented in this book are
based on the foundation work done while at Telcordia, NYU, Stevens Institute of
Technology, Rutgers University, AT&T, and other engineering ﬁrms, starting in the
early 1990s and continuing to the present. Some of his Internet- and wireless-related
work that plays a role in the deployment of the Internet of Things has been documented
in books he has authored, including:
r Internet and Intranet Engineering (McGraw-Hill, 1997)
r Internet Architectures (co-authored) (Wiley, 1999)
r Hotspot Networks: Wi-Fi for Public Access Locations (McGraw-Hill, 2002)
r Wireless Sensor Networks (co-authored) (Wiley 2007)
r Handbook of IPv4 to IPv6 Transition Methodologies For Institutional & Cor-
porate Networks (co-authored) (Auerbach, 2008)
r Satellite Systems Engineering in an IPv6 Environment (Francis and Taylor 2009)
r Mobile Video with Mobile IPv6 (Wiley 2012)
Mr. Minoli has many years of technical hands-on and managerial experience in
planning, designing, deploying, and operating IP/IPv6, telecom, wireless, satellite,
and video networks, and Data Center systems and subsystems for global Best-In-Class
carriers and ﬁnancial companies. He has worked on advanced network deployments at
ﬁnancial ﬁrms such as AIG, Prudential Securities, Capital One Financial, and service
provider ﬁrms such as Network Analysis Corporation, Bell Telephone Laboratories,
xvii

xviii
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
ITT DTS/Worldcom, Bell Communications Research (now Telcordia), AT&T, Lead-
ing Edge Networks Inc., SES, and other institutions. In the recent past, Mr. Minoli
has been responsible for (i) the development and deployment of IPTV systems, (ii)
the development and deployment of terrestrial and mobile IP-based networking ser-
vices; (iii) deployments of large aperture antenna at teleports in the United States and
abroad; (iv) deployment of satellite monitoring services worldwide using IP/MPLS
services; and (v) IPv6 services. He also played a founding role in the launching of
two companies through the high tech incubator Leading Edge Networks Inc., which
he ran in the early 2000s: Global Wireless Services, a provider of secure broadband
hotspot mobile Internet and hotspot VoIP services; and, InfoPort Communications
Group, an optical and Gigabit Ethernet metropolitan carrier supporting Data Cen-
ter/SAN/channel extension and cloud network access services. For several years, he
has been Session, Tutorial, and more recently overall Technical Program Chair for the
IEEE ENTNET (Enterprise Networking) conference; ENTNET focuses on enterprise
networking and security requirements for large ﬁnancial ﬁrms and other corporate
institutions.
Mr. Minoli has also written columns for ComputerWorld, NetworkWorld, and
Network Computing (1985–2006). He has taught at New York University (Information
Technology Institute), Rutgers University, and Stevens Institute of Technology (1984–
2006). Also, he was a Technology Analyst At-Large, for Gartner/DataPro (1985–
2001); based on extensive hand-on work at ﬁnancial ﬁrms and carriers, he tracked
technologies and wrote CTO/CIO-level technical scans in the area of telephony and
data systems, including topics on security, disaster recovery, network management,
LANs, WANs (ATM and MPLS), wireless (LAN and public hotspot), VoIP, network
design/economics, carrier networks (such as metro Ethernet and CWDM/DWDM),
and e-commerce. Over the years, he has advised Venture Capitals for investments of
$150M in a dozen high tech companies.
Mr. Minoli has also acted as Expert Witness in a (won) $11B lawsuit regard-
ing a VoIP-based wireless Air-to-Ground radio communication system for airplane
in-cabin services, as well as for a large lawsuit related to digital scanning and trans-
mission of bank documents/instruments (such as checks). He has also been engaged
as a technical expert in a number of patent infringement proceedings in the digital
imaging and VoIP space supporting law ﬁrms such as Schiff Hardin LLP, Fulbright
& Jaworski LLP, Dimock Stratton LLP/Smart & Biggar LLP, and Baker & McKenzie
LLP, among others.

CHAPTER 1
WHAT IS THE INTERNET OF THINGS?
1.1
OVERVIEW AND MOTIVATIONS
The proliferation of an ever-growing set of devices able to be directly connected to the
Internet is leading to a new ubiquitous-computing paradigm. Indeed, the Internet—its
deployment and its use—has experienced signiﬁcant growth in the past four decades,
evolving from a network of a few hundred hosts (in its ARPAnet form) to a platform
capable of linking billions of entities globally. Initially, the Internet connected insti-
tutional hosts and accredited terminals via specially developed gateways (routers).
More recently, the Internet has connected servers of all kinds to users of all kinds
seeking access to information and applications of all kinds. Now, with social media,
it intuitively and effectively connects all sorts of people to people, and to virtual
communities. The growth of the Internet shows no signs of slowing down, and it
is steadily becoming the infrastructure fabric of choice for a new paradigm for all-
inclusive pervasive computing and communications. The next evolution is to connect
all “things” and objects that have (or will soon have) embedded wireless (or wireline)
connectivity to control systems that support data collection, data analysis, decision-
making, and (remote) actuation. “Things” include, but are not limited to, machinery,
home appliances, vehicles, individual persons, pets, cattle, animals, habitats, habitat
occupants, as well as enterprises. Interactions are achieved utilizing a plethora of
possibly different networks; computerized devices of various functions, form factors,
Building the Internet of Things with IPv6 and MIPv6: The Evolving World of M2M Communications,
First Edition. Daniel Minoli.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
1

2
WHAT IS THE INTERNET OF THINGS?
sizes, and capabilities such as iPads, smartphones, monitoring nodes, sensors, and
tags; and a gamut of host application servers.
This new paradigm seeks to enhance the traditional Internet into a smart Inter-
net of Things (IoT) created around intelligent interconnections of diverse objects
in the physical world. In the IoT, commonly deployed devices and objects contain
an embedded device or microprocessor that can be accessed by some communica-
tion mechanism, typically utilizing wireless links. The IoT aims at closing the gap
between objects in the material world, the “things,” and their logical representation
in information systems. It is perceived by proponents as the “next-generation net-
work (NGN) of the Internet.” Thus, the IoT is a new type of Internet application
that endeavors to make the thing’s information (whatever that may be) available on
a global scale using the Internet as the underlying connecting fabric (although other
interconnection data networks, besides the Internet, can also be used such as private
local area networks and/or wide area networks). The IoT has two attributes: (i) being
an Internet application and (ii) dealing with the thing’s information. The term Internet
of Things was coined and ﬁrst used by Kevin Ashton over a decade ago1 (1). The
“things” are also variously known as “objects,” “devices,” “end nodes,” “remotes,”
or “remote sensors,” to list just a few commonly used terms.
The IoT generally utilizes low cost information gathering and dissemination
devices—such as sensors and tags—that facilitate fast-paced interactions in any
place and at any time, among the objects themselves, as well as among objects and
people. Actuators are also part of the IoT. Hence, the IoT can be described as a
new-generation information network that enables seamless and continuous machine-
to-machine (M2M)2 and/or human-to-machine (H2M) communication. One of the
initial goals of the IoT is to enable connectivity for the various “things”; a next
goal is to be able to have the “thing” provide back appropriate, application-speciﬁc
telemetry; an intermediary next step is to provide a web-based interface to the “thing”
(especially when human access is needed); the ﬁnal step is to permit actuation by
the “thing” (i.e., to cause a function or functions to take place). Certain “things” are
stationary, such as an appliance in a home; other “things” may be in motion, such as
a car or a carton (or even an item within the carton) in a supply chain environment
(either end-to-end, or while in an intermediary warehouse).
At the “low end” of the spectrum, the thing’s information is typically coded by the
unique identiﬁcation (UID) and/or electronic product code (EPC); the information is
(typically) stored in a radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID) electronic tag; and, the
information is uploaded by noncontact reading using an RFID reader. In fact, UID
and RFID have been mandated by the Department of Defense (DoD) for all their
suppliers to modernize their global supply chain; RFID and EPC were also mandated
1Synonym key words are: “Ubiquitous computing (Ubi-comp), pervasive computing, ambient intelligence,
sentient computing, and internet of objects.” Multiple terminology terms should not confuse the reader,
because, as a side note, often industry players redeﬁne terms just to give the concept some cachet.
For example, what some in the late 1960s called “time-sharing,” others in the 1980s called it “utility
computing.” Then in the 1990s, people called it “grid computing.” And now in the 2000s–2010s all the
rage is “cloud.” Same concepts, just new names.
2Some (e.g., 3GPP) also use the term machine-type communications (MTC) to describe M2M systems.

OVERVIEW AND MOTIVATIONS
3
by Wal-Mart to all their suppliers as of January 1, 2006, and many other commercial
establishments have followed suit since then. More generally, smart cards (SCs) will
also play an important role in IoT; SCs typically incorporate a microprocessor and
storage.
At the “mid range” of the spectrum, one ﬁnds devices with embedded intelligence
(microprocessors) and embedded active wireless capabilities to perform a variety of
data gathering and possibly control functions. On-body biomedical sensors, home
appliance and power management, and industrial control are some examples of these
applications.
At the other end of the spectrum, more sophisticated sensors can also be employed
in the IoT: some of these sensor approaches use distributed wireless sensor network
(WSN) systems that (i) can collect a wide variety of environmental data such as
temperature, atmospheric and environmental chemical content, or even low- or high
resolution ambient video images from geographically dispersed locations; (ii) can
optionally pre-process some or all of the data; and (iii) can forward all these informa-
tion to a centralized (or distributed/virtualized) site for advanced processing. These
objects may span a city, region, or large distribution grid.
Other “things” may be associated with personal area networks (PANs), vehicular
networks (VNs), or delay tolerant networks (DTNs).
The IoT is seen by many as a comprehensive extension of the Internet and/or Inter-
net services that can establish and support pervasive connections between objects
(things) (and their underlying intrinsic information) and data collection and manage-
ment centers located in the network’s “core” (possibly even in a distributed “cloud”)
(2,3). The IoT operates in conjunction with real-time processing and ubiquitous com-
puting. The IoT is also perceived as a global network that connects physical objects
with virtual objects through the combination of data capture techniques and com-
munication networks. As such, the IoT is predicated on the expansion of the scope,
network reach, and possibly even the architecture of the Internet through the inclusion
of physical instrumented objects, such expansion fused with the ability to provide
smarter services to the environment or to the end user, as more in situ transferable data
become available. Some see the IoT in the context of ambient intelligence; namely, a
vision where environment becomes smart, friendly, context aware, and responsive to
many types of human needs. In such a world, computing and networking technology
coexist with people in a ubiquitous, friendly, and pervasive way: numerous miniature
and interconnected smart devices create a new intelligence and interact with each
other seamlessly (4).
The IoT effectively eliminates time and space isolation between geographical
space and virtual space, forming what proponents label as “smart geographical
space” and creating new human-to-environment (and/or H2M) relationships. The
latter implies that the IoT can advance the goal of integration of human beings with
their surroundings. A smart environment can be deﬁned as consisting of networks of
federated sensors and actuators and can be designed to encompass homes, ofﬁces,
buildings, and civil infrastructure; from this granular foundation, large-scale end-
to-end services supporting smart cities, smart transportation, and smart grids (SGs),
among others, can be contemplated. Recently, the IEEE Computer Society stated that

4
WHAT IS THE INTERNET OF THINGS?
“. . . The Internet of Things (IoT) promises to be the most disruptive technology since
the advent of the World Wide Web. Projections indicate that up to 100 billion uniquely
identiﬁable objects will be connected to the Internet by 2020, but human understanding
of the underlying technologies has not kept pace. This creates a fundamental chal-
lenge to researchers, with enormous technical, socioeconomic, political, and even
spiritual, consequences. IoT is just one of the most signiﬁcant emerging trends in
technology . . .” (5).
Figure 1.1 depicts the high level logical partitioning of the interaction space,
showing where the IoT applies for the purpose of this text; the ﬁgure illustrates
human-to-human (H2H) communication, M2M communication, H2M communica-
tions, and machine in (or on) humans (MiH) communications (MiH devices may
include human embedded chips, medical monitoring probes, global positioning sys-
tem (GPS) bracelets, and so on). The focus of the IoT is on M2M, H2M, and MiH
applications; this range of applicability is the theme captured in this text.
Top left: Interaction space partitioning showing humans and machines
Top right: The target machine is shown explicitly to be embedded in the “thing” 
Bottom left: Interaction space showing icons 
Bottom right: Embedded machine, icon view 
H2H: Human to Human
H2M: Human to Machine = H2TM: Human to Thing with Microprocessor/Machine
M2M: Machine to Machine = M2TM: Machine to Thing with Microprocessor/Machine
MiH: Machine in Humans
        (e.g., medical sensors)
        (also includes chips in animals/pets)
(*) People have been communicating with
computers for over half-a-century, but in this
context “machine” means a microprocessor
embedded in some objects (other than a
traditional computer)
Traditional electronic
communications
H2M(*)
H2M(*)
M2M
M2M
M2TM
Things
Things
H2TM
(*)
M2TM
H2TM
(*)
H2H
H2H
H2H
H2H
IoT
Traditional electronic
communications
IoT
MiH
MiH
MiH
MiH
FIGURE 1.1
H2H, H2M, and M2M environment.

OVERVIEW AND MOTIVATIONS
5
Recently, the IoT has been seen as an emerging “paradigm of building smart com-
munities” through the networking of various devices enabled by M2M technologies
(but not excluding H2M), for which standards are now emerging (e.g., from European
Telecommunications Standards Institute [ETSI]). M2M services aim at automat-
ing decision and communication processes and support consistent, cost-effective
interaction for ubiquitous applications (e.g., ﬂeet management, smart metering,
home automation, and e-health). M2M communications per se is the communication
between two or more entities that do not necessarily need direct human intervention:
it is the communication between remotely deployed devices with speciﬁc roles and
requiring little or no human intervention. M2M communication modules are usually
integrated directly into target devices, such as automated meter readers (AMRs),
vending machines, alarm systems, surveillance cameras, and automotive equipment,
to list a few. These devices span an array of domains including (among others) indus-
trial, trucking/transportation, ﬁnancial, retail point of sales (POS), energy/utilities,
smart appliances, and healthcare. The emerging standards allow both wireless and
wired systems to communicate with other devices of similar capabilities; M2M
devices, however, are typically connected to an application server via a mobile data
communication network.
IoT applications range widely from energy efﬁciency to logistics, from appliance
control to “smart” electric grids. Indeed, there is increasing interest in connecting and
controlling in real time all sorts of devices for personal healthcare (patient monitor-
ing and ﬁtness monitoring), building automation (also known as building automation
and control (BA&C)—for example, security devices/cameras; heating, ventilation,
and air-conditioning (HVAC); AMRs), residential/commercial control (e.g., secu-
rity HVAC, lighting control, access control, lawn and garden irrigation), consumer
electronics (e.g., TV, DVRs); PC and peripherals (e.g., mouse, keyboard, joystick,
wearable computers), industrial control (e.g., asset management, process control,
environmental, energy management), and supermarket/supply chain management
(this being just a partial list). Figures 1.2–1.5 provide some pictorial views of actual
IoT applications; these ﬁgures only depict illustrative cases and are not exhaustive or
normative. As it can be inferred, however, in an IoT environment there are a multi-
tude of applications and players that need to be managed across multiple platforms
(6). Some see IoT in the context of the “Web 3.0” (a name/concept advanced by
John Markoff of The New York Times in 2006), although this term has not yet gained
industry-wide, consistent support (7). The proposed essence of the term implies
“an intelligent Web,” such as supporting natural language search, artiﬁcial intelli-
gence/machine learning, and machine-facilitated understanding of information, with
the goal of providing a more intuitive user experience. IoT might ﬁt such paradigm,
but does not depend on it.
The initial vision of the IoT in the mid-2000s was of a world where physical
objects are tagged and uniquely identiﬁed by RFID transponders; however, the con-
cept has recently grown in multiple dimensions, encompassing dispersed sensors
that are able to provide real-world intelligence and goal-oriented collaboration of
distributed smart objects via local interconnections (such as through wireless LANs,
WSNs, and so on), or global interconnections (such as through the Internet). The

6
WHAT IS THE INTERNET OF THINGS?
Weather
Server
Traffic
Server
EEG
ECG
BLOOD
PRESSURE
TOXINS
PROTEIN
GLUCOSE
MOTION
SENSORS
Body
Area
Network
Medical
Server
Internet or
Other
Interconnection
WAN
Police
Video
Server
Pollution
Data
aggregation
Caregiver/
Physician
Power Co.
Network
LAN/WLAN
Wireline 
Network
WiFi Network
ZigBee Network
Wireless Sensor
Network
Cellular Network
WiMax Network
FIGURE 1.2
Illustrative example of the IoT.
seamless integration of communication capabilities between RFID tags, sensors, and
actuators is seen as an important area of development. WSNs are likely the “outer
tier” communication apparatus of the IoT. Thus, the IoT is not just an extension
of today’s Internet: it represents an aggregate of intelligent end-to-end systems that
enable smart solutions, and, as such, it covers a diverse range of technologies, includ-
ing sensing, communications, networking, computing, information processing, and
intelligent control technologies, some of which are covered in this text.
As stated above, we take the IoT to encompass the M2M, H2M, and MiH space.
It has been estimated that in 2011, there were 7 billion people on earth and 60 billion
machines worldwide. Market research ﬁrm Frost & Sullivan recently forecasted that

OVERVIEW AND MOTIVATIONS
7
IPv6 adr
IPv6 adr
IPv6 adr
IPv6 adr
IPv6 adr
IPv6 adr
IPv6 adr
IPv6 adr
IPv6 adr
IPv6 adr
Water heater
& Heating system
Basement
Fireplace
Living
room
Roof & Attic
Bathroom
Kitchen
IPv6 adr
FIGURE 1.3
Another illustrative example of the IoT.
mobile computing devices, such as connected laptops, netbooks, tablets, and MiFi
nodes, will increase to 50 million units by 2017 in the United States, while total
cellular M2M connections are expected to increase from around 24 million in 2010
to more than 75 million over the same period; worldwide, the expectation is that the
number of M2M device connections will grow from around 60 million in 2010 to
over 2 billion in 2020 (8). Other market research puts the worldwide M2M revenues
at over $38 billion in 2012 (9). Yet other market research companies project 15 billion
connected devices moving 35 trillion gigabytes of data at a cost of $3 trillion annually
by 2015 (10). These market data point to major development and deployment of the
IoT technology in the next few years. Note that personal communication devices
(smartphones, pads, and so on) can be viewed as machines or just simply as end
nodes; when personal communication devices are used for H2M devices where the
human employs the smartphone to communicate with a machine (such as a thermostat
or a home appliance), then we consider the personal communication devices part of
the IoT (otherwise we do not).
The deﬁnition of “IoT” has still some variability and can encompass different
aspects depending on the researcher and/or the ﬁeld in question. The European

8
WHAT IS THE INTERNET OF THINGS?
Wireless
Wireless
Wireless
Wireless
Central communication device
WAN, Extranet,
Internet, Celluar
Emergency
(Police,
ambulance)
SurveiIlance
Service
(Security firm)
Homeland
Security
(HLS)
Person
mapping
Asset
tracking,
Fraud
AAA/
access
management
Stroage
Remote
control
Other
provider
HAN (Home Area Network) (logical view)
Fire alarms
Door locks
Alarm
system
Cameras
Appliances
Sensors
(e.g., gas)
Consumption
Meter
Other 
“thing”
Wireline
Wireline
FIGURE 1.4
Yet another illustrative example of the IoT showing service providers.
Commission recently made these observations, which we can employ in our discus-
sion of the IoT (11):
“ . . . Considering the functionality and identity as central it is reasonable to deﬁne the
IoT as “Things having identities and virtual personalities operating in smart spaces
using intelligent interfaces to connect and communicate within social, environmental,
and user contexts.” A different deﬁnition, that puts the focus on the seamless integration,
could be formulated as “Interconnected objects having an active role in what might be
called the Future Internet.” The semantic origin of the expression is composed by two
words and concepts: “Internet” and “Thing,” where “Internet” can be deﬁned as “The
world-wide network of interconnected computer networks, based on a standard commu-
nication protocol, the Internet suite (TCP/IP),” while “Thing” is “an object not precisely
identiﬁable.” Therefore, semantically, “Internet of Things” means “a world-wide net-
work of interconnected objects uniquely addressable, based on standard communication
protocols . . .”
Some see IoT as an environment where “things talk” and/or “things talk back” (7);
effectively this simply means that devices have communication capabilities. The set of

OVERVIEW AND MOTIVATIONS
9
Medical
Server
Medical
Server
MBAN with portable patient monitor
MBAN with stationary/bedside patient monitoring
Medical
Server
Medical
Server
Artificial
Joint
Controller
Toxins
Monitor
Blood Pressure
Monitor
EKG Monitor
EEG Monitor
Glucose
Monitor
Home Network
Home or Institution
Network
Caregiver/
Physician
Caregiver/
Physician
Internet
Internet
Artificial
Joint
Controller
Toxins
Monitor
Blood Pressure
Monitor
EKG Monitor
EEG Monitor
Glucose
Monitor
Wireless
Controller
IPv6
IPv6
IPv6
IPv6
IPv6
IPv6
IPv6
IPv6
IPv6
IPv6
IPv6
FIGURE 1.5
Yet another illustrative example of the IoT (body area network (BAN) appli-
cation).
data and environmental awareness that objects should have depends on the application
in question. Researchers are suggesting that objects should have the capability to be
aware of such data as, but not limited to, its creation, transformation, ownership
change, and physical-world parameters. Also, in some applications, objects should
be able to interact actively with the environment, operating as actuators.
At a macro level, an IoT comprises a remote set of assets (a sensing domain), a
network domain, and an applications domain. We deﬁne the data processing thing,
also known as data integration point or person (DIPP), as the point (entity, person)
where the administrative decisioning and/or the data accumulation takes place. We

10
WHAT IS THE INTERNET OF THINGS?
deﬁne the “remote things,” also known as data end points (DEPs), as the devices
where events are sensed, data are collected, and/or an actuation takes place. Table 1.1
provides a working taxonomy of “things” in the IoT universe, as perceived in this text.
There are interactions of interest between a DIPP being a human (H) and a “remote
thing” being a machine/device (e.g., a thermostat) (such as a person changing the
setting of the thermostat while away from home) or between two machines (M)
(such as a server handling the usage reading from a residential electric meter). A
person/human may use a PC or laptop, but increasingly a person may be using an
iPad/tablet or a smartphone. The DIPP could be accessing the IoT system from a
stationary location (e.g., a PC or server), from a wireless local environment (e.g., a
ﬁxed home hotspot), or from a completely mobile venue (e.g., using a smartphone).
The “remote thing” could be stationary (e.g., a thermostat), on a wireless LAN or
sensor network (but be relatively stationary), or be completely mobile (e.g., on a
mobile ad hoc Network (MANET)—a self-conﬁguring infrastructureless network of
mobile devices connected by wireless links—or on a 3G/4G cellular network).
IoT is not seen by advocates as a future thing, but a set of capabilities that are
already available at this time. Proponents and developers are endeavoring to reuse
what is already available by way of the Internet suite of protocols, although there may
be a need for some more research and/or standards, especially for large-scale, low
power, broadly dispersed (where sensors are broadly dispersed in the environment)
applications. An overriding goal is not to redesign the Internet (12); many researches
position the IoT and work in support of the IoT simply as the (normal) “Evolution
of the Internet” (what might be called by analogy with cellular networks, the long-
term evolution of the Internet (LTEI)). A key observation is that if each of the large
multitude of things in the IoT is to be addressed directly and individually, then a large
address space is needed.
Cost as well as energy requirements of embedded devices require the use of
efﬁcient protocols and efﬁcient communication architectures for the IoT. Standard-
ization of IoT elements also becomes critical: the beneﬁts of standardization include
reduced complexity of IoT deployments, reduced deployment time for new services,
lower capital requirements (CAPEX), and lower operating expense (OPEX). The IoT
requires robust “last-yard,” “last-mile,” and “core” network technologies to make it
a commercial reality.
Various technologies have indeed emerged in the past two decades that can be
utilized for implementations, including PANs, such as IEEE 802.15.4; wireless local
area networks (WLANs); WSNs; 3G/4G cellular networks; metro-Ethernet networks;
multiprotocol label switching (MPLS); and virtual private network (VPN) systems.
Wireless access and/or wireless ad hoc mesh systems reduce the “last-mile” cost
of IoT applications, such as for distributed monitoring and control applications.
However, we believe that the fundamental technical advancement that will foster
the deployment of the IoT is IP Version 6 (IPv6). In fact, IoT may well become the
“killer-app” for IPv6. IoT is deployable using IP Version 4 (IPv4) as has been the
case in the recent past, but only IPv6 provides the proper scalability and functionality
to make it economical, ubiquitous, and pervasive. There are many advantages in
using IP for IoT, but we have to ascertain that the infrastructure and the supporting

TABLE 1.1
Taxonomy of “Things” in IoT
H2M
DIPP “thing”
H
Stationary access/connectivity
Local mobility access/connectivity
Full mobility access/connectivity
Remote
“thing”
(DEP)
M
Target device
is stationary
Target device
has local
mobility
Target device
has full
mobility
Target device
is stationary
Target device
has local
mobility
Target device
has full
mobility
Target device
is stationary
Target device
has local
mobility
Target device
has full
mobility
Example
Access a home
thermostat
from an
ofﬁce PC
Access a
monitor on
a home-
bound pet
from an
ofﬁce PC
Access a GPS
device on a
teenager’s
car from an
ofﬁce PC
Access a home
thermostat
from a
home,
ofﬁce, or
hotspot
wireless PC
Access a
monitor on
a home-
bound pet
from a
home,
ofﬁce, or
hotspot
wireless PC
Access a GPS
device on a
teenager’s
car from a
home,
ofﬁce, or
hotspot
wireless PC
Access a home
thermostat
from a
smartphone
Access a
monitor on
a home-
bound pet
from a
smartphone
Access a GPS
device on a
teenager’s
car from a
smartphone
M2M
DIPP “thing”
M1
Stationary access/connectivity
Local mobility access/connectivity
Full mobility access/connectivity
Remote
“thing”
(DEP)
M2
Target device
is stationary
Target device
has local
mobility
Target device
has full
mobility
Target device
is stationary
Target device
has local
mobility
Target device
has full
mobility
Target device
is stationary
Target device
has local
mobility
Target device
has full
mobility
Example
Access a home
electrical
meter from
an ofﬁce/
provider
server
Access a
monitor on
a home-
bound pet
from an
ofﬁce/
provider
server
Access a GPS
device on a
person’s car
from an
ofﬁce/
provider
server
Access a home
electrical
meter from
a WLAN-
based
ofﬁce/
provider
server
Access a
monitor on
a home-
bound pet
from a
WLAN-
based
ofﬁce/
provider
server
Access a GPS
device on a
person’s car
from a
WLAN-
based
ofﬁce/
provider
server
Access a home
electrical
meter from
roaming-
3G/ 4G
based
provider
server
Access a
monitor on
a home-
bound pet
from a
roaming-
3G/
4G-based
provider
server
Access a GPS
device on a
person’s car
from a
roaming-
3G/
4G-based
provider
server
11

12
WHAT IS THE INTERNET OF THINGS?
Deploys
solution
Has direct
relation to
Service
provider
Or
Reseller
Offers
additional
service
(e.g., energy)
Resells
services
Solution
packaging
Provision of
services
Operation of
solution
Interfaces
Middleware
Applications
Tariffs
Vending
machines
PMDs
Radios
OMUs
Robotics
Computer
Networks
Availability
Connectivity
SIM cards
Sensors
Aggregators
Cameras
Sender
Enabling
capabilities
(e.g., QoS)
Solution
build-up
Hardware
integration
Legacy/SW
integration
Service
provider
System
integrator
Service
enabler
Network
operator
Machine
supply
Module/
Modems
Customer
Consumer
Reseller
(Bus. Cust.)
FIGURE 1.6
Stakeholder universe in the IoT/M2M world (representative, not complete
view).
technology scale to meet the challenges. This is why there is a broad agreement that
IPv6 is critical for the deployment of the IoT.
IoT stakeholders include technology investors, technology developers, planners
with carriers and service providers, chief technical ofﬁcers (CTOs), logistics pro-
fessionals, engineers at equipment developers, technology integrators, Internet-
backbone and ISP providers, cloud service providers, and telcos and wireless
providers, both domestically and in the rest of the world. See Figure 1.6.
1.2
EXAMPLES OF APPLICATIONS
Vertical industries in arenas such as automotive and ﬂeet management, telehealth (also
called telecare by some) and Mobile Health (m-Health—when mobile communica-
tions are used), energy and utilities, public infrastructure, telecommunications, secu-
rity and defense, consumer telematics, automated teller machines (ATMs)/kiosk/POS,

EXAMPLES OF APPLICATIONS
13
and digital signage are in the process of deploying IoT services and capabilities. Pro-
ponents make the claim that IoT will usher in a wide range of smart applications and
services to cope with many of the challenges individuals and organizations face in
their everyday lives. For example, remote healthcare monitoring systems could aid
in managing costs and alleviating the shortage of healthcare personnel; intelligent
transportation systems could aid in reducing trafﬁc congestion and the issues caused
by congestion such as air pollution; smart distribution systems from utility grids
to supply chains could aid in improving the quality and reducing the cost of their
respective goods and services; and, tagged objects could result in more systematic
recycling and effective waste disposal (13). These applications may change the way
societies function and, thus, have a major impact on many aspects of people’s lives
in the years to come. Many of today’s home entertainment and monitoring systems
often offer a web interface to the end user; the IoT aims at greatly extending those
capabilities to many other devices and many other applications.
A short list of (early) applications includes the following (also see Table 1.2):
r Things on the move
Retail
Logistics
Pharmaceutical
Food
r Ubiquitous intelligent devices
r Ambient and assisted living
Health
Intelligent Home
Transportation
r Education and Information
r Environmental aspects/Resource Efﬁciency
Pollution and disaster avoidance
A longer, but far from complete, list of applications includes the following:
r Smart appliances
r Efﬁcient appliances via the use of eco-aware/ambient-aware things
r Interaction of physical and virtual worlds; executable tags, intelligent tags,
autonomous tags, collaborative tags
r Intelligent devices cooperation
r Ubiquitous readers
r Smart transportation
r Smart living
r In vivo health

14
WHAT IS THE INTERNET OF THINGS?
TABLE 1.2
The Scope of IoT
Application
Devices (“Things”) of
Service Sector
Group
Location (Partial List)
Interest (Partial List)
Real estate
(industrial)
Commercial/
institutional
Ofﬁce complex, school,
retail space, hospitality
space, hospital, medical
site, airport, stadium
UPS, generator, HVAC,
ﬁre and safety (EHS),
lighting, security
monitoring, security
control/access
Industrial
Factory, processing site,
inventory room, clean
room, campus
Energy
Supply
providers/
consumers
Power generation, power
transmission, power
distribution, energy
management, AMI
Turbine, windmills, UPS,
batteries, generators,
fuel cells
Alternative
energy
systems
Solar systems, wind
system, cogeneration
systems
Oil/gas
operations
Rigs, well heads, pumps,
pipelines, reﬁneries
Consumer and
home
Infrastructure
Home wiring/routers, home
network access, home
energy management
Power systems,
HVAC/thermostats,
sprinklers, MID,
dishwashers,
refrigerators, ovens,
eReaders,
washer/dryers,
computers, digital
videocameras, meters,
lights, computers, game
consoles, TVs, PDRs
Safety
Home ﬁre safety system,
home environmental
safety system (e.g.,
CO2), home
security/intrusion
detection system, home
power protection system,
remote telemetry/video
into home, oversight of
home children, oversight
of home based
babysitters, oversight of
home-bound elderly
Environmentals
Home HVAC, home
lighting, home
sprinklers, home
appliance control, home
pools and jacuzzis
Entertainment
TVs, PDRs

EXAMPLES OF APPLICATIONS
15
TABLE 1.2
(Continued)
Application
Devices (“Things”) of
Service Sector
Group
Location (Partial List)
Interest (Partial List)
Healthcare
Care
Hospitals, ERs, mobile
POC, clinic,
laboratories, doctor’s
ofﬁce
MRIs, PDAs, implants,
surgical equipment,
BAN devices, power
systems
In vivo/home
Implants, home
monitoring systems,
body area networks
(BANs)
Research
Diagnostic laboratory,
pharmaceutical
research site
Industrial
Resource
automation
Mining sites, irrigation
sites, agricultural sites,
monitored
environments
(wetlands, woodlands,
etc.)
Pumps, valves, vets,
conveyors, pipelines,
tanks, motors, drives,
converters, packaging
systems, power systems
Fluids
management
Petrochemical sites,
chemical sites, food
preparation site,
bottling sites, wineries,
breweries
Converting
operations
Metal processing sites,
paper processing sites,
rubber/plastic
processing sites,
metalworking site,
electronics assembly
site
Distribution
Pipelines, conveyor belts
Transportation
Nonvehicular
Airplanes, trains, busses,
ships/boats, ferries
Vehicles, ships, planes,
trafﬁc lights, dynamic
signage, toll gates, tags
Vehicles
Consumer and
commercial vehicle
(car, motorcycle, etc.),
construction vehicle
(e.g., crane)
Transportation
subsystems
Toll booths, trafﬁc lights
and trafﬁc management,
navigation signs,
bridge/tunnel status
sensors
(continued )

16
WHAT IS THE INTERNET OF THINGS?
TABLE 1.2
(Continued)
Application
Devices (“Things”) of
Service Sector
Group
Location (Partial List)
Interest (Partial List)
Retail
Stores
Supermarkets, shopping
centers, small stores,
distribution centers
POS terminals, cash
registers, vending
machines, ATMs,
parking meters
Hospitality
Hotel, restaurants, caf´e’,
banquet halls, shopping
malls
Specialty
Banks, gas stations,
bowling, movie theaters
Public safety
and security
Surveillance
Radars, military security,
speed monitoring
systems, security
monitoring systems
Vehicles, ferries, subway
trains, helicopters,
airplanes, video
cameras, ambulances,
police cars, ﬁre trucks,
chemical/radiological
monitors, triangulation
systems, UAVs
Equipment
Vehicles, ferries, subway
trains, helicopters,
airplanes
Tracking
Commercial trucks, postal
trucks, ambulances,
police cars
Public
infrastructure
Water treatment sites,
sewer systems, bridges,
tunnels
Emergency
services
First responders
IT systems and
networks
Public networks
Network facilities, central
ofﬁces, data centers,
submarine cable, cable
TV headends, telco
hotels, cellular towers,
poles, teleports, ISP
centers, lights-off sites,
NOCs
Network elements,
switches, core routers,
antenna towers, poles,
servers, power systems,
backup generators
Enterprise
networks
Data centers, network
equipment (e.g.,
routers)
r Security-based living
r Energy and resource conservation
r Advanced metering infrastructure (AMI)
r Energy harvesting (biology, chemistry, induction)
r Power generation in hash environments
r Energy recycling
r Ambient intelligence
r Authentication, trust, and veriﬁcation

IPv6 ROLE
17
r Search the physical world (“Google of things”)
r Virtual worlds
r Web of things (WoT) which aims for direct web connectivity by pushing its
technology down to devices
Regarding retail, the ﬁrst large-scale application of the IoT technologies will be
to replace the bar code in retail environments. The challenge so far has been the (i)
higher cost of the tag over the bar code, (ii) some needed technology improvement
for transportation of metals and liquid items, and (iii) privacy concerns. Nonetheless,
the replacement has already started in some pilot projects. Although one may expect
to see the coexistence of the two identiﬁcation mechanisms for many years into the
future, advances in the electronics industry will make the RFID tag more affordable
and, thus, more attractive and accessible to the retailers. Logistics aims at improving
efﬁciency of processes or enables new value-added features. The warehouses of the
future will likely become completely automated, with items being checked in and out
and orders automatically passed to the suppliers. For example, with IoT techniques
foods may be transported without human intervention from producer to consumer, and
the manufacturers will have a direct feedback on the market’s needs. Health logistics
is one of the near-term applications of IoT, noting, for example, that reportedly more
than 7000 people lose their lives in US hospitals every year because of the errors in
medication delivery to the patient. Health logistics, the ﬂow of drugs and patients,
requires one to design systems that can be supported by the healthcare workers
and that can be integrated from the supply chain to the bedside, and even before the
patient is admitted to a hospital (11). The cost of healthcare is rising every year, having
reached 16% to 17% of the US gross domestic product (GDP), with the trend to add
at least 1% each year. Wide utilization of wireless communications in conjunction
with mobile monitoring devices can reduce healthcare costs by billions of dollars
on an annual basis, with much of that savings derived by reducing hospitalizations
and extending independent living for seniors (14). These observations are but a small
sample of the applications and scope of IoT. The evolution to a connected world
spans the arena of measurement, data collection, state inference, and reaction. Some
researchers also see a convergence of utility computing (cloud computing) with the
IoT (15). These and other practical applications will be discussed in the chapters
that follow, particularly in Chapter 3.
1.3
IPv6 ROLE
We retain the position that IoT may well become the “killer-app” for IPv6. Using
IPv6 with its abundant address spaces, globally unique object (thing) identiﬁcation
and connectivity can be provided in a standardized manner without additional status
or address (re)processing—hence, its intrinsic advantage over IPv4 or other schemes.
It is both desirable as well as feasible for all physical (and even virtual or logical)
objects to have a permanent unique identiﬁer, an object ID (OID). It is also desirable
as well as feasible for all end-point network locations and/or intermediary-point

18
WHAT IS THE INTERNET OF THINGS?
network locations to have a durable unique network address (NAdr); the IPv6 address
space enables the concrete realization of these goals. When objects that have enough
intelligence to (run a communication protocol stack so that they can) communicate
are placed on a network, these objects can be tagged with an NAdr. Every object then
has a tuple (OID, NAdr) that is always unique, although the second entry of the tuple
may change with time, location, or situation. In a stationary, nonvariable, or mostly
static environment, one could opt, if one so chose, to assign the OID to be identical
to the NAdr where the object is expected to attach to the network; that is, the object
inherits the tuple (NAdr, NAdr). In the rare case where the object moved, the OID
could then be refreshed to the address of the new location; that is, the object then
inherits the tuple (NAdr’, NAdr’). However, there is a general trend toward object
mobility, giving rise to a dynamic environment (e.g., for mobile or variable case);
hence, to retain maximal ﬂexibility it is best to separate, in principle, the OID from
the NAdr and thus assign a general (OID, NAdr) tuple where the OID is completely
invariant; however, the OID can still be drawn from the NAdr space, that is from the
IPv6 address space.
What was described above is not feasible in an IPv4 world, because in the 32-bit
address space, only 232∼1010 NAdr location can be identiﬁed uniquely. IPv6 offers
a much larger 2128 space; hence, the number of available unique node addressees is
2128∼1039. IPv6 has more than 340 undecillion (340,282,366,920,938,463,463,374,
607,431,768,211,456) addresses, grouped into blocks of 18 quintillion addresses.
Already today many tags operate with a 128-bit OID ﬁeld that allows 2128∼1039
(≈3.4 × 1038) unique identiﬁers, but the tuple (OID, NAdr = OID) could not be
deﬁned uniquely in the IPv4 world.
IPv6 was originally deﬁned in 1995 in request for comments (RFC) 1883 and then
further reﬁned by RFC 2460, “Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6) Speciﬁcation,”
authored by S. Deering and R. Hinden (December 1998). A large body of additional
RFCs has emerged in recent years to add capabilities and reﬁne the IPv6 concept. IPv6
embodies IPv4 best practices but removes unused or obsolete IPv4 characteristics;
this results in a better-optimized Internet protocol. Some of the advantages of IPv6
include the following:
r Scalability and expanded addressing capabilities: as noted, IPv6 has 128-bit
addresses versus 32-bit IPv4 addresses. With IPv4, the theoretical number of
available IP addresses is 232∼1010. IPv6 offers a much larger 2128 space. Hence,
the number of available unique node addressees is 2128∼1039.
r “Plug-and-play”: IPv6 includes a “plug-and-play” mechanism that facilitates
the connection of equipment to the network. The requisite conﬁguration is
automatic; it is a serverless mechanism.
r Security: IPv6 includes and requires security in its speciﬁcations such as payload
encryption and authentication of the source of the communication. End-to-end
security, with built-in strong IP-layer encryption and authentication (embed-
ded security support with mandatory IP security (IPsec) implementation), is
supported.

IPv6 ROLE
19
r Mobility: IPv6 includes an efﬁcient and robust mobility mechanism namely an
enhanced support for mobile IP, speciﬁcally, the set of mobile IPv6 (MIPv6)
protocols, including the base protocol deﬁned in RFC 3775.
For the IoT as well as for other applications for smartphones and similar devices,
there is a desire to support direct communication between mobile nodes (MNs)
and far-end destinations, whether such far-ends are themselves a stationary node or
another MN. Such far-end destination could be, for example, a roving sensor collect-
ing environmental or other data. In order to efﬁciently maintain reacheability, thus
supporting ﬂexible mobility, the goal is to retain the same explicit IP address regard-
less of the real-time location or speciﬁc network elements and/or networks used to sup-
port connectivity. This is not easily achievable with IPv4 for a number of reasons; how-
ever, MIPv6 described in RFC 3775, “Mobility Support in IPv6” (June 2004), among
others, facilitates this task. RFC 3775 is known as the “MIPv6 base speciﬁcation.”
RFCs are speciﬁcations and related materials published by the Internet Engineering
Task Force (IETF). IPv6 mobility, speciﬁcally MIPv6, relies on IPv6 capabilities.
RFC 3775 notes that without speciﬁc support for mobility in IPv6, packets destined
to an MN would not be able to reach it while the MN is away from its home network.
In order to continue communication in spite of its movement, an MN could change
its IP address each time it moves to a new link, but the MN would then not be able to
maintain transport and higher-layer connections when it changes location. Mobility
support in IPv6 is particularly important, as mobile users are likely to account for a
majority, or at least a substantial fraction, of the population of the Internet during the
lifetime of IPv6, including instrumented objects, which is the topic of this text. MIPv6
allows nodes to remain reachable while moving around in the IPv6 Internet: it enables
a device (an MN) to change its attachment point to the Internet without losing higher-
layer functionality through the use of tunneling between it and a designated home
agent (HA). Stated another way, MIPv6 enables an MN to maintain its connectivity to
the Internet when moving from one AR to another, a process referred to as handover.
See Figure 1.7.
Two fundamental questions are: (1) how to deliver and/or receive information
from an instrumented object and (2) how to do so in the presence of mobility. It is to
be understood that mobility management (items 1 and 2 just listed) can be handled,
to some (considerable) degree, by acquiring new physical links at the physical layer,
namely, via a new channel acquisition at the PHY layer as supported by a cellular-
level cell handoff (or a WiFi, WiMAX, or ZigBee handoff), in a transparent manner
to the upper layers (which include IP and higher layers supporting the video stream).
However, there are situations where an IP-level handoff is desirable; MIPv6 addresses
the latter case. Figure 1.8 depicts the protocol stacks at a generic level supporting
these two modes.
These (IPv6) mechanisms, which give objects the ability of addressing each other
and of verifying their respective identities, enable all the objects to exchange infor-
mation, if they so choose and/or if it is necessary. This enables one to create a highly
woven fabric of processing hosts, communication nodes and relays, sensors, and
actuators.

20
WHAT IS THE INTERNET OF THINGS?
Weather
server
CN
MN
Foreign
network
Home
agent
Internet
H A
Home network
Foreign
network
Correspondent
node(s)
Data
Data
BU
Traffic
server
Medical
server
Caregiver/
physician
Police
video
server
Pollution
data
aggregation
BU = Binding updates
MN = Mobile node
CN = Correspondent note
FIGURE 1.7
Communication supported in MIPv6 through the HA.
1.4
AREAS OF DEVELOPMENT AND STANDARDIZATION
Despite signiﬁcant technological advances in many subtending disciplines, difﬁcul-
ties associated with the evaluation of IoT solutions under realistic conditions in real-
world experimental deployments still hamper their maturation and signiﬁcant rollout.
Obviously, with limited standardization, there are capability mismatches between
different devices; also, there are mismatches between communication and processing
bandwidth. While IoT systems can utilize existing Internet protocols, as mentioned
earlier, in a number of cases the power-, processing-, and capabilities-constrained
IoT environments can beneﬁt from additional protocols that help optimize the com-
munications and lower the computational requirements. The M2M environment

AREAS OF DEVELOPMENT AND STANDARDIZATION
21
Previous Link A
Previous Route A
L3 A
L3 B1
L3 B2
L3 B3
Next Link B3
Next Link B2
Next Link B1
Next Route B3
Next Route B2
Next Route B1
PHY A
PHY B1
PHY B2
PHY B3
FIGURE 1.8
Handoff at the physical (e.g., cellular) or IP (e.g., routing) layer.
has been a fragmented space, but recent standardization efforts are beginning to
show results.
Some see the four “pillars” supporting or deﬁning the IoT: (i) M2M/MTC as the
“Internet of devices”; (ii) RFID as the “Internet of objects”; (iii) WSN as the “Internet
of transducers”; and (iv) supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) as the
“Internet of controllers” (7). Certainly, these are the constituent elements of the IoT
ecosystems, but they do not uniquely deﬁne the space, especially since WSNs are
not uniquely well deﬁned, and SCADA and RFIDs are legacy technologies. We see
the IoT mostly, but not exclusively, as a new generation of collaborative, ubiquitous-
computing entities that have signiﬁcant embedded computing/communication capa-
bilities, by and large using wireless links at the physical/media access layer and

22
WHAT IS THE INTERNET OF THINGS?
migrating (or natively using) IPv6 at the networking layer; while not aiming at
excluding any subsegment of the space, a forward-looking environment is assumed
and predicated in our discussion.
Standards covering many of the underlying technologies are critical because pro-
prietary solutions fragment the industry. Standards are particularly important when
there is a requirement to physically or logically connect entities across an interface.
Device-, network-, and application standards can enable global solutions for seam-
less operations at reduced costs. The focus of this text is to make the case that IPv6
is the fundamental optimal network communication technology to deploy IoT in a
robust, commercial manner rather than just a preliminary desktop “science experi-
ment” in some academic researcher’s laboratory. (Layer 2 wireless technologies are
also critical to IoT’s end-to-end connectivity.)
IoT standardization spans several domains, including physical interfaces, access
connectivity (e.g., low power IEEE802.15.4-based wireless standards such as
IEC62591, 6LoWPAN, and ZigBee Smart Energy (SE) 2.0, DASH7, ETSI M2M),
networking (such as IPv6), and applications. Some studies have shown that for the
home two wireless physical layer communication technologies that best meet the over-
all performance and cost requirements are Wi-Fi (802.11/n) and ZigBee (802.15.4)
(16). Examples of standardization efforts targeted for these environments include
the initiatives known as “constrained RESTful environments (CoRE),” “IPv6 over
low power WPAN (6LoWPAN),” and “routing over low power and lossy networks
(ROLL),” which have been (and are being) studied by appropriate working groups of
the IETF (12).
Some speciﬁc considerations need to be taken when designing protocols and
architectures for interconnecting smart objects to the Internet, including scalability,
power efﬁciency, interworking between different technologies and network domains,
usability and manageability, and security and privacy (12). To make the IoT a practical
pervasive reality, signiﬁcant research needs to be conducted within and across these
technological aspects of IoT. This has recently motivated a voluminous amount of
research activities in the ﬁeld. Some areas of active research include but are not
limited to the following (13–15):
r Standardization at all layers/domains
r Architectures and middlewares for IoT integration
r Protocols for smart things: end-to-end/M2M protocols and standardization
r Mobility management
r Cloud computing and things internetworking
r Lightweight implementations of cryptographic stacks
r End-to-end security capabilities for the things
r Bootstrapping techniques
r Routing protocols for the IoT
r Global connectivity

SCOPE OF THE PRESENT INVESTIGATION
23
1.5
SCOPE OF THE PRESENT INVESTIGATION
Given potential beneﬁt of the technology, corporate and technical planners may
be asking questions such as, but not limited to, “What is the IoT?”, “How can it
help my speciﬁc operation?”, “What is the cost of deploying such a system?”, and
“What are the security implications?”. This text addresses the following IoT aspects:
IPv6 technologies, MIPv6 technologies, applications, key technologies for the IoT
applications, implementation approaches, implementation challenges, and mid-range
and long-range opportunities.
Observations such as these give impetus to the investigation in this text (11):
“ . . . RFID and related identiﬁcation technologies will be the cornerstone of the upcom-
ing Internet of Things . . . While RFID was initially developed with retail and logistics
applications in mind in order to replace the bar code, developments of active components
will make this technology much more than a simple identiﬁcation scheme. In the not
too distant future, it can be expected that a single numbering scheme, such as IPv6, will
make every single object identiﬁable and addressable. Smart components will be able
to execute different set of actions, according to their surroundings and the tasks they are
designed for. There will be no limit to the actions and operations these smart “things”
will be able to perform: for instance, devices will be able to direct their transport, adapt
to their respective environments, self-conﬁgure, self-maintain, self-repair, and eventu-
ally even play an active role in their own disposal. To reach such a level of ambient
intelligence, however, major technological innovations and developments will need to
take place. Governance, standardization and interoperability are absolute necessities on
the path towards the vision of things able to communicate with each other . . .”
and (8):
“The M2M Evolution: In a “Perfect Storm” of technology adoption, M2M is leveraging
modern Internet technologies and infrastructures with mature IT middleware and solu-
tions to address the Enterprise’s desire for better utilizing operational assets and their
associated information.”
and (9):
“M2M is poised to become an integral part of the telecoms landscape with a potentially
transformative impact on a vast number of industries—with an equally vast number of
services and applications to monetize. As operators struggle to gain market share in
a time of subscriber saturation, M2M represents an opportunity to transform revenue
streams, ARPU and churn rates . . . M2M is already being successfully utilized in several
industries, with impressive results . . . With other industries as diverse as automotive
and e-health . . . smart services, smart metering and the connected home promise a
future of eco-friendly energy use, technologically advanced living spaces and machine
to machine connectivity. M2M seeks to improve the lives of subscribers, the success of
enterprises and the operations of service providers . . .”
and (17):

24
WHAT IS THE INTERNET OF THINGS?
“After years of anticipation, the M2M era has ﬁnally arrived. A new Yankee Group
forecast predicts enterprise cellular M2M connections worldwide will surge from 81.8
million in 2011 to nearly 217.5 million in 2015. In the same time frame, connectivity
revenue will more than double from U.S. $3.1 billion to U.S. $6.7 billion, making
the M2M market one of the highest growth areas in the wireless arena during the
next decade . . . Falling hardware prices and the increased availability of end-to-end
solutions have established a more accessible M2M market for enterprises around the
world.”
and (18):
“The IoT makes possible for virtually any object around us to exchange information and
work in synergy to increase quality of our life. There are smart clothes which will interact
intelligently with climate control of car and home to select the most suitable temperature
and humidity for the person. Smart book interacts with entertainment devices such as
TV in order to elaborate the topic we are reading . . .”
and (19):
“ . . . the possibilities and opportunities are endless . . .”
and (20):
The IoT is a key enabler for the realization of M2M, as it allows for the pervasive inter-
action with/between smart things leading to a effective integration of information into
the digital world. These smart (mobile) things – which are instrumented with sensing,
actuation, and interaction capabilities – have the means to exchange information and
inﬂuence the real world entities and other actors of a smart city eco-system in real time,
forming a smart pervasive computing environment. The objective is to reach a global
access to the services and information through the so-called Web of Things and efﬁcient
support for global communications, in order to embrance the M2M communications in
the future IoT composed of IPv6 network and various smart things . . . issues such as
the adaptation of legacy technologies and RFID to IPv6 and the Future IoT, security and
privacy requirements in Smart Cities and the design of a secure and privacy-aware IoT,
as well as the deﬁnition of new advanced architectures and models for the Internet and
its application to smart livable Cities, [are important].
After the introductory chapter, Chapter 2 provides a formal framework for the IoT.
Chapter 3 identiﬁes a number of practical IoT applications, including BANs and over-
the-air-passive surveillance (such as the Ring of Steel in London and now in many
US cities). Chapter 4 looks at fundamental IoT mechanisms, for example, addressing,
followed by a survey of key technologies to support the IoT applications. Emerging
and applicable standards are discussed in Chapter 5. Chapter 6 discusses wireless
connectivity at Layer 1 and Layer 2. Chapter 7 discusses connectivity at Layer 3,
speciﬁcally IPv6 mechanisms, which are critical to the large-scale deployment of
the IoT. Chapter 8 reviews MIPv6 technologies for possible mobile applications

APPENDIX 1.A: SOME RELATED LITERATURE
25
while Chapter 9 provides an overview of 6LoWPAN which is ideally suited to IoT
environments.
Interested readers include technology investors, researchers and academics, tech-
nology developers, planners with carriers and service providers, technology integra-
tors, Internet-backbone and ISP providers, cloud service providers, and telcos and
wireless providers.
This text is one in a series of texts by the author on the topic of IPv6. We are
not implying in this text that IPv6 and/or MIPv6 is strictly and uniquely required to
support IoT developments—early deployments are, in fact, using IPv4. We are advo-
cating, however, that platforms based on these protocols provide an ideal, future-
proof, scalable, and ubiquitous environment for such evolving services and capa-
bilities. Appendix 1.A identiﬁes some related books, a number of which are edited
monographs; our treatise endeavors to put emphasis on the use of IPv6.
APPENDIX 1.A: SOME RELATED LITERATURE
This appendix contains some related literature. As it can be seen, most of this IoT
literature is fairly recent and, therefore, does not uniquely cover the focus of this text,
which is related to IPv6 being the fundamental optimal communication technology
to deploy IoT in a robust commercial manner rather than just a desktop “science
experiment” in some academic researcher’s laboratory.
Here are some related books, a number of which are edited monographs:
r (Edited text) Giusto D, Iera A, Morabito G, Atzori L, editors, The Internet of
Things: 20th Tyrrhenian Workshop on Digital Communications.1st ed. Springer;
2010.
r (Edited text) Uckelmann D, Harrison M, Michahelles F, editors, Architecting
the Internet of Things, Springer; 2011.
r (Edited text) Chaouchi H, editor, The Internet of Things: Connecting Objects,
Wiley; 2012.
r (Edited text) Chabanne H, Urien P, Susini J-F, editors, RFID and the Internet
of Things, Wiley-ISTE; 2011.
r Lu Yan, Yan Zhang, Laurence T. Yang, The Internet of Things: from RFID
to the Next-generation Pervasive Networked Systems, Wireless Networks
and Mobile Communications Series, CRC Press, Taylor and Francis Group;
2008.
r Evdokimov S, Fabian B, G¨unther O, Ivantysynova L, Ziekow H, RFID and the
Internet of Things: Technology, Applications, and Security Challenges, Hanover,
Mass.: Now Publishers Inc.; 2011.
r Hazenberg W, Huisman M, Meta Products: Building the Internet of
Things,Amsterdam, NL: BIS Publishers; 2011.

26
WHAT IS THE INTERNET OF THINGS?
r Hersent O, Boswarthick D, Elloumi O, The Internet of Things: Key Applications
and Protocols. New York: Wiley; 2012.
r Zhou H, The Internet of Things in the Cloud: A Middleware Perspective, New
York, NY: CRC Press; 2013.
REFERENCES
1. Ashton K. That ‘Internet of things’ thing. RFID Journal, 2009.
2. Ping L, Quan L, Zude Z, Wang H. Agile supply chain management over the Internet of
Things. 2011 International Conference on Management and Service Science (MASS),
2011 Aug, 1–4; Wuhan, China.
3. Zheng J, Simplot-Ryl D, et al. The Internet of Things. IEEE Communications Magazine,
November 2011;49(11):30–31.
4. Practel, Inc., Role of Wireless ICT in Health Care and Wellness – Standards, Technologies
and Markets, May, 2012. CT: Published by Global Information, Inc. (GII).
5. IEEE Computer. The Internet of Things: The Next Technological Revolution. Special
Issue, February 2013.
6. Schlautmann A. Embedded Networking Systems in the Smart Home & Ofﬁce. M2M Zone
Conference at the International CTIA Wireless 2011; 2011 Mar 22–24;Orange County
Convention Center, Orlando Florida.
7. Zhou H. The Internet of Things in the Cloud: A Middleware Perspective. New York: CRC
Press; 2013.
8. Duke-Woolley R. Wireless Enterprise, Industry & Consumer Apps for the Automation
Age. M2M Zone Conference at the International CTIA Wireless 2011; 2011 Mar 22–24;
Orange County Convention Center, Orlando Florida.
9. Peerun S. Machine to Machine (M2M) Revenues Will Reach $38.1bn in 2012. Visiongain
Report, United Kingdom; 2012.
10. Kreisher K. Intel: M2M data tsunami begs for analytics, security. Online Magazine, (Oct
8), 2012. Available at http://www.telecomengine.com.
11. Internet of Things in 2020 – Roadmap For The Future, INFSO D.4 Networked Enterprise
& RFID, INFSO G.2 Micro & Nanosystems in co-operation with the Working Group
RFID Of The ETP EPOSS. (European Commission – Information Society and Media.)
Version 1.1–27, May, 2008.
12. Internet Architecture Board, Interconnecting Smart Objects with the Internet Workshop
2011, 25th March 2011, Prague.
13. Gluhak A, Krco S, et al. A Survey on Facilities for Experimental Internet of Things
research. Communications Magazine, IEEE, 2011;49(11):58–67.
14. Staff. Smart networked objects and Internet of Things. White paper, January 2011, Asso-
ciation Instituts Carnot, 120 avenue du G´en´eral Leclerc, 75014 Paris, France.
15. Ladid L. Keynote Speech, International Workshop on Extending Seamlessly to the Internet
of Things (esloT-2012), in conjunction with IMIS-2012 International Conference; 2012
July 4–6; Palermo, Italy.
16. Drake J, Najewicz D, Watts W. Energy Efﬁciency Comparisons of Wireless Communica-
tion Technology Options for Smart Grid Enabled Devices. White Paper, General Electric
Company, GE Appliances & Lighting, December 9, 2010.

REFERENCES
27
17. Yankee Group. Global Enterprise Cellular M2M Forecast, April 2011, Boston, MA.
Available at www.yankeegroup.com.
18. Lee GM, Park J, Kong N, Crespi N. The Internet of Things – Concept and Problem
Statement. July 2011. Internet Research Task Force, July 11, 2011, draft-lee-iot-problem-
statement-02.txt.
19. Principi B. CTIA: Global M2M deployments becoming a reality. Telecom Engine Online
Magazine, (May 9) 2012. Available at www.telecomengine.com.
20. Ladid L, Skarmeta A, Ziegler S. Symposium On Selected Areas In Communications:
Internet Of Things Track, IEEE 2013 Globecom, December 9–13, Atlanta, GA, U.S.A.

CHAPTER 2
INTERNET OF THINGS DEFINITIONS
AND FRAMEWORKS
This chapter elaborates on the concept, deﬁnition, and a usable framework of the
Internet of Things (IoT).
2.1
IoT DEFINITIONS
We noted in Chapter 1 that the IoT is an evolving type of Internet application that
endeavors to make a thing’s information (whatever that may be) securely available
on a global scale if/when such information is needed by an aggregation point or
points. Since the deﬁnition of the IoT is still evolving, the material that follows pro-
vides illustrative concept deﬁnitions rather than a tightly worded deﬁnition; nonethe-
less, a provisional “working deﬁnition” is in fact provided in order to baseline our
discussion.
2.1.1
General Observations
Some applicable observations related to the deﬁnition of the IoT include the following:
“Internet of Things is a twenty-ﬁrst century phenomenon in which physical consumer
products (meta products) connect to the web and start communicating with each other
by means of sensors and actuators . . .” (1).
Building the Internet of Things with IPv6 and MIPv6: The Evolving World of M2M Communications,
First Edition. Daniel Minoli.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
28

IoT DEFINITIONS
29
“Today’s Internet is experienced by users as a set of applications, such as email, instant
messaging, and social networks. While these applications do not require users to be
present at the time of service execution, in many cases they are. There are also sub-
stantial differences in performance between the various end devices, but in general end
devices participating in the Internet are considered to have high performance. As we
move forward with the interconnection of all kinds of devices via the Internet, these
characteristics will change. The term “Internet of Things” denotes a trend where a large
number of devices beneﬁt from communication services that use Internet protocols.
Many of these devices are not directly operated by humans, but exist as components in
buildings, vehicles, and the environment. There will be a lot of variation in the comput-
ing power, available memory, and communications bandwidth between different types
of devices. Many of these devices provide new services or provide more value for previ-
ously unconnected devices. Some devices have been connected in various legacy ways
in the past but are now migrating to the use of the Internet Protocol, sharing the same
communications medium between all applications and enabling rich communications
services . . .” (2).
“The M2M . . . term is used to refer to machine-to-machine communication, i.e.,
automated data exchange between machines. (“Machine” may also refer to virtual
machines such as software applications.) Viewed from the perspective of its func-
tions and potential uses, M2M is causing an entire “Internet of Things”, or internet
of intelligent objects, to emerge . . . On closer inspection, however, M2M has merely
become a new buzzword for demanding applications involving telemetry (automatic
remote transmission of any measured data) and SCADA (Supervisory, Control and
Data Acquisition). In contrast to telemetry and SCADA-based projects, the majority
of M2M applications are broadly based on established standards, particularly where
communication protocols and transmission methods currently in use are concerned.
Telemetry applications involve completely proprietary solutions that, in some cases,
have even been developed with a speciﬁc customer or application in mind. M2M
concepts, meanwhile, use open protocols such as TCP/IP, which are also found on
Internet and local company networks. The data formats in each case are similar in
appearance . . .” (3).
“IoT spans a great range of applications. People bring varied assumptions about what
devices are ‘things’. Most IoT devices have constraints but the nature of constraints
varies. IoT needs to be divided into manageable topic areas . . .” (4).
“Information Communications Technology (ITC) evolution has led to wireless personal
devices such as smart phones, personal computers and PDAs. These devices have in
common that they are designed to operate over IP networks. Hence, the number of
devices that are connected to the Internet is growing exponentially. This has led to
deﬁne a new concept of Internet, the commonly called Future Internet and Internet of
Things (IoT). The objective of IoT is the integration and uniﬁcation of all communication
systems located surrounds us. Thereby, the systems can get control and total access of
the other systems for leading to provide ubiquitous communication and computing with
the purpose of deﬁning a new generation of services . . .” (5).
“The vision of the internet of things is to attach tiny devices to every single object to
make it identiﬁable by its own unique IP address. These devices can then autonomously
communicate with one another. The success of the internet of things relies on overcoming

30
INTERNET OF THINGS DEFINITIONS AND FRAMEWORKS
the following technical challenges: (1) The current manner of using IP addresses must
change to a system that provides an IP address to every possible object that may need
one in the future. (2) The power behind the embedded chips on such devices will need to
be smaller and more efﬁcient. And, (3) The software applications must be developed that
can communicate with and manage the stream of data from hundreds of interconnected
non-computing devices that comprise a ‘smart’ system which can adapt and respond to
changes . . .” (6).
“ . . . Order(s) of magnitude bigger than the Internet, no computers or humans at end-
point, inherently mobile, disconnected, unattended . . . IoT is going to be an advanced
network including normal physical objects together with computers and other advanced
electronic appliances. Instead of forming ad hoc network, normal objects will be a
part of whole network so that they can collaborate, understand real time environmen-
tal data and react accordingly in need . . . The basic idea is that IoT will connect
objects around us (electronic, electrical, non electrical) to provide seamless commu-
nication and contextual services provided by them. Development of RFID (radio-
frequency identiﬁcation) tags, sensors, actuators, mobile phones make it possible to
materialize IoT which interact and co-operate each other to make the service bet-
ter and accessible anytime, from anywhere . . . The ‘Internet of Things (IoT)’ refers
to the networked interconnection of everyday objects. An ‘IoT’ means ‘a world-
wide network of interconnected objects uniquely addressable, based on standard
communication protocols’ . . . In the IoT, ‘things’ are very various such as comput-
ers, sensors, people, actuators, refrigerators, TVs, vehicles, mobile phones, clothes,
food, medicines, books, etc. These things are classiﬁed as three scopes: people,
machine (for example, sensor, actuator, etc) and information (for example clothes,
food, medicine, books and so on). These ‘things’ should be identiﬁed at least by one
unique way of identiﬁcation for the capability of addressing and communicating with
each other and verifying their identities . . . if the ‘thing’ is identiﬁed, we call it the
‘object’ . . .” (7,8).
“ . . . Commonly we focus on the deployment of a new generation of networked objects
with communication, sensory and action capabilities for numerous applications with a
vision ‘from simple connected objects as sensor networks to more complex and smarter
communicated objects as in the envisioned IoT’ . . . In the IETF/IRTF perspective,
one of our visions is to provide global interoperability via IP for making heteroge-
neous/constraint objects very smart . . .” (8,9).
“ . . . M2M describes devices that are connected to the Internet, using a variety of ﬁxed
and wireless networks and communicate with each other and the wider world. They
are active communication devices. The term embedded wireless has been coined, for
a variety of applications where wireless cellular communication is used to connect
any device that is not a phone. This term is widely used by the GSM Association
(GSMA) . . .” (10).
Originally the term “Internet of Things” was invented by the MIT Auto-ID
Center in 2001 and referred to an architecture that comprises four elements, as
follows (11):

IoT DEFINITIONS
31
– Passive radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFIDs), such as Class-1 Generation-2
UHFRFIDs,introducedbytheelectronicproductcode(EPC)GlobalConsortium
and operating in the 860–960 MHz range1
– Readers plugged to a local (computing) system, which read the EPC
– A local system offering IP connectivity that collects information pointed by the
EPC, thanks to a protocol called object naming service (ONS)
– EPCIS (EPC Information Services) servers that process incoming ONS requests
and returns physical markup language (PML) ﬁles, for example, XML documents
carrying meaningful information linked to RFIDs
However, as noted in the discussion so far, the term is now much more encom-
passing. A short, incomplete bibliography of articles describing the IoT includes the
references at the end of this chapter in general and the following in particular: (7–9,
12–19).
2.1.2
ITU-T Views
The ITU-T is in the process of identifying a common way to deﬁne/describe the IoT.
So far, the ITU-T has not found “a good deﬁnition to cover all aspects of IoT as the
IoT has quite big scope not only the technological viewpoints but also other views
. . . We recognized whatever we deﬁne, everyone cannot be happy” (20).
One can view the Internet as an infrastructure providing a number of technolog-
ical capabilities or as a concept to provide an array of data exchange and linkage
services. The infrastructure perspective describes the Internet as a global system of
interconnected computer networks (of many conceivable technologies) that use the
TCP/IP Internet Protocol Suite to communicate; the networks comprise millions of
private, public, business, academic, and governmental servers, computers, and nodes.
The concept perspective sees the Internet as a worldwide logical interconnection
of computers and networks that support the exchange of information among users,
including but not limited to interlinked hypertext documents of the World Wide Web
(WWW). Similarly, at the current time different experts can deﬁne the IoT differently,
the conceptual way or the infrastructural way as follows (20):
View A: IoT is just a concept (conceptual aspects of deﬁnition): the IoT does not
refer to a network infrastructure; the IoT is not a technical term but a concept
(or a phenomenon).
View B: IoT is an infrastructure: The IoT refers to an infrastructure.
As shown in Figure 2.1, if deﬁned as an infrastructure, IoT should be identiﬁed for
all aspects of infrastructure such as service and functional requirements, architectures,
1(also known as the “Gen 2” standard) this standard deﬁnes the physical and logical requirements for a
passive-backscatter, interrogator-talks-ﬁrst (ITF), RFID system operating in the 860–960 MHz frequency
range; the system comprises interrogators (also known as readers), and tags (also known as labels).

32
INTERNET OF THINGS DEFINITIONS AND FRAMEWORKS
Existing infrastructure
IoT = Concept
IoT = Infrastructure
Enhancement of
existing
Infrastructure
Harmonizing with
Existing Infrastructure
Conflicting with
Existing Infrastructure
New
Infrastructure
Service
Infrastructure
Identifying new
cap abilities and
functions to support
IoT from existing
infrastructure
Newly developing all
aspects including
requirements and
architecture of new
infrastructure
On-going work
Future work
Network
Infrastructure
FIGURE 2.1
Direction for standardization according to IoT deﬁnition.
and so on. If deﬁned as a concept, all relevant capabilities and speciﬁc functions to
support (or realize) that concept of IoT will need to be identiﬁed for each technical
area.
When ITU-T SG13 had developed Y.2002 (“Overview of ubiquitous networking
and of its support in NGN”), the study group (SG) noted that ubiquitous networking
is not a new network; the IoT is a conceptual design goal, which one has to consider
for developing standards. Based on this conceptual goal (a simple deﬁnition), each
SG can deﬁne detailed concepts with its own view. From SG13’s perspective, next-
generation network (NGN), smart ubiquitous network (SUN), and the future network
(FN) should support key characteristics for realizing IoT. The main role of SG13 is to
focus on the enhancement of networking technologies based on the NGN, the SUN,
and the FN, rather than creating a new network.
The ITU-T is suggesting to deﬁne the IoT as a short deﬁnition with more general
concept rather than as a technical deﬁnition; this should be done, in their view, in
order for the IoT to be easily incorporated into various areas from technology, as well
as accepted to all other interested SGs. After that, one can concentrate on deﬁning
the scope for IoT (e.g., service, network, control, security, quality, billing/charging
aspects, and others) and ﬁnding related technological issues for further standard-
ization work. ITU-T “strongly insists on a short deﬁnition as concept instead of a
technical deﬁnition (long or detailed description of technology)” (20). Tables 2.1 and
2.2 from TD27 (IoT-GSI) show a representative set of working deﬁnitions.
Some see machine-to-machine (M2M) deployments into four domains: sensors
and controllers; “the edge,” where data from these devices are gathered; the cloud,
where the data are stored and managed; and the client, where that data are ultimately
evaluated (21).

IoT DEFINITIONS
33
TABLE 2.1
Examples of Deﬁnitions for Case A (IoT is Just a Concept)
Candidate Deﬁnition
Reference
A technological revolution that represents the future
of computing and communications, and its
development depends on dynamic technical
innovation in a number of important ﬁelds, from
wireless sensors to nanotechnology
Source: ITU Internet Reports 2005:
The Internet of Things, Executive
Summary
The networked interconnection of objects—from the
sophisticated to the mundane—through identiﬁers
such as sensors, RFID tags, and IP addresses
Margery Conner, Technical Editor
of EDN Magazine, “Sensors
empower the ‘Internet of
Things’ ”, May 2010
The Internet of things links the objects of the real
world with the virtual world, thus enabling
anytime, anyplace connectivity for anything and
not only for anyone. It refers to a world where
physical objects and beings, as well as virtual data
and environments, all interact with each other in
the same space and time
Cluster of European Research
Projects on the Internet of Things,
“Vision and Challenges for
Realizing the Internet of Things”,
March 2010
The IoT refers to as ubiquitous networking or
pervasive computing environments, is a vision
where all manufactured things can be network
enabled, that is connected to each other via
wireless or wired communication networks
European Network and Information
Security Agency (ENISA)
The IoT is a world where physical objects are
seamlessly integrated into the information
network, and where the physical objects can
become active participants in business processes.
Services are available to interact with these “smart
objects” over the Internet, query and change their
state and any information associated with them,
taking into account security and privacy issues.
RFID, sensor networks, and so on are just enabling
technologies
SAS
IoT is a [high-level service concept based on]
existing and evolving global ICT (Information and
Communication Technology) infrastructures that
provide information services by interconnecting
things
2.1.3
Working Deﬁnition
Generalizing from the published literature and the observations made thus far in this
text, we characterize the IoT with a “working deﬁnition” as follows:
Deﬁnition: A broadly-deployed aggregate computing/communication application
and/or application-consumption system, that is deployed over a local (L-IoT),

34
INTERNET OF THINGS DEFINITIONS AND FRAMEWORKS
TABLE 2.2
Examples of Deﬁnitions for Case B (Infrastructural Aspects of Deﬁnition)
Candidate Deﬁnition
Reference
A global network infrastructure, linking physical and
virtual objects through the exploitation of data capture
and communication capabilities. This infrastructure
includes existing and evolving Internet and network
developments. It will offer speciﬁc object
identiﬁcation, sensor and connection capability as the
basis for the development of independent federated
services and applications. These will be characterized
by a high degree of autonomous data capture, event
transfer, network connectivity, and interoperability
Coordination and Support Action
(CSA) for Global
RFID-related Activities and
Standardization
(CASAGRAS)
A global information and communication infrastructure
enabling automated chains of actions (not requiring
explicit human intervention) facilitating information
assembly and knowledge production and contributing
to enrichment of human life by interconnecting
physical and logical objects based on standard and
interoperable communication protocols and through
the exploitation of data capture and communication
capabilities supported by existing and evolving
information and communication technologies
NOTE: Physical objects may include sensors, devices,
machines, and so on. Logical objects may include
contents and so on
Originally produced by the
discussion among
China-Japan-Korea. ITU
Q3/13 has made some
modiﬁcations
A global ICT infrastructure linking physical objects and
virtual objects (as the informational counterparts of
physical objects) through the exploitation of sensor
and actuator data capture, processing and
transmission capabilities. As such, the IoT is an
overlay above the “generic” Internet, offering
federated physical-object-related services (including,
if relevant, identiﬁcation, monitoring, and control of
these objects) to all kinds of applications.
Proposed by France Telecom on
the IoT deﬁnition mailing list.
IoT is (a global ICT infrastructure) which provides
information services by interconnecting things
NOTE: Infrastructure should not be interpreted only
as a network
A more prescriptive deﬁnition follows:
The Internet of Things consists of networks of sensors
attached to objects and communication devices,
providing data that can be analyzed and used to
initiate automated actions. The data also generate vital
intelligence for planning, management, policy, and
decision-making
Proposed by Cisco

IoT DEFINITIONS
35
metropolitan (M-IoT), regional (R-IoT), national (N-IoT), or global (G-IoT) geogra-
phy, consisting of (i) dispersed instrumented objects (“things”) with embedded one-
or two-way communications and some (or, at times, no) computing capabilities, (ii)
where objects are reachable over a variety of wireless or wired local area and/or
wide area networks, and, (iii) whose inbound data and/or outbound commands are
pipelined to or issued by a(n application) system with a (high) degree of (human or
computer-based) intelligence.
In this deﬁnition, things are generally objects, tags, sensors, or actuators in the envi-
ronment, but not typically business/personal PCs, laptops, smartphones, or tablets.
We posit that this deﬁnition looks at the IoT as both a concept and an infrastruc-
ture, from a hybrid perspective. Unless there is a speciﬁc need to clarify the nature
of the geographic scope, we use the generic term IoT to cover all instances of the
technology.
Note that a variety of deﬁnitions could be formulated; the above formulation is not
offered to be exclusive of other deﬁnitions offered by other researchers, but simply
to be a useful reference baseline for the present discussion.
Two other related “working deﬁnitions” are as follows:
Deﬁnition: Sensors are active devices that measure some variable of the natural or
man-made environment (e.g., a building, an assembly line, an industrial assemblage
supporting a process).
The technology for sensing and control includes electric and magnetic ﬁeld sen-
sors; radiowave frequency sensors; optical-, electro-optic-, and infrared sensors;
radars; lasers; location/navigation sensors; seismic and pressure-wave sensors; envi-
ronmental parameter sensors (e.g., wind, humidity, heat, and so on); and, biochemical
Homeland Security-oriented sensors.
Sensor networks usually consider remote devices as belonging to two classes,
based on device capabilities: Full-function devices (FFDs) and reduced function
devices (RFDs). Sensors and actuators are part of a larger universe of objects. Objects
in the IoT context can also be classiﬁed from a functionality perspective.
Deﬁnition: An actuator is a mechanized device of various sizes (from ultra-small to
very large) that accomplishes a speciﬁed physical action, for example, controlling a
mechanism or system, opening or closing a valve, starting some kind or rotary or
linear motion, or initiating physical locomotion. An actuator is the mechanism by
which an entity acts upon an environment.
The actuator embodies a source of energy, such as an electric current (battery,
solar, motion), and a source of physical interaction such as a hydraulic ﬂuid pressure
or a pneumatic pressure; the device converts that energy into some kind of action or
motion upon receipt of an external command or stimulus.
An object is a model of an entity. An object is distinct from any other object and
is characterized by its behavior. An object is informally said to perform functions
and offer services (an object that performs a function available to other entities
and/or objects is said to offer a service). For modeling purposes, these functions

36
INTERNET OF THINGS DEFINITIONS AND FRAMEWORKS
and services are speciﬁed in terms of the behavior of the object and of its interfaces
(18, 22). An object can, as needed, perform more than one function and a function
can be performed by the cooperation of several objects. Objects are also called
“smart/connected objects” by some. In the deﬁnition of the ITU (18), objects include
terminal devices (e.g., used by a person to access the network such as mobile phones,
personal computers, and so on), remote monitoring devices (e.g., cameras, sensors,
and so on), information devices (e.g., content delivery server), products, contents, and
resources. We stated in Chapter 1, however, that for the purpose of our discussion,
personal communication devices (smartphones, pads, and so on) can be viewed as
machines or just simply as end nodes: when personal communication devices are used
for H2M devices where the human employs the smartphone to communicate with
a machine (e.g., a thermostat or a home appliance), then we consider the personal
communication devices as part of the IoT; otherwise, we do not. Smart/connected
objects are heterogeneous with different sizes, mobility capabilities, power sources,
connectivity mechanisms, and protocols. A physical object interacts with several
entities, performs various functionalities, and generates data that might be used by
other entities. Usually, the resources of these objects are limited. Furthermore, there
are various types of networking interfaces that have different coverage and data rates.
These environments have the characteristics of low power and lossy networks such as
Bluetooth, IEEE 802.15.4 (6LoWPAN, ZigBee), near ﬁeld communication (NFC),
and so on (8). Things (objects) can be classiﬁed as shown in Figure 2.2. Objects have
the following characteristics, among others, (8):
r have the ability to sense and/or actuate
r are generally small (but not always)
r have limited computing capabilities (but not always)
r are energy/power limited
r are connected to the physical world
r sometimes have intermittent connectivity
r are mobile (but not always)
r of interest to people
r managed by devices, not people (but not always)
While the IoT can in principle be seen as a more encompassing concept than what
is captured under the ETSI M2M standards and deﬁnitions, nonetheless the M2M
deﬁnitions can serve the purpose adding some structure to the discussion. We noted
in Figure 1.1 a high level logical partitioning of the entity-to-entity interaction space
that included human to human (H2H) communication, M2M communication, human
to machine (H2M) communications, and machine in (or on) human (MiH) commu-
nications. (MiH devices may include medical monitoring probes, global positioning
system (GPS) bracelets, and so on.) For the present discussion, the focus of the IoT
is on M2M, H2M, and MiH applications; this range of applicability is the theme
captured in this text, also as depicted in Figure 2.3. Figure 2.4 illustrates classes of
generic IoT arrangements that are included in our discussion.

IoT DEFINITIONS
37
FIGURE 2.2
Object classiﬁcation.
Intuitively, an M2M/H2M environment comprises three basic elements: (i) the
data integration point (DIP)2; (ii) the communication network; and; (iii) the data
end point (DEP) (again, a machine M). See Figure 2.5, where the process (X) and
application (Y) form the actual functional end points. Typically, a DEP refers to a
microcomputer system, one end of which is connected to a process or to a higher
level subsystem via special interfaces; the other end is connected to a communication
network. However, the DEP can also be a machine M in a human H, as is the case
in the MiH environment. Many applications have a large base of dispersed DEPs (3).
A DIP can be an Internet server, a software application running on a ﬁrm-resident
host, or an application implemented as a cloud service. As previously mentioned,
2In Chapter 1, we also called the DIP a “data integration point or person (DIPP)” because the DIP
corresponds with a point (P, that is a machine M) or with a person (P).

38
INTERNET OF THINGS DEFINITIONS AND FRAMEWORKS
H2H
H2M
Caregiver/
Physician
Medical
Server
IoT Scope (Illustrative, not complete)
Traffic
Server
Security
Monitoring
Server
Police
Video
Server
Weather
Server
WMax Network
WiFi Network
Wireline
Network
LAN/
WLAN
Power Co.
Network
Wireless Sensor
Network
Cellular Network
ZigBee Network
Pollution
Data
aggregation
M2M
MiH
EEG
ECG
BLOOD
PRESSURE
TOXINS
PROTEIN
GLUCOSE
MOTION
SENSORS
Body
Area
Network
FIGURE 2.3
Scope of IoT by way of illustration.
basic applications include, but are not limited to, smart meters, e-health, track-and-
trace, monitoring, transaction, control, home automation, city automation, connected
consumers, and automotive.
As noted in Chapter 1, at a macro level, an IoT comprises a remote set of sensing
assets (sensing domain, also known as M2M domain in an M2M environment), a
network domain, and an applications domain. Figures 2.6 and 2.7 provide illustrative
pictorial view of the domains.
2.2
IoT FRAMEWORKS
A high level M2M system architecture (HLSA) (see Figure 2.8) is deﬁned in the ETSI
TS 102 690 V1.1.1 (2011–10) speciﬁcation that is useful to the present discussion.
We describe the HLSA next, summarized from Reference 23. The HLSA comprises
the device and gateway domain, the network domain, and the applications domain.

IoT FRAMEWORKS
39
M
M
M
MiH
M
M
M
H
Interface
Things
Things
Embedded
Web Server
M
H
Browser
H2M
H2M
M2M
M2M
FIGURE 2.4
Classes of generic IoT arrangements.
The device and gateway domain is composed of the following elements:
1. M2M device: A device that runs M2M application(s) using M2M service capa-
bilities. M2M devices connect to network domain in the following manners:
– Case 1 “Direct Connectivity”: M2M devices connect to the network domain
via the access network. The M2M device performs the procedures such as
Y
X
Data
Endpoint
(DEP)
X
Data
Endpoint
(DEP)
Data
Integration
Point
(DIP)
X
Data
Endpoint
(DEP)
Communication
Network
FIGURE 2.5
Basic elements of an M2M application.

40
INTERNET OF THINGS DEFINITIONS AND FRAMEWORKS
Caregiver/
Physician
Medical
Server
Internet or
Other
Interconnection
WAN
EEG
ECG
BLOOD
PRESSURE
TOXINS
PROTEIN
Body
Area
Network
Person
Person
Person
Machine
Machine
Machine
Machine
Machine
Machine
Machine
Machine
Machine
Machine
Machine
Machine
Machine
Machine
Sensing Device
Domain
Network
Domin
Application
Domin
MOTION
SENSORS
GLUCOSE
Traffic
Server
Police
Video
Server
Weather
Server
WiFi Network
Wireline Network
LAN/WLAN
Power Co.
Network
Wireless Sensor
Network
Cellular Network
ZigBee Network
Pollution
Data
aggregation
WMax Network
FIGURE 2.6
M2M domains.
registration, authentication, authorization, management, and provisioning
with the network domain. The M2M device may provide service to other
devices (e.g., legacy devices) connected to it that are hidden from the network
domain.
– Case 2 “Gateway as a Network Proxy”: The M2M device connects to the
network domain via an M2M gateway. M2M devices connect to the M2M
gateway using the M2M area network. The M2M gateway acts as a proxy
for the network domain toward the M2M devices that are connected to it.

IoT FRAMEWORKS
41
Network Domain
Sensing
Device Domain
Applications Domain
Monitoring
Systems
Control
Systems
Enterprise
Applications
Cellular – WAN -LAN
Cellular Network
Cellular Network
FIGURE 2.7
Other example of M2M domains.
User interface to application
e.g., Web portal interface
(usage monitoring,
user preferences, ...)
PC dedicated
appliance
M2M Applications
M2M Service Capabilities
M2M Core
Core Network (CN)
Access Network
MAS
Network
Management
Functions
M2M
Management
Functions
MSBF
Application domain
Based on existing standards 
3GP P, TISPAN, IETF, ...
Network domain
Based on existing standards 
3GP P, TISPAN, IETF, ...
M2M Device Domain
Based on existing standards and
technologies, e.g.,: DLMS, CEN, CENELEC,
PLT, Zigbee, M-BUS, KNX, etc.
M2M Device and Gateway Domain
M2M Gateway
M2M Device
M2M
Device
M2M
Applications
M2M
Applications
M2M Service
Capabilities
M2M Service
Capabilities
M2M Area
Network
Transport
Network
M2M Service
Provider’s
Domain
FIGURE 2.8
M2M HLSA.

42
INTERNET OF THINGS DEFINITIONS AND FRAMEWORKS
Examples of procedures that are proxied include authentication, authoriza-
tion, management, and provisioning.
(M2M devices may be connected to the network domain via multiple M2M
gateways.)
2. M2M area network: It provides connectivity between M2M devices and M2M
gateways. Examples of M2M area networks include personal area network
(PAN) technologies such as IEEE 802.15.1, Zigbee, Bluetooth, IETF ROLL,
ISA100.11a, among others, or local networks such as power line communica-
tion (PLC), M-BUS, Wireless M-BUS, and KNX.3
3. M2M gateway: A gateway that runs M2M application(s) using M2M service
capabilities. The gateway acts as a proxy between M2M devices and the network
domain. The M2M gateway may provide service to other devices (e.g., legacy
devices) connected to it that are hidden from the network domain. As an
example, an M2M gateway may run an application that collects and treats
various information (e.g., from sensors and contextual parameters).
The network domain is composed of the following elements:
1. Access network: A network that allows the M2M device and gateway domain
to communicate with the core network. Access networks include (but are not
limited to) digital subscriber line (xDSL), hybrid ﬁber coax (HFC), satel-
lite, GSM/EDGE radio access network (GERAN), UMTS terrestrial radio
access network (UTRAN), evolved UMTS terrestrial radio access network
(eUTRAN), W-LAN, and worldwide interoperability for microwave access
(WiMAX).
2. Core network: A network that provides the following capabilities (different
core networks offer different features sets):
– IP connectivity at a minimum, and possibly other connectivity means
– Service and network control functions
– Interconnection (with other networks)
– Roaming
3KNX (administered by the KNX Association) is an OSI-based network communications protocol for
intelligent buildings deﬁned in standards CEN EN 50090 and ISO/IEC 14543. KNX is the follow-on
standard built on the European Home Systems (EHS) Protocol, BatiBUS, and the European Installation
Bus (EIB or Instabus). Effectively, KNX uses the communication stack of EIB but augmented with the
physical layers and conﬁguration modes BatiBUS and EHS; thus, KNX includes the following PHYs:
r Twisted pair wiring (inherited from the BatiBUS and EIB Instabus standards). This approach uses
differential signaling with a signaling speed of 9.6 Kbps. Media access control is controlled with the
CSMA/CA method
r Powerline networking (inherited from EIB and EHS)
r Radio (KNX-RF)
r Infrared
r Ethernet (also known as EIBnet/IP or KNXnet/IP)

IoT FRAMEWORKS
43
– Core networks (CoNs) include (but are not limited to) 3GPP CoNs, ETSI
TISPAN CoN, and 3GPP2 CoN
3. M2M service capabilities:
– Provide M2M functions that are to be shared by different applications
– Expose functions through a set of open interfaces
– Use CoN functionalities
– Simplify and optimize application development and deployment through
hiding of network speciﬁcities
The “M2M service capabilities” along with the “core network” is known collec-
tively as the “M2M core.”
The applications domain is composed of the following elements:
1. M2M applications: Applications that run the service logic and use M2M
service capabilities accessible via an open interface.
There are also management functions within an overall M2M service provider
domain, as follows:
1. Network management functions: Consists of all the functions required to
manage the access and core networks; these functions include provisioning,
supervision, fault management.
2. M2M management functions: Consists of all the functions required to manage
M2M service capabilities in the network domain. The management of the M2M
devices and gateways uses a speciﬁc M2M service capability.
– The set of M2M management functions include a function for M2M service
bootstrap. This function is called M2M service bootstrap function (MSBF)
and is realized within an appropriate server. The role of MSBF is to facilitate
the bootstrapping of permanent M2M service layer security credentials in
the M2M device (or M2M gateway) and the M2M service capabilities in the
network domain.
– Permanent security credentials that are bootstrapped using MSBF are stored
in a safe location, which is called M2M authentication server (MAS). Such
a server can be an AAA server. MSBF can be included within MAS, or
may communicate the bootstrapped security credentials to MAS, through an
appropriate interface (e.g., the DIAMETER protocol deﬁned in IETF RFC
3588) for the case where MAS is an AAA server.
The H2M portion of the IoT could theoretically make use of these same mech-
anisms and capabilities, but the information ﬂow would likely need to be front-
ended by an access layer (which can also be seen as an application in the sense
described above) that allows the human user to interact with the machine using
an intuitive interface. One such mechanism can be an HTML/HTTP-based browser

44
INTERNET OF THINGS DEFINITIONS AND FRAMEWORKS
that interacts with a suitable software peer in the machine (naturally this requires
some higher level capabilities to be supported by the DEP/machine in order to be
able to run an embedded web server software module). (When used in embedded
devices or applications, web servers must assume they are secondary to the essen-
tial functions the device or application must perform; as such, the web server must
minimize its resource demands and should be deterministic in the load it places on
a system.4)
2.3
BASIC NODAL CAPABILITIES
Consistent with the HLSA, a remote device generally needs to have a basic protocol
stack that supports as a minimum local connectivity and networking connectivity
(we include the transport layer in our terminology here, whether this is TCP, UDP, or
some other protocol); in addition, some higher layer application support protocols are
generally needed, with varying degrees of computational/functional sophistication.
See Figure 2.9. IoT devices may have capability differences, such as but not limited
to the following (25): maximum transmission unit (MTU) differences, simpliﬁed
versus full-blown web protocol stack (COAP/UDP versus HTTP/TCP), single stack
versus dual stack, sleep schedule, security protocols, processing and communication
bandwidth. The networking technologies listed above, including 3GPP, 3GPP2, ETSI
TISPAN, eUTRAN, GERAN, HFC, IETF ROLL, ISA100.11a, KNX, M-BUS, PLC,
Satellite, SCADA (Supervisory Control And Data Acquisition), UTRAN, WiMAX,
Wireless M-BUS, W-LAN, and xDSL, are discussed in more detail in the chapters
that follow.
Distributed control/M2M typically entails continuously changing variables to con-
trol the behavior of an application. Typical requirements include the following capa-
bilities (26):
r Retransmission
– Network recovers from packet loss or informs application
– Recovery is immediate: on the order of RTTs, not seconds
4As an illustrative example of an embedded web server, Oracle’s GoAhead WebServer is a simple,
portable, and compact web server for embedded devices and applications; it runs on dozens of operating
environments and can be easily ported and adapted. The GoAhead WebServer is a simple, compact web
server that has been widely ported to many embedded operating systems. Appweb is faster and more
powerful—but requires more memory. If a device requires a simple, low end web server and has little
memory available, the GoAhead WebServer is ideal; if the device needs higher performance and extended
security, then Appweb is the right choice. As one of the most widely deployed embedded web servers,
Appweb is being used in networking equipment, telephony, mobile devices, consumer and ofﬁce equipment
as well as hosting for enterprise web applications and frameworks. It is embedded in hundreds of millions
of devices. The server runs equally well stand-alone or in a web farm behind a reverse proxy such as
Apache (24).

BASIC NODAL CAPABILITIES
45
M2M Applications
DEP
GUI
(opt.)
Middleware A
Application
Support Protocols
Network
Connectivity
Local
Connectivity A
Local
Connectivity B
Device
Hardware A
Application
Middleware B
Application 
Support Protocols
Network
Connectivity
Device
Hardware B
DIP
Other
IP Smart Objects
Middleware Capabilities
Application Support Protocols
Networking Connectivity
(IP-based)
smart 
buildings
Industrial 
machinery/
equipment
factories/
power plants
meters
other
Local Connectivity (IEEE 802, WSN, PLC, etc)
Asset
Management
Facility
Management
Security
Monitoring
Energy
Management
FIGURE 2.9
Protocol stack, general view.
r Network independent of MAC/PHY
r Scale
– Thousands of nodes
– Multiple link speeds
r Multicast
– Throughout network
– Reliable (positive Ack)
r Duplicate suppression
r Emergency messages
– Routed and/or queued around other trafﬁc
– Other trafﬁc slushed as delivered
r Routine trafﬁc delivered in sequence
r Separate timers by peer/message
r Polling of nodes
– Sequential
– Independent of responses
r Paradigm supports peer-to-peer
– Not everything is client/server
r Capabilities
– Discover nodes
– Discover node capabilities
– Deliver multisegment records (ﬁles)

46
INTERNET OF THINGS DEFINITIONS AND FRAMEWORKS
r Exchange of multisegment records
r Network and application versioning
r Simple publish/subscribe parsers
r Security
– Strong encryption
– Mutual authentication
– Protection against record/playback attacks
– Suite B ciphers
Related to the last item, Suite B security is a National Security Agency (NSA)
directive that requires that key establishment and authentication algorithms be based
on elliptic curve cryptography, and that the encryption algorithm be AES. Suite
B deﬁnes two security levels, of 128 and 192 bits (see Glossary for additional
information).
REFERENCES
1. Hazenberg W, Huisman M. Meta Products: Building the Internet of Things. Amsterdam,
NL: BIS Publishers; 2011.
2. Internet Architecture Board. Interconnecting Smart Objects with the Internet Workshop
2011, 25th March 2011, Prague.
3. Walter K-D. Implementing M2M applications via GPRS, EDGE and UMTS. Online
Article, August 2007, http://m2m.com. M2M Alliance e.V., Aachen, Germany.
4. Nordman B. Building Networks. Interconnecting Smart Objects with the Internet Work-
shop 2011, 25th March 2011, Prague.
5. Ladid L. Keynote Speech, International Workshop on Extending Seamlessly to the Internet
of Things (esloT-2012), in conjunction with IMIS-2012 International Conference; 2012
Jul 4–6; 2012, Palermo, Italy.
6. Financial Times Lexicon, London, U.K. Available at http://lexicon.ft.com.
7. Botterman M. Internet of Things: an early reality of the Future Internet. Workshop Report,
European Commission Information Society and Media, May 2009.
8. Lee GM, Park J, Kong N, Crespi N. The Internet of Things – Concept and Problem
Statement, July 2011. Internet Research Task Force, July 11, 2011, draft-lee-iot-problem-
statement-02.txt.
9. Staff. Smart networked objects and Internet of Things. White paper, January 2011, Asso-
ciation Instituts Carnot, 120 avenue du G´en´eral Leclerc, 75014 Paris, France.
10. OECD. Machine-to-Machine Communications: Connecting Billions of Devices. OECD
Digital Economy Papers, No. 192, 2012, OECD Publishing. doi:10.1787/5k9gsh2gp043-
en
11. Urien P, Lee GM, Pujolle G. HIP support for RFIDs. HIP Research Group, Internet Draft,
draft-irtf-hiprg-rﬁd-03, July 2011.
12. Atzori L, Iera A, Morabito G. The internet of things: a survey. Computer Networks,
October 2010;54 (15):2787–2805.

REFERENCES
47
13. Guinard D, Trifa V, Karnouskos S, Spiess P, Savio D. Interacting with the SOA-based
Internet of things: discovery, query, selection, and on-demand provisioning of web services.
IEEE Services Computing, IEEE Transactions, July–September 2010;3 (3).
14. ITU-T Internet Reports. Internet of Things. November 2005.
15. Malatras A, Asgari A, Bauge T. Web enabled wireless sensor networks for facilities
management. IEEE Systems Journal, 2008;2 (4).
16. Sarma A, Girao Joao. Identities in the Future Internet of Things. Wireless Pers Comm.,
2009.
17. Sundmaeker H, Guilemin P, Friess P, Woelfﬂe S, editors. Vision and Challenges for
Realizing the Internet of Things. European Commission, Information Society and Media,
March 2010.
18. ITU-T Y. 2002. Overview of ubiquitous networking and of its support in NGN. November
2009.
19. Zouganeli E, Svinnset IE. Connected objects and the Internet of things-a paradigm shift.
Photonics in Switching 2009, September 2009.
20. International Telecommunications Union, Telecommunication Standardization Sector
Study Period 2009–2012. IoT-GSI – C 44 – E. August 2011.
21. Kreisher K. Intel: M2M data tsunami begs for analytics, security. Online Magazine,
October 8, 2012. Available at http://www.telecomengine.com.
22. Lee GM, Choi JK, et al. Naming architecture for object to object communications. HIP
Working Group, Internet Draft, March 8, 2010, draft-lee-object-naming-02.txt
23. Machine-to-Machine Communications (M2M); Functional Architecture Technical Spec-
iﬁcation, ETSI TS 102 690 V1.1.1 (2011-10), ETSI, 650 Route des Lucioles F-06921
Sophia Antipolis Cedex – France.
24. Embedthis Inc. Promotional Materials, Embedthis Software, LLC, 4616 25th Ave NE,
Seattle, WA 98105. Available at http://embedthis.com.
25. Arkko J. Interoperability Challenges in the Internet of Things. Interconnecting Smart
Objects with the Internet Workshop 2011, 25th March 2011, Prague.
26. Dolan B, Baker F. Distributed Control: Echelon’s view of the Internet of Things. Inter-
connecting Smart Objects with the Internet Workshop 2011, 25th March 2011, Prague.

CHAPTER 3
INTERNET OF THINGS
APPLICATION EXAMPLES
This chapter provides a sample of applications than can be provided with/by the
Internet of Things (IoT), although any such survey is invariably incomplete and is
limited in the temporal domain (with new applications being added on an ongoing
basis). We look at applications that are already emerging and/or have a lot of cur-
rent industry interest. Related to IoT applications, proponents make the observation
that (1)
“ . . . there are so many applications that are possible because of IoT. For individual
users, IoT brings useful applications like home automation, security, automated devices
monitoring, and management of daily tasks. For professionals, automated applications
provide useful contextual information all the time to help on their works and deci-
sion making. Industries, with sensors and actuators operations can be rapid, efﬁcient
and more economic. Managers who need to keep eye on many things can automate
tasks connection digital and physical objects together. Every sectors energy, computing,
management, security, transportation are going to be beneﬁtted with this new paradigm.
Development of several technologies made it possible to achieve the vision of Internet of
things. Identiﬁcation technology such as RFID allows each object to represent uniquely
by having unique identiﬁer. Identity reader can read any time the object allows real time
identiﬁcation and tracking. Wireless sensor technology allows objects to provide real
time environmental condition and context. Smart technologies allow objects to become
more intelligent which can think and communicate. Nanotechnologies are helping to
reduce the size of the chip incorporating more processing power and communication
capabilities in a very small chip.
Building the Internet of Things with IPv6 and MIPv6: The Evolving World of M2M Communications,
First Edition. Daniel Minoli.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
48

OVERVIEW
49
Healthcare
M2M
Automation
Quality
control
Production line
management,
Quality control
Smart Meters,
Smart Grid
/
Green Energy
Home/
Hospital
Mobile
e-Health
/
Assisted Living
Home
Home / Office
Automation
Office
Tansport
Retail
Electronic
Monitoring/
Military Use
Stores
Tourism
Goods Tracking/
Supply chain
Automation
Vehicles
Supply
Chain
Intelligent
Transport Systems/
E-Vehicles/
Goods Tracking
Energy
Generation
Distribution
Production
Security
Crime /
Terrorism
Desaster /
Emergency
Buildings
FIGURE 3.1
Grouping of applications in the M2M context.
3.1
OVERVIEW
Table 1.2 offered a taxonomy of applications, although no claim is made here that
this taxonomy is complete or fully normative; in the same vein, Figure 3.1, par-
tially inspired by Reference 2, depicts a grouping of applications, particularly in the
machine-to-machine (M2M) context. As should be clear by now, some of the possible
short-term applications include the following: building automation and remote con-
trol (facilitating efﬁcient commercial spaces); smart energy (supporting ofﬁce build-
ing/home energy management); healthcare (providing health and ﬁtness monitoring);
home automation (giving rise to smart homes); and retail services (enabling smart
shopping). A longer list of applications includes, but is not limited to, the following:
r Public services and smart cities:
◦Telemetry: for example, smart metering, parking metering, and vending
machines
◦Intelligent transportation systems (ITSs) and trafﬁc management
◦Connecting consumer and citizens to public infrastructure (such as public
transportation)
◦In-building automation, municipal, and regional infrastructure
◦Metropolitan operations (trafﬁc, automatic tolls, ﬁre, and so on)
◦Electrical grid management at a global level; smart grids (SGs)
◦Electrical demand response (DR) at a global level
r Automotive, ﬂeet management, asset tracking:
◦e-Vehicle: for example, navigation, road safety, and trafﬁc control

50
INTERNET OF THINGS APPLICATION EXAMPLES
◦Driver safety and emergency services
◦Fleet management systems: hired-car monitoring, goods vehicle management
◦Back-seat infotainment device integration
◦Next-generation global positioning system (GPS) services
◦Tracking: asset tracking, cargo tracking, and order tracking
r Commercial markets:
◦Industrial monitoring and control, for example, industrial machines, and ele-
vator monitoring
◦Commercial building and control
◦Process control
◦Maintenance automation
◦Home automation
◦Wireless automated meter reading (AMR)/load management (LM)
◦Homeland security applications: chemical, biological, radiological, and
nuclear wireless sensors
◦Military sensors
◦Environmental (land, air, sea) and agricultural wireless sensors
◦Finance: Point-of-sale (POS) terminals, ticketing
◦Security: Public surveillance, personal security
r Embedded networking systems in the smart home and smart ofﬁce:
◦Smart appliances: for example, AC-power control, lighting control, heating
control, and low power management
◦Automated home: remote media control
◦Smart meters and energy efﬁciency: efﬁciencies obtained by exploiting the
potential of the SG
◦Telehealth (e-health): Assisted Living and in-home m-health services (includ-
ing remote monitoring, remote diagnostic)
◦Security and emergency services: integrated remote services
Table 3.1 provides some examples by category as deﬁned in 3GPP machine-type
communication (MTC) documentation (3). MTC is the term used in 3GPP to describe
M2M systems.
In recent years, ETSI has published a number of use cases for IoT (speciﬁcally
for M2M) applications in the following documents:
r ETSI TR 102 691: “Machine-to-Machine Communications (M2M); Smart
Metering Use Cases.”
r ETSI TR 102 732: “Machine-to-Machine Communications (M2M); Use Cases
of M2M Applications for eHealth.”

OVERVIEW
51
TABLE 3.1
Examples of MTC Applications as Deﬁned in 3GPP TS 22.368 Release 10
Category
Speciﬁc Example
Consumer devices
Digital camera
Digital photo frame
eBook
Health monitoring vital signs
Remote diagnostics
Supporting the aged or handicapped
Web access telemedicine points
Metering
Gas
Grid control
Heating
Industrial metering
Power
Water
Payment
Gaming machines
POS
Vending machines
Remote maintenance/control sensors
Elevator control
Lighting
Pumps
Valves
Vehicle diagnostics
Vending machine control
Service area MTC applications
Backup for landline
Car/driver security
Control of physical access (e.g., to buildings)
Security surveillance systems
Tracking and tracing ﬂeet management
Asset tracking
Navigation
Order management
Pay as you drive
Road tolling
Road trafﬁc optimization/steering
Trafﬁc information
r ETSI TR 102 897: “Machine-to-Machine Communications (M2M); Use Cases
of M2M Applications for City Automation.”
r ETSI TR 102 875: “Access, Terminals, Transmission, and Multiplexing (ATTM);
Study of European Requirements for Virtual Noise for ADSL2, ADSL2plus, and
VDSL2.”
r ETSI TR 102 898: “Machine-to-Machine Communications (M2M); Use Cases
of Automotive Applications in M2M Capable Networks.”
r ETSI TS 102 412: “Smart Cards; Smart Card Platform Requirements Stage 1
(Release 8).”

52
INTERNET OF THINGS APPLICATION EXAMPLES
The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) has published the
following relevant document, among others:
r ISO 16750: “Road Vehicles—Environmental Conditions and Testing for Elec-
trical and Electronic Equipment.”
Some of these (ETSI-covered) applications are discussed in the sections that
follow.
3.2
SMART METERING/ADVANCED METERING INFRASTRUCTURE
The European Technology Platform for Electricity Networks for the Future deﬁnes an
SG as: “an electricity network that can intelligently integrate the actions of all users
connected to it—the consumers, the power generators, and those that do both—in
order to efﬁciently deliver sustainable, economic, and secure electricity supplies.” A
key element of an SG is a smart metering network that enables automated meter-
ing capabilities on the customer side (downstream). On the upstream, the utility
acquires the capability for real-time grid monitoring and for information processing
of signiﬁcant network events; this includes fault detection, isolation, and resolution.
Speciﬁcally, a smart metering network enables a utility company to (i) remotely
connect or disconnect power to individual customers, (ii) remotely or automatically
update the grid conﬁguration, (iii) collect power consumption data in variable time
intervals, and (iv) modulate customer loads automatically during critical demand
periods. The SG is also able to automatically detect theft and is able to notify the util-
ity if a meter is tampered with. Smart appliances and SG devices are often referred to
being as “DR-enabled.” Some of the consumer beneﬁts of smart metering include the
elimination of domicile/site access issues, improved billing accuracy, and cost savings
derived from DR/demand management in conjunction with incentivized tariffs (4).
The general goal is to monitor and control the consumption of utilities-supplied
consumable assets, such as electricity, gas, and water. Utility companies deploy
intelligent metering services by incorporating M2M communication modules into
metering devices (“the thing”); these intelligent meters are able to send information
automatically (or on demand) to a server application that can directly bill or con-
trol the metered resource. The ultimate objective is to improve energy distribution
performance and efﬁciency by utilizing accurate real-time information on endpoint
consumption. A variation of this application for metering of gas, electricity, and water
is a pre-payment arrangement: here a consumer can purchase a speciﬁc volume of
gas, electricity, water, and so on by pre-payment; the information about the purchased
volume is securely transmitted to the metering device and then securely stored on
the M2M modules. During use, the actual information about the consumed volume is
transmitted to the M2M module, and when the purchased volume has been consumed,
the supply can be stopped (via a secure actuation capability) (5, 37). See Figure 3.2
for an example of a smart ﬂowmeter for a water utility application; similar concepts
apply to natural gas or electric power.

SMART METERING/ADVANCED METERING INFRASTRUCTURE
53
FIGURE 3.2
Example of an instrumented ﬂowmeter.
The advanced metering infrastructure (AMI) is the electric information service
infrastructure that is put in place between the end-user (or end device) and the power
utility. AMI is a system for implementing the SG, and it is the principal means for
realizing DR. According to press time market forecasts, shipments of smart meter
units were expected to continue to grow at a 15% annual rate, with a total of about
half-a-billion meters shipped by 2015.
Proponents expect that the use of smart appliances and energy management sys-
tems will allow consumers to manage and reduce their energy bills and overall
consumption. The combination of the AMI meter and an appropriate home area net-
work (HAN) enables consumers to become aware of electricity consumption costs on
a near real-time basis; to be able to monitor their energy usage; and to manage their
usage based on their ﬁnancial metrics. To assist consumers in managing their energy
use, manufacturers are designing products that contain built-in communication sys-
tems that communicate with the HAN (and the AMI meter). Having knowledge of
the cost of electricity and of the consumer preferences, these smart devices are able
to manage appliances to either defer operation or adjust the operating condition to
reduce peak energy demand. Thus, this intelligent management has the potential to
reduce the consumer’s energy bills and also reduce the peak demand for the utility.
Peak reduction can save utilities money by helping them avoid the construction of
new peaking power plants1 that exist only to handle peak loads; peak load may occur
only a few hours per day, or, in some cases, for only a few hours per year. Utilities can
1Peaking power plants are power plants that operate only when there is a high peak demand for electric
power.

54
INTERNET OF THINGS APPLICATION EXAMPLES
also avoid (or defer) the cost of upgrading their infrastructure to meet these infrequent
peak loads (6).
The AMI environment is fairly complex. The underlying technology that enables
these beneﬁts to the consumer and the utility company is the availability of an AMI
and HAN communication system. To be effective and easily deployed, the HAN
communication network should preferably be based on a network technology that
(i) utilizes open standards, (ii) is low cost, (iii) consumes a minimum amount of
energy, and (iv) does not require extensive new infrastructure. Metering devices are
typically monitored and controlled by a centralized entity outside or inside the net-
work operator system. Due to the need for centralized control, the centralized entity
will inform or poll the metering device when it needs measurement information
rather than the metering device autonomously sending measurements. Depending on
the nature of the metering application, low latency responses are sometimes required
(metering for high pressure pipelines, for example). To accomplish this, the central-
ized entity will need to inform the metering device when it needs a measurement.
Typically, due to the limitation of IPv4 address space, the metering terminal is behind
a network address translator (NAT) where it is not assigned a routable IPv4 address
(3). This predicament is one of the reasons why it is desirable to utilize IPv6 for IoT
devices/things.
AMI can utilize a number of methods and communication standards to connect
the end device to the applications of the utility company. To communicate between
physical service layers, some combinations and/or reﬁnements of existing commu-
nication protocols are required. See Figure 3.3, loosely modeled after reference (37).
While a number of power line carrier (PLC)-based communication approaches are
technically feasible, at the current time none of these technologies and protocols
have reached the level of technical maturity and cost competitiveness to enable one
Meter Data
Processing 
Server
(MDMS)
Automated
Data 
Collection 
Server 
(ADCS)
Data 
Collection
Unit 
(DCU)
PLC
PLC
Smart
Meter
Zigbee
Energy Service Interface
AMI Enterprise Service
Billing Usage System
FIGURE 3.3
Advanced Metering Infrastructure.

e-HEALTH/BODY AREA NETWORKS
55
to institutionalize a viable solution. However, there is work underway by several
industry and/or standards organizations to develop standards for devices supporting
these applications; for example, the European Commission (EC) has given support
to the following initiatives:
r EC’s M/411 Smart Metering Mandate: EC mandate issued in March 2009 by
the Directorate-General for Transport and Energy (DG TREN) and sent to
the three ESOs (European Standards Organizations)—CEN, CENELEC, and
ETSI. The objective is to build standards for European smart meters, allowing
interoperability and consumer actual consumption awareness.
r EC’s M/490 SG Mandate: EC mandate issued in March 2011 by DG TREN and
sent to the three ESOs—CEN, CENELEC, and ETSI. The objective is to build
standards for European SGs.
3.3
e-HEALTH/BODY AREA NETWORKS
e-Health applications include health and ﬁtness. Advocates envisage an environment
where mobile health monitoring systems interoperate seamlessly and cohesively to
reduce the lag time between the onset of medical symptoms in an individual and the
diagnosis of the underlying condition. These applications make use of one or more
biosensors placed on, or in, the human body, enabling the collection of a speciﬁed set
of body’s parameters to be transmitted and then monitored remotely. These sensors
free patients from the set of wires that would otherwise tie the patients to a speciﬁc
site at home or to a hospital bed; the on-body sensors are generally light and the
links are wireless in nature, allowing the patient to enjoy a high degree of mobility
(7). Sensors may consist of several wearable body sensor units, each containing a
biosensor, a radio, an antenna, and some on-board control and computation. When
multiple sensors are used by a patient, they are typically homed to a central unit also
on the body. These on-body sensor systems—the sensors and the connectivity—are
called wireless body area networks (WBANs), or alternatively, medical body area
networks (MBANs), or alternatively medical body area network system (MBANS),
although in the latter case the term does not necessarily mean a wireless system (8).
Figure 3.4 provides a pictorial view of a WBAN.
MBAN technology consists of small, low powered sensors on the body that capture
clinical information, such as temperature and respiratory function. Sensors are used
for monitoring and trending for disease detection, progression, remission, and ﬁtness.
As patients recover, MBANs allow them to move about the healthcare facility, while
still being monitored for any health issues that might develop. MBANs consist of
two paired devices—one that is worn on the body (sensor) and another that is located
either on the body or in close proximity to it (hub) (9). Some of these devices are
disposable and are similar to a band-aid in size and shape; the disposable sensors
include a low power radio transmitter. Sensors typically register patient’s temperature,
pulse, blood glucose level, blood pressure (BP), and respiratory health; the beneﬁts

56
INTERNET OF THINGS APPLICATION EXAMPLES
FIGURE 3.4
Wireless body area network/Medical body area network.
include increased mobility, better care, and lower costs. Examples of healthcare-
related sensors include, but are not limited to:
r Glucose meter: A device that measures the approximate concentration of glu-
cose in the blood; it is used by chronic disease (e.g., diabetes) management
applications.
r Pulse oximeter: A device that indirectly measures the amount of oxygen in a
patient’s blood (oxygen saturation (SpO2)).
r Electrocardiograph (ECG): A device that records and measures the electrical
activity of the heart over time.
r Social alarm devices: Devices that allow individuals to raise an alarm and com-
municate with a caretaker when an emergency situation occurs; the caretaker
may be a monitoring center, a medical care team, or a family member; these
include devices fall detector and panic pendant/wrist transmitters.
The development activities related to WBANs/MBANs/MBANSs pertain to the
formalization and standardization of wireless on-body monitoring technology entail-
ing low power radio system used for the transmission of non-voice data to and from
medical devices, especially in terms of frequency bands and communications at the
higher layers (PHY, MAC, IP). A WBANs/MBANs consists of one or more on-
body wireless sensors to simultaneously collect multiple vital sign parameters and/or
medical actuator devices that can communicate with a monitoring device placed
on/around (up to 10 m from) the human body. Today, existing technologies allow
for wired solutions for monitoring patient vital signs as well as controlling actuators

e-HEALTH/BODY AREA NETWORKS
57
such as ventilators and infusion pumps. On-body sensors—measuring vital signs of
a patient—and actuators are typically wired up to a bedside patient monitor. This
bundle-of-wires situation limits the mobility of patients and reduces their comfort,
adversely affecting their recovery times. Workﬂow delays are also introduced due to
caregivers moving tethered patients. In Europe, the ﬁrst wireless patient monitoring
solutions operating in the generic short-range device (SRD) band from 2400 MHz
to 2483.5 MHz have recently been introduced by vendors to overcome the disad-
vantages of wired solutions. However, the increasingly intensive use of this band by
other applications (such as WiFi R⃝, Bluetooth R⃝, and ISM equipment) will tend to pre-
vent such systems from offering the required reliability as their use increases within
healthcare facilities (8). Hence the need for a standardized dedicated approach for
MBANs, preferably with a worldwide and/or multiregion standard. There is move-
ment to that effect in the United States (see below) and in Europe (with ETSI TR 101
557 as discussed in Chapter 6).
WBANs/MBANs are considered to be an assistive technology (AT). AT can be
deﬁned as “any device or system that allows an individual to perform a task that
they would otherwise be unable to do, or increases the ease and safety with which
the task can be performed” (according to the United Kingdom Royal Commis-
sion on Long-term Care). Another deﬁnition is “any product or service designed
to enable independence for disabled or older people” (according to the European
Union SOPRANO Review State-of-the-Art and Market Analysis Deliverable D1.1.2
published in 2007) (10). Table 3.2 depicts some of the beneﬁts of (and/or motivations
for) MBAN technology (9).
Standards drive economy-of-scale beneﬁts for components; standards also sim-
plify the control and monitoring of patients in hospitals, in care facilities, and in
homes. e-Health and m-health rely on groups of connected devices, including devices
communicating with classic smartphones using near ﬁeld communication (NFC)
technology, or with other nodes using low power, short-range radio communication
technology such as Bluetooth low energy (BLE), or ZigBee (10), Kingsley (39).
r ZigBee aims at enabling the deployment of reliable, cost-effective, low power,
wireless monitoring and control products based on an open IEEE standard;
it was designed with simplicity in mind and is efﬁcient in the use of power,
allowing monitoring devices to operate on commonly available batteries for
years.
r BLE is a low power version of Bluetooth capable of reporting data from a
sensor for up to a year from a small button battery; although the BLE data rate
and radio range is lower than that of classic Bluetooth, also an IEEE standard,
the low power and long battery life make it suitable for short-range monitoring
applications in medicine.
r NFC is a form of contactless communication between devices such as smart-
phones or tablets and readers. Contactless communication allows a user to wave
the smartphone over an NFC-compatible device to send information without
requiring the devices to touch or to use a cable.

58
INTERNET OF THINGS APPLICATION EXAMPLES
TABLE 3.2
Beneﬁts of (and/or Motivations for) MBAN Technology
Beneﬁt
Description
Transforming
Patient Care,
Saving Lives
r Almost 50% of all patients in US hospitals are not monitored.
MBANs provide a cost-effective way to monitor patients in a
healthcare institution, so clinicians can provide real-time and
accurate data, allowing them to intervene and save lives
r MBANs allow for ubiquitous and reliable monitoring and give
healthcare providers the chance to identify life-threatening problems
or events before they occur. According to a study by the Institute for
Healthcare Improvement, a monitored hospital patient has a 48%
chance of surviving a cardiac arrest—this number plummets as low
as 6% without monitoring
r Portions of MBAN spectrum can also be used outside the hospital
and in patients’ homes. Monitoring a patient at home saves money by
reducing readmission rates
r MBAN-equipped devices allow patients greater independence and
mobility, both in the hospital and in the home, implying a higher level
of comfort and care
Driving Down
Costs
r With MBAN technology, physicians can intervene before a patient’s
condition seriously deteriorates—resulting in less time spent in the
intensive care unit—and can reduce costly follow-up visits. One
healthcare company estimates it could save $1.5 million per month if
unplanned (emergency) transfers could be prevented by early
detection and treatment
r Disposable wireless sensors can also help decrease hospital-acquired
infections. The industry estimates that disposable sensors could help
to save an estimated $2000 to $12,000 per patient—more than
$11 billion nationwide
r As one example, remote monitoring of patients with congestive heart
failure would create an annual savings of over $10 billion a year
Spurring
Innovation in
Mobile Health
r The m-health industry consists of mobile applications, cloud-based
data management, wireless medical devices, and other solutions to
increase patient engagement and improve the delivery of healthcare
services
r Almost 17 million people are accessing health data on their mobile
phones in the United States, a 125% increase since 2010
r m-health is expected to be a $2 to 6 billion industry by 2015
r About 88% of doctors support patients monitoring their health at
home, especially weight, blood sugar, and vital signs
r Early detection allows earlier treatment and better outcomes. For
example, after an initial hospitalization for heart failure, 60% of
patients are readmitted at least once within 6–9 months. Industry
estimates indicate that remote monitoring could generate net savings
of $197 billion over 25 years from just four chronic conditions

e-HEALTH/BODY AREA NETWORKS
59
These wireless technologies are discussed in more detail in Chapter 6.
In mid-2012, the US Federal Communications Commission (FCC) announced it
was planning to allocate spectrum bandwidth in the United States for use of body
sensors to monitor wirelessly a variety of patient’s vital signs using MBANSs. The
FCC was planning to adopt new rules to permit more intensive use of spectrum for
wireless medical devices, making the United States the ﬁrst country in the world to
dedicate spectrum for MBANs in hospitals, clinics, and doctors’ ofﬁces (9). Using the
newly allocated spectrum bandwidth, the sensors on a patient’s body wirelessly form a
network to a designated control node that aggregates the results and transmits that data
to centralized computer systems. The FCC’s MBAN proposal is a multi-industry effort
to foster innovation in this spectrum band (2360–2400 MHz) by allowing distinct but
compatible users to share. This proposed use of spectrum provides wireless health
manufacturers with increased spectrum capacity and reliability, giving them the
certainty they need to streamline their product development, which for many years
operated on a variety of frequencies. The proposed new spectrum allocation can:
r Provide more reliable service and increased capacity for the use of MBANs
in hospital waiting rooms, elevator lobbies, preparatory areas, and other high
density settings.
r Greatly improve the quality of patient care with more effective monitoring,
catching patients before critical stages, improving patient outcomes, and ulti-
mately saving lives.
r Decrease expenses while increasing competition and innovation, easing entry
for companies that are developing new wireless medical devices.
Healthcare monitoring applications include chronic disease monitoring, personal
wellness monitoring, and personal ﬁtness. Chronic diseases include diabetes, asthma,
heart diseases, and sleep disorders. Chronic diseases typically require some kind of
health monitoring, especially in advanced stages of the disease progression. Chronic
disease monitoring encompasses the following, as described in Reference 10 (on
which the next few paragraphs are based):
r Episodic patient monitoring; this is utilized in noncritical patients to track
speciﬁc indicators and identify the progress of the disease or recovery. In this use
case, the patient’s vital signs (e.g., heart rate, temperature) and disease-speciﬁc
indicators (e.g., BP, blood glucose level, EKG) are monitored to determine
anomalies and identify trends. The monitoring is done periodically, and all
the information collected by the medical sensors is time-stamped and then
securely forwarded to a gateway that functions as a patient monitoring system.
Additionally, the gateway forwards the aggregated information in a secure way
to a database server. Medical personnel and family caregivers can access the
information stored in the database server to monitor the progress of the disease.
r Continuous patient monitoring; this is associated with acute conditions that
require constant or frequent measurement of health status. In this case, the

60
INTERNET OF THINGS APPLICATION EXAMPLES
vital signs (e.g., heart rate, temperature, pulse oximeter) are monitored on a
constant basis to allow continuous measurement of patients’ health status at
rest or during mild exercise for purpose of treatment adjustment, recovery, or
diagnosis. The vital signs measurements waveforms (e.g., pulse pleth wave or
heart rate) are securely streamed to an on-body data collection unit for data
fusion and/or sequential storage. The data is securely forwarded from the data
collection unit to an off-body gateway (e.g., PC/laptop, PDA or mobile phone)
for storage and data analysis; alternatively, the data can be sent directly to a
mobile terminal. The patient or the care provider remotely activates the on-body
sensors via the off-body unit; the measurement data from the body sensors is
securely transmitted continuously to the on-body unit, where it is temporarily
stored. Subsequently, the recorded measurement data is securely sent to the off-
body unit via batch transmission for persistent storage and further analysis by
the healthcare provider. Optionally, an off-body unit can also be used for secure
waveform viewing during the measurement. The healthcare professional uses
the captured data to provide the appropriate diagnosis or to adjust the treatment
level.
r Patient alarm monitoring: this entails the triggering of alarms based on preset
conditions that are speciﬁc to the patient and the disease. In this use case, the
patient’s vital signs (e.g., heart rate, temperature) and disease-speciﬁc indicators
(e.g., BP, EKG, EEG) are monitored on a continuous basis. The data collected
by the sensors is time-stamped and securely forwarded to a gateway that acts
as a patient monitoring system. The gateway securely forwards the aggregated
information to a database server. Additionally, at predetermined settings, alarms
are issued and responses/actions could be triggered automatically. For example,
if during the monitoring of a diabetic patient the blood glucose level falls below
a certain threshold, an alert can be sent to the patient, physician(s), and/or
medical personnel. Increasing the sampling rate of a given monitor can also be
triggered once an alarm has been asserted. The alarm can be issued either by
the medical device or by the gateway.
Personal wellness monitoring concerns a person’s activity and safety (especially
for the elderly). Applications include but are not limited to smoke alarms, panic
buttons, motion sensors, home sensors (e.g., bed, door, window, shower), and other
monitors for assisted living facilities. The information collected by these devices is
securely transmitted to a central location for decision-making, analysis, trending, and
storage. Personal wellness monitoring includes the following:
r Senior activity monitoring scenario focuses on monitoring an elderly person’s
daily activity. Besides a wearable medical sensors/devices that monitor the vital
signs (e.g., heartbeat, body temperature), this application involves monitoring
other nonmedical sensors such as environmental sensors. If an elderly person
has to follow a certain daily schedule, for example, taking a weight measurement
in the morning, obtaining glucose level readings at 11 AM and at 5 PM, and so

e-HEALTH/BODY AREA NETWORKS
61
on, the caregiver can monitor the daily activity status of the person. If certain
routine activities are not completed, the person can be sent a reminder.
r Safety monitoring scenario deals with monitoring the safety of the home envi-
ronment. The home environment is monitored for safety hazards including toxic
gases, water, and ﬁre. Additionally, the vital signs (e.g., heartbeat, temperature)
of the persons in the home are also monitored.
Personal ﬁtness monitoring includes (i) monitoring and tracking ﬁtness level and
(ii) personalized ﬁtness schedule scenario:
r The monitoring and tracking ﬁtness level use case focuses on tracking the
ﬁtness level or progress made by an individual. A number of parameters that the
individual wishes to monitor are recorded as that individual performs his/her
workout routine (e.g., while running on a treadmill, the individual monitors
his/her heart rate, temperature, and blood oxygen level). This information,
obtained from medical sensors that are worn by the individual, is securely
streamed to a gateway or a collection data unit and displayed on the treadmill’s
console in real time, along with other performance information provided by the
treadmill. Additionally, the gateway sends the information to a database server
for recordkeeping.
r The personalized ﬁtness schedule use case focuses on personalization of the
ﬁtness schedule of an individual. The schedule to be followed by that individual
can be entered by a trainer or the individual. For example, training for a marathon
could include running on a treadmill according to a schedule designed by his/her
trainer. For each training day, the trainer schedules the distance, the pace, and
the maximum heart rate at which the individual is to train. The trainer would
also like to monitor the individual’s respiration pattern. While the distance and
the pace are provided by the treadmill, the heart rate and the respiration are
monitored by wireless medical devices worn by the individual.
Some press time demonstrations of MBAN technology included the following:
r Fetal telemetry: A small, lightweight, and noninvasive way to continuously
monitor a baby’s health, while allowing the mother to move freely.
r LifeLine home care pendants: A device that collects health information for the
elderly or those with chronic diseases—allowing them to live independently
with the security and peace of mind that they are being monitored.
r Predictive and early warning systems: Provides continuous monitoring to help
prevent sudden and acute deterioration of a patient’s condition.
r A greatly abbreviated press time list of speciﬁc illustrative examples in this
arena includes the following.2
2Companies named in this text are simply illustrative examples of entities that may offer technologies and
services under discussion at point in the text; named companies are generally not the only suppliers that

62
INTERNET OF THINGS APPLICATION EXAMPLES
Sierra Wireless has developed Positive ID secure modules to provide support for
diabetics through monitoring levels of glucose in the blood. Cinterion/Gemalto has
developed Aerotel, a system capable of modulating in real time the ﬂow of air sent to
people suffering from sleep apnea; the company has also developed M2M modules to
remotely monitor problems of cardiac arrhythmia in real time. The ﬁrst applications
of NFC technology appeared recently in the United States with the launch by the
company iMPack of a system “tracking” the quality of sleep, allowing a clock to
transmit data collected during the night to the Nokia C7 NFC smartphone. It uses an
embedded application to generate an initial result, which can then be transmitted to
a physician (11).
Press time research issues for WBANs include but are not limited to the following:
r Antenna design for in- and on-body networks
r Channel modeling radio propagation issues for WBAN
r Electromagnetic radiation and human tissues
r Interference management and mitigation
r Coexistence of WBAN with other wireless technologies
r Protocols and algorithms for the PHY, MAC, and network layer
r End-to-end quality of service (QoS) provision for WBAN
r Energy-efﬁcient and low power consumption protocols
r Power management for WBAN
r Integration of WBAN with heterogeneous networks
r (Lightweight) security, authentication, and cryptography solutions for WBAN
r Standardization activities
3.4
CITY AUTOMATION
Some applications in this domain include but are not limited to the following:
r Trafﬁc ﬂow management system in combination with dynamic trafﬁc light
control
r Street light control
r Passenger information system for public transportation
r Passive surveillance (see Section 3.9)
Generic city sensors include environmental sensors and activity sensors. Environ-
mental sensors include:
– thermal
– hygrometric
may provide such services, and mention of a company and/or service does not imply that such entities or
capabilities are recommended herewith, or considered in any way better than others.

CITY AUTOMATION
63
– anemometric
– sound
– gas
– particles
– light, other EM spectrum
– seismic
Activity sensors include:
– pavement/roadway pressure
– vehicle and pedestrian detection
– parking space occupancy
ETSI TR 102 897: “Machine-to-Machine Communications (M2M); Use Cases of
M2M Applications for City Automation” provides the following description of these
applications (12):
Use Case 1: Trafﬁc Flow Management System in Combination with Dynamic
Trafﬁc Light Control. The ﬂow of road trafﬁc within cities depends on a number of
factors such as the number of vehicles on the road, the time and the day, the current
or expected weather, current trafﬁc issues and accidents, as well as road construction
work. Trafﬁc ﬂow sensors provide key trafﬁc ﬂow information to a central trafﬁc
ﬂow management system; the trafﬁc ﬂow management system can develop a real-
time trafﬁc optimization strategy and, thus, endeavor to control the trafﬁc ﬂow. The
trafﬁc control can be achieved by dynamic information displays informing the driver
about trafﬁc jams and congested roads; trafﬁc signs can direct the trafﬁc to utilize less
used roads. The trafﬁc ﬂow management system can also interact with controllable
trafﬁc lights to extend or to reduce the green light period to increase the vehicle
throughput on heavy used roads; dynamically changeable trafﬁc signs can lead to an
environment where the vehicular trafﬁc is managed more efﬁciently, thus enabling
cities to reduce fuel consumption, air pollution, congestions, and the time spent on
the road.
Use Case 2: Street Light Control. Street lights are not required to shine at the
same intensity to accomplish the intended safety goal. The intensity may depend on
conditions such as moonlight or weather. Adjusting the intensity helps to reduce the
energy consumption and the expenditures incurred by a municipality. The street light
controller of each street light segment is connected (often wirelessly) with the central
street light managing and control system. Based on local information measured by
local sensors, the control system can dim the corresponding street lights of a segment
remotely or is able to switch street lights on and off.
Use Case 3: Passenger Information System for Public Transportation. Public
transportation vehicles, such as busses, subways, and commuter trains, operate on
a schedule that may be impacted by external variables and, thus, have a degree of
variability compared with a baseline formal schedule. Passengers need to know when
their next connection is available; this information also allows passengers to select
alternative connections in the case of longer delays. In this application, the current

64
INTERNET OF THINGS APPLICATION EXAMPLES
locations of the various public transport vehicles are provided to the central system
that is able to match the current location with the forecasted location at each time or
at speciﬁc checkpoints. Based on the time difference, the system is able to calculate
the current delay and the expected arrival time at the upcoming stops. The vehicle
location can be captured via checkpoints on the regular track or via GPS/general
packet radio service (GPRS) tracking devices that provide the position information
in regular intervals. Two approaches are possible:
r With a checkpoint-based approach, the line number (of the bus or the street
car) is captured at each station where the vehicle stops regularly, or at deﬁned
checkpoint in between. Because of the fact that the sensor at a speciﬁc station
is able to provide the data to the central system, the expected delay can be
calculated by comparing the information of the scheduled arrival time and the
actual arrival time. This change can be added to the arrival time displayed
at each following station. Each vehicle must be equipped with a transponder
(variously based on infrared, radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID), short-range
communication, or optical recognition). In addition, each station has to be
equipped with one or more checkpoint systems that are able to readout or to
receive the line number information of the vehicle. In case of larger stations
with several platforms, multiple systems are needed.
r With a GPS/GPRS-based approach, each vehicle has to be equipped with a
GPS/GPRS tracking device that provide, besides the current position, the infor-
mation that can be directly or indirectly matched to the serviced line number.
Based on the “regular” position/time pattern, the system is able to calculate the
actual time difference and provide the expected time on the passenger display.
A combination of checkpoint- and GPS/GPRS-based solution can be used to
integrate railed vehicles (such as subways and street cars) and road vehicles (such as
busses).
3.5
AUTOMOTIVE APPLICATIONS
IoT/M2M automotive and transportation applications focus on safety, security, con-
nected navigation, and other vehicle services such as, but not limited to, insurance
or road pricing, emergency assistance, ﬂeet management, electric car charging man-
agement, and trafﬁc optimization. These applications typically entail IoT/M2M com-
munication modules that are embedded into the car or the transportation equipment.
Some of the technical challenges relate to mobility management and environmental
hardware considerations. A brief description of applications follows from Reference
13 (on which the next few paragraphs are based).
r bCall (breakdown call): A bCall sends the current vehicle position to a roadside
assistance organization and initiates a voice call. The bCall trigger is usually a

AUTOMOTIVE APPLICATIONS
65
switch that is manually pushed by the user in order to activate the service. An
“enhanced” bCall service allows current vehicle diagnostic information to be
transmitted in addition to the vehicle position.
r Stolen vehicle tracking (SVT): A basic application for automotive M2M com-
munications is tracking of mobile assets—either for purposes of managing a
ﬂeet of vehicles or to determine the location of stolen property. The goal of
a SVT system is to facilitate the recovery of a vehicle in case of theft. The
SVT service provider periodically requests location data from the Telematics
Control Unit (TCU) in the vehicle and interacts with the police. The TCU may
also be capable of sending out automatic theft alerts based on vehicle intrusion
or illegal movement. The TCU may also be linked to the Engine Manage-
ment System (EMS) to enable immobilization or speed degradation by remote
command. Vehicles contain embedded M2M devices that can interface with
location-determination technology and can communicate via a mobile cellular
network to an entity (server) in the M2M core. The M2M devices will com-
municate directly with the telecommunication network; the M2M devices will
interface with location-determination technology such as standalone GPS, or
network-based mechanisms such as assisted GPS, Cell-ID, and so on. For theft-
tracking applications, the M2M device is typically embedded in an inaccessible
or inconspicuous place so that it may not be easily disabled by a thief. The
tracking server is an entity located in the M2M core and owned or operated
by the asset owner or service provider to receive, process, and render location
and velocity information provided by the deployed assets. The tracking server
may trigger a particular M2M device to provide a location/velocity update, or
the M2M devices may be conﬁgured to autonomously provide updates on a
schedule or upon an event-based trigger.
r Remote diagnostics: Remote diagnostic services can broadly be grouped into
the following categories:
r Maintenance minder—when the vehicle reaches a certain mileage (e.g., 90%
of the manufacturer’s recommended service interval since the previous ser-
vice), the TCU sends a message to the owner or the owner’s named deal-
ership, advising the owner (or the dealership) that the vehicle is due for
service.
r Health check—Either on a periodic basis or triggered by a request from the
owner, the TCU compiles the vehicle’s general status using inbuilt diagnostic
reporting functions and transmits a diagnostic report to the owner, the owner’s
preferred dealership, or to the vehicle manufacturer.
r Fault triggered—When a fault (a diagnostic trouble code [DTC]) is detected
with one of the vehicle systems, this triggers the TCU to send the DTC code
and any related information to the owner’s preferred dealer, or to the vehicle
manufacturer.
r Enhanced bCall—When a manual breakdown call is initiated by the owner,
the TCU sends both position data and DTC status information to the roadside
assistance service or to the vehicle manufacturer.

66
INTERNET OF THINGS APPLICATION EXAMPLES
r Fleet management: The ﬂeet owner wishes to track the vehicles—that is, to
know, over time, the location and velocity of each vehicle—in order to plan
and optimize business operations. A ﬂeet management application assumes that
a ﬂeet of vehicles have been deployed with M2M devices installed that are
able to:
r Interface with sensors on the vehicle that measure velocity
r Interface with devices that can detect position
r Establish a link with a mobile telecommunication network using appropriate
network access credentials, such as a USIM (universal subscriber identity
module)
A server in the ﬂeet owner’s employ receives, aggregates, and processes the tracking
data from the ﬂeet and provides this information to the ﬂeet owner. Devices could be
conﬁgured to autonomously establish communication with the server via a cellular
network either at regular intervals, at prescheduled times, or based on some event
such as crossing a geographic threshold. Alternatively, the M2M devices could be
commanded by the M2M server to report their location/velocity data. See Figure 3.5
for an illustrative example.
r Vehicle-to-infrastructure communications. A European Intelligent Transport
Systems Directive3 seeks the implementation of eSafety applications in vehicles.
Some vehicle manufacturers have begun to deploy vehicle-to-vehicle communi-
cation, for example, in the context of wireless access in vehicular environments
(WAVE). On the other hand, vehicle to roadside applications are less well-
developed; in this case, vehicles have embedded M2M devices that can inter-
face with location-determination technology and can communicate via a mobile
telecommunication network to an entity (server). This application assumes that
vehicles have been deployed with M2M devices installed that are able to:
r Interface with sensors on the vehicle that measure velocity, external impacts
r Interface with devices that can detect position
r Establish a link with a mobile telecommunication network using appropriate
network access credentials, such as a USIM
r Upload or download trafﬁc and safety information to a trafﬁc information
server
Devices could be conﬁgured to establish communication with the server via the
cellular network based on some event triggered by a vehicle sensor such as external
impact, motor failure, and so on. For example, the trafﬁc information server pushes
roadside or emergency information out to vehicles based on location (cell location or
actual location). Or, vehicle information is pushed to the trafﬁc information server
3A directive is a legislative act of the European Union requiring member states to achieve a stated result
but without mandating the means of achieving that result.

HOME AUTOMATION
67
GPS
GPS
GPS
GPS
GPS
GPS
Asset
Owner &
Tracking
Server
Telecom
Network
Telecom
Network
Telecom
Core
FIGURE 3.5
Vehicular asset tracking.
based on external sensor information, internal sensor information, or subscription
basis. See Figure 3.6.
r Insurance services: Pay-as-you-drive (PAYD) schemes offer insurers the oppor-
tunity to reduce costs based on actual risk and provide more competitive products
to the end-user based on getting feedback from the vehicle as to when, where,
how, or how far the vehicle is being driven (or a combination of these factors).
3.6
HOME AUTOMATION
Home automation has received a lot of attention of late in the IoT/M2M context. Basic
applications of the automated home include remote media control, heating control,
lighting control (including low power landscape lighting control), and appliance
control. Sensed homes, as examples of smart space, are seen as “next-step/next-
generation” applications. Smart meters and energy efﬁciency (making use of the
potential of SG), discussed above, also ﬁt this category. Telehealth (e.g., assisted living
and in-home m-health services) also can be captured under this set of applications;
security and emergency services also can be included here.

68
INTERNET OF THINGS APPLICATION EXAMPLES
Traffic Information
Server
Mobile Network
Vehicle-to-Vehicle comms
FIGURE 3.6
Vehicle-to-infrastructure communications.
M2M communications is expected to play a major role in residences, where
instrumentation of elements supporting daily living (e.g., appliances), comfort, health,
security, and energy efﬁciency can improve the quality of life and the quality of
experience. Home control applications include but are not limited to:
r Lighting control
r Thermostat/HVAC
r White goods/
r Appliance control
r In-home displays
Home security applications include but are not limited to:
r Door access phone
r Window locks
r Motion detector
r Smoke/ﬁre alert
r Baby monitors
r Medical pendant
See Figure 3.7 for an illustrative example.
Energy efﬁciency at home is a key application of interest because of the possibility
of monetary saving for the consumer. Occupancy sensors can be used to establish
whether there is somebody in a room or not and when the room becomes unoccupied
the lights are automatically switched off; other types of sensors can be used to control

Energy Harvesting
Micro site (solar/ wind
etc.) 
LINEN
BATH
Water Meter
Electricity Meter
Water Meter
Gas Meter
Light Dimmer/
Control
BEDROOM
WALK-IN
CLOSET
WALK-IN
CLOSET
Home
Gateway
Zigbee/ ULE/ w-Mbus
etc.
Heat/ Light
Control
LIVING ROOM
ENTRY
Heating Control
DINING ROOM
BATH
Boiler
UTILITY
KITCHEN
NOOK
FAMILY ROOM
Heat Meter
Media Tablet/ Laptop
xxxxx
xxxxx
xxxxx
xxxxx
RTX Data
Concentrators
RTX Smart Meters
Electric Vehicles/ HEVs
(Charging Station)
Porch
xxxxxxxxx
FIGURE 3.7
Home automation example.
69

70
INTERNET OF THINGS APPLICATION EXAMPLES
the energy consumption from different equipments (e.g., temperature, TVs, and so
on). The sensors and actuators can be autonomous (as in the case of light sensors), or
can be connected to an M2M gateway control node (wirelessly or using wires, e.g., via
PLC). By integrating the data from a plethora of sensors (e.g., outside temperature,
multizone heating status), the gateway can dispatch the appropriate commands to the
relevant actuators (e.g., to switch off the heater in a room or zone, or in the entire
house). The M2M system allows reducing energy consumption by automatically
adapting the use of the house equipment to various short-term situations (people
moving in and out of rooms, people going to work and retuning later) or long-term
situations (people taking vacations or long weekends or managing a second/vacation
home) (5).
3.7
SMART CARDS
Smart cards (SCs) in general, and M2M-based systems in particular, enable wired
and wireless communication for a large set of commercial and industrial applications.
SCs are now routinely accepted as credentials for controlling secure physical access.
The purpose of an SC is to safeguard user identities and secret keys and to perform
requisite cryptographic computations (an SC is a tamper-resistant device). SC tech-
nology includes contact and contactless systems. A terminal is the entity with which
the SC can establish a secure channel. Examples include generic card acceptance
devices (CADs), a CAD on a mobile handset, a Set-top box, a laptop/PC/tablet. See
Figure 3.8.
Applications include utility monitoring, vending machines, security systems,
industrial machines, automotive, trafﬁc management, speed cameras, and medical
equipment. A more inclusive list of SC applications is as follows:
r Biometrics
r Cybersecurity
r Enterprise ID
r Government ID
ePassport
FIPS 201
Real ID
Passport Card/WHTI
r Healthcare
r Identity
r Logical access
r Market research
r Mobile telecommunications
r Network security

SMART CARDS
71
User Interface
UICC, with
applications
UICC
Card
Acceptance
Device
Secure Terminal
Environment (including 
KeyPad 
and Display)
Firewell application
USIM
FIGURE 3.8
UICC environment, including user interfaces.
r Payments
POS
Contactless payments
EMV payments
Mobile payments/NFC
Transportation payments
r Physical access
r Privacy
r RF/RFID tags
r Security
ePassport security
Contactless payments security
Transit fare payment system security
r Transportation (toll tags, speed-of-vehicle readers)
These applications require advanced, durable USIM cards. SCs are resource-limited
devices because they are designed to be economic and portable (small and light).

72
INTERNET OF THINGS APPLICATION EXAMPLES
In recent years, memory size on SCs has increased from KBs up to MBs; this
trend is expected to continue in the future allowing operators to offer enhanced new
services.
Applications such as electronic payment, electronic ticketing, and transit can be
combined with physical access to provide a multiapplication and multitechnology ID
credential; the issuer can also record and update appropriate privileges from a single
central location. Contactless SCs can authenticate a person’s identity, determine the
appropriate level of access, and admit the cardholder to a facility, all from data
stored on the card; SCs can also include additional authentication factors (such as
biometric templates) and other card technologies (such as an SC chip) (14). Another
application example is POS use. Currently, most POS terminals are connected using
a wired connection; as a consequence, the terminals are placed at a ﬁxed position
within the establishment in question, and the person needing to perform a transaction
is required to go to the location of the POS terminal—this may be inconvenience
or restrict commerce (in some fashion). In some cases (e.g., remotely located POS
terminals, parking meters, garage checkout booths, and so on), a wired connection is
difﬁcult and costly to be installed. An option, therefore, is to connect POS terminals
via a secure wireless connection. As M2M communication modules are installed
into wireless POS terminals, street parking, and ticketing machines, and so on to
provide communication for credit or debit card online transactions, new commercial
applications become a reality (5).
Contactless cards use NFC to communicate and receive power over short dis-
tances; since these devices do not need physical contact with a reader, they simplify
operation and increases transaction speeds. For transponders to work they require
power, although the levels are very small. Passive devices operate without an inter-
nal battery source, deriving the power to operate from the ﬁeld generated by the
reader; this implies that passive devices offer an unlimited operational lifetime but
have shorter read ranges and require a higher-powered reader (15). There are three
basic contactless technologies considered for physical access control applications:
125 kHz, ISO/IEC 14443, and ISO/IEC 15693 technologies.
r 125 kHz read-only technology is used by many of today’s RFID access control
systems and is based on de facto industry standards rather than international
standards. 125 kHz technology allows for a secure, uniquely coded number to
be transmitted and processed by a back-end system. The back-end system then
determines the rights and privileges associated with that card.
r Contactless SC technology based on ISO/IEC 14443 and ISO/IEC 15693 stan-
dards are intelligent, read/write devices capable of storing different kinds of data
and operating at different ranges. Contactless SCs operate at 13.56 MHz and are
further divided into proximity (ISO 14443) and vicinity (ISO 15693) devices
with nominal operating ranges of up to 10 cm and 1 m, respectively. ISO 14443
speciﬁes A and B operation modes that use different communication and card
selection procedures. The ISO 14443A standard is used with most contactless
cards and is compatible with the lower layers of popular commercial products.
The standard speciﬁes the operating frequency, modulation and coding schemes

SMART CARDS
73
(ISO 14443-2), anti-collision routines (ISO 14443-3), and communication pro-
tocols (ISO 14443-4). It uses amplitude shift keying (ASK) modulation with
modiﬁed miller coding (106 Kbps) in reader to card communication (15).
NFC setups allow a device (known as a reader, interrogator, or active device)
to create a radio frequency current that enables communication with another NFC-
compatible device or a small NFC tag holding the information the reader wants.
Passive devices, such as the NFC tag in smart posters, store information and com-
municate with the reader, but do not actively read other devices. Peer-to-peer com-
munication through two active devices is also a possibility with NFC, allowing both
devices to send and receive information. NFC maintains interoperability between dif-
ferent wireless communication methods such as Bluetooth and other NFC standards
including FeliCa—popular in Japan—through the NFC Forum. Founded in 2004 by
Sony, Nokia, and Philips, the NFC Forum enforces standards that manufacturers must
meet when designing NFC-compatible devices. This ensures that NFC is secure and
remains easy to use with different versions of the technology. Compatibility is the
key to the growth of NFC as a popular payment and data communication method. It
must be able to communicate with other wireless technologies and be able to inter-
act with different types of NFC transmissions. For example, by integrating credit
cards, subway tickets, and paper coupons all into one device, a customer can board a
train, pay for groceries, redeem coupons or store loyalty points, and even exchange
contact information all with the wave of a smartphone. NFC technology is popular
in parts of Europe and Asia and is also being deployed in the United States. As an
illustrative example, Google launched Google Wallet that supports MasterCard Pay-
Pass, PayPal offers money transfers between smartphones, and other companies are
expected to follow suit. The expectation is that as the technology is deployed, more
NFC-compatible smartphones will be available, and more stores will offer NFC card
readers for customer convenience (16). This topic is revisited later in the text.
SC use depends on the environment in which they are deployed. For example,
in banking, user information includes identity, account information, and possibly
information on recent transactions made and secret keys used in security functions;
the operations allowed encompass card holder authentication, automatic transaction
registration, and transaction nonrepudiation. In mobile communications, user infor-
mation includes identity, personal information such as address book, operator-related
information, and again secret keys used in security functions. Functions executed
include user authentication, voice encryption, as well as data access to user’s private
information. There are no peripherals that allow user direct access, such as a keyboard
or a screen: SC access must go through a terminal, and, unless the communication is
secure end-to-end, this may constitute a security weakness. System security is deter-
mined at the weakest link and, unless strengthened, attackers may target the terminal
or the data exchange with the terminal, to get round the robustness of the tamper-
resistant device (17). For example, a UICC (Universal Integrated Circuit Card) is
the SC used in mobile terminals in GSM and UMTS networks. A UICC typically
contains several applications, and the same SC provides access to both GSM and
UMTS networks. The UICC also provides storage (e.g., for a directory). In a GSM
network, the UICC contains a subscriber identiﬁcation module (SIM) application; in

74
INTERNET OF THINGS APPLICATION EXAMPLES
a UMTS network it is the USIM application. It is a new-generation SIM included in
cell phones or laptops using high speed 3G cellular networks. The UICC SC typically
has a CPU, ROM, RAM, EEPROM, and I/O circuits.
Occupational use of health cards still lags behind that of credit cards and mobile
phone SIM/USIM cards, but they are ﬁnding applications in countries where the
health system is subject to extensive major fraud and where the costs of conventional
treatment of medical data are becoming difﬁcult to manage. The Health Informa-
tion Technology for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act, signed in the
United States in February 2009, encourages stakeholders in the health ecosystem to
work toward the creation of a network (protected health infrastructure) for the col-
lection and exchange of standardized medical data (electronic health record) using
“certiﬁed technology” capable of simultaneously ensuring the availability, sharing,
security, accuracy, and conﬁdentiality of such data. Although not explicitly named,
smart security technologies are at the forefront of this trend: any candidate technol-
ogy must be able to handle the rights of all stakeholders (patients, doctors, nurses,
specialists, pharmacists, and so on), keys and certiﬁcates, means of encryption, and
strong authentication (in some cases, biometric). The American Medical Association
(AMA) has stressed the beneﬁts offered by the use of an SC that stores personal med-
ical information (allergies, blood type, current treatment, and so on), especially in
emergency situations. The Secure ID Coalition, which also campaigns in the United
States for the generalization of personal health cards, observed recently that SCs could
be employed to reduce fraud in health spending of around $370 billion over a period
of just 10 years. Several health SCs have already emerged in the United States as of
press time. For example, LifeNexus4 launched a health card that also serves as a per-
sonal credit card. A bracelet containing a contactless chip (MasterCard PayPass) has
also been issued; the bracelet contains a unique number (VITAnumber5), providing
access in emergencies to the bearer’s personal medical data. Germany was prepar-
ing to launch a new generation of health cards (eGK Generation 1plus) designed
in conjunction with insurance companies for online use. In France, the new CPS3
card for health professionals entered circulation earlier this year; this contactless card
is now in line with the European IAS ECC standard (signature, identiﬁcation, and
authentication) (11).
Other examples of SC/UICC applications include the following as described in
Reference 17 (some of these applications require a high speed dedicated channel
between UICC and terminal):
r The UICC is a control point for device management (DM). DM aims to provide
the protocols and mechanisms to achieve remote management of devices. DM
includes: (a) setting initial conﬁguration information in devices; (b) subsequent
installation and updates of persistent information in devices (ﬁrmware update);
4See previous footnote.
5VITA Products Incorporated’s VITAnumber is a unique numerical identiﬁer printed on a VITAband that is
individually assigned to each user. The VITAnumber links the user to his/her Emergency Response Proﬁle
(ERP). Unlike other ID bracelets, which print all the personal information on the band, the VITAnumber
anonymizes the personal information until it is needed.

SMART CARDS
75
(c) retrieval of management information from devices; and (d) processing events
and alarms generated by devices. In this application, the SC inserted in the device
is expected to: (i) support dynamic provisioning of the device with up-to-date
information and (ii) handle a part of the security during the update of device
ﬁrmware (service access controlled by the operator, authentication of the origin,
and so on). To achieve this, the SC must store DM objects accessible by the
device through the SC to device interface and also manageable by a remote
server (through the device).
r Digital rights management (DRM) and distributed applications. DRM is used to
secure media content owned by a service provider; the end-user has a limited set
of rights to use the content. Usually, media content is supposed to be rendered
on any type of compatible terminal (e.g., CD audio on any CD player) so that
the user can transport his/her content wherever he/she wants. Adding security
should not change this user experience. When the user is a mobile network
operator (MNO) subscriber, the rights are bound to a device, not to a user. This
implies that when the user needs to change the player (i.e., the handset), the
rights have to be downloaded onto the new device and the certiﬁcates are to
be recalculated with the new terminal ID. This scheme works well as long as
a network connection is available and/or the terminal belongs to the same user
domain.
r Multimedia ﬁle management. As the UICC will be able to store and
encrypt/decrypt multimedia ﬁles (such as multimedia message service [MMS],
pictures, MP3 ﬁles, video clips), customer’s usability and quality user experi-
ence cannot be compromised by a too long wait for the data download/upload.
For example, it could be of interest to associate an image, a sound, and even-
tually a short video with the information relative to each contact in order to
display all the images and video when accessing the phonebook.
r Man–machine interface (MMI) on UICC. Large-sized SCs offer the possibility
to store card issuer’s MMI in the UICC. During initialization process, the
terminal can detect the type of UICC (which operator, which service providers,
which features) and upload the whole MMI that the card issuer has deﬁned for
its purposes and its services.
r Real-time multimedia data encryption/decryption. UICC can be used to directly
encrypt/decrypt data stream (such as protected voice communications or
streamed video and music). For example, the user should be able to receive
multimedia ﬁles encrypted using rights stored inside the UICC. Both the con-
tent and its decryption key should be stored in the UICC and also the decryption
process could be executed inside the card. The decrypted content could be
offered via a streaming protocol in order to increase the level of security. In
addition, the user could also store personal contents in the UICC and send them
after having protected them through encryption features of the UICC.
r Storage of terminal applications on the UICC. UICC could be used to store
and distribute applications that could be uploaded by the terminal during the
initialization phase or later. The uploading from the UICC to the terminal
(or vice versa) of the applications should happen dynamically according to

76
INTERNET OF THINGS APPLICATION EXAMPLES
user rights purchased from the operator. This enables efﬁcient management of
operator-related applications on the terminal and easy deployment of innovative
services on the ﬁeld.
r Direct and indirect UICC connection to a PC. As it is now possible for some
devices, it should be possible either to insert a UICC directly into a PC laptop or
to connect the handset to PC laptop in order to download/retrieve some personal
data (MMS, pictures, movies, applications, and so on) to/from the card in a very
quick time but also to easily execute cryptographic operations for accessing a
secure environment (e.g., PKI for e-commerce). The user should consider the
UICC as his/her trusted storage device, ensuring acceptable performances for
the targeted use.
r Web server on SC. UICC can be considered similar to a web server, to which
an Internet connection can be established with a usual Internet browser. Such
a solution removes the needs of deployment of middleware to interface the
functionality of the UICC as standard browsers and protocols would be used
to access UICC contents and applications. Contents will be both stored and
dynamically generated on the SC and then transferred to the terminal: the aim is
to reuse standard graphic features of handsets to allow mobile operators to offer
attractive and secure services. An effective communication interface between
the terminal and the UICC will enhance the web server performances; TCP/IP-
based communication allows internal pages (in the UICC) to be served locally
and remotely using standard protocols and methods.
r Antivirus on UICC. The usage of the UICC as a storage device or the download-
ing on it of new applications and services leads to the need of antivirus running
on the UICC itself, as is the case in a PC environment. The UICC could be able
to perform auto-scan, to update virus signature or manage user rights.
r High priced ticketing scenario. Tickets can be purchased and stored securely on
the UICC. In view of the (medium to) high value of the tickets, the UICC-based
implementation must provide adequate protection mechanisms (e.g., to make
it useless to steal someone’s phone to enter an event). The UICC-based ticket
may need the system to authenticate itself before each ticket can be viewed,
used, or deleted. The ability to view and legitimately and securely transfer
tickets is potentially an added beneﬁt for tickets stored in a UICC (as compared
with a “classical” contactless card). For this type of application, UICC-based
ticketing offers the issuers of these tickets a cheaper way of implementing a
contactless ticketing system. For the user, UICC-based ticketing should offer
a more convenient and secure way to carry ticket and more ﬂexible purchase
experience.
r Payment application. Here the UICC contains the application and data required
for contactless payment application. The terminal containing the UICC in this
scenario has two possibilities: (i) it can act like a contactless payment application
to pay at a contactless-enabled POS; (ii) it can act as a proxy for a payment
account in which a third party performs a debit transaction, passing the payment
to the merchant.

TRACKING (FOLLOWING AND MONITORING MOBILE OBJECTS)
77
r Loyalty application. Here the UICC contains the application and data required
for loyalty application. The terminal containing the UICC can act like a con-
tactless loyalty application at a contactless-enabled POS.
r Healthcare application. Here the UICC contains the application and data
required for a healthcare application. The terminal containing this UICC is
used to store medical and health insurance data. These essential data would be
available whatever the powering mode of the UICC. The use of the contactless
interface may occur in places where strict security or safety rules apply (e.g.,
regulations requiring a terminal to be switched off in a hospital).
The SC Alliance is an advocate for a multitude of applications of SC technology; it
is a not-for-proﬁt, multi-industry association of member ﬁrms working to accelerate
the widespread acceptance of multiple applications for SC technology—the Alliance
membership includes leading companies in banking, ﬁnancial services, computer,
telecommunications, technology, healthcare, retail and entertainment industries, as
well as a number of government agencies.
3.8
TRACKING (FOLLOWING AND MONITORING MOBILE OBJECTS)
Track and trace applications are typical of automotive environments as well as of
goods movement in production environments, distribution, and retail; in the latter
case RFID tags are often utilized. Automotive applications are focused on (i) phys-
ical security for people such as emergency situations, (ii) asset tracking for theft or
law enforcement applications, and (iii) ﬂeet management to achieve increased opera-
tional efﬁciency. Other facets of these services include remote diagnostics, navigation
systems, PAYD (insurance, in-car services), and so on. See Table 3.3, loosely based
on references (5, 13). In these applications, the M2M modules will have to function
in an extended temperature and humidity range; in addition, the connection with the
M2M communication module will have to withstand the vibration produced by the
engine of a car, truck, or construction machinery, as well as by the movement of
the vehicle on the road. Tracking devices are often placed in harsh environments;
this means that may experience strong vibrations or shocks. The space is often very
limited, implying that the size of the M2M communication module needs to be kept
to a minimum.
Tracking (such as vehicles of any kind, containers, people, pets, and so on) is a com-
mon application implemented in conjunction with GPS; it can also be implemented
using cellular technology. GPS is based on a cluster of satellites that continually
send out signals. The satellites orbit the earth approximately every 12 h; the height
of the orbits is about 20,183 km in the MEO (medium earth orbit). See Figure 3.9.
GPS receivers can determine their position based on the time delay between trans-
mission and reception of the signals transmitted by the satellites. The satellites are
arranged on six planes, each of them containing at least four slots where satellites
can be arranged equidistantly. Typically more than 24 GPS satellites orbit the earth
(Russia and Europe are also planning to deploy their own GPS systems). In theory,

78
INTERNET OF THINGS APPLICATION EXAMPLES
TABLE 3.3
Track and Trace Application Examples
Example
Description
Emergency call
The in-vehicle emergency call system can automatically or manually
send location and driver information to an emergency center. The
in-vehicle M2M communication module supports the transfer of
emergency call data between the vehicle and the emergency service
center. The on-board M2M communication module is connected to
sensors that can identify an accident event and in such case set up a
connection to an emergency center forwarding information about the
location, an indication about the level of the accident, and possibly
other additional information. A key requirement for this application
is that the M2M module and its sensors/interfaces are able to survive
and operate after a shock caused by an accident
Fleet management
For this application, a vehicle has a built-in M2M communication
module (typically owned by the service provider not the driver) that
collects information, such as location, timings, trafﬁc jams,
maintenance data, and travel location environmental conditions at any
point along the way. This information is transmitted by the module
via a mobile network to a server application where it is used to track
the vehicle and deliveries. Using real-time information (such as trafﬁc
conditions), a logistics application can optimize the delivery plan and
route; the updated delivery plan is then sent to the vehicle’s driver.
Using maintenance-related information, maintenance can be planned
or remote emergency maintenance can be performed. In addition,
environmental sensors can be used to retrieve information on the
storage environment and condition of product being transported
Theft tracking
In this application, the use of M2M capabilities allows the recovery of a
stolen vehicle. The M2M module supports secure communication
over the network to a third-party entity. The M2M module needs to
be protected against theft and misuse; another factor in this
environment is the often limited space available to conceal or secure
the system from theft and misuse, implying that the size of M2M
modules should be kept small
Person/animal
protection/
tracking
In this application, humans (e.g., workers, healthcare, elderly, or
children) and/or animals are equipped with portable and/or wearable
devices incorporating an M2M communication module that transmits
information (automatically or on demand) to a server application
used to monitor the status and positioning of the subject. Cellular
and/or GPS-based triangularization functions are used. These
services may be implemented via applications residing inside the
M2M module/ UICC
Object protection/
tracking
The purpose of this application is to track and trace. In this application,
objects (e.g., containers, construction equipment, and so on) are
equipped with portable devices containing an M2M communication
module, and optionally a GPS function, which forward location/status
information either automatically or on demand to a server application;
the server can monitor the status and location of those objects

OVER-THE-AIR-PASSIVE SURVEILLANCE/RING OF STEEL
79
FIGURE 3.9
GPS satellites.
three satellites emitting signals are sufﬁcient to determine the precise position and
height; in practice additional satellites are utilized. GPS allows one to establish the
receiver’s position as well as the receiver’s speed and direction (this is done by mea-
suring the Doppler effect or the numerical differentiation of a location according
to time). Figure 3.10 shows a basic service arrangement: the DEP is comprised of
a GPS sensor and a cellular modem; the GPS sensor transfers the position data to
the cell modem and the modem transmits the position data to the DIP via a cellular
network. The positioning data is then manipulated, displayed (e.g., using a map or
GIS—geographic information system), and/or stored as needed.
3.9
OVER-THE-AIR-PASSIVE SURVEILLANCE/RING OF STEEL
Integrated open-air surveillance (IOS) technologies such as high resolution digital
video surveillance (DVS), license plate recognition technology, facial recognition
systems, trafﬁc light cameras, gunshot detection systems (GDSs), aerial surveillance
with drones (UAVs—unmanned aerial vehicles), and other related technologies are
increasingly being put to use to support public safety mandates at a reduced surveil-
lance/interdiction costs for those jurisdictions that deploy the infrastructure, while
at the same time generating revenues for service providers and system integrators.
Open air refers to the fact that the surveillance is done in the public domain; this
type of surveillance can be done, for example, with (i) high resolution (even low
light level) digital video cameras (which can be wired and/or wireless); (ii) license
plate/face recognition technology; (iii) GDSs; and (iv) other related technologies or
sensors. Integrated refers to the internetworking of multiple geographically dispersed

80
INTERNET OF THINGS APPLICATION EXAMPLES
Geolocation
Application
GSM/G3/G4
Network
GSM/G3/G4
Modem
GPS-
Sensor
Data Endpoint
(DEP)
Data
Integration
Point
(DIP)
FIGURE 3.10
Geolocation/tracking application.
systems and multiple technologies with database systems that may archive a variety
of pertinent background data or metadata. IOS technologies make use of both of these
capabilities. Many of these applications can be seen as IoT applications, where the
“things” are the sensors, the cameras, and other related instrumentation.
IOS enables the collection, aggregation, and analysis of factors in physical public
view. This is not identical to the term mass surveillance. Mass surveillance is used to
describe the pervasive surveillance of an entire (or large fraction of the) population.6,7
6Mass surveillance could be done, say, with wiretapping of voice and data communications, metadata
collection, or with other means. We are not covering this topic because different technologies are in play
compared with those used for integrated open-air surveillance: We only make passing mention of this by
noting that recent surveys in about 50 countries suggest that there has been an increase in recent years
in surveillance. For example, there are already mass surveillance (and open-air surveillance) in Taiwan,
Thailand, the United States, Singapore, the United Kingdom, China, Malaysia and Russia, and others.
In 2006, the European Union passed and adopted the Data Retention Directive (Directive 2006/24/EC),
which requires telecommunication companies to retain metadata on telecommunications (e.g., who called
whom, when, how often, etc.) and to keep the collected data at the disposal of governmental agencies for
up to two years. Under this directive, access to the information is not required to be limited to investigation
of serious crimes nor is a warrant required for access.
7The directive requires member states to ensure that communication providers must retain necessary data
as speciﬁed in the directive
r to trace and identify the source of a communication;
r to trace and identify the destination of a communication;
r to identify the date, time, and duration of a communication;
r to identify the type of communication;

OVER-THE-AIR-PASSIVE SURVEILLANCE/RING OF STEEL
81
We focus in this section only on open-air surveillance and not other areas (e.g.,
wiretapping of voice and data communications). Open-air surveillance may be done
either with or without the consent of those under surveillance; it may or may not serve
their interests. The focus of this section, however, is on legitimate law enforcement
applications. There are legitimate legal law enforcement uses of the technology,
but also there are other uses of the technology. Considerations and issues related to
possible surveillance abuse and privacy concerns are not addressed herewith, although
these should not be ignored outright.8
As a backdrop, note that during the 1990s, the City of London, England, deployed
for a security and surveillance an electronic cordon surrounding the city. The popular
name of the system was and remains Ring of Steel. In 2005, the Ring of Steel was
widened to include more businesses in the City. In 2007, New York City announced
plans to install an array of cameras and roadblocks designed to detect, track, and
deter terrorists; this effort is known as the Lower Manhattan Security Initiative,
which is similar to the “Ring of Steel.” The Lower Manhattan Security Initiative
aims at hardening a number of physical “high value target” areas. The New York
Police Department also deployed a system to track every car, truck, or other vehi-
cle entering Manhattan and screen it for radiation or other terror threats; this pro-
posal is called Operation Sentinel and is being developed alongside the Security
Initiative to tighten security throughout lower Manhattan. As of early 2013 Lower
Manhattan reportedly had 3,000 publicly deployed monitoring video cameras. These
cameras are integrated via a system known as Domain Awareness System, that pro-
vides data mining using artiﬁcial intelligence techniques. In the recent past, many
other cities in the United States have made similar announcements. In recent years,
the federal budget sought to increase the amount of money spent on surveillance
technology and programs; the money is being used by state and local govern-
ments to create networks of surveillance cameras to watch over the public in the
streets, shopping centers, at airports, and elsewhere (18–20). At the private level,
many universities are now using camera surveillance systems, including the Uni-
versity of Nevada at Reno, the University of Texas at Austin, and the University of
Pennsylvania (18).
Figure 3.11 depicts a generalized scenario of dispersed equipment such as video
cameras, triangularization devices, and wireless sensors connected over a (multitech-
nology) network to a control/operations center. Connectivity services may include
traditional telephone company facilities, including T1 lines, ﬁberoptic links, metro
r to identify the communication device;
r to identify the location of mobile communication equipment.
The data is required to be available to competent national authorities in speciﬁc cases, “for the purpose
of the investigation, detection and prosecution of serious crime, as deﬁned by each Member State in its
national law.”
8There are advocates that are (strongly) opposed to the idea of surveillance. The reader may wish to consult
the Electronic Privacy Information Center, Spotlight on Surveillance, http://epic.org/, and/or Privacy
International, http://www.privacyinternational.org, for such advocacy.

82
INTERNET OF THINGS APPLICATION EXAMPLES
Connectivity Network
(telco, MPLS, IP,
Cellular 3G/4G)
Control
Center
NOC
Database
Database
FIGURE 3.11
Generalized scenario of dispersed IOS equipment.
Ethernet services, MultiProtocol label switching, Internet services, and wireless links,
including cellular 3G/4G, WiMax, WiFi links, point-to-point microwave, and other
wireless technologies.
IOS’ baseline objective is to create and maintain (through a combination of tech-
nologies and analysis tools) a “crime-free zone” within an urban or suburban envi-
ronment by securing a perimeter both physically and electronically. At this time,
cameras are found in stores, streets, parks, and intersections where police seek to
ticket drivers for running red lights; cameras installed at intersections monitor every
vehicle coming into the city—the cameras capture all license plate numbers.
The recent Law Enforcement success in using video imaging to identify suspects
the Boston Marathon bombing will give further impetus to sustained additional
deployment of IOS-based technologies in general, and video monitoring in particular,
in major U.S. cities and abroad. While the data fusion and data mining will require
large computational (and human) capabilities, the utility of having these data is
self-evident. Face recognition technology will become widespread in the future.

OVER-THE-AIR-PASSIVE SURVEILLANCE/RING OF STEEL
83
Deployments of IOS-like services have seen quantiﬁable success in high crime
areas. IOS proponents and law enforcement personnel often feel that the beneﬁts
“outweigh concern over privacy.” Basic open-air surveillance is increasingly being
undertaken by metropolitan (law enforcement) jurisdictions and by homeland security
agencies: IOS systems are now being deployed in various forms in the United States
and abroad. Cities such as Baltimore, Chicago, and New Orleans have installed
camera surveillance networks with ﬁnancing from the federal government; during
the 2010s, many additional agencies and municipalities have deployed these IOS
capabilities.
IOS functionality, however, can go beyond routine law enforcement and can
provide sensor-based capabilities for toxic chemicals, explosives, and biological
agents; applications include anti-terrorist detection, for example, with a chemical
sensing overlay. Furthermore, with every telephone call, swipe of a card, and click of
a mouse that an individual may make, information is being recorded, compiled, and
stored, and this data is generally available for mining by authorities; while the latter
is not exactly “open air,” it is still affords a somewhat “passive” form of monitoring.
IOS approaches can be taxonomized as follows:
r Public space open-air surveillance: Methods of collecting (any type of) infor-
mation about individuals when they are in any public environment (whether
indoors or outdoors). Examples are people in a crowd, people in the street, cars
with toll tags, and so on.
r Private space open-air surveillance: Methods of collecting (any type of) infor-
mation about individuals when they are in a private environment, typically
indoors. Examples are people in a doctor’s ofﬁce, people at work, and so on.
r Hybrid public/private space open-air surveillance: Methods of collecting (any
type of) information about individuals that crosses both boundaries. Examples
include using cell phones to track movements.
At the macro level, three drivers have been offered for IOS services:
r Detection/prevention of crimes
r Anti-terrorism
r Increased municipal revenue collection via remote monitoring of infractions
Recent events in Boston, Massachusetts, will further fuel sales growth in the $3.2
billion video U.S. surveillance industry, as assessed in 2013; the U.S. market was
projected to grow to $4.1 billion by 2016.
Looking at the ﬁrst driver, for example, some US cities have a high rate of violent
crime, with 2332.6 violent crimes per 100,000 population, compared with a national
average of 454.5 (2008 statistics) (21). Some claim that studies have found that
surveillance systems have limited effect on crime, and that it is more effective to
place more ofﬁcers on the streets and improve lighting in high crime areas (18); law
enforcement entities tend to take the view that services such as the IOS services

84
INTERNET OF THINGS APPLICATION EXAMPLES
described here can be very helpful. San Francisco has given license plate readers to
police as well as to parking control ofﬁcers, allowing them to track cars parked for
too long in one spot; some cities use the cameras to assess anti-congestion tolls on
motorists, while casino bosses get an alert when a high roller—or a cheater—arrives
at the establishment (22).
At this juncture, the apparent goal of metropolitan (law enforcement) jurisdic-
tions and homeland security agencies is to have a capability to support quick turnkey
installations for IOS services. The deployment can be motivated and “sold” to the
appropriate governmental funding agency on the idea that recurring revenue stream
generated by IOS enablement (parking tickets (38), expired registration, suspended
license, bail jumpers) will pay for itself in a matter of months. Most importantly,
criminal activity detection coupled with rapid interdiction can result in the reduction,
migration, and cessation of the same. IOS systems are being positioned by advo-
cates for Homeland Security grant money similar to the approach used for Public
Safety Interoperable Communications (PSIC) grants for state, municipal, and local
jurisdictions.
As noted, the basic model for IOS is based on the concept of Ring of Steel. During
the 1990s, the City of London, England, deployed for a security and surveillance cor-
don surrounding the city to deter identiﬁable threats; the popular name of the system
was and remains Ring of Steel. Under this arrangement, roads entering the city are
narrowed and have small chicanes to force drivers to slow down and be recorded by
interconnected video cameras. A chicane is an obstacle on a racecourse or a series
of tight serpentine curves in a roadway (opposite directions in an otherwise straight
stretch—usually an S-shape curve), used on city streets to slow down trafﬁc. These
roads typically have a concrete median with a sentry box where police can stand guard
and monitor trafﬁc.9 Since February 2003, the London congestion charging zone con-
tains the Ring of Steel and also records all trafﬁc on closed-circuit TV (CCTV). These
measures were introduced following an IRA bombing campaign in the city; during
the 1990s, the sentry posts were guarded by armed police continuously. Following
the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, and other terrorist threats, security has been
stepped up again. In 2005, the Ring of Steel was widened to include more businesses
in the City. London had 200,000 cameras in 2005, and more than 4.3 million cameras
have been deployed throughout the country. (Britain now has a ﬁfth of the cameras
in use around the world—and around 8000 speed cameras.) It is estimated that there
is one camera for every 14 citizens and the typical Briton is seen by 300 cameras per
day—some say the average Briton is being recorded 3,254 times a week inclusively
using a variety of means (the average person living in Britain has that many pieces of
personal information stored about him or her—details about shopping habits, mobile
phone use, emails, locations during the day, journeys and Internet searches—most of
which is kept in databases for years and in some cases indeﬁnitely) (23).
Video surveillance is only one of several technologies and techniques used for
IOS. Much of the technology needed to implement IOS is off-the-shelf; however
9Notwithstanding the term “Ring of Steel,” the roadblocks and chicanes are actually created with concrete
blocks that are wedged together.

OVER-THE-AIR-PASSIVE SURVEILLANCE/RING OF STEEL
85
the integration is novel. Sensor technologies can be upgraded as new and/or afford-
able developments emerge (e.g., EM detection of IEDs, microwave bombardment
using ultra wide band (UWB) methods at stationary and moving structures, etc.). The
potential enhancements to visual detection are numerous (including night vision/IR
sensors, gait analysis, etc.). Constituent technologies that can be deployed in inte-
grated open-air surveillance consist of:
r High resolution (low light level) DVS (wired & wireless). Cameras can be
indoor/outdoor, PTZ (pan, tilt, zoom) and conﬁgured in covert or exposed
modes depending upon deterrent philosophy, ﬁeld conditions, and ﬁeld of view
considerations.
r Outdoor cameras will be physically hardened, vandal–proof and pole, wall
and surface mountable.
r Transport media (copper, ﬁber, wireless) and camera power (wired, solar, bat-
tery) will depend upon physical constraints. Dozens to hundreds of cameras
will be deployed in a scalable architecture.
r Recording can be selective or under all conditions at all times for a given
view.
r These cameras can be remotely controlled by police to PTZ and rotate; have
day and night vision capabilities, and wireless technologies. The cost can be
as high as $60,000 per unit for some complex systems.
r Image processing systems (at the command center) to analyze the video
streams in real time, alert law-enforcement personnel, and detect aberrant behav-
ior (individuals walking erratically, lying prone), imagery of interest (e.g., crowd
gathering, individuals running, etc.) as well as simple motion detection and if
possible facial recognition of “persons of interest.”
r License plate recognition of both parked and moving vehicles (within the ﬁeld
of view) at speeds up to 60 MPH moving past certain checkpoints. This can
be augmented with UPC handheld scanners of registration stickers by roving
patrols.
r GDSs using acoustic triangulation technology (pioneered with great success in
Iraq to ferret out night snipers). GDS will be integrated with DVS so that after
detecting gunﬁre, DVS will “train” on speciﬁc areas viewing in zoom for low
light conditions and initiating event recording.
r Moveable barrier technology to inhibit selectively the movement of people
and vehicle and/or people at designated checkpoints.
r Real-time position reporting system for vehicles, personnel, assets (VPA)
using a combination of GPS, radio triangulation, and other automated vehi-
cle locator (AVL) technologies (sign post transponders/checkpoints); per-
sonnel can be equipped with either or both active transponders/vehicles
also. The tracking can start with inexpensive techniques (available from cell
phone or other portable radio systems) and evolve to military-style resolution
(+/−1 m).

86
INTERNET OF THINGS APPLICATION EXAMPLES
r Computer-aided dispatch will direct VPA to events, targets based on prede-
ﬁned and/or user-deﬁned threat categories/priorities. This can be augmented of
course with AI techniques working off a predeﬁned knowledge base.
r GIS will be overlaid and integrated with photogrammetry and remote sensing
(PRS), as appropriate to identify building structures, natural resources, and
known hazardous materials.
r Interoperability may be needed between different systems to extend coverage
and surveillance area as well as among types of personnel (local police, state
authorities, law enforcement, Ofﬁce of Domestic Preparedness (ODP), and
intelligence types) as well as in some cases the Feds (FEMA, FBI, DEA, ATF,
etc.).
r Traditional covert alarms alerting personnel to events of interest.
r Wireless sensors for detection of toxic chemicals, explosives, and biological
agents, along with sensor networking systems to support a city-wide distributed
environment.
The surveillance ring provided by IOS can be tightened or loosened dynamically by
enabling different regional cameras and/or “illuminating” areas of interest. Table 3.4
(based partially on Reference 23) provides a perspective on data collection, including
“over-the-air” information.
Table 3.5 lists a number of recent examples to illustrate some of the approaches,
issues, and perspectives; this appendix is only illustrative of some announcements in
the past few years; of late, there has been an acceleration in the deployment of IOS
systems across the United States, also including the use of domestic drones.
3.10
CONTROL APPLICATION EXAMPLES
Some other possible examples are discussed below, as described in Reference 5.
Controlling vending machines. Vending machines can be found in a variety of
locations, for example inside ofﬁce or public buildings, outdoors in public places, and
gas stations. The re-stocking and maintenance of vending machines is typically done
manually by staffers that visit the vending machines at regular intervals to check
the re-stock levels, re-stock the machines, and perform any requisite maintenance
functions. The introduction of M2M technology automates vending machine man-
agement: by having access to a (mobile) telecommunication network, the built-in
M2M communication module provides information to the operator about the current
status of the vending machine (e.g., current ﬁll-levels, maintenance status, possible
damages, malfunctions, and so on); as a consequence, the vending machines need
only to be visited when absolutely required.
Controlling production machines. Various industrial processes make use of
dispersed production devices (including but not limited to construction machines,
manufacturing machines, food production machines, and so on). These machines may
be exposed to harsh environments driving repair and maintenance requirements. This

CONTROL APPLICATION EXAMPLES
87
TABLE 3.4
A Perspective on Data Collection
Mobile phones
Every day the average person makes three mobile phone calls and sends
at least two text messages. Each time the network provider logs
information about who was called as well as the caller’s location and
direction of travel, worked out by triangulation from phone towers.
Customers can also have their locations tracked even when they are
not using their phones, as the devices send out unique identifying
signals at regular intervals. All of this information can be accessed by
police and other public authorities investigating crimes
The Internet
Internet service providers (ISPs) compile information about their
customers when they go online, including name, address, the unique
identiﬁcation number for the connection, known as an IP address, any
browser used, and location. They also keep details of emails, such as
whom they were sent to, together with the date and time they were
sent. In 2008, an average of 50 websites are visited and 32 emails sent
per person in Britain every day; very likely these numbers are higher
today (23). Privacy campaigners have expressed concern that the
country’s three biggest ISPs—BT, Virgin Media, and TalkTalk—now
provide this data to a digital advertising company called Phorm so
that it can analyze web surﬁng habits. ISPs are already voluntarily
providing information they hold about their customers if requested by
law-enforcement agencies and public authorities. A total of 520,000
requests were made in the United Kingdom by public ofﬁcials for
telephone and Internet details last year, an increase from around
350,000 the previous year. Internet search engines also compile data
about their users, including the IP address and what was searched for.
Google receives around 68 searches from the average person each
day and stores this data for 18 months. Companies such as Google
and ISPs are building up huge databases of data about Internet users.
These companies may be compelled, through a legal action, to hand
over this information to third parties or the Government, or the
companies may lose the data and it can then be misused
Loyalty cards
Store “loyalty” cards also retain large amounts of information about
individuals who have signed up to use them. They link a person’s
personal details to the outlets used, the transaction times, and how
much is spent. In the case of Nectar cards, which are used by more
than 10 million people in Britain once a week, information from
dozens of shops is compiled, giving a detailed picture of a
cardholder’s shopping habits
Banks
Banks can also be required to hand over personal account information
to the authorities if requested as part of an investigation. They also
provide personal data to credit reference agencies, debt collectors,
and fraud prevention organizations. Debit and credit card transactions
can give information about where and on what people are spending
their money
(continued )

88
INTERNET OF THINGS APPLICATION EXAMPLES
TABLE 3.4
(Continued)
CCTV
The biggest source of surveillance in Britain is through the network of
CCTV (closed-circuit television) cameras. On average, an individual
will appear on 300 CCTV cameras during a day and those tapes are
kept by many organizations for indeﬁnite lengths of time. On the
London Underground network, Transport for London (TfL) keeps
footage for a minimum of 14 days. TfL operates more than 8500
CCTV cameras in its underground stations, 1550 cameras on tube
trains, and up to 60,000 cameras on buses. Britain now has more
CCTV cameras in public spaces than any other country in the world.
A study in 2002 estimated that there were around 4.2 million
cameras, but that number is likely to now be far higher
Number plate
recognition
The latest development in CCTV is the increased use of automatic
number plate recognition systems, which read number plates and
search databases for signs that a vehicle has been used in crime. A
national automatic number plate recognition system is maintained by
the Association of Chief Police Ofﬁcers along motorways and main
roads. Every number plate picked up by the system is stored in a
database with date, time, and location for two years
Public transport
and car toll
cards
Travel passes such as the Oyster Card used in London and the Key card,
in Oxford, can also reveal remarkable amounts of information about
an individual. When they are registered to a person’s name, they
record journey history, dates, times, and fares. The same can be said
about EasyPass (toll) cards for cars
The workplace
Employers are increasingly using radio-tagged security passes for
employees, providing them with information about when staff enter
and leave the ofﬁce
On the street
Car-mounted video-camera passby to record pictures of the street for
Google’s StreetView website
Airports
Miami International Airport is one of a dozen airports in the United
States that have begun pilot-testing whole-body imaging machines,
which reveal weapons and explosives concealed under layers of
clothing. It allows authorities to detect threat objects that are not
metallic and that cannot be detected by metal detectors, and items
that are sometimes missed even in a physical pat-down, in a
nonintrusive manner using millimeter wave technology to create an
image. This technology is being discontinued in some locations due
to privacy concerns (24).
maintenance is typically done by dedicated personnel who have to visit the production
machines at regular intervals to repair, perform maintenance, and identify damages
or malfunction. M2M technologies improve the efﬁciency and optimization of the
operation by allowing access to a mobile telecommunication network to forward
information about the current status of the production machine (e.g., the current
maintenance status, possible damages which may lead to malfunctions, and so on;
additionally it is possible to transmit updates of updated software or perform remote
maintenance).

CONTROL APPLICATION EXAMPLES
89
TABLE 3.5
Recent Examples of IOS Systems; for Illustrative Purposes
New York City,
New York
The New York Police Department is working on a plan to track every
car, truck, or other vehicle entering Manhattan and screen it for
radiation or other terror threats; the proposal, called Operation
Sentinel, is being developed alongside a separate $90 million security
initiative to tighten security throughout lower Manhattan in New
York City. Police ofﬁcials say Operation Sentinel would rely on
license plate readers, radiation detectors, and closed-circuit cameras
installed at the 16 bridges and four tunnels serving Manhattan,
including the Brooklyn and George Washington bridges and the
Lincoln Tunnel. About a million vehicles drive into Manhattan every
day. The vehicle data—license plate numbers, radiological readings,
and photos—would be automatically analyzed by computers
programmed with information about suspicious vehicles. Vehicle
data deemed innocent would be purged from police records after 30
days. The plan calls for 116 ﬁxed and mobile license plate readers
and 3000 closed-circuit cameras monitored by ofﬁcers assigned to a
command center on Broadway (this goal was reportedly achieved as
of early 2013). The plan was modeled in part after the Ring of Steel
surveillance measures in London’s ﬁnancial district. There is no
estimate yet for the cost of Operation Sentinel since it was only in the
planning phase at press time. The proposal has raised red ﬂags for
civil rights advocates, as one might expect (25)
Washington D.C.
For public health and safety reasons D.C. ofﬁcials were planning in
2008 to give police access to more than 5260 CCTV cameras
citywide that monitor trafﬁc, schools, and public housing; this makes
D.C. one of the largest surveillance networks in the country. The
Video Interoperability for Public Safety (VIPS) program aims at
consolidating more than 5200 cameras operated by D.C.
agencies—including D.C. Public Schools and the D.C. Housing
Authority—into one network managed by the city’s Homeland
Security and Emergency Management Agency. The program will
allow agencies to share camera video feeds and provide the city with
a network that is actively monitored and that will operate 24 × 365
days a year. The initiative was expected to enhance the District’s
counter-surveillance and public safety capabilities by increasing the
number of cameras available for authorities to monitor. For example,
225 surveillance cameras in high crime neighborhoods will become
available to police, and other agencies also will have access to 1388
outside cameras and 3874 cameras inside buildings throughout the
city. Nearly 3500 of the cameras are operated by D.C. Public
Schools. The city’s transportation department operates 131 of the
devices, which are normally trained on streets but can swivel (26).
The Police Chief testiﬁed in 2008 that the department’s cameras have
resulted in a 19% reduction in violent crime within 250 feet of the
devices, and a 4% violent crime reduction within 1000 feet. The
District expected to spend an estimated $900,000 in recent years to
operate and staff the consolidated monitoring network
(continued )

90
INTERNET OF THINGS APPLICATION EXAMPLES
TABLE 3.5
(Continued)
In the recent past, D.C. ofﬁcials have placed cameras on light poles,
police cars, and government buildings. But now, they are planning to
put them on street-sweepers in the latest example of increasing
surveillance of city residents. Ofﬁcials will equip the District’s
street-sweeping machines with cameras that can scan license plates
and photograph vehicles illegally parked in a street-sweeping zone.
The cameras will cost approximately $40,000 each and will be placed
initially on two street-sweepers. The city also operates 74
surveillance cameras afﬁxed to light poles and buildings in
neighborhoods as part of an effort to deter crime. Ofﬁcials say that if
20% of motorists violate regulations against parking in blocks
marked for street sweeping in a given month, the city will collect over
$200,000 in additional monthly revenue
Boston
As of mid-2013 the Boston Financial District had about 250 public and
private cameras and dvs to terrorist events that number is expected to
increase over time.
Medina,
Washington
In Medina, a new sign bears this warning: “You Are Entering a 24 Hour
Video Surveillance Area.” Cameras have recently been installed at
intersections to monitor every vehicle coming into the city. Under the
“automatic license plate recognition” project, once a car enters
Medina, a camera captures its license plate number. Within seconds,
the number is run through a database. If a hit comes up for a
felony—say, the vehicle was reported stolen or is being driven by a
homicide suspect—the information is transmitted instantaneously to
police, who can “leap into action.” All captured information is stored
for 60 days—even if nothing negative turns up, he said. That allows
police to mine data if a crime occurs later. The Police Chief has stated
that “These cameras provide us with intelligence; they gets us in front
of criminals.” Medina had discussed the idea for years as a way to
discourage crime (in 2008 there were 11 burglaries). Spokesmen for
the American Civil Liberties Union of Washington argue that such a
system raises the issue of privacy violations but Medina City Council
members state that crime prevention “outweighs concern over
privacy” (27)
Hunts Point,
Washington
Hunts Point has been using a video-camera setup to record a continuous
loop of car trafﬁc in and out of town since 2006. There are eight
cameras in all; pairs of cameras point in four directions. No residents
have ever complained about it. The town has used it for evidence in a
couple of trafﬁc accident cases (27)
Michigan and New
York Borders
The US Border Patrol is erecting 16 more video surveillance towers in
Michigan and New York as part of its plans to use technology to help
secure parts of the United States’ 4000-mile northern border with
Canada. The government awarded the $20 million project to Boeing
Co., the same company responsible for the so-called virtual fence
along the United States–Mexico border that has come under criticism
for faulty technology. Eleven of the towers are being installed in
Detroit and ﬁve in Buffalo, N.Y., to help monitor water trafﬁc
between Canada and the United States along Lake St. Clair and the
Niagara River. At present, Border Patrol agents are posted along the
river to keep an eye on water trafﬁc (28)

CONTROL APPLICATION EXAMPLES
91
TABLE 3.5
(Continued)
Also in Michigan, the City of Flint was looking for sponsors for
surveillance cameras that will be mounted around the city to keep a
watch out for criminals. In exchange for cash, the city will show the
business names next to police logos on the pole-mounted camera
boxes that sport a blue police light that ﬂashes 24 h a day. These
systems are known as PODDS (portable overt digital surveillance
system). The 14 cameras being planned cost around half-a-million
dollars (29)
Illinois, Arizona,
Maryland
Chicago is the US city that has made the most aggressive use of
surveillance technology, has installed more than 2250 cameras in its
“Homeland Security Grid,” which DHS helped ﬁnance, and began
linking the devices into a single network over a 900-mile ﬁber-optic
grid (26). The cameras are linked to an operations center constantly
monitored by police ofﬁcers. Additionally, the State of Illinois has
reportedly considered installing speed cameras in each direction of
every interstate in the 20 State Police districts across the state to raise
$50 million a year in revenue. Currently, camera-equipped vans nab
speeders in construction zones, but state law does not allow speed
cameras on interstates. As of 2013 Chicago authorities had access to
our 10,000 public and private video surveillance cameras. Also,
Cicero, Ill., was planning to install several surveillance cameras with
a grant from Homeland Security
In Arizona, 100 speed cameras were planned to be deployed on
highways at a cost of about $20 million. The state was planning to
raise $90 million a year by imposing $165 ﬁnes on vehicles going 10
mph over the speed limit
Baltimore has used federal grants to ﬁnance its camera system and
a “Watch Center.” The cameras are connected to the state’s existing
highway monitoring cameras, and the plan is for ﬁve counties in
Maryland—Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Carroll, Hartford, and
Howard—to connect with the city’s surveillance system
Florida
A surveillance video program is being implemented in Orlando called
Innovative Response to Improve Safety (IRIS) aimed at detecting
crimes or other incidents and send alerts to law enforcement.
High-tech cameras similar to those used in London will be installed
in busy sections of Orlando to help curb crime. The IRIS cams are
also known as “intelligent cameras.” The ﬁrst 18 of 60 motion-
detecting cameras installed around Orlando will cost about $1.3
million. Orlando is one of the ﬁrst US cities in the nation to get the
high-tech cameras that provide real-time data enabling the police to
send ofﬁcers as soon as they see some activity and we send ofﬁcers to
that activity in a “hot zone”—the legacy technology that is in stores
employs ofﬂine recording (typically for evidence for future use, for
future follow-up, and future investigative purposes); these systems do
all that, but also allow real-time video collection (30)
As of 2013 Orlando police had 138 cameras scattered throughout
the city with more on the way. Police stated that in 2012 the cameras
were used in nearly 800 criminal investigations, leading to more than
100 arrests.
(continued )

92
INTERNET OF THINGS APPLICATION EXAMPLES
TABLE 3.5
(Continued)
The Miami Police Department could soon be the ﬁrst in the United
States to use cutting-edge, spy-in-the-sky technology to beef up their
ﬁght against crime. A small pilotless drone manufactured by
Honeywell International, capable of hovering and “staring” using
electro-optic or infrared sensors, is expected to make its debut soon in
the skies over the Florida Everglades. If use of the drone wins Federal
Aviation Administration approval after tests, the Miami-Dade Police
Department will start ﬂying the 14-pound (6.3 kg) drone over urban
areas with an eye toward full-ﬂedged employment in crime ﬁghting.
It is intended to be used in tactical situations as an extra set of eyes.
The wingless Honeywell aircraft ﬁts into a backpack and is capable
of vertical takeoff and landing. Government agencies acknowledge
the development of a dragonﬂy-sized unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV)
known as the “Insectohopter” for laser-guided spy operations as long
ago as the 1970s. There is reportedly strong interest from law-
enforcement agencies in getting UAVs up and running and smaller
aircrafts are possibly having a “huge economic impact” over the next
10 years (31). (Reportedly there are around 100 different designs of
ﬂying drones currently in use by the US Government.)
Other localities
Tiburon, a town that juts into San Francisco Bay, is planning to use
cameras to record the license plate number of every vehicle that
crosses city limits. Some residents describe the plan as a
commonsense way to thwart thieves, most of whom come from out of
town. The readers, which use character recognition software, can
compare plates to databases of cars that have been stolen or linked to
crimes, then immediately notify police of matches. The project has an
expected price tag of $100,000. Once the street cameras are installed,
hunting a burglary suspect could be easier: ofﬁcials will look for a
plate that came and went and detectives could then check to see if any
of the cars has been linked with crimes in the past. Information on
which cars enter and leave town will be erased within 60 days and
police ofﬁcers will be granted access to the information only during
an investigation. License plate readers have exploded in popularity in
recent years, but Tiburon would be one of the ﬁrst to mount them at
ﬁxed locations—and perhaps the very ﬁrst to record exhaustively
every car coming or going. California Highway Patrol (CHP) ofﬁcials
have put the readers on 18 cruisers and at four ﬁxed locations. CHP
ofﬁcers have seen an increase in recoveries of stolen cars since the
devices were installed, starting in August 2005. Through December
2008, CHP had used the devices to recover 1739 cars and arrest 675
people (22)
In New Orleans, digital camera images are sent to a main server
archive for monitoring, and the Internet-based archive can be
accessed from any location, including police vehicles. Paramus, N.J.,
is launching a pilot camera surveillance system at shopping malls that
will be partially ﬁnanced by federal grants. A federal grant was
expected to help Newport, R.I. pay for the installation of surveillance
cameras. St. Bernard Parish, La., has used federal funds for
surveillance cameras

MYRIAD OTHER APPLICATIONS
93
TABLE 3.5
(Continued)
England
Local newspapers read: “Now snooping on the public has reached new
heights with local authorities putting spy planes in the air to snoop on
homeowners who are wasting too much energy” (32). Thermal
imaging cameras are being used to create color-coded maps that will
enable council ofﬁcers to identify offenders. The aircraft takes
images of homes and businesses, with those losing the most heat
showing up as red, while better insulated properties appear blue. The
City Council has spent £30,000 using a plane carrying a thermal
camera to determine which homes are wasting energy. A scheme is
already underway in Broadland District Council in Norfolk, which
has spent £30,000 hiring a plane with a thermal imaging camera. The
exercise has been so successful that other local authorities are
planning to follow suit.
In England, police could soon use unmanned spyplanes like those
used to track enemy troops in Iraq and Afghanistan for surveillance
operations on British homes. Plans to introduce the UAVs are
outlined in the Home Ofﬁce’s Science and Innovation Strategy. The
Home Ofﬁce has suggested that the remote-controlled drones could
be used to help police gather evidence and track criminals without
putting ofﬁcers at risk. The miniature aircraft could be ﬁtted with
cameras and heat-seeking equipment, allowing police to carry out
aerial reconnaissance from a control room. They also have the beneﬁt
of being quieter than conventional helicopters or spotter planes and
are much cheaper to run due to their fuel economy. Home Ofﬁce’s
Science and Innovation Strategy states that “UAVs are likely to
become an increasingly useful tool for police in the future, potentially
reducing the number of dangerous situations the police may have to
enter and also providing evidence for prosecutions and support police
operations in real time” (33)
In one week, the average person living in Britain has 3254 pieces
of personal information stored about him or her, most of which is
kept in databases for years and in some cases indeﬁnitely. The data
include details about shopping habits, mobile phone use, emails,
locations during the day, journeys, and Internet searches. In many
cases, this information is kept by companies such as banks and shops,
but in certain circumstances they can be asked to hand it over to a
range of legal authorities. The U.K. Government has published plans
to grant local authorities and other public bodies access to the email
and Internet records of millions. Phone companies already retain data
about their customers and (in the United Kingdom, for example) give
it to 650 public bodies on request
3.11
MYRIAD OTHER APPLICATIONS
Many other examples of IoT applications can be cited and many more will evolve
in the future. For example, M2M and SCADA applications are now also being

94
INTERNET OF THINGS APPLICATION EXAMPLES
extended to support over satellite links. Satellite service providers perceive M2M
communications as an approach the global demand for uninterrupted and seamless
data connectivity across a mixture of urban, suburban, exurban, rural, and oceanic
environments: satellite-based M2M can facilitate the delivery of small quantities
of information to and from anywhere in the world. Applications include civil gov-
ernment, environmental monitoring and climate analysis, police and coast guard,
off-shore oil drilling, and mining. Observers are noticing an increased demand for
satellite services from several companies associated with ﬁnance, energy, and mar-
itime industries. Although at press time, satellite-based services were only a small
share of the M2M market which is largely dominated by cellular systems (around 2%
in terms of volume and 6% of revenue in 2011), M2M is a growing segment for the
satellite industry: forecasts say the global satellite M2M market will reach 2.3 billion
EUR by 2016. The region with the highest rate of progress will be the Asia-Paciﬁc
with developments in countries such as China, Indonesia, Vietnam, and India (34).
Proponents make the case that “M2M market represents an interesting and potentially
huge revenue stream for the satellite industry with opportunities in many markets,
particularly vertical ones.” (35).
As another application, Bank of America Corp has been testing a technology that
allows a customer to pay at a store register by simply scanning an image with a
smartphone, such as Apple Inc’s iPhone or Google Inc’s Android devices. This is
similar but not identical to the SC concept described earlier in the chapter. Com-
panies such as, but not limited to, Google and eBay Inc’s PayPal are investigating
ways to turn phones into digital wallets that house credit and debit cards, coupons
and store loyalty program details. The market for global mobile payments was over
$170 billion at press time. Initially Bank of America experimented with NFC tech-
nology, in which a chip installed in a phone transmits a radio signal when it is
waved or tapped at a device at the cash register; newer approaches entail the use of
iPhones and phones that implement the Android operating system (iPhone 5 does
not embed NFC chips). In the bank’s NFC trials, customers stored their payment
information digitally in a secure area on their phone and then paid at a merchant
who kept a device to read the signal from the phone (36). In the latest test, cus-
tomers store their payment cards on a computer server and when they pay, they use
an application on their phone that scans a Quick Response code displayed at the
register.
REFERENCES
1. Lee GM, Park J, Kong N, Crespi N. The Internet of Things – Concept and Problem
Statement. July 2011. Internet Research Task Force, July 11, 2011, draft-lee-iot-problem-
statement-02.txt.
2. Scarrone E, Boswarthick D. Overview of ETSI TC M2M Activities, March 2012, ETSI,
650 Route des Lucioles F-06921 Sophia Antipolis Cedex – France.
3. 3rd Generation Partnership Project, Technical Speciﬁcation Group Services and Sys-
tem Aspects; Service Requirements for Machine Type Communications (MTC); Stage 1
(Release 10); Technical Speciﬁcation 3GPP TS 22.368 V10.1.0 (2010–06).

REFERENCES
95
4. African Utility Week Conference: 22–23 May 2012, Nasrec Expo Centre, Johannesburg.
Available at www.african-utility-week.com.
5. Machine-to-Machine communications (M2M); M2M Service Requirements. ETSI TS 102
689 V1.1.1 (2010–08). ETSI, 650 Route des Lucioles F-06921 Sophia Antipolis Cedex –
France.
6. Drake J, Najewicz D, Watts W. Energy Efﬁciency Comparisons of Wireless Communica-
tion Technology Options for Smart Grid Enabled Devices. White Paper, General Electric
Company, GE Appliances & Lighting, December 9, 2010.
7. ETSI TR 102 732: Machine to Machine Communications (M2M); Use Cases of M2M
Applications for eHealth. (2011–03). ETSI, 650 Route des Lucioles F-06921 Sophia
Antipolis Cedex – France.
8. ETSI TR 101 557 V1.1.1 (2012–02), Electromagnetic Compatibility and Radio Spectrum
Matters (ERM); System Reference document (SRdoc); Medical Body Area Network
Systems (MBANSs) in the 1785 MHz to 2500 MHz range.
9. Staff. FCC Chairman Unveils Proposal to Spur Innovation in Medical Body Area Net-
works, to Transform Patient Care, and Lower Health Care Costs. May 17, 2012, Federal
Communications Commission, 445 12th Street SW, Washington, DC 20554.
10. ZigBee Wireless Sensor Applications for Health, Wellness and Fitness, March 2009,
ZigBee Alliance. Available at www.zigbee.org.
11. Staff. Smart Cards, Mobile Telephony and M2M at the Heart of e-health Services. CARTES
& IDentiﬁcation Conference, Parc des Expositions Paris-Nord Villepinte, November, 2011.
12. ETSI TR 102 897: Machine to Machine Communications (M2M); Use Cases of M2M
Applications for City Automation. (2010-01). ETSI, 650 Route des Lucioles F-06921
Sophia Antipolis Cedex – France.
13. ETSI TR 102 898: Machine to Machine Communications (M2M); Use Cases of Automo-
tive Applications in M2M Capable Networks. (2010-09). ETSI, 650 Route des Lucioles
F-06921 Sophia Antipolis Cedex – France.
14. Smart Card Alliance. Contactless Technology for Secure Physical Access: Technology
and Standards Choices. Smart Card Alliance Report, October 2002, Publication Number:
ID-02002, Princeton Junction, New Jersey.
15. Hancke G. A Practical Relay Attack on ISO 14443 Proximity Cards. White Paper, July
2008, University of Cambridge, Computer Laboratory JJ Thomson Avenue, Cambridge,
CB3 0FD, UK.
16. Promotional Material of NearFieldCommunication.org. Available at www.nearﬁeld
communication.org.
17. ETSI TS 102 412: Smart Cards; Smart Card Platform Requirements Stage 1 (Release 8).
(2007-07). ETSI, 650 Route des Lucioles F-06921 Sophia Antipolis Cedex – France.
18. Electronic Privacy Information Center, Spotlight on Surveillance, More Cities Deploy
Camera Surveillance Systems with Federal Grant Money, May 2005, Washington, D.C.
Available at http://epic.org/.
19. Department of Homeland Security, Budget-in-Brief Fiscal Year 2006, at 81-82 (Feb. 7,
2005).Available at http://www.epic.org/privacy/surveillance/spotlight/0505/dhsb06.pdf.
20. Rotenberg M, Laurant C. Privacy and Human Rights: An International Survey of Privacy
Laws and Developments, EPIC and Privacy International 2004 (EPIC 2004).
21. O’Leary-Morgan K, Morgan S, Boba R, editors, City Crime Rankings 2009—2010. Wash-
ington, DC: CQ Press, A Division of SAGE; November 23, 2009.

96
INTERNET OF THINGS APPLICATION EXAMPLES
22. Bulwa D. Tiburon May Install License Plate Cameras. San Francisco Chronicle; July 10,
2009.
23. Gray R. How big brother watches your every move. The Sunday Telegraph, 16 Aug 2008.
24. Cordle IP. Miami Airport Security Cameras see Through Clothing. Miami Herald, July
22, 2008.
25. AP/Crain’s New York, NYPD Planning to Track Every Vehicle in Manhattan. August 18,
2008.
26. Washington Times. D.C. Police Set to Monitor 5,000 Cameras. April 9, 2008.
27. Krishnan S. Cameras Keep Track of all Cars Entering Medina. Seattle Times, September
16, 2009.
28. Sullivan E. Surveillance Towers Planned for Detroit, Buffalo, AP, March 31, 2009.
29. Foren J. Flint seeks sponsors for police surveillance cameras. Flint Journal, July 30, 2008.
30. Local6.com. Orlando Surveillance Cams Will Detect Motion, Alert In Real-Time. June
23, 2008.
31. Brown T. Spy-in-the-sky Drone Sets Sights on Miami. Reuters, March 26, 2008.
32. Levy A. Council Uses Spy Plane with Thermal Imaging Camera to Snoop on Homes
Wasting Energy. Daily Mail, 24th March 2009.
33. Wardrop M. Remote-controlled Planes Could Spy on British Homes. The Sunday Tele-
graph, 24 Feb 2009.
34. IDATE. The Satellite M2M Market 2012–2016. Report, IDATE Consulting & Research,
April 23, 2012, London, UK.
35. Staff. Satellite M2M: An Emerging Revenue Stream, September/October 2010. Available
at www.satellite-evolution.com.
36. Rothacker R. Bank of America Tests Technology to Pay with Phones. Reuters, October 1,
2012.
37. Jung N-J, Yang I-K, Park S-W, Lee S-Y. “A design of AMI protocols for two way commu-
nication in K-AMI”, Control, Automation and Systems (ICCAS), Conference Proceedings
2011 11th international Conference on, Date of Conference: 26-29 Oct. 2011, S/W Center,
KEPCO Res. Inst., Daejeon, South Korea, Page(s): 1011–1016.
38. Washington Times. Street-sweeper Cameras Eye Illegal Parking. April 2, 2008.
39. Kingsley S, “Personal body networks go wireless at 2.4GHZ”, ElectronicsWeekly Online
Magazine, 16 May 2012, http://www.electronicsweekly.com.

CHAPTER 4
FUNDAMENTAL IoT MECHANISMS
AND KEY TECHNOLOGIES
This chapter looks brieﬂy at some fundamental issues and technologies that have to
be considered in the context of Internet of things (IoT) design and deployment. In
fact, there are indeed many issues that have to be considered; only a small set of
such issues are covered here as a way to highlight some of the underlying logical
and technological infrastructure needed. A hybrid view of the IoT both as a service
(application) concept and as an infrastructure is utilized in this discussion.
4.1
IDENTIFICATION OF IoT OBJECTS AND SERVICES
There are a number of key underpinning issues that come into play in the (architec-
tural) design and ﬁeld deployment of IoT applications. The discussion that follows
is synthesized from a number of published documents including References 1–3
among others.
An important ﬁrst issue is the identiﬁcation of objects and services. There are
various types of identiﬁers with different purposes and practicality. Globally unique
identiﬁers are highly desirable. Identiﬁcation codes can be classiﬁed as (i) object
IDs (OIDs) and (ii) communication IDs. Examples of the former include but are
not limited to radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID)/electronic product code (EPC),
Building the Internet of Things with IPv6 and MIPv6: The Evolving World of M2M Communications,
First Edition. Daniel Minoli.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
97

98
FUNDAMENTAL IoT MECHANISMS AND KEY TECHNOLOGIES
content ID,1 telephone number, and uniform resource identiﬁer (URI)/uniform
resource locator (URL); examples of the latter include media access control (MAC)
address, network layer/IP address, and session/protocol ID. A number of researchers
advocate deﬁning an identity layer for objects that is logically independent of the
networking addresses; according to these proponents, the IoT should be identity
oriented. One such practical, but not necessarily elegant, approach might be to use
RFIDs physically attached to the objects in question that would act as electronic ID
for objects to which they are linked.
Among other identiﬁcation approaches, one can use the general approach brieﬂy
described in Chapter 1. There we noted that it is both desirable and feasible for all
objects to have a permanent unique identiﬁer, an OID. It is also desirable as well
as feasible for all end-point network locations and/or intermediary-point network
locations to have a durable, unique network address (NAdr); the IPv6 address space
enables the concrete realization of these location identiﬁcation goals. When objects
that have enough intelligence to run a communications protocol stack (so that they
can communicate), are placed on a network, these objects can be tagged with a NAdr.
Every object then has a tuple (OID, NAdr) that is always unique, although the
second entry of the tuple may change with time, location, or situation. In a stationary,
non-variable, or mostly static environment, one could opt, if one so chose, to assign
the OID to be identical to the NAdr where the object is expected to attach to the
network; that is, the object inherits the tuple (NAdr, NAdr). In the rare case where
the object moved, the OID could then be refreshed to the address of the new location;
that is, the object then inherits the tuple (NAdr’, NAdr’). However, there is a general
trend toward object mobility, giving rise to a dynamic environment; hence, to retain
maximal ﬂexibility, it is best to separate, in principle, the OID from the NAdr and thus
assign a general (OID, NAdr) tuple where the OID is completely invariant; however,
the OID can still be drawn from the NAdr space, that is, from the IPv6 address space.
The basic requirement for an identiﬁcation scheme is that it affords global unique-
ness. Additionally, it is useful to have mechanisms for hierarchical grouping to deal
with large populations. The aggregation feature of IPv6 address provides such hier-
archical grouping. For a number of applications, there is a need to map/bind IP
addresses (communications IDs) with other relevant OIDs. Additionally, modern
layered communication architectures also require addressing and processing capa-
bilities at several layers, for example, at the Data Link Layer, at the Network Layer,
at the Transport (Protocol ID), and at the session/application layer. Naturally, there
is also a desire for simplicity. Some argue that different identiﬁcation schemes are
required for different applications. For example, the information related to things
such as books, medicine, and clothes may not require global identiﬁcation because
revocation lists are required (e.g., some objects may eventually be consumed and/or
destroyed).
1The content ID, deﬁned by the Content ID Forum, is an identiﬁer that is typically attached to a content-
based object. It can specify and distinguish digital content, being a complete set of attribute information
about a content object stored as metadata including, among other aspects, the nature of the contents,
rights-related information, and information about distribution.

IDENTIFICATION OF IoT OBJECTS AND SERVICES
99
An example of IDs for objects is the above-mentioned EPC used in the
RFID/sensor context. An EPC is a number assigned to an RFID tag representa-
tive of an actual EPC. Their value is that they have been carefully characterized
and categorized to embed certain meanings within their structure. Each number is
encoded with a header, identifying the particular EPC version used for coding the
entire EPC number. An EPC manager number is deﬁned, allowing individual com-
panies or organizations to be uniquely identiﬁed; an object class number is present,
identifying objects used within this organization, such as product types. Finally, a
serial number is characterized, allowing the unique identiﬁcation of each individual
object tagged by the organization (4). An EPC is a unique identiﬁcation code that
is generally thought of as the next generation of the traditional bar code. Like the
bar code, EPC uses a numerical system for product identiﬁcation, but its capabilities
are much greater. An EPC is actually a number that can be associated with speciﬁc
product information, such as date of manufacture and origin and destination of ship-
ment. This provides signiﬁcant advantages for businesses and consumers. The EPC is
stored on an RFID tag, which transmits data when prompted by a signal emitted by a
special reader. Note that EPC and RFID are not interchangeable—there are numerous
RFID applications that have nothing to do with the EPC, such as E-Z Pass use at
tollbooths (5).
In addition to OID, there may be a need for object naming. Domain name system
(DNS) is one example of a mechanism for Internet-based naming; however, currently
one only identiﬁes the speciﬁc server in which the contents are stored; the data itself
is not named. In the IoT context, some proponents have argued for the advantages
of identifying information by name, not by node address. DNS is used to map
the “human-friendly” host names of computers to their corresponding “machine-
friendly” IP addresses. Hence, one is able, for example, to access the server (or large
farm of servers) of CNN, Google, and so on, simply by the term www.cnn.com and
so on. To some large degree, object name service (ONS) will also be important in the
IoT to map the “thing-friendly” names of object which may belong to heterogeneous
name spaces (e.g., EPC, uCode, and any other self-deﬁned code) on different networks
(e.g., TCP/IP network) into their corresponding “machine-friendly” addresses or other
related information of another TCP/IP network (1). However, a “thing” or an object
in an IoT world may be a lot more mundane and modest in scope/function (say, than
CNN, Citibank, United Airlines, Ford), such that it does not need to have its own
name, since very few people may be interested in that speciﬁc thing. For example,
a large villa may have, for argument’s safe, a dozen security sensors. While it is
true that they could be named “Smith-villa-front-door sensor,” “Smith-villa-front-
gate sensor,” “Smith-villa-back-door sensor,” “Smith-villa-garage-door sensor,” very
few people besides Mr. Smith or Mr. Smith’s security company will ever want to
speciﬁcally identify these objects by name. Nonetheless, object naming service for
IoT applications needs to be developed, at least for a set of applications.
For some applications, especially where there is a need for simple end-user visibil-
ity of a small set of objects (i.e., where the objects are few and discretely identiﬁable –
a home’s thermostat, a home’s refrigerator, a home’s lighting system, a pet of the
owner), the object may be identiﬁed through Web Services (WSs). WSs provide

100
FUNDAMENTAL IoT MECHANISMS AND KEY TECHNOLOGIES
standard infrastructure for data exchange between two different distributed applica-
tions. Lightweight WS protocols are of interest; for example, the representational
state transfer (REST) interface may be useful in this context. REST is a software
architecture for distributed systems to implement WSs. REST is gaining popularity
compared with more classical protocols such as simple object access protocol (SOAP)
and web services description language (WSDL) due to its relative simplicity.
Given the potential pervasive nature of IoT objects and IoT applications (e.g.,
grid control, home control, trafﬁc control, and medical monitoring), security and
privacy in communications and services become absolutely critical. Security needs
to be intrinsically included in protocol development, and not just be a catch-up after-
thought. The plethora of heterogeneous devices now connected to the Internet, from
traditional PCs and laptops, to smartphones and Bluetooth-enabled devices, to name
just a few, aggravates the risk. Strong authentication, encryption while transmitting,
and also encryptions for data at rest is ideal; however, the computational requirements
for encryption can be signiﬁcant. Furthermore, at the central/authenticating site, rapid
authentication support is desirable; otherwise objects would not be able to authenticate
in large-population environments.
In some IoT applications, as discussed in Chapter 3, there is a need to know the
precise physical location of objects; thus, the challenge is how to cost-effectively
obtain location information; methods that rely on GPS or cellular services may be
too expensive for some applications. In some cases, objects move independently; in
other cases, the objects move as the one group. Different tracking methods may be
required to achieve efﬁcient handling of tracking information. That is, if a group of
objects is known to move as an ensemble (say, a myriad of sensors on a cruise ship; or,
multiple medical monitors on an individual, as part of a medical body area network
(MBAN) with one gateway controller), then one needs only to ﬁgure out where one
object is, and the rest of the objects is then in the same relative position. Typically,
there is a need to maintain ubiquitous and seamless communication while tracking
the location of objects.
Capabilities for scalability are important in order to be able to support an IoT
environment where there is a large population that is highly distributed. Solutions
are necessary in the arena of distributed networking. For example, the IAB’s October
2006 Routing and Addressing Workshop (RFC 4984) refocused interest in scalable
routing and addressing architectures for the Internet. Among the many issues driv-
ing this renewed interest are concerns about the scalability of the routing system.
Proposals have been made recently based on the “locator/identiﬁer separation.” The
basic idea behind the separation is that the Internet architecture combines two func-
tions, routing locators (where one is attached to the network) and identiﬁers (where
one is located), in one number space: the IP address. Proponents of the separation
architecture postulate that splitting these functions apart will yield several advan-
tages, including improved scalability for the routing system. The separation aims
to decouple locators and identiﬁers, thus allowing for efﬁcient aggregation of the
routing locator space and providing persistent identiﬁers in the identiﬁer space. The
locator/ID separation protocol (LISP) IETF Working Group (WG) has completed
the ﬁrst set of experimental RFCs describing the LISP. LISP requires no changes to

STRUCTURAL ASPECTS OF THE IoT
101
end-systems or to routers that do not directly participate in the LISP deployment.
LISP aims for an incrementally deployable protocol. The LISP WG is working on
deliverables for the 2012/2013 time frame that include (i) an architecture description,
(ii) deployment models, (iii) a description of the impacts of LISP, (iv) LISP security
threats and solutions, (v) allocation of end-point identiﬁer (EID) space, (vi) alternate
mapping system designs, and (vii) data models for management of LISP. The ﬁrst
three items (architecture, deployment models, and impacts) need to be completed ﬁrst
before other items can be submitted as RFCs (2). Shim6 (RFCs 5533 through 5535)
is another example of possible interest. This protocol is a layer 3 shim for providing
locator agility with failover capabilities for IPv6 nodes. Hosts that employ Shim6 use
multiple IPv6 address preﬁxes and setup state with peer hosts. This state can later be
used to failover to a different set of locators, should the original locators stop work-
ing. The Shim6 approach has a number of advantages, such as enabling small sites to
be multihomed without requiring a provider-independent IPv6 address preﬁx for the
site. However, the approach has also been criticized, for example, for the operational
impacts that the use of multiple preﬁxes causes; at this time, there is no clear view
on how well Shim6 works in practice, and implementation and deployment in select
networks is needed to determine its true characteristics (3).
4.2
STRUCTURAL ASPECTS OF THE IoT
Some key structural related desiderata are highlighted in this section; these issues
ultimately may determine the extent and/or rapidity of deployment of IoT services
and technologies. This list is not exhaustive.
4.2.1
Environment Characteristics
As we have seen at various points in this text, most (but certainly not all) IoT/machine-
to-machine (M2M) nodes have noteworthy design constraints, such as but not limited
to the following (6):
r Low power (with the requirement that they will run potentially for years on
batteries)
r Low cost (total device cost in single-digit dollars)
r Signiﬁcantly more devices than in a LAN environment
r Severely limited code and RAM space (e.g., generally desirable to ﬁt the
required code—MAC, IP, and anything else needed to execute the embedded
application—in, for example, 32K of ﬂash memory, using 8-bit microproces-
sors)
r Unobtrusive but very different user interface for conﬁguration (e.g., using ges-
tures or interactions involving the physical world)
r Requirement for simple wireless communication technology. In particular, the
IEEE 802.15.4 standard is very promising for the lower (physical and link)
layers

102
FUNDAMENTAL IoT MECHANISMS AND KEY TECHNOLOGIES
TABLE 4.1
Properties and Requirements of M2M Applications
ITS
e-Health
Surveillance
Smart Meters
Mobility
Vehicular
Pedestrian/
vehicular
None
None
Message size
Medium
Medium?
Large
Small (few kB)
Trafﬁc pattern
Regular/
irregular
Regular/
irregular
Regular
Regular
Device density
High
Medium
Low
Very high (up to
10,000 per cell)
Latency
requirements
Very high (few
milliseconds)
Medium
(seconds)
Medium
(<200 ms)
Low (up to hours)
Power
efﬁciency
requirements
Low
High (battery
power
devices)
Low
High (battery-
powered
meters)
Reliability
High
High
Medium
High
Security
requirements
Very high
Very high
Medium
High
Courtesy: A. Maeder, NEC Laboratories Europe.
4.2.2
Trafﬁc Characteristics
The characteristics of IoT/M2M communication is different from other types of net-
works or applications. For example, cellular mobile networks are designed for human
communication and communication is connection centric; it entails interactive com-
munication between humans (voice, video), or data communication involving humans
(web browsing, ﬁle downloads, and so on). It follows that cellular mobile networks
are optimized for trafﬁc characteristics of human-based communication and appli-
cations. Speciﬁcally, communication takes place with a certain length (sessions) and
data volume; furthermore, communication takes place with a certain interaction fre-
quency and patterns (talk-listen, download-reading, and so on) (7). On the other hand,
in M2M the expectation is that there are many devices, there will be long idle inter-
vals, transmission entails small messages, there may be relaxed delay requirements,
and device energy efﬁciency is paramount. Table 4.1 depicts some key properties and
requirements of M2M applications.
4.2.3
Scalability
While some applications (e.g., smart grid, home automation, and so on) may start
out covering a small geographic area or a small community of users, as noted above,
there invariably will be a desire over time for the service to expand, in order to make
such service more cost-effective on a per-unit basis, or to have sufﬁcient critical mass
for developers to be motivated to invest resources to add capabilities to the service.
When contemplating expansion, one wants to be able to build on previously deployed
technology (systems, protocols), without having to scrap the system and start from
scratch. Also, the efﬁciency of a larger system should be better than the efﬁciency of
a smaller system. This is what is meant by scalability. The goal is to make sure that

KEY IoT TECHNOLOGIES
103
capabilities such as addressing, communication, and service discovery, among others,
are delivered efﬁciently in both small and large scale. There is a need for enough
name space to support increasing populations of devices and new applications. In
particular, note that IPv6 is an ideal component (but not the only one) to be employed
to support scalability, both for a given application as it reaches more users and for
use for a wide class of applications spanning many ﬁelds (as described in Chapter 3).
4.2.4
Interoperability
Because of the plethora of applications, technology suppliers, and stakeholders, it
is desirable to develop and/or re-use a core set of common standards. To the degree
possible, existing standards may prove advantageous to a rapid and cost-effective
deployment of the technology. Product and service interoperability is of interest.
4.2.5
Security and Privacy
Unfortunately, security is chronically an after-thought when it comes to protocol
development: almost invariably a protocol spec will have many pages of data format
and operation procedures and only a short paragraph or two on security considerations.
When IoT relates to electric power distribution, goods distribution, transport and
trafﬁc management, e-health, and other key applications, as noted earlier, it is critical
to maintain system-wide conﬁdentiality, identity integrity, and trustworthiness.
4.2.6
Open Architecture
The goal is to support a wide range of applications using a common infrastructure,
preferably based on a service-oriented architecture (SOA) over an open service plat-
form, and utilizing overly networks (these being logical networks deﬁned on top of a
physical infrastructure). In an SOA environment, objects expose their functionalities
using a protocol such as SOAP or REST application programming interface (API).
These devices may provide their functionality as a WS that can in turn be used by
other entities (other devices or other business applications).
4.3
KEY IoT TECHNOLOGIES
There are a number of key supportive technologies that are needed for wide-scale
deployment of IoT applications. This list is not exhaustive.
4.3.1
Device Intelligence
A key consideration relates to on-board intelligence. In order for the IoT to become
a reality, the objects should be able to intelligently sense and interact with the envi-
ronment, possibly store some passive or acquired data, and communicate with the
world around them. Object-to-gateway device communication, or even direct object-
to-object communication, is desirable. These intelligent capabilities are necessary to
support the ubiquitous networking to provide seamlessly interconnection between

104
FUNDAMENTAL IoT MECHANISMS AND KEY TECHNOLOGIES
humans and objects. Some have called this mode of communication Any Services,
Any Time, Any Where, Any Devices, and Any Networks (also known as “5-Any”) (1).
Pervasive computing (also known as ubiquitous computing) deals with the embedded
ability to support logical processing as well with the ability to be in continuous range
of a wireless gateway peer.
4.3.2
Communication Capabilities
As just noted, it is highly desirable for objects to support ubiquitous end-to-end
communications; hence, another technological consideration relates to communica-
tion mechanisms. To achieve ubiquitous connectivity human-to-object and object-to-
object communications, networking capabilities will need to be implemented in the
objects (“things”). In particular, IP is considered to be key capability for IoT objects;
furthermore, the entire TCP/IP Internet Suite is generally desirable. Self-conﬁguring
capabilities, especially how an IoT device can establish its connectivity automati-
cally without human intervention, are also of interest. IPv6 auto-conﬁguration and
multihoming features are useful in this context, particularly the scope-based IPv6
addressing features.
While we have discussed objects that have sophisticated capabilities (IP support,
IPv6 support, Web server capabilities, and so on) in the past few paragraphs, some
applications, especially those using simple sensors and/or where is there a very large
number of dispersed sensors and/or where there is limited remote energizing power,
may have a need to support leaner protocols both at the network layer (e.g., route
and/or topology management) and at the transport layer (e.g., using UDP). This
may entail some extensions of existing networking protocols to achieve a level of
simplicity and minimize power consumption. For constrained objects that do not have
high levels of energizing power, memory, and/or computing, lightweight protocols
that minimize energy consumption is a desiderata; however, one needs to keep in
mind that these protocols may not have enough capabilities to support advanced
applications. It should be noted that some existing applications may not even support
the IP protocol (even IPv4) and the IP addressing scheme. Hence, there is a need
to support heterogeneous (IP and non-IP) networking interfaces, at least in the short
term. There may be a need for proxy gateways; such gateways would support multiple
interfaces that have evolved from different heterogeneous networks. Interoperability
among heterogeneous interfaces can facilitate commercial deployment.
4.3.3
Mobility Support
Yet another consideration relates to tracking and mobility support of mobile object (1).
Mobility-enabled architectures and protocols are required. Some objects move inde-
pendently, while others will move as one of group. Therefore, according to the moving
feature, different tracking methods are required. It is important to provide ubiquitous
and seamless communication among objects while tracking the location of objects.
Mobile IPv6 (MIPv6) offers several capabilities that can address this requirement.

KEY IoT TECHNOLOGIES
105
4.3.4
Device Power
A key consideration relates to the powering of the “thing,” especially for mobile
devices or for devices that otherwise would not have intrinsic power. M2M/IoT
applications are almost invariably constrained by the following factors: devices have
ultra-low-power capabilities, devices must be of low cost, and devices generally
must have small physical size and be light. Speciﬁcally, efﬁcient communication
mechanisms are needed. A number of devices operate with a small battery, while
other devices use a self-energizing energy source, for example a small solar cell
array. Yet other devises are passive (e.g., passive RFID) and, thus, need to derive
energy indirectly from the environment, such as an intercepting electric/magnetic
ﬁeld. The power requirement is driven by the need to operate for extended periods
of time from small batteries or from energy-scavenger mechanisms. In general,
wireless technologies require signiﬁcant amounts of power; hence, the need for low
energy (LE) wireless technologies, as discussed in Chapter 6. Batteries are critical
to all sorts of products including laptops, pads, smartphones, and IoT objects. The
so-called “coin batteries,” also known as “button batteries,” are typical in many
IoT applications.
In recent years, battery technology has seen a doubling in performance approx-
imately every 10 (some say 15) years. Unfortunately, battery technology does not
follow Moore’s Law which observes empirically that computer chips double in per-
formance and drop their price 50% every 18 to 24 months.
Batteries convert chemical energy released in particular chemical reactions into
electrical energy. Batteries have a positive and a negative electrode (the cathode
and the anode), separated by an electrolyte. When the electrodes are connected to
a closed circuit, a series of chemical reactions occurs such that at one end charged
particles (ions) from the electrolyte ﬂow to the anode, react, and free up electrons;
at the other end, reactions at the cathode attract free electrons. Thus, electrons at
the anode move to the cathode and the ﬂow of electrons through the electric circuit
creates an electric current—the electrolyte also prevents the electrons from taking the
shortest direct path, instead forcing them through the attached circuit. In rechargeable
batteries, the reactions are reversible, with the ions and electrons ﬂowing back in
the opposite direction during charging. Batteries can be classiﬁed into primary and
secondary systems (8). Primary batteries are disposable batteries, that is, batteries
that cannot be recharged, and their conversion of chemical energy into electrical
energy is irreversible (the chemicals are consumed while the battery discharges).
Secondary batteries can be recharged, and the electrode material is reconstituted
using an electric charge, so that discharge process can be repeated a number of times
during the lifecycle of the battery.
The most common primary systems are alkaline, lithium, and metal/air batteries.
Among secondary batteries, lead acid, nickel/cadmium (NiCd), nickel/metal hybrid
(NiMH), and lithium-ion (Liion)/lithium-polymer (Li-polymer) batteries dominate
the market, but efforts are constantly being made to ﬁnd new systems that can match
or exceed the performance of existing systems, improve their safety, and reduce
their cost.

106
FUNDAMENTAL IoT MECHANISMS AND KEY TECHNOLOGIES
Rechargeable Liion batteries have an anode comprising carbon (e.g., graphite), a
metal oxide cathode, and an electrolyte containing lithium salt. It is relatively easy to
peel ions from lithium metal. The widespread deployment of this battery technology
is due to the fact that the resulting batteries are lightweight, have a high energy
density, hold their charge better than other batteries, and they do not suffer from the
“memory effect,” where batteries hold less and less charge over time if they are not
drained and then recharged completely. The technology became popular in the early
1990s, replacing the nickel cadmium predecessors. In recent years, manufacturers
have improved battery performance by applying enhanced engineering, optimizing
the structures, and/or adding new materials inside the battery to make them more
efﬁcient. While battery technology is evolving, Liion batteries will continue to be
important for the foreseeable future.
Materials such as silicon and others are being studied as possible replacement of
the graphite anodes in Liion batteries. Silicon is of interest because it is inexpensive, it
is abundant, and, by weight, it can store 10 times more lithium ions than graphite; this
implies that it could theoretically allow a 10-fold increase in performance. However,
to be useful, researchers must overcome a problem: while graphite anodes hold their
shape when they soak up lithium ions, silicon swells, causing silicon particles to
become separated, quickly reducing the performance of the battery. There is work
underway to address this challenge, for example, by developing rubbery conductive
binders that stick to the silicon particles within the anode, stretching and shrinking as
the battery is charged and discharged. Others are looking to develop Liion batteries
with anodes containing silicon nanowires. We are also starting to see a research on
totally different chemistries. One example is lithium–air batteries with anodes made
of lightweight porous carbon. Oxygen from the air enters the porous carbon and
reacts with the lithium ions in the electrolyte and electrons in the external circuit to
form solid lithium oxide. Recharging causes the lithium compound to decompose,
releasing the lithium ions and releasing the oxygen; calculations of the amount of
energy involved in the chemical reactions involved suggest it could produce batteries
that last three to ﬁve times as long as existing Liion batteries. Other researchers are
also investigating lightweight lithium–sulfur packs, which have a life span of three
times that of current Liion batteries. Research work is proceeding on these and other
technologies (9). However, these advances represent only incremental improvements
in performance. New materials may be needed to make a quantum leap forward.
MIT’s Materials Project has already identiﬁed four new materials with the potential
to be used in batteries. For example, the use of magnesium metal anode could result
into a three-fold energy density compared with the best Liion batteries; furthermore
these magnesium-ion batteries hold the majority of their charge over 3000 charge
cycles. The technology, however, is not ready for widespread commercialization.
Another approach is the fuel cell, which is a proven technology since they were
used to power electronics of the Gemini and Apollo space missions. Fuel cells convert
chemical energy into electricity by converting the chemical energy from a fuel (e.g.,
alcohol) into electricity through a chemical reaction with oxygen. Fuel cells have a
high energy density: hydrogen contains nearly 150 times the energy of an equivalent
weight of lithium. However, to be practical, they need to be small and have an easily

KEY IoT TECHNOLOGIES
107
rechargeable reservoir for fuel. Microelectromechanical system (MEMS) technology
is being investigated for this purpose. MEMSs are miniaturized mechanical devices
that are already used in solar cells and ﬂat-screen TVs. Currently, the technology
is expensive because precious metals such as platinum and palladium are used;
companies such as, but not limited to, NEC, Toshiba, and Apple are continuing
substantive research in the ﬁeld.
Some evolving technologies use small solar panels embedded in the screen of a
smartphone or object; other systems may use kinetic devices that translate movement
of objects into an electric current. Solar cells are an example of an energy harvester,
but they are for low efﬁciency when converting ambient light into useful electrical
energy. A 3 cm2 solar cell (dimensions similar to the common CR2032 coin cell)
yields only 12 μW.
There are a number of factors that must be considered in selecting the most suitable
battery for a particular application; key considerations include (8):
r Operating voltage level
r Load current and proﬁle
r Duty cycle—continuous or intermittent
r Service life
r Physical requirement
r Size
r Shape
r Weight
r Environmental conditions
r Temperature
r Pressure
r Humidity
r Vibration
r Shock
r Pressure
r Safety and reliability
r Shelf life
r Maintenance and replacement
r Environmental impact and recycling capability
r Cost
4.3.5
Sensor Technology
A sensor network is an infrastructure comprising sensing (measuring), comput-
ing, and communication elements that gives the administrator the ability to instru-
ment, observe, and react to events and phenomena in a speciﬁed environment. The
administrator typically is some civil, government, commercial, or industrial entity.

108
FUNDAMENTAL IoT MECHANISMS AND KEY TECHNOLOGIES
Network(ed) sensor systems support a plethora of applications, not the least being
Homeland Security. Typical applications include, but are not limited to, data col-
lection, monitoring, surveillance, and medical telemetry. Sensors facilitate the
instrumenting and controlling of factories, ofﬁces, homes, vehicles, cities, and the
ambiance, especially as commercial off-the-shelf technology becomes available. With
sensor network technology, speciﬁcally, with embedded networked sensing, ships, air-
crafts, and buildings can “self-detect” structural faults (e.g., fatigue-induced cracks).
Places of public assembly can be instrumented to detect airborne agents such as toxins
and to trace the source of the contamination, should any be present (this also can be
done for ground/underground situations). Earthquake-oriented sensors in buildings
can locate potential survivors and can help assess structural damage; tsunami-alerting
sensors can certainly prove useful for nations with extensive coastlines. Sensors also
ﬁnd extensive applicability in battleﬁeld for reconnaissance and surveillance. In addi-
tion to sensing, one is often also interested in control and activation (13).
There are four basic components in a sensor network: (i) an assembly of distributed
or localized sensors; (ii) an interconnecting network (usually, but not always, wireless-
based); (iii) a central point of information clustering; and (iv) a set of computing
resources at the central point (or beyond) to handle data correlation, event-trending,
querying, and data mining. Because the interconnecting network is generally wireless,
these systems are known as wireless sensor networks (WSNs).
In this context, the sensing and computation nodes are considered part of the
sensor network; in fact, some of the computing may be done in the network itself.
Because of the potentially large quantity of data collected, algorithmic methods
for data management play an important role in sensor networks. The computation
and communication infrastructure associated with sensor networks is often speciﬁc
to this environment and rooted in the device- and application-based nature of these
networks. For example, unlike most other settings, in-network processing is desirable
in sensor networks; furthermore, node power (and/or battery life) is a key design
consideration.
Sensors, the things or objects in this discussion, are active devices that measure
some variable of the natural or man-made environment (e.g., a building, an assem-
bly line, an industrial assemblage). Sensors in a WSN have a variety of purposes,
functions, and capabilities. The radar networks used in air trafﬁc control, the national
electrical power grid, and the nation-wide weather stations deployed over a regular
topographic mesh are all examples of early-deployment sensor networks. All of these
systems, however, use specialized computers and communication protocols and are
very expensive. Less expensive WSNs are now being planned for novel applications in
physical security, healthcare, and commerce. The technology for sensing and control
includes electric and magnetic ﬁeld sensors; radio-wave frequency sensors; optical,
electro-optic, and infrared sensors; radars; lasers; location/navigation sensors; seismic
and pressure-wave sensors; environmental parameter sensors (e.g., wind, humidity,
heat, and so on); and biochemical Homeland Security-oriented sensors.
Sensors can be described as “smart” inexpensive devices equipped with multiple
on-board sensing elements: they are low cost, low power, untethered multifunc-
tional nodes that are logically homed to a central sink node. Sensors are typically
internetworked via a series of multihop short-distance low power wireless links

KEY IoT TECHNOLOGIES
109
(particularly within a deﬁned “sensor ﬁeld”); they typically utilize the Internet or
some other network for long-haul delivery of information to a point (or points) of ﬁnal
data aggregation and analysis. In general, within the “sensor ﬁeld,” WSNs employ
contention-oriented random access channel sharing/transmission techniques that are
now incorporated in the IEEE 802 family of standards; indeed, these techniques were
developed in the late 1960s and 1970s expressly for wireless (not cabled) environ-
ments, and for large sets of dispersed nodes with limited channel-management intel-
ligence. However, other channel management techniques are also available. Sensors
are typically deployed in a high density manner and in large quantities: a WSN con-
sists of densely distributed nodes that support sensing, signal processing, embedded
computing, and connectivity; sensors are logically linked by self-organizing means
(sensors that are deployed in short-hop point-to-point master-slave pair arrangements
are also of interest). Wireless sensors typically transmit information to collecting
(monitoring) stations that aggregate some or all of the information. WSNs have
unique characteristics, such as, but not limited to, power constraints/limited bat-
tery life for the wireless sensors, redundant data, low duty cycle, and many-to-one
ﬂows. Consequently, new design methodologies are needed across a set of disci-
plines, including, but not limited to, information transport, network and operational
management, conﬁdentiality, integrity, availability, and in-network/local processing.
In some cases, it is challenging to collect (extract) data from wireless nodes (WNs)
because connectivity to/from the WNs may be intermittent due to a low battery sta-
tus (e.g., if these are dependent on sun light to recharge), or other wireless sensor
malfunction. Furthermore, a lightweight protocol stack is desired. Often, a very large
number of client units (say 64K or more) need to be supported by the system and by
the addressing apparatus.
Sensors span several orders of magnitude in physical size; they (or, at least some of
their components) range from nanoscopic-scale devices to mesoscopic-scale devices
at one end; and, from microscopic-scale devices to macroscopic-scale devices at the
other end. Nanoscopic (also known as nanoscale) refers to objects or devices in the
order of 1–100 nm in diameter; mesoscopic scale refers to objects between 100 and
10,000 nm in diameter; the microscopic scale ranges from 10 to 1000 microns; and
the macroscopic scale is at the millimeter-to-meter range. At the low end of the
scale, one ﬁnds, among others, biological sensors, small passive microsensors (such
as “smart dust”), and “lab-on-a-chip” assemblies. At the other end of the scale, one
ﬁnds platforms such as, but not limited to, identity tags, toll collection devices, con-
trollable weather data collection sensors, bioterrorism sensors, radars, and undersea
submarine trafﬁc sensors based on sonars.2 Some refer to the latest generation of
sensors, especially the miniaturized ones that are directly embedded in some phys-
ical infrastructure, as “microsensors.” Microsensors with on-board processing and
wireless interfaces can be utilized to study and monitor a variety of phenomena and
environments at close proximity.
Sensors may be passive and/or be self-powered; further along in the power-
consumption chain, some sensors may require relatively low power from a battery
2While satellites can be used to support sensing, this book does not explicitly include them in the technical
discussion.

110
FUNDAMENTAL IoT MECHANISMS AND KEY TECHNOLOGIES
or line feed. At the high end of the power-consumption chain, some sensors may
require very high power feeds (e.g., for radars). Chemical-, physical-, acoustic-, and
image-based sensors can be utilized to study ecosystems (e.g., in support of global
parameters such as temperature, microorganism populations, and so on). Near-term
commercial applications include, but are not limited to, industrial/building WSNs,
appliance control (lighting and heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC)),
automotive sensors and actuators, home automation and networking, automatic meter
reading/load management (LM), consumer electronics/entertainment, and asset man-
agement. Commercial market segments include the following:
r Industrial monitoring and control
r Commercial building and control
r Process control
r Home automation
r Wireless automated meter reading (AMR)/ LM
r Metropolitan operations (trafﬁc, automatic tolls, ﬁre, and so on)
r Homeland Security applications: chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear
wireless sensors
r Military sensors
r Environmental (land, air, sea)/agricultural wireless sensors
Suppliers and products tend to cluster according to these categories.
Implementations of WSNs have to address a set of technical challenges; however,
the move toward standardization will, in due course, minimize a number of these
challenges by addressing the issues once and then resulting in off-the-shelf chipsets
and components. One of the challenges of WSNs is the need for extended temporal
operation of the sensing node in spite of a (typically) limited power supply (and/or
battery life). In particular, the architecture of the radio, including the use of low power
circuitry, must be properly selected. In practical terms, this implies low power con-
sumption for transmission over low bandwidth channels and low power-consumption
logic to pre-process and/or compress data. Energy-efﬁcient wireless communications
systems are being sought and are typical of WSNs. Low power consumption is a key
factor in ensuring long operating horizons for non-power-fed systems (some systems
can indeed be power-fed and/or relay on other power sources). Power efﬁciency in
WSNs is generally accomplished in three ways:
(i) Low duty cycle operation
(ii) Local/in-network processing to reduce data volume (and, hence, transmission
time)
(iii) Multihop networking (this reduces the requirement for long-range transmission
since signal path loss is an inverse power with range/distance (e.g., 4)—each
node in the sensor network can act as a repeater, thereby reducing the link
range coverage required, and, in turn, the transmission power

KEY IoT TECHNOLOGIES
111
Conventional wireless networks are generally designed with link ranges of the
order of tens, hundreds, or thousands of miles. The reduced link range and the
compressed data payload in WSNs result in characteristic link budgets that differ
from conventional systems.
4.3.6
RFID Technology
RFIDs are electronic devices associated with objects (“things”) that transmit their
identity (usually a serial number) via radio links. The RFID space is large and well
documented. Our discussion here is very limited by choice; the reader requiring more
details is encouraged to seek out the literature on the topic.
RFID tags are devices that typically have a read-only chip that stores a unique
number but has no processing capability. RFID tags have broad applications, including
the rapid collection of data in commercial environments. For example, RFID and bar
coding are nearly ubiquitous in the inventory process, providing both accuracy and
speed of data collection. These technologies facilitate the global supply chain and
impact all subsystems within that overall process, including material requirement
planning (MRP), just in time (JIT), electronic data interchange (EDI), and electronic
commerce (EC). RFIDs are also used in industrial environments, such as but not
limited to dirty, wet, or harsh environments. The technology can also be used for
identiﬁcation of people or assets. Figure 4.1 depicts two illustrative examples of
RFIDs. Figure 4.2 depicts the basic operation of an RFID system.
Contactless smart cards (SCs) are more sophisticated than RFID tags, being that
they contain a microprocessor that enables (i) on-board computing, (ii) two-way
FIGURE 4.1
Illustrative examples of RFIDs.

112
FUNDAMENTAL IoT MECHANISMS AND KEY TECHNOLOGIES
Labels
Reader
Receiver
Transmitter
Controller
FIGURE 4.2
RFID reader operation.
communication including encryption, and (iii) storage of predeﬁned and newly
acquired information. Because of their more restricted capabilities, RFID tags are typ-
ically less expensive than SCs. When an RFID tag or contactless SC passes within a
deﬁned range, a reader generates electromagnetic waves; the tag’s integrated antenna
receives the signal and activates the chip in the tag/SC, and a wireless communica-
tions channel is set up between the reader and the tag enabling the transfer of pertinent
data. Figure 4.3 provides a comparison between SCs and RFID tags.
RFID examples applicable to IoT include but are not limited to the following:
r Warehouse retailer automotive
r Grocery chain transportation
r Distribution center asset management
r Manufacturing
r Inventory management
r Warehousing and distribution
r Shop ﬂoor (production)
r Document tracking and asset management
r Industrial applications (e.g., time and attendance, shipping document tracking,
receiving ﬁxed assets)
r Retail applications
There are a number of standards for RFIDs. Some of the key ones include the
following:
r The ISO 14443 standard describes components operating at 13.56 MHz fre-
quency that embed a CPU; power consumption is about 10mW; data through-
put is about 100 Kbps and the maximum working distance (from the reader) is
around 10 cm.
r The ISO 15693 standard also describes components operating at 13.56 MHz
frequency, but it enables working distances as high as 1 m, with a data throughput
of a few Kbps.

KEY IoT TECHNOLOGIES
113
1
2
3
RFID 
chips are 
much smaller 
than smart chips
        When a contactless smart card 
or an RFID tag passes within range,
a reader sends out radio frequency 
electromagnetic waves.
      The antenna, tuned 
to receive these waves, 
wakes up the chip in the 
smart card or tag.
       A wireless  commun-
ications channel is set up 
between the reader and 
the smart card or tag.
The contactless 
smart card contains 
a microprocessor, 
a small but real computer 
that makes calculations, 
communicates both 
ways, remembers 
new information, 
and actively 
uses these 
capabilities for 
security and many 
other applications.
RFID tags are devices that typically 
have a read-only chip that stores a 
unique number but has no processing 
capability. It is more like a radio-based 
bar code used mostly for 
identification (hence 
“radio frequency 
identification”).
Characteristics of a contactless card
Strong security capacities:
mutual authentication before providing access 
to information
access can be further protected via PIN or 
biometric
encryption to protect data on card during exchange
hardware and software protection to combat 
attacks or counterfeiting
Hundreds of security features mean an 
individual’s personal ID, financial details, 
payment transactions, transit fares or 
physical access privileges can be safely 
stored, managed, and exchanged
Short-distance data exchange, typically two 
inches
Read and write memory capacity of 512 bytes 
and up, with very large memory storage 
possible
Characteristics of an RFID tag
Minimal security:
one-way authentication; 
card cannot protect itself
insufficient storage for biometrics
no on-chip calculations of new 
information
relies on static keys
Single function; used to help 
machines identify objects to 
increase efficiency. 
Example: inventory control
Small memory (92 bytes); 
often read-only
Larger distance data exchange, 
typically several yards
Because of their more restricted 
capabilities, RFID tags are generally 
cheaper.
Overview: what happens in RF (radio frequency) communication
FIGURE 4.3
Comparison between contactless SCs and RFID tags. Source: Gemalto (used
with Permission).

114
FUNDAMENTAL IoT MECHANISMS AND KEY TECHNOLOGIES
r The ISO 18000 standard deﬁnes parameters for air interface communications
associated with frequency such as 135 KHz, 13.56 MHz, 2.45 GHz, 5.8 GHz,
860–960 MHz, and 433 MHz. The ISO 18000–6 standard uses the 860–960 MHz
range and is the basis for the Class-1 Generation-2 UHF RFID, introduced by
the EPCglobal Consortium.
As a side note, EPCglobal Inc. was created as a joint venture between GS1
(formerly EAN International) and GS1 US (formerly the Uniform Code Council,
Inc.)—the same organizations entrusted to drive adoption of the barcode—to develop
standards and to create a “visible” global supply chain. EPCglobal is a neutral,
not-for-proﬁt standards organization consisting of manufacturers, technology solu-
tion providers, and retailers. Many industries participate in the EPCglobal standards
development process such as aerospace, apparel, chemical, consumer electronics,
consumer goods, healthcare and life sciences, and transportation and logistics.
Typically, EPC codes used for active RFIDs or IP addresses are transmitted in clear
form; however, some new protocols are now emerging that can provide strong privacy
for the IoT. The host identity protocol (HIP) is one example; with this protocol, active
RFIDs do not expose their identity in clear text, but protect the identity value (e.g.,
an EPC) using cryptographic procedures (10).
Table 4.2 based on material from Reference 11 provides a very basic listing of
RFID concepts. An RFID system is logically comprising several layers, as follows:
the tag layer, the air interface (also called media interface) layer, and the reader layer;
additionally there are network, middleware, and application aspects. Some of the key
aspects of the basic layers are as follows:
r Tag (device) layer: Architecture and EPCglobal Gen2 tag ﬁnite state machine
r Media interface layer: Frequency bands, antennas, read range, modulation,
encoding, data rates
r Reader layer: Architecture, antenna conﬁgurations, Gen2 sessions, Gen2
The following is a list of key speciﬁcations supporting basic RFID operations:
r EPCglobalTM: EPCTM Tag Data Standards
r EPCglobalTM (2004): FMCG RFID Physical Requirements Document
r EPCglobalTM (2004): Class-1 Generation-2 UHF RFID Implementation Refer-
ence
r EPCglobalTM (2005): Radio-Frequency Identity Protocols, Class-1 Generation-
2 UHF RFID, Protocol for Communications at 860 MHz–960 MHz
r European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI), EN 302 208:
Electromagnetic Compatibility and Radio Spectrum Matters (ERM)—Radio-
Frequency Identiﬁcation Equipment Operating in the Band 865 MHz to 868
MHz with Power Levels up to 2 W, Part 1 – Technical Characteristics and Test
Methods

KEY IoT TECHNOLOGIES
115
TABLE 4.2
Basic RFID Concepts
Concept
Deﬁnition
Air interface
The complete communication link between an interrogator and a tag
including the physical layer, collision arbitration algorithm, command
and response structure, and data-coding methodology
Continuous
wave (CW)
Typically a sinusoid at a given frequency, but more generally any
interrogator waveform suitable for powering a passive tag without
amplitude and/or phase modulation of sufﬁcient magnitude to be
interpreted by a tag as transmitted data
Cover-coding
A method by which an interrogator obscures information that it is
transmitting to a tag. To cover-code data or a password, an
interrogator ﬁrst requests a random number from the tag. The
interrogator then performs a bit-wise EXOR of the data or password
with this random number and transmits the cover-coded (also called
ciphertext) string to the tag. The tag uncovers the data or password by
performing a bit-wise EXOR of the received cover-coded string with
the original random number
EPC
A unique identiﬁer for a physical object, unit load, location, or other
identiﬁable entity playing a role in business operations. EPCs are
assigned following rules designed to ensure uniqueness despite
decentralized administration of code space, and to accommodate
legacy coding schemes in common use. EPCs have multiple
representations, including binary forms suitable for use on RFID tags,
and text forms suitable for data exchange among enterprise
information systems
EPCglobal
architecture
framework
A collection of interrelated standards (“EPCglobal Standards”), together
with services operated by EPCglobal, its delegates, and others (“EPC
Network Services”), all in service of a common goal of enhancing
business ﬂows and computer applications through the use of EPCs
Interrogator
A device that modulates/transmits and receives/demodulates a sufﬁcient
set of the electrical signals deﬁned in the signaling layer to
communicate with conformant tags, while conforming to all local
radio regulations. A typical interrogator is a passive-backscatter,
interrogator-talks-ﬁrst (ITF), RFID system operating in the
860–960 MHz frequency range. An interrogator transmits information
to a Tag by modulating an RF signal in the 860 MHz–960 MHz
frequency range. The tag receives both information and operating
energy from this RF signal. Tags are passive, meaning that they
receive all of their operating energy from the interrogator’s RF
waveform. An interrogator receives information from a tag by
transmitting a continuous-wave (CW) RF signal to the tag; the Tag
responds by modulating the reﬂection coefﬁcient of its antenna,
thereby backscattering an information signal to the interrogator. The
system is ITF, meaning that a tag modulates its antenna reﬂection
coefﬁcient with an information signal only after being directed to do
so by an interrogator. Interrogators and tags are not required to talk
simultaneously; rather, communications are half-duplex, meaning
that interrogators talk and tags listen, or vice versa
(continued)

116
FUNDAMENTAL IoT MECHANISMS AND KEY TECHNOLOGIES
TABLE 4.2
(Continued)
Concept
Deﬁnition
Operating
environment
A region within which an interrogator’s RF transmissions are attenuated
by less than 90dB. In free space, the operating environment is a sphere
whose radius is approximately 1000 m, with the interrogator located
at the center. In a building or other enclosure, the size and shape of
the operating environment depends on factors such as the material
properties and shape of the building and may be less than 1000 m in
certain directions and greater than 1000 m in other directions
Operating
procedure
Collectively, the set of functions and commands used by an interrogator
to identify and modify tags (also known as the tag-identiﬁcation
layer)
Passive tag (or
passive label)
A tag (or label) whose transceiver is powered by the RF ﬁeld
Physical layer
The data coding and modulation waveforms used in interrogator-to-tag
and tag-to-interrogator signaling
Singulation
Identifying an individual tag in a multiple-tag environment
Slotted random
anticollision
An anticollision algorithm where tags load a random (or
pseudo-random) number into a slot counter, decrement this slot
counter based on interrogator commands, and reply to the interrogator
when their slot counter reaches zero
Tag air interface
As deﬁned in ISO 19762–3, a conductor-free medium, usually air,
between a transponder and a reader/interrogator through which data
communication is achieved by means of a modulated inductive or
propagated electromagnetic ﬁeld
Tag-
identiﬁcation
layer
Collectively, the set of functions and commands used by an interrogator
to identify and modify tags (also known as the operating procedure)
r European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI), EN 302 208:
Electromagnetic Compatibility and Radio Spectrum Matters (ERM)—Radio-
Frequency Identiﬁcation Equipment Operating in the Band 865 MHz to 868
MHz with Power Levels up to 2 W, Part 2—Harmonized EN under article 3.2 of
the R&TTE Directive
r ISO/IEC Directives, Part 2: Rules for the Structure and Drafting of International
Standards
r ISO/IEC 3309: Information Technology—Telecommunications and Informa-
tion Exchange Between Systems—High Level Data Link Control (HDLC)
Procedures—Frame Structure
r ISO/IEC 15961: Information Technology, Automatic Identiﬁcation and Data
Capture—Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation (RFID) for Item Management—Data
Protocol: Application Interface
r ISO/IEC 15962: Information Technology, Automatic Identiﬁcation and
Data Capture Techniques—Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation (RFID) for Item

KEY IoT TECHNOLOGIES
117
Management—Data Protocol: Data Encoding Rules and Logical Memory Func-
tions
r ISO/IEC 15963: Information Technology—Radiofrequency Identiﬁcation for
Item Management—Unique Identiﬁcation for RF Tags
r ISO/IEC 18000–1: Information Technology—Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation
for Item Management—Part 1: Reference Architecture and Deﬁnition of Param-
eters to be Standardized
r ISO/IEC 18000–6: Information Technology Automatic Identiﬁcation and Data
Capture Techniques—Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation for Item Management Air
Interface—Part 6: Parameters for Air Interface Communications at 860–960
MHz
r ISO/IEC 19762: Information Technology AIDC Techniques—Harmonized
Vocabulary—Part 3: Radio-Frequency Identiﬁcation (RFID)
r U.S. Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Title 47, Chapter I, Part 15: Radio-
Frequency Devices, U.S. Federal Communications Commission
Figure 4.4 depicts the set of relevant standards in the EPCglobal environment.
In particular, the EPCglobal organization has deﬁned an EPCglobal Architecture
Framework in the document The EPCglobal Architecture Framework, EPCglobal
Final Version 1.4, December 2010. The EPCglobal Architecture Framework is a
Architecture
Framework
Certificate Profile
Pedigree
Tag Data Standard (TDS)
Tag Data Translation (TDT)
Discovery Services
Data
Standards
Exchange
Capture
Identify
Interface
Standards
Standards
in development
Object Name Service (ONS)
EPC Information Services (EPCIS)
Core Business Vocabulary (CBV)
Application Level Events (ALE)
Reader Mangement (RM)
Low Level Reader Protocol (LLRP)
Tag Protocol - EPC UHF Gen 2
Tag Protocol - EPC HF
Discovery Configuration & Information (DCI)
FIGURE 4.4
Standards that comprise the EPCglobal environment.

118
FUNDAMENTAL IoT MECHANISMS AND KEY TECHNOLOGIES
collection of interrelated standards (“EPCglobal Standards”), together with services
operated by EPCglobal, its delegates, and others (“EPC Network Services”), all in
service of a common goal of enhancing business ﬂows and computer applications
through the use of EPCs. It describes the collection of interrelated standards for
hardware, software, and data interfaces, together with core services that are operated
by EPCglobal and its delegates, all in service of a common goal of enhancing the
supply chain through the use of EPCs. The architecture deﬁne core services that are
operated by EPCglobal and its delegates, showing how the different components ﬁt
together to form a cohesive whole. It discusses (12):
r Individual hardware, software, and data interfaces are deﬁned normatively by
EPCglobal standards, or by standards produced by other standards bodies.
EPCglobal standards are developed by the EPCglobal Community through the
EPCglobal Standard Development Process (SDP). EPCglobal standards are
normative, and implementations are subject to conformance and certiﬁcation
requirements. An example of an interface is the UHF Class-1 Gen-2 tag air
interface, which speciﬁes a radio-frequency communications protocol by which
an RFID tag and an RFID reader device may interact. This interface is deﬁned
normatively by the UHF Class-1 Gen-2 tag air interface standard.
r The design of hardware and software components that implement EPCglobal
standards are proprietary to the solution providers and end users that create such
components. While EPCglobal standards provide normative guidance as to the
behavior of interfaces between components, implementers are free to innovate
in the design of components so long as they correctly implement the interface
standards. An example of a component is an RFID tag that is the product of a
speciﬁc tag manufacturer. This tag may comply with the UHF Class-1 Gen-2
tag air interface standard.
r A special case of components that implement EPCglobal standards are shared
network services that are operated and deployed by EPCglobal itself (or by
other organizations to which EPCglobal delegates responsibility), or by other
third parties. These components are referred to as EPC network services and
provide services to all end users. An example of an EPC Network Service is
the ONS, which provides a logically centralized registry through which an EPC
may be associated with information services. The ONS is logically operated by
EPCglobal; from a deployment perspective this responsibility is delegated to a
contractor of EPCglobal that operates the ONS “root” service, which in turn
delegates responsibility for certain lookup operations to services operated by
other organizations.
4.3.7
Satellite Technology
Due to its global reach and the ability to support mobility in all geographical envi-
ronments (including Antarctica), satellite communications can play a critical role in

REFERENCES
119
many broadly distributed M2M applications. This topic deserves more attention and
development because it offers interesting commercial possibilities.
REFERENCES
1. Lee GM, Park J, Kong N, Crespi N. The Internet of Things – Concept and Problem
Statement. July 2011. Internet Research Task Force, July 11, 2011, draft-lee-iot-problem-
statement-02.txt.
2. Manderson T, Halpern JM. Locator/ID Separation Protocol (lisp). IETF Working Group.
3. Huston G, Lindqvist K. Site Multihoming by IPv6 Intermediation (shim6). IETF Working
Group, 2010.
4. Lee GM, Choi JK, et al. Naming Architecture for Object to Object Communications. HIP
Working Group, Internet Draft, March 8, 2010, draft-lee-object-naming-02.txt.
5. EPCglobal
R⃝Organization Web Site, http://www.gs1.org/epcglobal.
6. Mulligan G. IPv6 Over Low power WPAN (6lowpan). Description of Working Group,
IETF, 2012, http://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/6lowpan/charter/, http://www.ietf.org/mail-
archive/web/6lowpan/.
7. Maeder A. How to Deal with a Thousand Nodes: M2M Communication Over Cellular
Networks. IEEE WoWMoM 2012 Panel, San Francisco, California, USA June 25–28,
2012.
8. Tidblad AA. The Future of Battery Technologies – Part I, Intertek White Paper, November
2009, icenter@intertek.com.
9. Fleming N. Smartphone Batteries: When will They Last Longer?. bbc.com online article,
February 27, 2012.
10. Urien P, Lee GM, Pujolle G. HIP Support for RFIDs. HIP Research Group, Internet Draft,
draft-irtf-hiprg-rﬁd-03, July 2011.
11. EPCglobal
R⃝, EPCTM Radio-Frequency Identity Protocols, Class-1 Generation-2 UHF
RFID, Protocol for Communications at 860 MHz–960 MHz, Version 1.0.9, January 2005.
12. EPCglobal
R⃝, The EPCglobal Architecture Framework, EPCglobal Final Version 1.4,
December 2010, Ken Traub Editor.
13. Minoli D, Sohraby K, Zanti T. Wireless Sensor Networks, Wiley 2007, New York, NY.

CHAPTER 5
EVOLVING IoT STANDARDS
For many years, embedded systems have been deployed as specialized vertical appli-
cations with unique functions and attributes. As the need arises for broad-scale deploy-
ment, with the ensuing requirement of being able to easily connect these embedded
machines to control systems and to users that require interaction with them, stan-
dards become fundamentally important. This chapter provides a short survey of some
key evolving standards that can be used to support IoT applications. Mainstream
layer 1/2 communication standards (speciﬁcally, Zigbee, Bluetooth, and long-term
evolution [LTE]) and layer 3 communication standards (speciﬁcally, IPv6, Mobile
IPv6, and IPv6 technologies directly applied to the IoT) are discussed in Chapters 6
through 9; this chapter, therefore, covers the multitude of other support standards that
come into play in the deployment of IoT and machine-to-machine (M2M) services
(also known as machine-type communication [MTC] in third-generation partnership
project [3GPP] environments).
5.1
OVERVIEW AND APPROACHES
Despite technological advances in many supporting technologies that are advancing
IoT concepts, difﬁculties associated with interworking and multisupplier approaches
still hamper the cost-effective implementation and rollout of the technology. When
there is insufﬁcient standardization, capability mismatches between different devices
Building the Internet of Things with IPv6 and MIPv6: The Evolving World of M2M Communications,
First Edition. Daniel Minoli.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
120

OVERVIEW AND APPROACHES
121
easily arise. While IoT systems can utilize existing Internet protocols, as mentioned
earlier, in a number of cases the power-, processing-, and capabilities-constrained
IoT environment can beneﬁt from additional protocols that help optimize the com-
munications and lower the computational requirements. Developers have expressed
the desire for having the IoT utilize existing Internet protocol stack, to a large extent
and to the degree possible. However, one should expect some challenges and mod-
iﬁcations because of the larger capability variations than in the current Internet,
and because of the fact that there is no human in the loop for most applications
(M2M), although humans may be in the loop in human-to-machine (H2M) situations.
Also, as hinted in Chapter 4, power consideration drive the need for leaner protocol
stacks.
Standards covering many of the underlying technologies are important because
proprietary solutions fragment the industry. Standards are particularly critical when
there is a requirement to physically or logically connect entities across an interface.
Some areas requiring standardization include, but are not limited to, the following
(1–3):
r Developing IP/routing/transport/web protocols subsets that scale down to IOT
devices; speciﬁcally, lightweight routing protocols for the IoT;
r Describing architectures that employ gateways and middleware;
r Developing mobility management;
r Internetworking of IoT things;
r Lightweight implementations of cryptographic stacks; and building a suitable
security infrastructure: end-to-end security capabilities for the IoT things;
r Developing standards for applications, speciﬁcally, data formats; and
r Discouraging on domain-speciﬁc solutions.
There is a practical desire, motivated by ﬁnancial consideration, to build opti-
mized solutions that can solve the problem in a particular setting, but these solu-
tions may not be general enough for all situations. Such “point solutions” invari-
ably leads to interoperability problems. Some observers make the case that Internet
protocols were successful because they were good enough, scalable, and useful,
not because they were particularly optimized for any hardware back in the early
days (3).
Fortunately, several global organizations are currently working on global M2M
standards. Several standardization efforts are underway addressing layer-speciﬁc
protocols, optimized architectures, and policy, including but not limited to the
following:
r The Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) IPv6 routing protocol for low
power and lossy networks (RPL)/routing over low power and lossy networks
(ROLL);
r IETF constrained application protocol (CoAP);

122
EVOLVING IoT STANDARDS
r IETF constrained RESTful environments (CoRE);
r IETF IPv6 over low power WPAN (6LoWPAN);
r 3GPP MTC; and
r ETSI M2M. Recall that M2M involves communication without (or only limited)
human intervention where the human is not the input agent but possibly (but
not always) the output agent. For example, ETSI TS/TR 102 addresses M2M
architecture and services (e.g., smart metering, e-health, auto, and city).
A number of speciﬁc considerations need to be taken when designing protocols
and architectures for interconnecting smart objects to the Internet. Key concerns
are scalability, power efﬁciency, interworking between different technologies and
network domains, usability and manageability, and security and privacy (4). IoT
standardization deals with physical interfaces, access connectivity (e.g., low power
IEEE 802.15.4-based wireless standards such as IEC62591, 6LoWPAN, and ZigBee
Smart Energy (SE) 2.0, DASH7/ISO/IEC 18000-7), networking (such as IPv6), and
applications. IETF 6LoWPAN, ROLL, and CoRE aim at making IPv6 work well
on constrained devices. 3GPP MTC seeks to include scalability in LTE. ETSI M2M
aims at making devices communicate to service platforms and applications (5). Other
activities include:
r IEEE 802: addresses LANs, WLANs, and PANs (personal area networks), par-
ticularly the IEEE802.15.4 wireless standards such as IEC62591, 6LoWPAN,
and ZigBee, ZigBee IP (ZIP), ZigBee SE 2.0—IEEE 802 now includes over 100
standards. Speciﬁcally, the ZigBee Alliance’s ZIP standard is a ﬁrst deﬁnition
of an open standards-based IPv6 stack for smart objects, the goal being to bring
IPv6 network protocols over 802.15.4 wireless mesh networks to reality.
r IEEE P2030/SCC21: addresses smart grid (SG) interoperability.
r Emerging IEEE P1901.2 standard for Orthogonal Frequency Division Multi-
plexing (OFDM)-based communication over power lines and offers guaranteed
interoperability. This standard is key to fostering SG deployments.
r ETSI TS/TR 102: addresses M2M architecture, services, smart metering,
e-health, auto, and city.
r 3GPP SA1-SA3: addresses services, architecture, and security.
r JTC1 SC 6 and China NITSC: address sensor networks.
r TIA: TR-50: addresses smart device communications.
r CENELEC: addresses device addressability.
In summary, three major strands of press time standardization include the follow-
ing: (i) ETSI: for end-to-end framework for M2M; (ii) 3GPP: to enable operators to
support services; and (iii) IEEE: to optimize the radio access/physical layer.

IETF IPv6 ROUTING PROTOCOL FOR RPL ROLL
123
5.2
IETF IPv6 ROUTING PROTOCOL FOR RPL ROLL
Low power and lossy networks (LLNs) are1 a class of networks in which both the
routers and their interconnect are constrained. LLN routers typically operate with
constraints on processing power, memory, and energy (battery power); their intercon-
nects are characterized by high loss rates, low data rates, and instability. LLNs com-
prise a few dozen routers up to thousands of routers. Supported trafﬁc ﬂows include
point-to-point (between devices inside the LLN), point-to-multipoint (from a central
control point to a subset of devices inside the LLN), and multipoint-to-point (from
devices inside the LLN toward a central control point). The IPv6 Routing Protocol
for LLNs (RPL) is a mechanism proposed by the IETF to support multipoint-to-point
trafﬁc from devices inside the LLN toward a central control point, as well as point-
to-multipoint trafﬁc from the central control point to the devices inside the LLN (6).
LLNs consist largely of constrained nodes (with limited processing power, mem-
ory, and sometimes energy when they are battery operated or energy scavenging).
These routers are interconnected by lossy unstable links, resulting in relatively high
packet loss rates and typically supporting only low data rates. Another characteristic
of such networks is that the trafﬁc patterns are not simply point-to-point, but in many
cases point-to-multipoint or multipoint-to-point. Furthermore, such networks may
potentially comprise up to thousands of nodes. These characteristics offer unique
challenges to a routing solution. To address these issues, the IETF ROLL Work-
ing Group has deﬁned application-speciﬁc routing requirements for an LLN routing
protocol; it has also speciﬁed the RPL. A set of IETF companion documents to the
basic speciﬁcation provides further guidance in the form of applicability statements
specifying a set of operating points appropriate to the building automation, home
automation, industrial, and urban application scenarios.
Existing routing protocols include OSPF/IS-IS (open shortest path ﬁrst/
intermediate system to intermediate system), OLSRv2 (optimized link state routing
protocol version 2), TBRPF (topology-based reverse path forwarding), RIP (routing
information protocol), AODV (ad hoc on-demand distance vector), DYMO (dynamic
MANET on-demand), and DSR (dynamic source routing). Some of the metrics to be
considered for IoT applications include the following:
r Routing state memory space—limited memory resources of low power nodes;
r Loss response—what happens in response to link failures;
r Control cost—constraints on control trafﬁc;
r Link and node cost—link and node properties are considered when choosing
routes.
The existing protocols all fail one or more of these goals for IoT applications. For
example, for protocol state memory size OSPF/IS-IS fails; for loss OSPF/IS-IS fails;
1This discussion is based on and summarized from the IETF document draft-ietf-roll-rpl-19 [6]; it included
to motivate the reader to consult the full document and/or related IETF documents for an inclusive view
of the issue.

124
EVOLVING IoT STANDARDS
for control OSPF/IS-IS fails; for link cost OSPF/IS-IS would pass; and for node cost
OSPF/IS-IS fails (see Reference 7 for additional information). Hence, the need for a
new protocol.
In order to be useful in a wide range of LLN application domains, RPL separates
packet processing and forwarding from the routing optimization objective. Examples
of such objectives include minimizing energy, minimizing latency, or satisfying con-
straints. An RPL implementation, in support of a particular LLN application, will
include the necessary objective function(s) as required by the application.
Consistent with the layered architecture of IP, RPL does not rely on any particular
features of a speciﬁc link layer technology. RPL is designed to be able to operate over
a variety of different link layers, including ones that are constrained, potentially lossy,
or typically utilized in conjunction with highly constrained host or router devices,
such as but not limited to low power wireless or PLC (power line communication)
technologies.
RPL operations, however, require bidirectional links. In some LLN scenarios,
communication links may exhibit asymmetric properties. Therefore, the reachability
of a router needs to be veriﬁed before the router can be used as a parent. RPL expects
an external mechanism to be triggered during the parent selection phase in order to
verify link properties and neighbor reachability. Neighbor unreachability detection
(NUD) is such a mechanism, but alternates are possible, including bidirectional
forwarding detection described in RFC 5881 and hints from lower layers via layer
2 triggers. In general, a detection mechanism that is reactive to trafﬁc is favored in
order to minimize the cost of monitoring links that are not being used.
RPL also expects an external mechanism to access and transport some control
information, referred to as the “RPL Packet Information,” in data packets. The RPL
packet information enables the association of a data packet with an RPL instance and
the validation of RPL routing states. The IPv6 Hop-by-Hop RPL option is an example
of such a mechanism. The mechanism is required for all packets except when strict
source routing is used which, by nature, prevents endless loops and alleviates the
need for the RPL packet information. Future companion speciﬁcations may propose
alternate ways to carry the RPL packet information in the IPv6 packets and may
extend the RPL packet information to support additional features.
RPL provides a mechanism to disseminate information over the dynamically
formed network topology. The dissemination enables minimal conﬁguration in the
nodes, allowing nodes to operate mostly autonomously.
In some applications, RPL assembles topologies of routers that own independent
preﬁxes. Those preﬁxes may or may not be aggregatable depending on the origin of
the routers. A preﬁx that is owned by a router is advertised as “on-link.”
RPL also introduces the capability to bind a subnet together with a common preﬁx
and to route within that subnet. A source can inject information about the subnet to be
disseminated by RPL, and that source is authoritative for that subnet. Because many
LLN links have non-transitive properties, a common preﬁx that RPL disseminates
over the subnet must not be advertised as on-link.
RPL may, in particular, disseminate IPv6 neighbor discovery (ND) informa-
tion preﬁx information option (PIO) and the route information option (RIO). ND

IETF IPv6 ROUTING PROTOCOL FOR RPL ROLL
125
DAG roots
DAG
DODAG
DAG root
FIGURE 5.1
DAGs and DODAGs.
information that is disseminated by RPL conserves all its original semantics for
router to host, with limited extensions for router to router, though it is not to be
confused with routing advertisements and it is never to be directly redistributed in
another routing protocol. An RPL node often combines host and router behaviors.
Some basic deﬁnitions in RPL are as follows (see Fig. 5.1):
r Directed acyclic graph (DAG) is a directed graph with no cycles.
r Destination-oriented DAG (DODAG) is a DAG rooted at a single destination.
RPL deﬁnes optimization objective when forming paths toward roots based on
one or more metrics. Metrics may include both link properties (reliability, latency)
and node properties (e.g., powered on not). RPL deﬁnes a new ICMPv6 message with
three possible types:
r DAG information object (DIO)—carries information that allows a node to dis-
cover an RPL instance, learn its conﬁguration parameters, and select DODAG
parents;
r DAG information solicitation (DIS)—solicit a DODAG information object from
an RPL node;
r Destination advertisement object (DAO)—used to propagate destination infor-
mation upward along the DODAG.
A node rank deﬁnes a node’s relative position within a DODAG with respect to
the DODAG root.
The approach in RPL is to build a topology (instance) where routes to these nodes
are optimized (namely, DODAG(s) rooted at these nodes). DODAG construction
proceeds as follows (7):
r Nodes periodically send link-local multicast DIO messages;
r Stability or detection of routing inconsistencies inﬂuence the rate of DIO mes-
sages;

126
EVOLVING IoT STANDARDS
r Nodes listen for DIOs and use their information to join a new DODAG, or to
maintain an existing DODAG;
r Nodes may use a DIS message to solicit a DIO;
r Based on information in the DIOs, the node chooses parents that minimize path
cost to the DODAG root.
RPL is optimized for many-to-one and one-to-many trafﬁc patterns. Routing state
is minimized: stateless nodes have to store only instance(s) conﬁguration parameters
and a list of parent nodes. The protocol takes into account both link and node
properties when choosing paths. Additionally, link failures do not trigger global
network re-optimization. The reader is referred to the draft speciﬁcation discussed
in the key reference (6) for an extensive discussion of the capabilities, formats, and
procedures of this protocol.
5.3
CONSTRAINED APPLICATION PROTOCOL (CoAP)
5.3.1
Background
The IETF constrained RESTful environments (CoRE) Working Group has recently
undertaken standardization work the CoAP. CoAP is a simple application layer pro-
tocol targeted to simple electronic devices (e.g., IoT/M2M things) to allow them
to communicate interactively over the Internet. CoAP is designed for low power
sensors (especially wireless sensor network [WSN] nodes described in Chapters 3
and 4) and for actuators that need to be controlled or monitored remotely, using
IP/Internet networks. CoAP can be seen as a specialized web transfer protocol for
use with constrained networks and nodes for M2M applications, such as smart energy
and building automation. CoAP operates with HTTP (hypertext transfer protocol) for
basic support with the web, allowing proxies to be built providing access to CoAP
resources via HTTP in a uniform way, while also supporting multicast and enjoying
low overhead CoAP can run on most devices that support user datagram protocol
(UDP) or a similar protocol. Some key aspects of the protocol are as follows: (i)
minimal complexity for the mapping with HTTP; (ii) low header overhead and low
parsing complexity; (iii) support for the discovery of resources; (iv) simple resource
subscription process; and (v) simple caching based on max-age.
CoAP makes use of two message types, requests and responses, using a simple
binary base header format. The base header may be followed by options in Internet
control message protocol (ICMP)-style type-length-value format. CoAP is by default
bound to UDP and, optionally, to transmission control protocol (TCP). Any bytes
after the headers in the packet are considered the message body if any. The length of
the message body is implied by the datagram length. When bound to UDP, the entire
message must ﬁt within a single datagram. When used with 6LoWPAN as deﬁned in
RFC 4944, messages ﬁt into a single IEEE 802.15.4 frame.
The constrained nodes for which CoAP is targeted often have 8-bit microcon-
trollers with small amounts of ROM and RAM, while networks such as 6LoWPAN

CONSTRAINED APPLICATION PROTOCOL (CoAP)
127
often have high packet error rates and a typical throughput of 10s of Kbps. CoAP pro-
vides a method/response interaction model between application end-points, supports
built-in resource discovery, and includes key web concepts such as URIs (uniform
resource identiﬁers) and content-types. CoAP easily translates to HTTP for integra-
tion with the web while meeting specialized requirements such as multicast support,
very low overhead, and simplicity for constrained environments (8).
The use of Web Services (WS) on the Internet has become ubiquitous in most
applications; it depends on the fundamental representational state transfer (REST)
architecture of the web (see Section 5.4). The CoRE working group2 aims at realizing
the REST architecture in a suitable form for constrained IoT/M2M nodes (e.g., 8-bit
microcontrollers with limited RAM and ROM) and IoT/M2M networks (e.g., 6LoW-
PAN). Constrained networks such as 6LoWPAN support the expensive fragmentation
of IPv6 packets into small link-layer frames. One design goal of CoAP has been to
keep message overhead small, thus limiting the use of fragmentation.
One of the main goals of CoAP is to design a generic web protocol for the
special requirements of this constrained environment, especially considering energy,
building automation, and other M2M applications. The objective of CoAP is not to
statically compress HTTP, but rather to realize a subset of REST common with HTTP,
but optimized for M2M applications. Although CoAP can be used for compressing
simple HTTP interfaces, it also offers features for M2M such as built-in discovery,
multicast support, and asynchronous message exchanges. CoAP has the following
main features:
r Constrained web protocol fulﬁlling M2M requirements;
r UDP binding with optional reliability supporting unicast and multicast requests;
r Asynchronous message exchanges;
r Low header overhead and parsing complexity;
r URI and content-type support;
r Simple proxy and caching capabilities;
r A stateless HTTP mapping, allowing proxies to be built providing access to
CoAP resources via HTTP in a uniform way or for HTTP simple interfaces to
be realized alternatively over CoAP; and
r Security binding to datagram transport layer security (DTLS).
The interaction model of CoAP is similar to the client/server model of HTTP.
However, M2M interactions typically result in a CoAP implementation acting in
both client and server roles (called an end-point). A CoAP request is equivalent to
that of HTTP and is sent by a client to request an action (using a method code)
on a resource (identiﬁed by a URI) on a server. The server then sends a response
with a response code; this response may include a resource representation. Unlike
2This discussion is based on and summarized from the IETF document draft-ietf-core-coap-09 (8); it is
included to motivate the reader to consult the full document and/or related IETF documents for an inclusive
view of the issue.

128
EVOLVING IoT STANDARDS
Application
UDP
IP (especially IPv6)
CoAP
Lower layers (e.g., Zigbee, LANs, WLANs, and PANs)
Requests/responses
messages
FIGURE 5.2
Abstract layering of CoAP.
HTTP, CoAP deals with these interchanges asynchronously over a datagram-oriented
transport such as UDP. This is done logically using a layer of messages that supports
optional reliability (with exponential back-off). CoAP deﬁnes four types of messages:
conﬁrmable (CON), non-conﬁrmable (NON), acknowledgement, reset; method codes
and response codes included in some of these messages make them carry requests or
responses. The basic exchanges of the four types of messages are transparent to the
request/response interactions.
One could think of CoAP logically as using a two-layer approach, a CoAP mes-
saging layer used to deal with UDP and the asynchronous nature of the interactions,
and the request/response interactions using method and response codes (see Fig. 5.2).
CoAP is, however, a single protocol, with messaging and request/response just fea-
tures of the CoAP header. Figure 5.3 depicts the overall protocol stack that is being
considered in the CoAP context.
The reader is referred to the draft speciﬁcation discussed in the key reference
(8) for an extensive discussion of the capabilities, formats, and procedures of this
protocol. A short summary follows.
CoAP
TCP
802.15.4
WiFi
BT-LE
Adaptation (6LoWPAN)
IPv4/v6
RPL
UDP
FIGURE 5.3
Overall protocol stack in CoAP’s environment.

CONSTRAINED APPLICATION PROTOCOL (CoAP)
129
5.3.2
Messaging Model
The CoAP messaging model is based on the exchange of messages over UDP between
end-points. It uses a short ﬁxed-length binary header (4 bytes) that may be followed
by compact binary options and a payload. This message format is shared by requests
and responses. Each CoAP message contains a message ID used to detect duplicates
and for optional reliability.
Reliability is provided by marking a message as CON. A CON message is
retransmitted using a default timeout and exponential back-off between retransmis-
sions, until the recipient sends an acknowledgement message (ACK) with the same
message ID from the corresponding end-point. When a recipient is not able to process
a CON message, it replies with a reset message (RST) instead of an ACK. A message
that does not require reliable delivery, for example, each single measurement out of
a stream of sensor data, can be sent as a NONmessage. These are not acknowledged,
but still have a message ID for duplicate detection. When a recipient is not able to
process a NON message, it may reply with an RST.
Since CoAP is based on UDP, it also supports the use of multicast IP destination
addresses, enabling multicast CoAP requests.
5.3.3
Request/Response Model
CoAP request and response semantics are carried in CoAP messages, which include
either a method code or response code, respectively. Optional (or default) request
and response information, such as the URI and payload content-type, are carried as
CoAP options. A token option is used to match responses to requests independent of
the underlying messages.
A request is carried in a CON or NON message, and if immediately available,
the response to a request carried in a CON message is carried in the resulting ACK
message. This is called a piggy-backed response. If the server is not able to respond
immediately to a request carried in a CON message, it simply responds with an
empty ACK message so that the client can stop retransmitting the request. When the
response is ready, the server sends it in a new CON message (which then in turn
needs to be acknowledged by the client). This is called a separate response. Likewise,
if a request is sent in a NON message, then the response is usually sent using a new
NON message, although the server may send a CON message.
CoAP makes use of GET, PUT, POST, and DELETE methods in a similar manner
to HTTP.
5.3.4
Intermediaries and Caching
The protocol supports the caching of responses in order to efﬁciently fulﬁll requests.
Simple caching is enabled using freshness and validity information carried with CoAP
responses. A cache could be located in an end-point or an intermediary.
Proxying is useful in constrained networks for several reasons, including (i) net-
work trafﬁc limiting, (ii) to improve performance, (iii) to access resources of sleeping

130
EVOLVING IoT STANDARDS
devices, or (iv) for security reasons. The proxying of requests on behalf of another
CoAP end-point is supported in the protocol. The URI of the resource to request is
included in the request, while the destination IP address is set to the proxy.
The reader is referred to the draft speciﬁcation discussed in the key reference
(8) for an extensive discussion of the capabilities, formats, and procedures of this
protocol.
5.4
REPRESENTATIONAL STATE TRANSFER (REST)
As noted, CoAP uses REST techniques. REST was ﬁrst described in 2000 by Roy
Fielding in his University of California dissertation which analyzed a set of web-
focused software architecture principles for distributed computing. REST aims at
supporting scalability of component interactions, generality of interfaces, and inde-
pendent deployment of components. Hence, it deﬁnes a set of architectural prin-
ciples by which one can design WS that focus on a system’s resources, includ-
ing how resource states are addressed and transferred over HTTP by a plethora
of clients written in different languages (9). Stated differently, REST is an archi-
tectural style of large-scale networked software that takes advantage of the tech-
nologies and protocols of the World Wide Web; it describes how distributed data
objects, or resources, can be deﬁned and addressed, stressing the easy exchange
of information and scalability (10). A REST-based WS follows four basic design
principles:
r Use HTTP methods explicitly.
r Be stateless.
r Expose directory structure-like URIs.
r Transfer XML, JavaScript Object Notation (JSON), or both.
5.5
ETSI M2M
ETSI recently created a dedicated Technical Committee, with the mission to develop
standard M2M communications. The group seeks to provide an end-to-end view
of M2M standardization and is expected to co-operate closely with ETSI’s ongo-
ing activities on next-generation networks (NGNs), radio communications, ﬁber
optics and powerline, as well as collaboration with 3GPP standards group on
mobile communication technologies. The reference model used in this text is the
M2M model developed by this group, as deﬁned in various evolving standards,
including the ETSI M2M Release 1 standards described in ETSI TS 102 689
(requirements), ETSI TS 102 690 (functional architecture), and ETSI TS 102 921
(interface descriptions). ETSI has also published a number of documents deﬁn-
ing common use cases. These documents were cited in other chapters and are not
re-listed here.

THIRD-GENERATION PARTNERSHIP PROJECT SERVICE REQUIREMENTS
131
Key elements in the M2M environment include the following (11):
r M2M device: A device capable of replying to request for data contained within
those device or capable of transmitting data contained within those devices
autonomously;
r M2M area network (device domain): A network that provides connectivity
between M2M devices and M2M gateways, for example, a PAN;
r M2M gateway: A gateway (say a router or higher layer network element) that
uses M2M capabilities to ensure M2M devices interworking and interconnection
to the communication network;
r M2M communication networks (network domain): A wider-range network that
supports communications between the M2M gateway(s) and M2M application;
examples include but are not limited to xDSL, LTE, WiMAX, and WLAN; and
r M2M applications: Systems that contain the middleware layer where data
goes through various application services and is used by the speciﬁc business-
processing engines.
The reader is referred to the architecture speciﬁcation cited above for an extensive
discussion of the M2M environment.
5.6
THIRD-GENERATION PARTNERSHIP PROJECT SERVICE
REQUIREMENTS FOR MACHINE-TYPE COMMUNICATIONS
5.6.1
Approach
Current mobile networks are optimized for human-to-human (H2H) trafﬁc and not
for M2M/MTC interactions; hence, optimizations for MTC are advantageous. For
example, one needs lower costs to reﬂect lower MTC ARPUs (average revenue per
user); also, there is a need to support triggering. Hence, 3GPP has started work on
M2M speciﬁcation in 2010 for interoperable solutions, particularly in the 3G/4G/LTE
context. Table 5.1 provides a superset of speciﬁcations that are applicable to MTC ser-
vices. Figure 5.4 depicts the service model, while Figure 5.5 depicts the architecture.
In that architecture, the interfaces are as follows:
r MTCu: provides MTC devices access to the 3GPP network for the transport of
user trafﬁc;
r MTCi: the reference point for MTC server to connect the 3GPP network via
3GPP bearer service; and
r MTCsms: the reference point for MTC server to connect the 3GPP network via
3GPP SMS.
The key document 3rd Generation Partnership Project Service Requirements for
Machine Type Communications—Release 10 focused on overload and congestion
control, extended access barring (EAB), low priority access, APN (access point

132
EVOLVING IoT STANDARDS
TABLE 5.1
3GPP Speciﬁcations Related to MTC
3GPP
Speciﬁcations
Speciﬁcations Associated with or Affected by MTC Work
22.011
Service accessibility
22.368
Service requirements for MTC; stage 1
23.008
Organization of subscriber data
23.012
Location management procedures
23.060
General packet radio service (GPRS); service description; stage 2
23.122
Non-access-stratum (NAS) functions related to mobile station (MS) in idle
mode
23.203
Policy and charging control architecture
23.401
GPRS enhancements for evolved universal terrestrial radio access network
(E-UTRAN) access
23.402
Architecture enhancements for non-3GPP accesses
23.888
System improvements for MTC
24.008
Mobile radio interface layer 3 speciﬁcation; core network protocols; stage 3
24.301
NAS protocol for evolved packet system (EPS); stage 3
24.368
NAS conﬁguration management object (MO)
25.331
Radio resource control (RRC); protocol speciﬁcation
29.002
Mobile application part (MAP) speciﬁcation
29.018
GPRS; serving GPRS support node (SGSN)—visitors location register
(VLR); Gs interface layer 3 speciﬁcation
29.060
GPRS; GPRS tunneling protocol (GTP) across the Gn and Gp interface
29.118
Mobility management entity (MME)—VLR SGs interface speciﬁcation
29.274
3GPP EPS; evolved GTP for control plane (GTPv2-C); stage 3
29.275
Proxy mobile IPv6 (PMIPv6)-based mobility and tunneling protocols;
stage 3
29.282
Mobile IPv6 vendor-speciﬁc option format and usage within 3GPP
31.102
Characteristics of the universal subscriber identity module (USIM)
application
33.868
Security aspects of MTC
36.331
Evolved universal terrestrial radio access (E-UTRA); RRC; protocol
speciﬁcation
37.868
RAN improvements for MTC
43.868
GERAN improvements for MTC
44.018
Mobile radio interface layer 3 speciﬁcation; RRC protocol
44.060
GPRS; MS–base station system (BSS) interface; radio link control/medium
access control (RLC/MAC) protocol
45.002
Multiplexing and multiple access on the radio path
name)-based congestion control, and downlink throttling (12). For MTC communi-
cation, the following communication scenarios are identiﬁed and described in the
Release 10 document:
(i) MTC devices communicating with one or more MTC server;
(ii) MTC devices communicating with each other.

THIRD-GENERATION PARTNERSHIP PROJECT SERVICE REQUIREMENTS
133
Direct model
Applications
MTC
application
MTC
application
MTC server
MTC
application
Service
enablement
Connectivity
Devices
Operator’s wireless
network
Operator’s wireless
network
Operator’s wireless
network
Devices
Devices
Indirect model
service provider
controlled
Indirect model
operator controlled
MTC server
FIGURE 5.4
M2M in 3GPP—service models.
MTC
device
MTCu
MTC
server
MTC
remote app
MTC
device
UE
Um/
Uu/
LTE-Uu
SGSN /
MME
RAN
MTC
server
MTCi
MTCsms
3GPP bearer services /
SMS / IMS
MTC
server
MTC
user
MTC
application
HLR /
HSS
MTC
IWF
SMS-SC/
IP-SM-GW
IP SMS
Legacy SMS
S6m
T5a/T5b
Gn/Gp/S1-U
3GPP
Gi/SGi
Gi/SGi
MTCsp
API
Operator
controlled
service provider
controlled
Involet model
Direct model
Hybrid model
+
1
1
1
2
2
2
T4
Rf/Ga
MTCsms
Control plane
User plane
Gr/S6a/
S6d
GGSN/
S-GW+P-GW
CDF/
CGF
FIGURE 5.5
M2M in 3GPP—Architecture.

134
EVOLVING IoT STANDARDS
For MTC devices communicating with one or more MTC servers, the following
use cases exist:
(a) MTC server controlled by the network operator; namely the MTC server is
located in the operator domain. Here
– The network operator offers API (e.g., Open Systems Architecture [OSA])
on its MTC server(s)
– MTC user accesses MTC server(s) of the network operator via API
(b) MTC server not controlled by the network operator; namely MTC server is
located outside the operator domain. Here
– The network operator offers the network connectivity to the MTC server(s)
located outside of the network operator domain
The communication scenario where the MTC devices communicate directly with-
out intermediate MTC server is not considered in this release of the speciﬁcation.
MTC applications do not all have the same characteristics. This implies that
not every system optimization is suitable for every MTC application. Therefore,
MTC features are deﬁned in Release 10 to provide structure for the different system
optimization possibilities that can be invoked. Such MTC features are offered on a
per subscription basis. MTC features can be individually activated. The following
MTC features have been deﬁned:
– Low mobility
– Time controlled
– Time tolerant
– Packet switched (PS) only (here the MTC feature PS only is intended for use
with MTC devices that only require packet switched services)
– Small data transmissions
– Mobile originated only
– Infrequent mobile terminated
– MTC monitoring
– Priority alarm
– Secure connection
– Location-speciﬁc trigger
– Network provided destination for uplink data
– Infrequent transmission
5.6.2
Architectural Reference Model for MTC
The latest Release 11 (an extensive document) focuses on numbers and addressing,
on improvements of device triggering, and on interfaces between MTC server and
mobile network (13,14). Referring to Figure 5.5, MTCsp is a new control interface

CENELEC
135
for interactions with MTC server; MTC-IWF is a new interworking function between
(external) MTC server and operator core network handling security, authorization,
authentication, and charging.
The end-to-end application, between the user equipment (UE) used for MTC
and the MTC application, uses services provided by the 3GPP system, and option-
ally services provided by an MTC server. The 3GPP system provides transport and
communication services (including 3GPP bearer services, IMS, and SMS) including
various optimizations that can facilitate MTC. Figure 5.5 shows UE used for MTC
connecting to the 3GPP network (UTRAN, E-UTRAN, GERAN, I-WLAN, and so
on) via the Um/Uu/LTE-Uu interface. The architecture encompasses a number of
models as follows:
– Direct model—direct communication provided by the 3GPP operator: The MTC
application connects directly to the operator network without the use of any
MTC server;
– Indirect model—MTC service provider controlled communication: The MTC
server is an entity outside of the operator domain. The MTCsp and MTCsms are
external interfaces (i.e., to a third-party M2M service provider);
– Indirect model—3GPP operator controlled communication: The MTC server is
an entity inside the operator domain. The MTCsp and MTCsms are internal to
the public land mobile network (PLMN);
– Hybrid model: The direct and indirect models are used simultaneously in the
hybrid model, for example, connecting the user plane using the direct model and
doing control plane signalling using the indirect model.
Some believe that there may be E.164 telephone number issues as related to M2M:
in several countries, regulators have indicated that there are not enough (mobile)
numbers available for M2M applications. 3GPP postulates that solutions will have to
support 100× more M2M devices than devices for H2H communications. Proposed
solutions include: (i) mid-term solution: special M2M number ranges with longer
telephone numbers (e.g., 14 digits); (ii) long-term solution: no longer provide E.164
telephone numbers for M2M applications.
Figure 5.6 provides a view to the various protocol stacks deﬁned in Release 11.
The reader is referred to the Technical Report by 3GPP (13) for an extensive
discussion of architectural aspects and system requirements for MTC/M2M commu-
nication. The second part of Chapter 6 discusses some 3GPP networks that may come
into play in the MTC/M2M context.
5.7
CENELEC
Recently, the European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization (CENELEC)
has accepted the transport proﬁle of Siemens’ distribution line carrier communication
protocol, CX1, as a standardization proposal. The standard aims at supporting open

136
EVOLVING IoT STANDARDS
User-plane
Control plane
MTC server-MTC-IWF MTCsp reference point
MTC Server-SMS SC MTCsms reference point
MTC application
MTC application
IP
MT/L3
MT/L2
L2
L1
L3
L2
L1
L3
IP
IP
IP
MTC UP
function
MT/L1
UE
Urr/Uu/LTE-Uu
CP protocol(s)
CP
protocol(s)
MTCsp
protocol(s)
MTCsp protocol(s)
MTCsms protocol
MTCsms protocol
MTCsms
MTC server
SMS_SC
MTCsp
MTC server
MTC-IWF
TBD
3GPP PLMN
network elements
IP
IP
IP
IP
IP
3GPP PLMN
(RAN+CN nodes)
S5/S8
Gn/Gp
P-GW/GGSN
MTCi
MTC server
API
Application
domain
FIGURE 5.6
User and control plane stack for MTC architecture—as described in Release
11—Technical Report 3GPP TR 23.888 V1.7.0 (2012–08).
and fault tolerant communication via powerline in intelligent power supply grids.
As the basis for the transmission protocol, which uses the low voltage network as
a communication channel for data of grid sensors and smart meters, the transport
proﬁle has been designed to ensure interoperability in accordance with EU Mandate
M/441. CENELEC TC 13 was planning to forward the CX1 transport proﬁle to
TC 57 of the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) as a proposal for
inclusion in the IEC standardization process. CX1 is already used to connect meters
and other intelligent terminal devices in Siemens’ SG metering systems, such as
in the load switching devices that will replace household ripple control receivers.
The systems collect energy consumption data and network information, which are
then relayed to a control center for further processing (15). CX1 utilizes spread
spectrum modulation, in which multiple frequencies within the same frequency band
are used simultaneously to transmit a single signal. This means that interference,
which often occurs at certain frequencies, has only a negligible effect on signal

ZigBee IP (ZIP)
137
transmission. In addition, the communication protocol can handle any change in the
physical communication parameters of a low voltage power supply grid, such as signal
attenuation, noise, network disruption and signal coupling, as well as operational
changes in network conﬁguration. The protocol can also be integrated into existing
IEC protocol-based network automation and energy management infrastructures.
5.8
IETF IPv6 OVER LOWPOWER WPAN (6LoWPAN)
6LoWPAN is an IPv6 adaption layer for low power wireless PAN (LoWPAN).
IPv6-over-IEEE 802.15.4 described in RFC 4944 speciﬁes how IPv6 is carried over
an IEEE 802.15.4 network with the help of an adaptation layer which sits between
the MAC layer and the IP network layer. As it should be clear at this juncture, a link
in a LoWPAN is characterized as lossy, low power, low bit-rate, short range, with
many nodes saving energy with long sleep periods.
It turns out that multicast as used in IPv6 ND described in RFC 4861 is not
desirable in such a wireless low power and lossy network. Moreover, LoWPAN links
are asymmetric and non-transitive in nature. A LoWPAN is potentially composed
of a large number of overlapping radio ranges. Although a given radio range has
broadcast capabilities, the aggregation of these is a complex non-broadcast multi-
access (NBMA) structure with generally no LoWPAN-wide multicast capabilities.
Link-local scope is in reality deﬁned by reachability and radio strength. Thus, one
can consider a LoWPAN to be made up of links with undetermined connectivity
properties, along with the corresponding address model assumptions deﬁned therein.
Hence, there is work underway to develop optimizations to IPv6 ND (RFC 4861)
speciﬁcally aimed at low power and lossy networks such as LoWPANs (16).
This topic is covered in Chapter 9, after the reader has acquired some background
on IPv6.
5.9
ZigBee IP (ZIP)
ZigBee is a wireless PAN IEEE 802.15.4 standard, which we cover in Chapter 6.
Here we simply make some passing reference to the ZigBee Alliance’s ZIP standard,
which is a ﬁrst deﬁnition of an open standards-based IPv6 stack for smart objects.
The goal is to extend the use of IP networking into resource-constrained devices over
a wide range of low power link technologies. The effort related to ZIP development
has made signiﬁcant progress to bring IPv6 network protocols over 802.15.4 wireless
mesh networks to reality. ZIP is a protocol stack based on IETF- and IEEE-deﬁned
standards such as 6LoWPAN and IEEE 802.15.4 to be used for the Smart Energy 2.0
(SE 2.0) proﬁle.
ZIP enables low power 802.15.4 nodes to participate natively with other IPv6-
enabled WiFi, Homeplug, and Ethernet nodes without the complexity and cost of
application layer gateways. To accomplish this, the ZIP stack incorporates a number
of standardized IETF protocols including 6LoWPAN for IP header compression
and ND, and RPL for mesh routing. ZIP further employs other IETF standards to

138
EVOLVING IoT STANDARDS
support network joining procedures, service discovery, and TLS/SSL-based security
mechanisms (17). At press time, the ZIP speciﬁcation was nearing release of its 0.9
draft and had already progressed through numerous certiﬁcation events. In particular,
there has been interest in validating that ZIP will comfortably support SEP2 unicast
and multicast messaging over an 802.15.4-based HAN mesh. It was anticipated that
production ready, certiﬁed stacks would be available mid-2013. Early implementers
included Cisco, Exegin, and Grid2Home, among others. Proponents expect that ZIP-
based product offerings would soon be interoperating within the SG.
5.10
IP IN SMART OBJECTS (IPSO)
The IPSO Alliance is an advocate for IP-networked devices for use in energy, con-
sumer, healthcare, and industrial applications. The objective of the Alliance is not
to deﬁne technologies or standards, but to document the use of IP-based technolo-
gies deﬁned at the standard organizations such as IETF with focus on support by
the Alliance of various use cases. The IPSO Alliance is a non-proﬁt association
of more than 60 members at press time from leading technology, communications,
and energy companies around the world. The mission is to provide a foundation for
industry growth through building stronger relationships, fostering awareness, pro-
viding education, promoting the industry, generating research, and creating a better
understanding of IP and its role in connecting smart objects. Goals include (18):
r Promote IP as the premier solution for access and communication for smart
objects.
r Promote the use of IP in smart objects by developing and publishing white papers
and case studies and providing updates on standards progress from associations
like IETF, among others, and through other supporting marketing activities.
r Understand the industries and markets where smart objects can have an effective
role in growth when connected using the Internet protocol.
r Organize interoperability tests that will allow members and interested parties
to show that products and services using IP for smart objects can work together
and meet industry standards for communication.
r Support IETF and other standards development organizations in the develop-
ment of standards for IP for smart objects.
APPENDIX 5.A: LEGACY SUPERVISORY CONTROL AND DATA
ACQUISITION (SCADA) SYSTEMS
This appendix provides a short summary of SCADA, a legacy, but widely deployed
system used to monitor and control a plant or equipment in industries such as but
not limited to energy, oil and gas reﬁning, water and waste control, transporta-
tion, and telecommunications. This section is summarized and synthesized from

LEGACY SUPERVISORY CONTROL AND DATA ACQUISITION (SCADA) SYSTEMS
139
reference (19) from the National Communications System (NCS). M2M approaches
seek to enhance, modernize, and extend the basic concepts found in SCADA (M2M
is not intended to be directly interoperable with SCADA but can be supported with
proxies/gateways.)
A SCADA system gathers remote operational information, transfers the informa-
tion to a central site, then alerts a management station that an event has occurred,
carrying out necessary analysis and control. These systems can be relatively simple,
such as one that monitors environmental conditions of a small ofﬁce building, or very
complex, such as a system that monitors all the activity in a nuclear power plant or
the activity of a municipal water system. Traditionally, SCADA systems have made
use of public switched network (PSN) facilities for monitoring purposes; wireless
technologies are now being widely deployed for purposes of monitoring.
A SCADA system encompasses the transfer of data between a SCADA central host
computer and a number of remote terminal units (RTUs) and/or programmable logic
controllers (PLCs); the central host typically supports operator terminals. Speciﬁcally,
a SCADA system consists of:
r One or more ﬁeld data interface devices, usually RTUs or PLCs, which interface
to ﬁeld sensing devices and local control switchboxes and actuators;
r A communications system used to transfer data between ﬁeld data interface
devices and control units and the computers in the SCADA central host; the
communication may use telephone, cable, radio, cellular, satellite, etc. or any
combination of these;
r A central host computer server or servers (sometimes called a SCADA center,
master station, or master terminal unit [MTU]);
r A collection of standard and/or custom software systems [sometimes called
human machine interface (HMI) software or man machine interface (MMI)
software] used to provide the SCADA central host and operator terminal appli-
cation, support the communications system, and monitor and control remotely
located ﬁeld data interface devices.
There have been three generations of SCADA systems:
r First generation—monolithic approach
r Second generation—distributed approach
r Third generation—networked approach
In a SCADA system, the RTU accepts commands to operate control points, sets
analog output levels, and responds to requests. The RTU provides status, as well as
discrete and accumulated data to the SCADA master station. The data representations
sent are not identiﬁed in any fashion other than by unique addressing. The addressing
is designed to correlate with the SCADA master station database. The RTU has no
knowledge of which unique parameters it is monitoring in the real world; it simply
monitors certain points and stores the information in a local addressing scheme. Each

140
EVOLVING IoT STANDARDS
protocol consists of two message sets or pairs. One set forms the master protocol,
containing the valid statements for master station initiation or response, and the other
set is the RTU protocol, containing the valid statements an RTU can initiate and
respond to. In most but not all cases, these pairs can be considered a poll or request
for information or action and a conﬁrming response. The SCADA protocol between
master and RTU forms a viable model for RTU-to-intelligent electronic device (IED)
communications. Currently, there are several different protocols in use; the most
common are:
r IEC 60870-5 series, speciﬁcally IEC 60870-5-101 (commonly referred to as
101) and
r Distributed network protocol version 3 (DNP3).
IEC 60870-5 Series
IEC 60870-5 speciﬁes a number of frame formats and services that may be provided
at different layers. IEC 60870-5 is based on a three-layer enhanced performance
architecture (EPA) reference model (see Fig. 5A.1) for efﬁcient implementation
within RTUs, meters, relays, and other IEDs. Additionally, IEC 60870-5 deﬁnes
basic application functionality for a user layer; such user layer is situated between
the open system interconnection (OSI) application layer and the application program.
This user layer adds interoperability for such functions as clock synchronization and
ﬁle transfers.
IEC 60870-5-101
IEC 60870-5-102
IEC 60870-5-103
Application
Application layer
(OSI layer 7)
Link interface
Physical interface
LLC-like layer
MAC-like layer
Link layer
(OSI layer 2)
Physical layer
(OSI layer 1)
IEC 60870-5-5
IEC 60870-5-4
IEC 60870-5-3
IEC 60870-5-2
IEC 60870-5-1
FIGURE 5A.1
SCADA protocols and EPA.

LEGACY SUPERVISORY CONTROL AND DATA ACQUISITION (SCADA) SYSTEMS
141
The following descriptions provide the basic scope of each of the ﬁve documents
in the base IEC 60870-5 telecontrol transmission protocol speciﬁcation set. Standard
proﬁles are necessary for uniform application of the IEC 60870-5 standards. A
proﬁle is a set of parameters deﬁning the way a device acts; such proﬁles have been
created.
r IEC 60870-5-1 (1990–02) speciﬁes the basic requirements for services to be
provided by the data link and physical layers for telecontrol applications. In
particular, it speciﬁes standards on coding, formatting, and synchronizing data
frames of variable and ﬁxed lengths that meet speciﬁed data integrity require-
ments. At the physical layer, the Standard 101 Proﬁle additionally allows the
selection of International Telecommunication Union-Telecommunication Stan-
dardization Sector (ITU-T) standards that are compatible with Electronic Indus-
tries Association (EIA) standards RS-232 and RS-485 and also support ﬁber
optics interfaces.
r IEC-60870-5-2 (1992–04) provides a selection of link transmission procedures
using a control ﬁeld and optional address ﬁeld; the address ﬁeld is optional
because some point-to-point topologies do not require either source or destina-
tion addressing.
r IEC 60870-5-3 (1992–09) speciﬁes rules for structuring application data units
in transmission frames of telecontrol systems. These rules are presented as
generic standards that may be used to support a variety of present and future
telecontrol applications. This section of IEC 60870-5 describes the general
structure of application data and basic rules to specify application data units
without specifying details about information ﬁelds and their contents.
r IEC 60870-5-4 (1993–08) provides rules for deﬁning information data elements
and a common set of information elements, particularly digital and analog
process variables that are frequently used in telecontrol applications.
r IEC 60870-5-5 (1995–06) deﬁnes basic application functions that perform stan-
dard procedures for telecontrol systems, which are procedures that reside beyond
layer 7 (application layer) of the ISO reference model. These utilize standard
services of the application layer. The speciﬁcations in IEC 60870-5-5 (1995–06)
serve as basic standards for application proﬁles that are then created in detail
for speciﬁc telecontrol tasks.
DNP3
DNP3 is a protocol for transmission of point-to-point data using serial communica-
tions. It has been used primarily by utilities, but can also be used in other areas. The
DNP3 is speciﬁcally developed for interdevice communication involving SCADA
RTUs and provides for both RTU-to-IED and master-to-RTU/IED. It is based on the
three-layer EPA model contained in the IEC 60870-5 standards, with some alterations

142
EVOLVING IoT STANDARDS
to meet additional requirements of a variety of users in the electric utility industry.
DNP3 was developed with the following goals in mind:
r High data integrity. The DNP3 data link layer uses a variation of the IEC 60870-
5-1 (1990–02) frame format FT3. Both data link layer frames and application
layer messages may be transmitted using conﬁrmed service.
r Flexible structure. The DNP3 application layer is object based, with a structure
that allows a range of implementations while retaining interoperability.
r Multiple applications. DNP3 can be used in several modes, including: (i) polled
only; (ii) polled report-by-exception; (iii) unsolicited report-by-exception (qui-
escent mode); and (iv) a mixture of modes. It can also be used with several
physical layers, and as a layered protocol it is suitable for operation over local
and some wide area networks.
r Minimized overhead. DNP3 was designed for existing wire-pair data links with
operating bit rates as low as 1200 bps and attempts to use a minimum of
overhead while retaining ﬂexibility. Selection of a data reporting method, such
as report-by-exception, further reduces overhead.
r Open standard. DNP3 is a non-proprietary, evolving standard controlled by a
users group whose members include RTU, IED, and master station vendors,
and representatives of the electric utility and system consulting community.
REFERENCES
1. Gluhak A, Krco S, et al. A survey on facilities for experimental internet of things research.
Communications Magazine, IEEE, November 2011;49(11):58–67.
2. Ladid L. Keynote Speech, International Workshop on Extending Seamlessly to the Internet
of Things (ESLOT 2012), in conjunction with IMIS-2012 International Conference, July
4–6, 2012, Palermo, Italy.
3. Arkko J. Interoperability Challenges in the Internet of Things. Interconnecting Smart
Objects with the Internet Workshop 2011, 25th March 2011, Prague.
4. Internet Architecture Board, Interconnecting Smart Objects with the Internet Workshop
2011, 25th March 2011, Prague.
5. Kutscher D, Farrell S. Towards an Information-Centric Internet with more Things.
Interconnecting Smart Objects with the Internet Workshop 2011, 25th March 2011,
Prague.
6. Winter T, editor. ROLL/RPL: IPv6 Routing Protocol for Low Power and Lossy Networks,
March 2011, draft-ietf-roll-rpl-19.
7. Kuryla S. RPL: IPv6 Routing Protocol for Low Power and Lossy Networks, Networks
and Distributed Systems Seminar, March 1, 2010.
8. Shelby Z, Hartke K, Bormann C, Frank B. Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP).
CoRE Working Group, March 12, 2012, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-core-coap-09.
9. Richardson L, Ruby S. RESTful Web Service, O’Reilly Media, 2007, Sebastopol, CA.
10. Kay R. QuickStudy: Representational State Transfer (REST). ComputerWorld, August 6,
2007.

REFERENCES
143
11. Lin T-M. M2M: Machine to Machine Communication (From ETSI/3GPP Aspect). White
Paper, Industrial Technology Research Institute of Taiwan, R.O.C, 2010.
12. 3rd Generation Partnership Project, Technical Speciﬁcation Group Services and Sys-
tem Aspects; Service Requirements for Machine Type Communications (MTC); Stage 1
(Release 10); Technical Speciﬁcation 3GPP TS 22.368 V10.1.0 (2010–06).
13. 3rd Generation Partnership Project, Technical Speciﬁcation Group Services and System
Aspects; System Improvements for Machine-Type Communications; Stage 1 (Release 11);
Technical Report 3GPP TR 23.888 V1.7.0 (2012–08).
14. Norp T. Mobile Network Improvements for M2M, a 3GPP Perspective. ETSI M2M
Workshop, October 2011. TNO, P.O. Box 342, NL-7300 AH Apeldoorn.
15. Mrosik J. International PLC data communication standard for grid automation and smart
metering proposed by Siemens. On line Magazine, Nov 15, 2012, http://www. metering
.com.
16. Shelby Z, editor. Neighbor Discovery Optimization for Low Power and Lossy Networks
(6LoWPAN), Updates: 4944 (if approved), August 24, 2012, IETF draft-ietf-6lowpan-nd-
21.
17. Duffy P. Zigbee IP: Extending the Smart Grid to Consumers., Cisco Blog – The Platform,
June 4, 2012, Cisco Systems, Inc., 170 West Tasman Dr., San Jose, CA 95134 USA.
18. IPSO Alliance, http://www.ipso-alliance.org/.
19. National Communications System, Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA)
Systems, Technical Information Bulletin 04-1, NCS TIB 04-1, October 2004, P.O. Box
4052, Arlington, VA 22204-4052. http://www.ncs.gov.

CHAPTER 6
LAYER 1/2 CONNECTIVITY: WIRELESS
TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
This chapter surveys basic lower-layer wireless technologies to support IoT/machine-
to-machine (M2M) applications, as it appears that many such implementations will
entail wireless connectivity at the PHY/MAC layer. Available wireless networks1 that
can be utilized for IoT/M2M applications include the following:
r Personal area networks (PANs): Zigbee R⃝, Bluetooth R⃝, especially Bluetooth
low energy (BLE), near ﬁeld communications (NFC), and proprietary systems
(e.g., ANT+,2 NIKE+3); speciﬁcally, there is interest in low-power wireless
personal area networks (LoWPANs); some of these PANs are also classiﬁed as
low-rate wireless personal area networks (LR-WPANs);
1Some refer to the entire “wireless networks” ﬁeld as wireless information and communication technology
(WICT).
2ANT/ANT+ is a proprietary wireless sensor network technology targeted at manufacturers of bike
computers, speed/cadence sensors, foot pods, power meters, heart rate monitors, calorimeters, body mass
index-measuring devices, blood pressure monitors, blood glucose meters, and so on, promoted by the
ANT+ Alliance. It is principally used for compatible Garmin device. For example, an ANT+ heart rate
strap will send heart rate data to a watch, phone, bike computer, tablet, and/or any other device that reads
ANT+ heart rate.
3Nike+ R⃝is a proprietary wireless technology developed by Nike and Apple to allow users to monitor
their activity levels while exercising.
Building the Internet of Things with IPv6 and MIPv6: The Evolving World of M2M Communications,
First Edition. Daniel Minoli.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
144

WPAN TECHNOLOGIES FOR IoT/M2M
145
r Wireless local area networks (WLANs): Wi-Fi R⃝IEEE Standard 802.11 (includ-
ing vendor-speciﬁc implementations for low power4);
r Metropolitan area networks (MANs): WiMAX;
r Wireless sensor networks (WSN): application-speciﬁc technology, in general;
r Third generation (3G)/4G cellular: Universal mobile telecommunications sys-
tem (UMTS), general packet radio service (GPRS), enhanced data rates (EDRs)
for GSM evolution (EDGE), and long-term evolution (LTE); and,
r Global: Satellite networks.
While IoT/M2M connectivity might be achieved by wired means, for example
power line communication (PLC)-based grid management, some operators have used
wireless technology for meter reading. Furthermore, although energy suppliers rou-
tinely utilize supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA)-based systems to
enable remote telemetry functions in the power grid and, and although, traditionally,
SCADA systems have used wireline networks to link remote power grid elements
with a central operations center, at this time an increasing number of utilities are
turning to public cellular networks to support these functions. Some of the wireline
technologies, including PLC, are brieﬂy discussed in the appendix to this chapter.
6.1
WPAN TECHNOLOGIES FOR IoT/M2M
A PAN (also called WPAN) is a network used for communication among intelligent
devices physically close to a person (including smartphones, tablets, body monitors,
and so on). PANs can be used to support wireless body area networks (WBANs)
(also known as wireless medical body area networks [WMBANs] and/or medical
body area network systems [MBANSs]), but they can also be used to support other
applications. As discussed in Chapter 3, Medical applications include, among others,
vital sign monitoring, respiration monitoring, electrocardiography (ECG), pH mon-
itoring, glucose monitoring, disability assistance, muscle tension monitoring, and
artiﬁcial limb support. Nonmedical applications of WBANs include, among others,
video streaming, data transfer, and entertainment and gaming. The reach of a PAN
is typically a few meters. The devices in question are sometimes known as short-
range devices (SRDs) (1). PANs can be used for communication among the personal
devices themselves (intrapersonal communication), or for connecting to a higher level
network such as the Internet. Table 6.1 (partially based on Reference 2) summarizes
a coarse comparison between three wireless technologies, highlighting the features
of BANs/WBANs. The WBAN technologies can satisfy, in various degrees, major
requirements that the healthcare industry considers important: (i) very low-power
4In recent years, several improvements have been made to the Wi-Fi LAN standard; some of these
improvements (including IEEE Standard 802.11v) are aimed at reducing its power consumption. Wi-Fi is
optimized for traditional ofﬁce automation (OA) large data transfer, where high throughput is needed; it
is not generally intended for coin cell operation.

146
LAYER 1/2 CONNECTIVITY: WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
TABLE 6.1
Comparison of Technologies
WBAN
WSN
Cellular Wireless
Networks
Trafﬁc
Application speciﬁc, sporadic/cyclic, modest
data rate
Multimedia, high
data rate
Topology
Dynamic
Random, dynamic
Few infrastructure
changes
Conﬁguration/
maintenance
Some ﬂexibility
Specialists are
needed
Self-conﬁgurable,
unattended
operation
Managed by large
organizations/
carriers
Battery
Multimonth to multiyear battery life
Replaced as needed
Network size
Dense distribution
limited by body size
Unlimited number
(typically 102–106)
Tens of nodes
Node
Low/modest complexity
High complexity
Overall design
goals
Limited
electromagnetic
exposure, energy
efﬁciency
Energy efﬁciency,
self-operability
cost optimization
Bandwidth efﬁciency.
QoS (throughput/
delay)
Standardization
Multiple (IEEE)
standards especially
at lower layers
Relatively little
standardization
Multiple international
standards, ITU-T,
ETSI, etc.
sensor consumption, (ii) very low transmitted power, and (iii) high reliability and
quality of service (QoS).
Focusing speciﬁcally on WBANs, the key wireless standards include ZigBee/IEEE
802.15.4 along with the Personal, Home and Hospital Care (PHHC) Proﬁle—ZigBee
Health Care, IEEE 802.15.1 (Bluetooth), and the newer IEEE 802.15.6 and IEEE
802.15.4j; other standards include ISO/IEEE 11073 and ETSI TR 101 557 V1.1.1
(2012–02). Note that both ZigBee and Bluetooth have been extended and modiﬁed
in recent years to satisfy particular requirements of medical/ﬁtness industries (3).
Low-power consumption IEEE 802.11 Wi-Fi is considered generally less attractive
at this time, although some proponents argue in favor.5
In this chapter, we focus predominantly on PANs and 3G/4G technologies. See
Table 6.2 for a tabulation of some important technologies. It is not the goal of this
5Proponents make the case that no other wireless technology is as IP friendly as Wi-Fi. For example,
ZigBee IP that requires the use of a bridge. ZigBee may have lower node costs, but it requires new
infrastructure. Wi-Fi also provides the highest bandwidth of any wireless technologies—some low-power
implementations provide up to 11 Mbps, with a fallback to 1 Mbps. ZigBee offers less than 250 Kbps, with
no fallback. Wi-Fi also provides well-proven encryption, authentication, and end-to-end network security
(WPA2, EAP, TLS/SSL); ZigBee still requires testing, since some security holes have been identiﬁed (4).
On the other hand, Wi-Fi’s power requirements are high. Work is being conducted in Wi-Fi groups to
lower power consumption. Currently, however, proprietary drivers are needed, with the technology only
applicable to the personal computer market where receiver power budgets are higher (5).

WPAN TECHNOLOGIES FOR IoT/M2M
147
TABLE 6.2
Key Wireless Technology and Concepts Supporting IoT/M2M
Applications
Technology/Concept
Description
3GPP
3GPP unites six telecommunications standard bodies, known as
“organizational partners” and provides their members with a
stable environment to produce the reports and speciﬁcations
that deﬁne 3GPP technologies. These technologies are
constantly evolving through—what have become known
as—generations of commercial cellular/mobile systems.
3GPP was originally the standards partnership evolving
Global System for Mobile communication (GSM) systems
toward the 3G. However, since the completion of the ﬁrst
LTE and the Evolve Packet Core (EPC) speciﬁcations, 3GPP
has become the focal point for mobile systems beyond 3G.
From 3GPP Release 10 onward, 3GPP is compliant with the
latest ITU-R requirements for IMT-Advanced “Systems
beyond 3G.” The standard now allows for operation at speeds
up to100 Mbps for high-mobility and 1 Gbps for
low-mobility communication. The original scope of 3GPP
was to produce Technical Speciﬁcations and Technical
Reports for a 3G Mobile System based on evolved GSM CNs
and the radio access technologies that they support (i.e.,
Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (UTRA) both frequency
division duplex [FDD] and time division duplex [TDD]
modes). The scope was subsequently amended to include the
maintenance and development of the GSM Technical
Speciﬁcations and Technical Reports including evolved radio
access technologies (e.g. GPRS and EDGE) (6). The term
“3GPP speciﬁcation” covers all GSM (including GPRS and
EDGE), W-CDMA, and LTE (including LTE-Advanced)
speciﬁcations. The following terms are also used to describe
networks using the 3G speciﬁcations: UTRAN, UMTS (in
Europe), and FOMA (in Japan)
3GPP2 (Third-Generation
Partnership Project 2)
3GPP2 is a collaborative 3G telecommunications
speciﬁcation-setting project comprising North American and
Asian interests developing global speciﬁcations for
ANSI/TIA/EIA-41 Cellular Radiotelecommunication
Intersystem Operations network evolution to 3G and global
speciﬁcations for the radio transmission technologies (RTTs)
supported by ANSI/TIA/EIA-41. 3GPP2 was born out of the
International Telecommunication Union’s (ITU)
International Mobile Telecommunications “IMT-2000”
initiative, covering HS, broadband, and Internet protocol
(IP)-based mobile systems featuring network-to-network
interconnection, feature/service transparency, global
roaming, and seamless services independent of location (7)
(continued )

148
LAYER 1/2 CONNECTIVITY: WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
TABLE 6.2
(Continued )
Technology/Concept
Description
6LoWPAN: IPv6 over
low-power area
networks (IEEE
802.15.4)
6LoWPAN is now a widely accepted approach to run IP on
802.15.4 based on RFC 4944 (September 2007). It is
supported in TinyOS, Contiki, and in standards such as
ISA100, ZigBee SE 2.0. RFC 4944 makes 802.15.4 look like
an IPv6 link. It provides basic encapsulation, efﬁcient
representation of packets < ∼100 bytes. It addresses topics
such as (8):
r Fragmentation (how to map 1280-byte MTU to
packets 128 bytes or less);
r First approach to stateless header compression;
r Datagram tag/datagram offset;
r Mesh forwarding;
r Identify originator/ﬁnal destination;
r Minimal use of complex MAC layer concepts
ANT/ANT+
ANTTM is a low-power proprietary wireless technology
introduced in 2004 by the sensor company Dynastream. The
system operates in the 2.4 GHz band. ANT devices can
operate for years on a coin cell. ANT’s goal is to allow sports
and ﬁtness sensors to communicate with a display unit.
ANT+TM extends the ANT protocol and makes the devices
interoperable in a managed network. ANT+ recently
introduced a new certiﬁcation process as a prerequisite for
using ANT+ branding (5)
Bluetooth
Bluetooth is a PAN technology based on IEEE 802.15.1. It is a
speciﬁcation for short-range wireless connectivity for
portable personal devices initially developed by Ericsson.
The Bluetooth SIG made their speciﬁcations publicly
available in the late 1990s, at which time the IEEE 802.15
Group has took the Bluetooth work and developed a
vendor-independent standard. The sublayers of IEEE
802.15:include: (i) RF layer; (ii) baseband layer; (iii) the link
manager; and (iv) the L2CAP. Bluetooth has evolved through
four versions; all versions of the Bluetooth standards
maintain downward compatibility. BLE is a subset to
Bluetooth v4.0 with an entirely new protocol stack for rapid
build-up of simple links. BLE is an alternative to the “power
management” features that were introduced in Bluetooth v1.0
to v3.0 as part of the standard Bluetooth protocols
(Bluetooth is a trademark of the Bluetooth Alliance, a
commercial organization that certiﬁes the interoperability of
speciﬁc devices designed to the respective IEEE standard.)

WPAN TECHNOLOGIES FOR IoT/M2M
149
TABLE 6.2
(Continued )
Technology/Concept
Description
EDGE (Enhanced Data
Rates for Global
Evolution)
An enhancement of the GSMTM radio access technology to
provide faster bit rates for data applications, both circuit and
packet switched. As an enhancement of the existing GSM
PHY layer, EDGE is realized via modiﬁcations of the existing
layer 1 speciﬁcations rather than by separate, standalone
speciﬁcations. Other than providing improved data rates,
EDGE is transparent to the service offering at the upper layers,
but is an enabler for HS circuit switched data (HSCSD) and
enhanced GPRS (EGPRS). By way of illustration, the GPRS
can offer a data rate of 115 Kbps, whereas EDGE can increase
this to 384 Kbps. This is comparable with the rate for early
implementations of Wideband Code Division Multiple Access
(W-CDMA), leading some parties to consider EDGE as a 3G
technology rather than 2G (a capability of 384 Kbps allows
EDGE systems to meet the ITU’s IMT-2000 requirements).
EDGE is generally viewed as a bridge between the two
generations: a sort of 2.5G (9)
DASH7
A long range low-power wireless networking technology, with
the following features:
r Range: dynamically adjustable from 10 m to 10 km
r Power: <1 milliwatt power draw
r Data rate: dynamically adjustable from 28 Kbps to 200
Kbps
r Frequency: 433.92 MHz (available worldwide)
r Signal propagation: penetrates walls, concrete, water
r Real-time locating precision: within 4 m
r Latency: conﬁgurable, but worst case is less than 2 s
r P2P cessaging
r IPv6 support
r Security: 128-bit AES, public key
r Standard: ISO/IEC 18000-7; advanced by the DASH7
Alliance
GPRS (General Packet
Radio Service)
Packet-switched functionality for GSM, which is essentially
circuit switched. GPRS is the essential enabler for always-on
data connection for applications such as web browsing and
push-to-talk over cellular. GPRS was introduced into the GSM
speciﬁcations in Release 97 and usability was further approved
in Releases 98 and 99. It offers faster data rates than plain
GSM by aggregating several GSM time slots into
a single bearer, potentially up to eight, giving a theoretical data
rate of 171 Kbps. Most operators do not offer such high rates,
because obviously if a slot is being used for a GPRS bearer, it
is not available for other trafﬁc. Also, not all mobiles are able
to aggregate all combinations of slots.
(continued )

150
LAYER 1/2 CONNECTIVITY: WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
TABLE 6.2
(Continued )
Technology/Concept
Description
The “GPRS class number” indicates the maximum speed
capability of a terminal, which might be typically 14 Kbps in
the uplink direction and 40 Kbps in the downlink,
comparable with the rates offered by current wireline dial-up
modems. Mobile terminals are further classiﬁed according to
whether or not they can handle simultaneous GSM and
GPRS connections: class A = both simultaneously, class B =
GPRS connection interrupted during a GSM call,
automatically resumed at end of call, class C = manual
GSM/GPRS mode switching. Further data rate increases
have been achieved with the introduction of EDGE (9)
GSM EDGE Radio
Access Network
(GERAN)
GERAN is an Radio Access Network (RAN) architecture,
based on GSM/EDGE radio access technologies. GERAN is
the term given to the second-generation digital cellular GSM
radio access technology, including its evolutions in the form
of EDGE and, for most purposes, the GPRS. The GERAN is
harmonized with the UTRAN through a common
connectivity to the UMTS CN, making it possible to build a
combined network for GSM/GPRS and UMTS. GERAN is
also the name of the 3GPPTM Technical Speciﬁcation Group
responsible for its development. The technical speciﬁcations
which together comprise a 3GPP system with a GERAN are
listed in 3GPP TS 41.101
IEEE 802.15.4
IEEE Standard for Local and MANs. Part 15.4: Low-Rate
Wireless Personal Area Networks (LR-WPANs). IEEE
802.15.4-conformant devices support a wide range of
industrial and commercial applications. The amended MAC
sublayer facilitates industrial applications such as process
control and factory automation in addition to the MAC
behaviors that support the Chinese wireless personal area
network (CWPAN) standard
IEEE 802.15.4j (TG4j)
MBANs
The purpose of Task Group 4j (TG4j) is to create an amendment
to 802.15.4, which deﬁnes a PHY layer for IEEE 802.15.4 in
the 2360 to 2400 MHz band and complies with FCC MBAN
rules. The amendment may also deﬁne modiﬁcations to the
MAC needed to support this new PHY layer. This
amendment allows 802.15.4- and MAC-deﬁned changes to
be used in the MBAN band (10)
Infrared Data Association
(IrDA
R⃝)
IrDA is an SIG consisting of about 40 members at press time.
The SIG is pursuing a 1 Gbps connectivity link; however, this
link only operates over a distance of less than 10 cm. One of
the challenges with IR signaling is its requirement for LOS
requirement. Additionally, IrDA is also not very power
efﬁcient (power per bit) when compared with radio
technologies

WPAN TECHNOLOGIES FOR IoT/M2M
151
TABLE 6.2
(Continued )
Technology/Concept
Description
ISA100.11a
ISA SP100 standard for wireless industrial networks developed
by the International Society of Automation (ISA) to address all
aspects of wireless technologies in a plant. The ISA100
Committee addresses wireless manufacturing and control
systems in the areas of the: (i) environment in which the
wireless technology is deployed; (ii) technology and life cycle
for wireless equipment and systems; and (iii) application of
wireless technology. The wireless environment includes the
deﬁnition of wireless, radio frequencies (starting point),
vibration, temperature, humidity, electromagnetic
compatibility (EMC), interoperability, coexistence with
existing systems, and physical equipment location.
ISA100.11a Working Group Charter addresses (11):
r Low-energy consumption devices, with the ability to
scale to address large installations
r Wireless infrastructure, interfaces to legacy
infrastructure and applications, security, and network
management requirements in a functionally scalable
manner
r Robustness in the presence of interference found in
harsh industrial environments and with legacy systems
r Coexistence with other wireless devices anticipated in
the industrial work space
r Interoperability of ISA100 devices
LTE (Long Term
Evolution)
LTE is the 3GPP initiative to evolve the UMTS technology
toward a 4G. LTE can be viewed as an architecture framework
and a set of ancillary mechanisms that aim at providing
seamless IP connectivity between UE and the packet (IPv4,
IPv6) data network without any disruption to the end-users’
applications during mobility. In contrast to the circuit-switched
model of previous-generation cellular systems, LTE has been
designed to support only packet-switched services
NFC (Near Field
Communication)
A group of standards for devices such as PDAs, smartphones,
and tablets that support the establishment of wireless
communication when such devices are in immediate proximity
of a few inches. These standards encompass communications
protocols and data exchange formats; they are based on
existing RFID standards including ISO/IEC 14443 and FeliCa
(a contactless RFID smart card system developed by Sony,
e.g., utilized in electronic money cards in use in Japan). NFC
standards include ISO/IEC 18092, as well as other standards
deﬁned by the NFC Forum. NFC standards allow two-way
communication between endpoints (earlier generation systems
were one-way systems only). Unpowered NFC-based tags can
also be read by NFC devices; therefore, this technology can
substitute for earlier one-way systems. Applications of NFC
include contactless transactions
(continued )

152
LAYER 1/2 CONNECTIVITY: WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
TABLE 6.2
(Continued )
Technology/Concept
Description
NIKE+
Nike+
R⃝is a proprietary wireless technology developed by Nike
and Apple to allow users to monitor their activity levels while
exercising. Its power consumption is relatively high, returning
only 40 days of battery life from a coin cell. It is a proprietary
radio that only works between Nike and Apple devices. Nike+
devices are shipped as a single unit: processor, radio, and
sensor (5)
RF4CE (Radio Frequency
for Consumer
Electronics)
RF4CE is based on ZigBee and was standardized in 2009 by four
CE companies: Sony, Philips, Panasonic, and Samsung. Two
silicon vendors support RF4CE: Texas Instruments and
Freescale Semiconductor, Inc. RF4CE’s intended use is as a
device RC system, for example for television set-top boxes. The
intention is that it overcomes the common problems associated
with IR: interoperability, line of sight, and limited enhanced
features (5)
Satellite systems
Satellite communication plays a key role in commercial,
TV/media, government, and military communications because
of its intrinsic multicast/broadcast capabilities, mobility aspects,
global reach, reliability, and ability to quickly support
connectivity in open-space and/or hostile environments.
Satellite communications is a LOS one-way or two-way RF
transmission system that is comprised of a transmitting station
(uplink), a satellite system that acts as a signal regeneration
node, and one or more receiving stations (downlink). Satellites
can reside in a number of orbits. A geosynchronous (GEO)
satellite circles the earth at the earth’s rotational speed and with
the same direction of rotation, therefore appearing at the same
position in the sky at a particular time each day. When the
satellite is in the equatorial plane, it appears to be permanently
stationary when observed at the earth’s surface, so that an
antenna pointed to it will not require tracking or (major)
positional adjustments at periodic intervals of time (this satellite
arrangement is also known as “geostationary”). The
geostationary orbit is at 35,786 km (22,236 mi) of altitude from
the earth’s surface. Other orbits include the following: low earth
orbits (LEOs), medium earth orbits (MEOs) (aka intermediate
circular orbits [ICOs]), polar orbits, and highly elliptical orbits
(HEOs). LEOs are either elliptical or (more commonly) circular
orbits that are at a height of 2000 km or less above the surface of
the earth. The advantage of LEOs is that they signiﬁcantly
reduce the propagation delay of the signal. The orbit period at
these altitudes varies between 90 min and 2 h and the maximum
time during which a satellite in LEO orbit is above the local
horizon for an observer on the earth is up to 20 min.

WPAN TECHNOLOGIES FOR IoT/M2M
153
TABLE 6.2
(Continued )
Technology/Concept
Description
With LEOs, there are long periods during which a given
satellite is out of view of a particular ground station; this may
be acceptable for some applications, for example, for earth
monitoring. Coverage can be extended by deploying more than
one satellite and using multiple orbital planes. A complete
global coverage system using LEO orbits requires a large
number of satellites (>12+), in multiple orbital planes, and in
various orbits. See Reference 12 for extensive treatment of this
topic
UTRAN (UMTS
Terrestrial Access
Network)
A collective term for the NodeBs (base stations) and radio
network controllers (RNCs) that comprise the UMTS RAN.
NodeB is the equivalent to the BTS concept used in GSM. The
UTRAN allows connectivity between the UE and the CN
UMTS (Universal Mobile
Telecommunications
System)
UMTS is a 3G mobile cellular technology for networks
supporting voice and data (IP) based on the GSM standard
developed by the 3GPP
Very small aperture
terminal (VSAT)
A complete end-user terminal (typically with a small 4–5 ft
antenna) that is designed to interact with other terminals in a
satellite delivered data IP-based network, commonly in a
“star” conﬁguration through a hub. Contention and/or trafﬁc
engineering are typical of these services. Hub or network
operator to control the system and present billing based on a
data throughput, or other form of usage basis. VSATs are
utilized in a variety of remote applications and are designed as
low-cost units (say $1500–$3000 depending on application
and data rate)
Wi-Fi
WLANs based on the IEEE 802.11 family of standards,
including 802.11a, 802.11b, 802.11g, and 802.11n (13).
(Wi-Fi is a trademark of the Wi-Fi Alliance, a commercial
organization that certiﬁes the interoperability of speciﬁc
devices designed to the respective IEEE standard.)
WiMAX
WiMAX is deﬁned as Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave
Access by the WiMAX Forum, formed in June 2001 to
promote conformance and interoperability of the IEEE 802.16
standard. The WiMAX Forum describes WiMAX as “a
standards-based technology enabling the delivery of last mile
wireless broadband access as an alternative to cable and DSL.”
(53)
Wireless Meter-Bus
(M-Bus)
The Wireless M-Bus standard (EN 13757–4:2005) speciﬁes
communications between water, gas, heat, and electric meters
and is becoming widely accepted in Europe for smart metering
or AMI applications. Wireless M-Bus is targeted to operate in
the 868 MHz band (from 868 MHz to 870 MHz); this band
enjoys good trade-offs between RF range and antenna size.
Typically chip manufacturers, for example Texas Instruments,
have both single-chip (SoC) and two-chip solutions for
Wireless M-Bus
(continued )

154
LAYER 1/2 CONNECTIVITY: WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
TABLE 6.2
(Continued )
Technology/Concept
Description
WSN (Wireless Sensor
Network)
A sensor network is an infrastructure comprised of sensing
(measuring), computing, and communication elements that gives
the administrator the ability to instrument, observe, and react to
events and phenomena in a speciﬁed environment. Typically, the
connectivity is by wireless means, hence the term WSN. See
reference (14) for an extensive treatment of this topic
WirelessHART
(aka IEC 62591)
WirelessHART is a wireless sensor networking technology based on
the highway addressable remote transducer protocol (HART). In
2010, WirelessHart was approved by the International
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) as IEC 62591 as a wireless
international standard. IEC 62591 entails operation in the 2.4
GHz ISM band using IEEE 802.15.4 standard radios and makes
use of a time-synchronized, self-organizing, and self-healing
mesh architecture. WirelessHART/IEC 62591 was deﬁned for the
requirements of process ﬁeld device networks. It is a global
IEC-approved standard that speciﬁes an interoperable
self-organizing mesh technology in which ﬁeld devices form
wireless networks that dynamically mitigate obstacles in the
process environment. This architecture creates a cost-effective
automation alternative that does not require wiring and other
supporting infrastructure (15)
ZigBee RF4CE
speciﬁcation
The specialty-use driven speciﬁcation was designed for simple,
two-way device-to-device control applications that do not require
the full-featured mesh networking capabilities offered by ZigBee
2007. ZigBee RF4CE offers lower memory size requirements,
thereby enabling lower cost implementations. The simple
device-to-device topology provides easy development and testing,
resulting in faster time to market. ZigBee RF4CE provides a
multivendor interoperable solution for consumer electronics
featuring a simple, robust, and low-cost communication network
for two-way wireless connectivity. Through the ZigBee Certiﬁed
program, the Alliance independently tests platforms
implementing this speciﬁcation and has a list of ZigBee
Compliant Platforms offering support for ZigBee RF4CE (16)
ZigBee speciﬁcation
The core ZigBee speciﬁcation deﬁnes ZigBee’s smart,
cost-effective, and energy-efﬁcient mesh network based on IEEE
802.15.4. It is a self-conﬁguring, self-healing system of
redundant, low-cost, very low-power nodes that enable ZigBee’s
unique ﬂexibility, mobility, and ease of use. ZigBee is available
as two feature sets, ZigBee PRO and ZigBee. Both feature sets
deﬁne how the ZigBee mesh networks operate. ZigBee PRO, the
most widely used speciﬁcation, is optimized for low-power
consumption and to support large networks with thousands of
devices (16). (ZigBee is a trademark of the ZigBee Alliance, a
commercial organization that certiﬁes the interoperability of
speciﬁc devices designed to the respective IEEE standard.)
(continued )

WPAN TECHNOLOGIES FOR IoT/M2M
155
TABLE 6.2
(Continued )
Technology/Concept
Description
Z-wave
Z-wave is a wireless ecosystem that aims at supporting connectivity
of home electronics, and the user, via Remote Control (RC). It
uses low-power radio waves that easily travel through walls,
ﬂoors, and cabinets. Z-wave control can be added to almost any
electronic device in the home, even devices that one would not
ordinarily think of as “intelligent,” such as appliances, window
shades, thermostats, smoke alarms, security sensors, and home
lighting. Z-wave operates around 900 MHz (the band used by
some cordless telephones but avoids interference with Wi-Fi
devices). Z-wave was developed by Zen-Sys, a Danish startup
around 2005; the company was later acquired by Sigma Designs.
The Z-wave Alliance was established in 2005; it is comprised of
about 200 industry leaders dedicated to the development and
extension of Z-wave as the key enabling technology for “smart”
home and business applications
chapter to provide an in-depth technical review of all these technologies, since each
would require a text of its own, but the goal is to expose the reader to a plethora of
available choices (furthermore, we are not attempting to exhaustively list all possibly
applicable wireless or wireline standards, but to focus on a handful of key ones).
The following network topologies are applicable to personal low-power radio
networks (5) (also see Table 6.3 ):
r Broadcast: environment where a message is sent from a device in the hope
that it is received by a receiver within range. The broadcaster does not receive
signals;
r Mesh: environment where a message can be relayed from one point in a network
to any other by hopping through multiple nodes;
r Star: environment where a central device can communicate with a number of
connected devices;
r Scanning: environment where a scanning device is constantly in receive mode,
waiting to pick up a signal from anything transmitting within range;
r Point-to-point: in this mode, a one-to-one connection exists, where only two
devices are connected over the communication path.
6.1.1
Zigbee/IEEE 802.15.4
As we have seen, the commercialization of consumer-based IoT services requires the
introduction of wireless, low-power, battery-powered sensors and actuators in peo-
ple’s premises. Until recently, this space has been comprised of several PHY/MAC-
speciﬁc nonstandardized protocol stacks that do not interoperate. ZigBee’s focus has
been aimed at the “little devices” (things, objects) often overlooked in an IT-centric

TABLE 6.3
Topologies Supported by PAN Wireless Technologies
ZigBee
RF4CE
BLE
Wi-Fi
NFC
ANT/ANT+ NIKE+
IrDA
Topology
Broadcast
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
Mesh
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
Point-to-point
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Scanning
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Star
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
Technology
aspects
Range
100 m
100 m
280 m
150 m
5 cm
30 m
10 m
10 cm
Processor costs
N/A
N/A
N/A
High cost
High cost
Low cost
Low cost
N/A
Radio cost
Low cost
Low cost
Low cost
High cost (∼$3)
High cost (∼$1)
Very low
cost
Very low
cost
Very low
cost
Throughput
∼100
Kbps
(same as
ZigBee)
∼305
Kbps
∼6 Mbps (lowest
power 802.11b
mode)
∼424 Kbps
∼20 Kbps
∼272 bps
∼1 Gbps
Latency
∼20 ms
(same as
ZigBee)
∼2.5 ms
∼1.5 ms
Manufacturer
speciﬁc
(typically polled
every second)
∼Zero
∼1 s
∼25 ms
Peak current draw
(manganese
dioxide lithium
coin batteries
such as the
CR2032)
∼40 mA
(same as
ZigBee)
∼12.5 mA >100 mA
∼50 mA
∼17 mA
∼12.3 mA
∼10.2 mA
Power per bit
∼185.9
μW/bit
(same as
ZigBee)
0.153
μW/bit
0.00525 μW/bit for
high throughput
NA
0.71 μW/bit
2.48 μW/bit 11.7 μW/bit
Note 1: ANT/ANT+, NIKE+, and IrDA systems are only cited in passing in this chapter.
Note 2: Some parameters included here are based on data derived in Reference 5.
156

WPAN TECHNOLOGIES FOR IoT/M2M
157
Developer (vendor)&
Customer
Applications
Application Profile
Application framework
Network and Security
Logical Link Control
Medium Access Control
Physical Layer
2.4 GHz
868/915 MHz
IEEE 802.15.4
Alliance
ZigBee
ZigBee or OEM
Star/ Mash/ Cluster-Tree       32-/64-/128-bit encryption
ZigBee Alliance
  –  “the software”
  –  Network, Security & Application layers
  –  Brand management
IEEE 802.15.4
  –  “the hardware”
  –  Physical & Media Access Control layers
FIGURE 6.1
ZigBee protocol stack (overview).
world, such as light switches, thermostats, electricity meters, remote controls (RCs),
as well as more complex sensor devices found in the healthcare, commercial build-
ing, and industrial automation sectors (17). To avoid multiple separate consumer
networks, a PHY/MAC-agnostic solution is needed upon which IP standards and
other well-known higher-layer protocols can run with little changes (18). ZigBee is
one such open standard, as discussed below. ZigBee IP (ZIP) discussed in Chapter 5
is an example where Zigbee systems operate in an IP context. Here we focus more
on the wireless lower-layer aspects of Zigbee and not the IP part per se.
ZigBee makes use of the physical radio speciﬁed by IEEE 802.15.4; it adds logical
network capabilities, and security and application software. Figure 6.1 depicts the
ZigBee protocol stack at a general level and Figure 6.2 depicts the stack at a more
speciﬁc level. ZigBee utilizes the globally available, license-free 2.4 GHz industrial,
scientiﬁc, and medical (ISM) frequency band to provide low data rate wireless appli-
cations (more generally, under IEEE 802.15.4, wireless links can operate in three
unlicensed frequency bands, namely the 858 MHz band, the 902-to-928 MHz band,
and the 2.4 GHz band6).
IEEE 802.15.4 deﬁnes a robust radio PHY (physical) layer and MAC (medium
access control) layer, while ZigBee deﬁnes the network, security, and application
framework for an IEEE 802.15.4-based system. (Table 6.4 provides an overview of
the IEEE 802.15 family of PAN standards.) ZigBee networks support star, mesh,
and cluster-tree topologies. These capabilities enable a network to have over 65,000
devices on a single wireless network. ZigBee offers low-latency communication
between devices without the need for the initial network synchronization delays as
required by Bluetooth. ZigBee can create robust self-forming, self-healing wireless
mesh networks. The ZigBee mesh network connects sensors and controllers without
being restricted by distance or range limitations; ZigBee mesh networks allow all
6858 MHz in Europe; 902-to-928 MHz in the United States and Australia; 2.5 GHz in India; and 2.4 GHz
in most countries worldwide

158
LAYER 1/2 CONNECTIVITY: WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
Application (APL) Layer
Application Framework
Application Support Sublayer (APL)
Network (NWK) Layer
ZDO Mangement Plane
Security
Service
Provider
Medium Access Control (MAC) Layer
Physical (PHY) Layer
2.4 GHz Radio
868/915 MHz Radio
PLME-SAP
PD-SAP
Layer
interface
MLDE-SAP
NLDE-SAP
End Manufacturer
defined
ZigBee Alliance
defined
IEEE 802.15.4
defined
MLME-SAP
NLME-SAP
ASPME-SAP
NLME-SAP
Endpoint 0
APSDE-SAP
Endpoint 1
APSDE-SAP
ZDO Public
Interfaces
Endpoint 240
APSDE-SAP
Application
Object 240
Application
Object 1
ZigBee Device Object
(ZDO)
ASP Security
Management
Reflector
Management
ASP Message
Broker
Security
Management
Message
Broker
Routing
Management
Network
Management
FIGURE 6.2
ZigBee protocol stack (details).
participating devices to communicate with one another and act as repeaters transfer-
ring data between devices.
ZigBee is available as two feature sets, ZigBee PROTM and ZigBee. Both feature
sets deﬁne how the ZigBee mesh networks operate. ZigBee PRO, the most widely
used speciﬁcation, is optimized for low-power consumption and to support large
networks with thousands of devices (16). In October 2007, the ZigBee Alliance
announced an expanded set of features for the ZigBee protocol. This new stack
proﬁle is universally referred to as ZigBee PRO and for the most part deﬁnes speciﬁc
stack settings and makes mandatory many of the features that are optional in the
ZigBee stack that was ratiﬁed in 2006. ZigBee PRO also adds some new application
proﬁles such as automatic meter reading, commercial building automation, and home
automation. In general, ZigBee PRO features implement support for larger networks,
for example stochastic addressing to assign addresses using probability analysis to
simplify network formation. The Alliance likes to position ZigBee PRO as a seamless
extension of 2006 ZigBee (a ZigBee 2006 node can join a 2007 network, and vice-
versa, but designers cannot mix 2006 routers with 2007 routers) (19). ZigBee PRO
implements a technique known as frequency agility (not hopping): a network node
is able to scan for clear spectrum (with a choice of 16 available channels) and
communicate its ﬁndings back to the ZigBee coordinator so that a new channel can

WPAN TECHNOLOGIES FOR IoT/M2M
159
TABLE 6.4
The IEEE 802.15TM Family of Wireless PANs
Standard and Date
Description
IEEE 802.15.1TM-2005
IEEE Standard for Information
technology—Telecommunications and Information
Exchange between systems: Local and MAN-speciﬁc
requirements. Part 15.1: Wireless Medium Access Control
(MAC) and Physical layer (PHY) speciﬁcations for Wireless
Personal Area Networks (WPANs)
IEEE 802.15.2TM-2003
IEEE Recommended Practice for Telecommunications and
Information Exchange between systems: Local and
MAN-speciﬁc requirements. Part 15.2: Coexistence of
Wireless Personal Area Networks with Other Wireless
Devices Operating in Unlicensed Frequency Band
IEEE 802.15.3TM-2003
IEEE Standard for Information
Technology—Telecommunications and Information
Exchange between systems: Local and MAN-speciﬁc
requirements. Part 15.3: Wireless Medium Access Control
(MAC) and Physical layer (PHY) speciﬁcations for High
Rate Wireless Personal Area Networks (WPAN)
IEEE 802.15.3bTM-2005
IEEE Standard for Information
Technology—Telecommunications and Information
Exchange between systems: Local and MAN-speciﬁc
requirements. Part 15.3b: Wireless Medium Access Control
(MAC) and Physical layer (PHY) speciﬁcations for High
Rate Wireless Personal Area Networks (WPANs) Amendment
1: MAC Sublayer
IEEE 802.15.3cTM-2009
IEEE Standard for Information
Technology—Telecommunications and Information
Exchange between systems: Local and MAN-speciﬁc
requirements. Part 15.3: Wireless Medium Access Control
(MAC) and Physical layer (PHY) speciﬁcations for High
Rate Wireless Personal Area Networks (WPANs) Amendment
2: Millimeter-wave-based Alternative PHY layer extension
IEEE 802.15.4TM-2011
IEEE Standard for Local and MANs. Part 15.4: Low-Rate
Wireless Personal Area Networks (LR-WPANs)
IEEE 802.15.4eTM-2011
IEEE Standard for Local and MANs. Part 15.4: Low-Rate
Wireless Personal Area Networks (LR-WPANs) Amendment
1: MAC sublayer
IEEE 802.15.5TM-2009
IEEE Standard for Recommended Practice for Information
technology - Telecommunications and information exchange
between systems: Local and MANs - Speciﬁc requirements
Part 15.5: Mesh Topology Capability in WPANs.
IEEE 802.15.6TM-2012
IEEE Standard for Local and MANs. Part 15.6: Wireless Body
Area Networks
IEEE 802.15.7TM-2011
IEEE Standard for Local and MANs. Part 15.7: Short-Range
Wireless Optical Communication Using Visible Light

160
LAYER 1/2 CONNECTIVITY: WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
be used across the network (5). ZigBee PRO networks have the ability to aggregate
routes through the use of “many-to-one” routing; this allows each device to share
the same routing path reducing broadcast and network trafﬁc and greatly improves
the efﬁciency and stability of the network routing table. The ZigBee 802.15.4 spec
deﬁnes a maximum packet size of 128 octets; this packet size is optimal for short
control messages, but there may be instances where the network needs to send larger
messages; therefore, ZigBee PRO now has the means to automatically fragment
and reassemble a message at a receiving node relieving the host application of this
overhead.
At press time, there were over 600 certiﬁed products from 400 companies. The
interoperability process has been fostered by the ZigBee Alliance. The ZigBee
Alliance is a global ecosystem of 400+ companies in the M2M/IoT space devel-
oping standards and producing products for use in commercial building automation,
consumer electronics, health care and ﬁtness, home automation, energy management,
retail management, and wireless telecommunications. The Alliance was established
in October 2002 to create global standards to connect a wide range of devices into
secure, low-cost, low-power, and easy-to-use wireless sensor and control networks.
Nine interoperable standards published by the Alliance enable manufacturers to bring
to market a variety of energy management, commercial, and consumer application
products.
LR-WPANs applications require a low-cost, small-size, highly reliable technology
which offers long battery life, measured in months or even years, and automatic or
semiautomatic installation. The IEEE 802.15.4 standard supports these requirements
by trading off higher speed and performance for architectures that beneﬁt from low-
power consumption and low cost. ZigBee is a low-power wireless speciﬁcation that
introduces mesh networking to the low-power wireless space and is targeted toward
applications such as smart meters, home automation, and RC units. ZigBee technol-
ogy provides reasonably efﬁcient low-power connectivity and ability to connect a
large number of devices into a single network. Some studies have shown that for the
home, two wireless PHY layer communications technologies that best meet the over-
all performance and cost requirements are Wi-Fi (802.11/n) and ZigBee (802.15.4)
(20). 6LoWPAN, discussed in Chapter 9, makes use of the IEEE 802.15.4 PAN struc-
ture. Other researchers, however, argue that ZigBee’s relative complexity (as seen in
the protocol stack of Fig. 6.2) and the apparent fact that the power consumption of
ZigBee devices is higher than the consumption of some alternatives (e.g., BLE) tend
to make ZigBee not always the most ideal solution for unmaintained devices that need
to operate for extensive periods of time from a limited power source; hence, while
many home applications make ideal use of ZigBee, other IoT/M2M applications can
also be supported by other approaches.
The PHY layer of the reference model speciﬁes the network interface components,
their parameters, and their operation. To support the operation of the MAC layer, the
PHY layer includes a variety of features, such as receiver energy detection (RED), link
quality indicator (LQI), and clear channel assessment (CCA). The PHY layer is also
speciﬁed with a number of operational low-power features, including low-duty cycle
operations, strict power management, and low transmission overhead. IEEE 802.15.4
deﬁnes several addressing modes: it allows the use of either IEEE 64-bit extended

WPAN TECHNOLOGIES FOR IoT/M2M
161
addresses or (after an association event) 16-bit addresses unique within the PAN. The
MAC layer handles network association and disassociation. It also regulates access
to the medium; this is achieved through two modes of operation, namely beaconing
and nonbeaconing. The beaconing mode is speciﬁed for environments where con-
trol and data forwarding is achieved by an always active device. The nonbeaconing
mode speciﬁes the use of unslotted, nonpersistent CSMA-based MAC protocol. The
network layer provides the functionality required to support network routing capa-
bilities, conﬁguration and device discovery, association and disassociation, topology
management, MAC layer management, and routing and security management. Three
network topologies, namely star, mesh, and cluster tree, are supported. The security
layer leverages the basic security services speciﬁed by the IEEE 802.15.4 security
model to provide support for infrastructure security and application data security.
The application layer consists of the application support sublayer (APS), the ZigBee
device object (ZDO), and the manufacturer-deﬁned application objects. The responsi-
bilities of the APS sublayer include maintaining tables for binding devices together,
based on their services and their needs, and forwarding messages between bound
devices. Refer to Table 6.3 for some technical parameters of this technology.
ZigBee channels are similar to those for BLE in that they are 2 MHz wide; however,
they are separated by 5 MHz, thus wasting spectrum, to some degree. ZigBee is
not a frequency-hopping technology; therefore, it requires careful planning during
deployment in order to ensure that there are no interfering signals in the vicinity (5).
The design of the PHY layer is driven by the need for low-cost, power-effective PHY
layer for cost-sensitive, low data rate monitoring and control applications. Under IEEE
802.15.4, wireless links can operate in three unlicensed frequency bands, already
identiﬁed above, namely in the 858 MHz band, in the 902-to-928 MHz band, and
in the 2.4 GHz band. Based on these frequency bands, the IEEE 802.15.4 standard
deﬁnes three physical media (14):
r Direct sequence spread spectrum (DSSS) using binary phase shift keying
(BPSK), operating in the 868 MHz at a data rate of 20 Kbps;
r DSSS using BPSK, operating in the 915 MHz at a data rate of 40 Kbps; and
r DSSS using offset quadrature phase shift keying (O-QPSK), operating in the
2.4 GHz at a data rate of 140 Kbps.
These operating frequency bands are depicted in Figure 6.3. The spreading code
of the 868 MHz and the 915 MHz PHY layers is a 15-chip m-sequence. Both
speciﬁcations use BPSK with differential encoding data modulation scheme. The data
rate of 868 MHz layer is 20 Kbps, while the data rat of the 915 MHz speciﬁcation
is 40 Kbps. The resulting chip rate is 300 Kchips/s for the 868 MHz PHY layer and
600 Kchips/s for the 915 MHz PHY layer. The data modulation of the 2.4 GHz PHY
layer is a 16-ary orthogonal modulation. Consequently, 16 symbols are orthogonal set
of 32-chip Pseudorandom Noise (PN) codes. The resulting data rate is 250 Kbps (4
bits/symbol, 62.5 Ksymbols/s). The speciﬁcation uses O-QPSK with half-sine pulse
shaping, which is equivalent to minimum shift keying; the resulting chip rate is 2.0
Mchips/s.

162
LAYER 1/2 CONNECTIVITY: WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
868.3
2
Channel 0
Channels 1-10
Channels 11-26
902 MHz
5 MHz
2.4835
2.4
Europe
Americas
20 Kbps
40 Kbps
10
Worldwide
250 Kbps
16
1
868 MHz
COVERAGE
DATA RATE
CHANNELS
COVERAGE
DATA RATE
CHANNELS
COVERAGE
DATA RATE
CHANNELS
928
915 MHz
868 MHz
2.4 GHz
2.4 GHz ISM
915 MHz
FIGURE 6.3
IEEE 802.15.4 PHY layer operating frequency bands.
IEEE 802.15.4 deﬁnes four types of frames: beacon frames, MAC command
frames, acknowledgement frames, and data frames (see Fig. 6.4). As noted earlier,
IEEE 802.15.4 networks can either be nonbeacon enabled or beacon enabled. The
latter is an optional mode in which devices are synchronized by a so-called coordi-
nator’s beacons. This allows the use of superframes within which a contention-free
guaranteed time service (GTS) is possible. In nonbeacon-enabled networks, data
frames are sent via the contention-based channel access method of unslotted carrier
sense multiple access/collision detect (CSMA/CD). In nonbeacon-enabled networks,
beacons are not used for synchronization; however, they are still useful for link-layer
device discovery to aid in association and disassociation events (21).
The packet structure of the IEEE 802.15.4 PHY layer is depicted in Figure 6.5.
The ﬁrst ﬁeld of this structure contains a 32-bit preamble; this ﬁeld is used for symbol
synchronization. The next ﬁeld represents the start of packet delimiter; this ﬁeld of
8 bits is used for frame synchronization. The 8-bit PHY header ﬁeld speciﬁes the
length of the PHY service data unit (PSDU). The PSDU ﬁeld can carry up to 127
bytes of data.
In order to accommodate the MAC protocol, the IEEE 802.15.4 standard distin-
guishes devices based on their hardware complexity and capability. Accordingly, the
standard deﬁnes two classes of physical devices, namely a full function device (FFD)
and a reduced function device (RFD). These device types differ in their use and

WPAN TECHNOLOGIES FOR IoT/M2M
163
Acknowledgement Frame Format
MAC Command Frame Format
Beacon Frame format
Data Frame Format
Octets:
Octets:
PHY
layer
Preamble
Sequence
Start of Frame
Delimiter
Frame
Length
SHR
PHR
MPDU
PSDU
PSDU
MAC
sublayer
MAC
sublayer
2
Address
Information
Address
Information
Command
Type
Command
Payload
Data Payload
FCS
FCS
MFR
MSDU
5 + (4 to 20) + n
11 + (4 to 20) + n
12 + (4 to 20) + n
MHR
MPDU
PSDU
PPDU
MFR
MSDU
MHR
Data
Scquence
Number
Data
Scquence
Number
4
1
1
Octets:
Octets:
PHY
layer
Preamble
Sequence
Start of
Frame
Delimiter
Frame
Length
SHR
PHR
FCS
MFR
MHR
Frame
Control
Frame
Control
PSDU
PPDU
MPDU
6 + (4 to 20) + n
4
2
2
1
5
11
1
1
MAC
sublayer
Octets:
Octets:
PHY
layer
Preamble
Sequence
Start of
Frame
Delimiter
Frame
Length
SHR
PHR
4
1
1
1
4 to 20
n
2
Octets:
Octets:
PHY
layer
Preamble
Sequence
Start of Frame
Delimiter
Frame
Length
SHR
PHR
MPDU
PPDU
PSDU
MAC
sublayer
2
2
Frame
Control
Src. Address
Information
Superframe
Specification
GTS
Fields
Pending
Address
Fields
Beacon
Payload
FCS
MFR
MSDU
7 + (4 to 10) + k + m + n
13 + (4 to 10) + k + m + n
MHR
Beacon
Sequence
Number
4
1
1
1
4 to 20
n
m
k
2
2
1
4 to 20
n
2
1
Frame
Control
Data
Scquence
Number
FIGURE 6.4
IEEE 802.15.4 frames.

164
LAYER 1/2 CONNECTIVITY: WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
Preamble
4 Bytes
6 Bytes
≤ 127 Bytes
(≤ 4.1 ms @ 250 Kbps)
(≤ 50.8 ms @ 40 Kbps)
(0.2 ms @ 250 Kbps)
(1.2 ms @ 40 Kbps)
1 Byte
1 Byte
Start of
Packet
Delimiter
PHY
Header
PHY Service
Data Unit (PSDU)
FIGURE 6.5
IEEE 802.15.4 PHY layer packet structure.
how much of the standard they implement. An FFD is equipped with the adequate
resources and memory capacity to handle all the functionalities and features speciﬁed
by the standard. It can, therefore, assume multiple network responsibilities; it can also
communicate with any other network device. An RFD is a simple device that carries
a reduced set of functionalities, for lower cost and complexity. It typically contains a
physical interface to the wireless modem and executes the speciﬁed IEEE 802.15.4
MAC layer protocol. Furthermore, it can only associate and communicate with an
FFD. Based on these physical device types, ZigBee deﬁnes a variety of logical device
types. These logical devices are distinguished based on their physical capabilities and
the role they play in the deployed network (14). There are three categories of logical
devices:
r Network coordinator: An FFD device responsible for network establishment
and control. The coordinator is responsible for choosing key parameters of the
network conﬁguration and for starting the network. It also stores information
about the network and acts as the repository for security keys.
r Router: An FFD device that supports the data routing functionality, including
acting as an intermediate device to link different components of the network and
forwarding message between remote devices across multihop paths. A router
can communicate with other routers and end devices.
r End Devices: An RFD device that contains (just) enough functionality to com-
municate with its parent node, namely the network coordinator or a router. An
end device does not have the capability to relay data messages to other end
devices.
A PAN coordinator is the designated principal controller of the WPAN. Every
network has exactly one PAN coordinator, selected from within all the coordinators
of the network. A coordinator is a network device conﬁgured to support network
functionalities and additional responsibilities, including:
r Managing a list of all associated network devices;
r Exchanging data frames with network devices and peer coordinator;

WPAN TECHNOLOGIES FOR IoT/M2M
165
r Allocating 16-bit short addresses to network devices. The short addresses,
assigned on-demand, are used by the associated devices in lieu of the 64-bit
addresses for subsequent communications with the coordinator;
r Generating, on a periodic basis, beacon frames. These frames are used to
announce the PAN identiﬁer, the list of outstanding frames, and other network
and device parameters.
Based on these logical device types, a ZigBee WPAN can be organized into one of
three possible topologies, namely a star, a mesh (peer-to-peer), or a cluster tree. (See
Fig. 6.6.) The star network topology supports a single coordinator, with up to 65,536
devices. In this topology conﬁguration, one of the FFD-type devices assumes the role
of network coordinator. All other devices act as end devices. The selected coordinator
is responsible for initiating and maintaining the end devices on the network. Upon
initiation, the end devices can only communicate with the coordinator. The mesh
conﬁguration allows path formation from any source device to any destination device,
using tree- and table-driven routing algorithms. Cluster-tree networks enable a peer–
peer network to be formed with a minimum of routing overhead, using multihop
routing. The topology is suitable for latency-tolerant applications. A cluster-tree
network is self-organized and supports network redundancy to achieve a high degree
of fault resistance and self-repair. The cluster can be rather large, comprising up to
255 clusters of up to 254 nodes each, for a total of 64,770 nodes. It may also span
large physical areas. Any FFD can be a coordinator. Only one coordinator is selected
for the PAN. The PAN coordinator forms the ﬁrst cluster and assigns to it a cluster
identity (CID) of value 0. Subsequent clusters are then formed with a designated
cluster head for each cluster.
Public application proﬁles are agreements for messages, message formats, and
processing actions. Proﬁles enable developers to create interoperable, distributed
application entities residing on separate devices. These applications (written by the
device manufacturer) send commands, request data, and process commands and
Mesh Topology
Star Topology 
Cluster-Tree Topology
PAN Coordinator 
Full Function Device (FFD) 
Reduced Function Device (RFD) 
FIGURE 6.6
Network topologies.

166
LAYER 1/2 CONNECTIVITY: WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
requests over the ZigBee network. The ZDO represents a predeﬁned base class of
functionality upon which all applications are written. The ZDO creates an abstraction
so that the developer can focus on writing application-speciﬁc code rather than dealing
with the low-level details. The ZDO provides an interface between the application
objects, the proﬁle (e.g., the ZigBee Health Care), and the APS. The ZDO satisﬁes
the common requirements of all applications operating in a ZigBee protocol stack.
The ZDO is responsible for initializing the APS, the network layer, and the security
service provider. Table 6.5 lists speciﬁc application standards deﬁned and supported
by ZigBee and the ZigBee Alliance.
Note: IEEE 802.15.4 mandates link-layer security based on Advanced Encryption
Standard (AES), but it does not specify capabilities for bootstrapping, key manage-
ment, and security at higher layers.
The ZigBee Alliance’s focus on health care has resulted in the development of
the ZigBee Health Care public application proﬁle, also known as the PHHC Proﬁle
or simply the Medical Proﬁle. ZigBee Health Care was designed for use by assis-
tive devices operating in noninvasive health care. ZigBee Health Care provides an
industry-wide standard for exchanging data between a variety of medical and non-
medical devices. The PHHC Proﬁle supports secure monitoring and management of
noncritical, low-acuity healthcare services in support of chronic disease management.
This proﬁle also provides support for IEEE 11073-conformant devices (e.g., glucome-
ters, pulse oximeters, ECGs, blood pressure monitors, respirometers, weight scales,
and thermometers). The ZigBee Health Care deﬁnitions are comprised of device
specializations deﬁned by IEEE, including IEEE 11073 device specializations of
standards point-of-care medical device communication. One of the standards that are
part of this family, the 11073–20601 standard, is a transport-independent, optimized
exchange protocol. This standard forms the basis of the data exchanges between the
devices that will support the PHHC Proﬁle. This protocol provides methods for (i)
establishing logical connections between devices, (ii) presenting the capabilities of
devices, and (iii) servicing communication needs. In summary, the ZigBee Health
Care public application proﬁle fully supports ISO/IEEE 11073 for point-of-care med-
ical device communication and provides support for additional devices. The ZigBee
Health Care also supports all device specializations; device specializations for a
number of medical devices already exist including the pulse oximeter, blood pressure
monitor, pulse monitor, weight scale, and glucose meter (16,17).
Earlier, we mentioned ZIP as an example of an IP-based stack (IPv6 in particular)
that supports Zigbee. A typical ZIP product implementation would have parameters
similar to these:
r ZigBee: ZigBee Pro compliant and Full ZigBee Smart Energy (SE) Proﬁle
support
r Radio: IEEE 802.15.4 compliant ZigBee radio
r Operating frequency: 2405–2483.5 MHz, supports ZigBee channels 11 to 26,
5 MHz spacing
r Receiver sensitivity: −95 dBm

WPAN TECHNOLOGIES FOR IoT/M2M
167
TABLE 6.5
Application Standards Deﬁned and Supported by ZigBee and the ZigBee
Alliance
Standard
Application Description
ZigBee Building
Automation (used
for efﬁcient
commercial spaces)
ZigBee Building Automation offers a global standard for
interoperable products enabling the secure and reliable
monitoring and control of commercial building systems. It is the
only BACnet
R⃝-approved wireless mesh network standard for
commercial buildings
ZigBee Health Care
(used for health and
ﬁtness monitoring)
ZigBee Health Care offers a global standard for interoperable
products enabling secure and reliable monitoring and
management of noncritical, low-acuity healthcare services
targeted at chronic disease, aging independence and general
health, and wellness and ﬁtness. ZigBee Alliance has joined
forces with the Continua Health Alliance, a nonproﬁt, open
industry coalition of the ﬁnest healthcare and technology
companies collaborating to improve the quality of personal
health care. Continua has endorsed ZigBee Health Care as its
low-power LAN standard in the Continua 2010 Design
Guidelines
ZigBee Home
Automation (used
for smart homes)
ZigBee Home Automation offers a global standard for
interoperable products enabling smart homes that can control
appliances, lighting, environment, energy management and
security, as well as the expandability to connect with other
ZigBee networks
ZigBee Input Device
(easy-to-use
touchpads, mice,
keyboards, wands)
ZigBee Input Device is a global standard for greener, innovative,
and easy-to-use mice, keyboards, touchpads, wands, and other
input devices used with computers and CE devices. This
standard allows consumers to use their devices from greater
distances or even from another room because operation is not
limited to LOS. The standard operates with existing ZigBee
Remote Control-equipped HDTVs, set-top boxes, and other
devices and existing computers. ZigBee Input Device is a
standard designed speciﬁcally for the ZigBee RF4CE
speciﬁcation
ZigBee Light Link
(LED lighting
control)
ZigBee Light Link gives the lighting industry a global standard for
interoperable and very easy-to-use consumer lighting and
control products. It allows consumers to gain wireless control
over all their LED ﬁxtures, light bulbs, timers, remotes, and
switches. Products using this standard will let consumers
change lighting remotely to reﬂect ambiance, task, or season, all
while managing energy use and making their homes greener.
Since ZigBee Light Link is a ZigBee standard, lighting products
will interoperate effortlessly with products using other ZigBee
standards already in consumers’ homes, including ZigBee
Home Automation, ZigBee Input Device, ZigBee Remote
Control, and ZigBee Health Care
(continued )

168
LAYER 1/2 CONNECTIVITY: WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
TABLE 6.5
(Continued )
Standard
Application Description
ZigBee network
devices (assist and
expand ZigBee
networks)
ZigBee network device is the category for device speciﬁc
standards designed to assist and expand ZigBee PRO-based
networks. These universal devices can work on just about any
ZigBee PRO network; they also work with most ZigBee
standards. ZigBee Gateway is the ﬁrst standard to join this
category, and work is underway to develop standards for bridge
and range extender devices. ZigBee Gateway makes it easy to
connect Internet-based service provider systems with ZigBee
users everywhere, allowing them both to take advantage of cost
and energy efﬁciencies. This standard complements a number of
ZigBee standards using the ZigBee PRO speciﬁcation: (i)
ZigBee Building Automation; (ii) ZigBee Health Care; (iii)
ZigBee Home Automation; (iv) ZigBee Retail Services; (v)
ZigBee SE; and (vi) ZigBee Telecom Services
ZigBee Remote
Control (used for
advanced RCs)
ZigBee Remote Control provides a global standard for advanced,
greener, and easy-to-use RF remotes that remove LOS
restrictions while also delivering two-way communication,
longer range of use, and extended battery life. It was designed
for a variety of CE devices including HDTV, home theater
equipment, set-top boxes, and other audio equipment
ZigBee Retail Services
(used for smarter
shopping)
ZigBee Retail Services is a global standard of interoperable
products to monitor, control, and automate the purchase and
delivery of goods. It will also help retailers’ manage their
supply chain. ZigBee Retail Services will support a fully
integrated ecosystem of technology suppliers, merchants,
distribution centers, and both residential and commercial
consumers in providing a standard way to purchase, fulﬁll,
automate, and monitor the purchase and delivery of goods
ZigBee Smart Energy
(SE) (used for home
energy savings)
ZigBee SE is a leading standard for interoperable products that
monitor, control, inform, and automate the delivery and use of
energy and water. It helps create greener homes by giving
consumers the information and automation needed to easily
reduce their consumption and save money, too. ZigBee SE
version 1.1, the newest version for product development, adds
several important features including dynamic pricing
enhancements, tunneling of other protocols, prepayment
features, over-the-air updates, and guaranteed backward
compatibility with certiﬁed ZigBee SE products version 1.0. All
ZigBee SE products are ZigBee certiﬁed to perform regardless
of manufacturer, allowing utilities and consumers to purchase
with conﬁdence. Every product needed to implement a robust
ZigBee SE HAN is available. These products make it easy for
utilities and governments to deploy smart grid solutions that are
secure, easy to install, and consumer friendly
(continued )

WPAN TECHNOLOGIES FOR IoT/M2M
169
TABLE 6.5
(Continued )
Standard
Application Description
SE Proﬁle version 2.0 was under development at press time, in
cooperation with a number of other standard development groups.
SE 2.0 offers IP-based control for AMI and HANs; the IP-based
protocol is used to monitor, control, and automate the delivery and
use of energy and water. This version will not replace ZigBee SE
version 1, rather it will offer utilities and energy service providers
another choice when creating their AMI and HANs. In addition to
all the services and devices found in ZigBee SE version 1, version
2.0 will feature control of PEV charging, installation, conﬁguration
and ﬁrmware download for HAN devices, prepay services, user
information and messaging, load control, demand response and
common information, and application proﬁle interfaces for wired
and wireless HANs. Development partners include HomeGrid,
HomePlug Powerline Alliance, International Society of
Automative Engineers SAE International, IPSO Alliance, SunSpec
Alliance, and the Wi-Fi Alliance
On August 25, 2012, the Alliance closed the ﬁnal public comment
period on the latest draft 0.9 version of the Draft Standard (public
application proﬁle) and supporting documents. This was the ﬁnal
comment period because SE Proﬁle 2 development is nearly
complete. Public and member comments will be integrated to
produce a ﬁnal version 1 of the standard
ZigBee Telecom
Services (used for
value-added
services)
ZigBee Telecom Services offers a global standard for interoperable
products enabling a wide variety of value-added services,
including information delivery, mobile gaming, location-based
services, secure mobile payments, mobile advertising, zone billing,
mobile ofﬁce access control, payments, and peer-to-peer
data-sharing services. This single standard offers an affordable and
easy way to introduce innovative new services that touch almost
everyone using mobile phones and other portable electronic
devices. It offers a variety of value-added services for mobile
phone network operators, retailers, businesses, and governments
Source: ZigBee Alliance.
r Transmitter power: +18 dBm output power (<100 mW)
r Ethernet and TCP/IP speciﬁcations:
r Ethernet 10/100 base TX with auto negotiation
r Supports standard socket-based communications
r Protocols supported: IPv6, UDP, TCP, Telnet, ICMP, ARP, DHCP, BOOTP,
Auto IP, HTTP, SMTP, TFTP, HTTPS, SSH, SSL, FTP, PPP, SNMP
r Encryption: end-to-end AES 128-bit encryption, 3DES and RC4 encryption
for SSH and SSL
r Authentication: SHA-1, MD5

170
LAYER 1/2 CONNECTIVITY: WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
It should be noted that ZigBee and Bluetooth protocols are substantially different
and are designed for different purposes: ZigBee is designed for low-to-very-low-duty
cycle static and dynamic environments with many active nodes; Bluetooth, on the
other hand, is designed for high QoS, variety of duty cycles, and moderate data rates
in networks with limited active nodes.
6.1.2
Radio Frequency for Consumer Electronics (RF4CE)
The specialty-use-driven ZigBee RF4CE protocol has been designed for simple,
two-way device-to-device control applications that do not require the full-featured
mesh networking capabilities offered by ZigBee 2007. ZigBee RF4CE offers lower
memory size requirements, thereby enabling lower cost implementations.
RF4CE is based on ZigBee and was standardized in 2009 by four consumer
electronics (CE) companies: Sony, Philips, Panasonic, and Samsung.
The ZigBee RF4CE speciﬁcation deﬁnes an RC network that deﬁnes a simple,
robust, and low-cost communication network allowing wireless connectivity in appli-
cations for CE devices. The ZigBee RF4CE speciﬁcation enhances the IEEE 802.15.4
standard by providing a simple networking layer and standard application layer that
can be used to create a multivendor interoperable solution for use within the home.
Some of the characteristics of ZigBee RF4CE include the following (16):
r Operation in the 2.4 GHz frequency band according to IEEE 802.15.4;
r Frequency agile solution operating over three channels;
r Incorporates power-saving mechanisms for all device classes;
r Discovery mechanism with full application conﬁrmation;
r Pairing mechanism with full application conﬁrmation;
r Multiple star topology with inter-PAN communication;
r Various transmission options including broadcast;
r Security key generation mechanism;
r Utilizes the industry standard AES-128 security scheme;
r Speciﬁes a simple RC control proﬁle for CE products;
r Support alliance-developed standards or manufacturer-speciﬁc proﬁles.
RF4CE’s intended use is as a device RC system, for example for television set-
top boxes. The intention is that it overcomes the common problems associated with
infrared (IR): interoperability, line-of-sight (LOS), and limited enhanced features (5).
At least wo-chip vendors supported RF4CE as of press time: Texas Instruments and
Freescale Semiconductor, Inc.
6.1.3
Bluetooth and its Low-Energy Proﬁle
6.1.3.1
Overview
Bluetooth is a WPAN technology based on IEEE 802.15.1. It
is a speciﬁcation for short-range wireless connectivity for portable personal devices,
including computer peripherals. It is now one of the most popular technologies in

WPAN TECHNOLOGIES FOR IoT/M2M
171
consumer electronics. Bluetooth was initially developed by Ericsson; in the late
1990s, the Bluetooth Special Interest Group (SIG) made their speciﬁcations publicly
available. Soon thereafter, the IEEE 802.15 Group took the Bluetooth work and
developed a vendor-independent standard. The Bluetooth SIG, in conjunction with
the IEEE, has managed enhancements of the basic standard over the years. Bluetooth
has evolved through four versions (see Table 6.6); all versions of the Bluetooth
standards maintain downward compatibility. The Bluetooth SIG has approximately
17,000 member companies in telecommunication, computing, and CE.
TABLE 6.6
Versions of Bluetooth
Version
Description
Bluetooth v1.0 and v1.0B
Original versions; had limited interoperability
Bluetooth v1.1
This is original IEEE Standard 802.15.1–2002
Bluetooth v1.2
Ratiﬁed as IEEE Standard 802.15.1–2005. Incorporates a
number of enhancements compared with v1.1 including (i)
faster connection and discovery; (ii) use of AFH spread
spectrum; (iii) supports higher transmission speeds up to 721
Kbps; and (iv) adds ﬂow control mechanisms
Bluetooth v2.0 + EDR
Published in 2004. Incorporates a number of enhancements
compared with v1.1 including faster data transfer of about
3 Mbps and lower power consumption through a reduced
duty cycle. Note: To be exact, Version 2.0 devices have a
higher power consumption; however, the fact that the
transmission rate is three times faster (thereby reducing the
transmission burst times), effectively reduces consumption to
half that of 1.x devices
Bluetooth v2.1 + EDR
Published in July 2007. This release adds secure simple pairing
(SSP), which improves the pairing process for Bluetooth
devices while improving security; it also incorporates a
subrating mechanism that reduces the power consumption in
low-power mode
Bluetooth v3.0 + HS
Published in April 2009. This release supports a theoretical data
transfer speeds of up to 24 Mbps by using the Bluetooth link
for negotiation and establishment of a session for high data
rate trafﬁc carried over a collocated 802.11 link. It adds
alternate MAC/PHY (AMP) for the use of 802.11 as a HS
transport. Note: The HS portion of the speciﬁcation is not
mandatory, and only devices with the “+HS” label actually
support the Bluetooth over 802.11 HS data transfer. The
enhanced power control feature updates the power control
feature to remove the open loop power control and also to
clarify ambiguities in power control as related to EDR
Bluetooth v4.0
Published in June 2010. This version includes Classic
Bluetooth, Bluetooth high speed, and BLE protocols.
Bluetooth high speed is based on Wi-Fi and Classic
Bluetooth consists of legacy Bluetooth protocols

172
LAYER 1/2 CONNECTIVITY: WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
Bluetooth is a short-range data exchange communication protocol widely used
in cellular phones, smartphones, tablets, and PDAs (has a range of about 10 m, or
a maximum of 100 m with power boost). Bluetooth is designed for a small variety
of tasks, such as synchronization, voice headsets, cell-modem calls, and mouse and
keyboard input. The Bluetooth speciﬁcation deﬁnes a low-power, low-cost technology
that provides a standardized platform for eliminating cables between mobile devices
and facilitating connections between products.
Bluetooth operates in the 2.4-GHz ISM band and has a bandwidth of approximately
1–3 Mbps (newer version support higher speeds). Bluetooth uses frequency-hopping
spread spectrum. While the cost of Bluetooth equipment is signiﬁcantly lower than
the cost of WLAN, the transmission range of 10 m or less and the data transfer rate
12 Mbps or less (in Version 2.0 of the standard) are often considered a drawback. By
comparison, EEE 802.11a/b/g/n is a collection of related technologies that operate
in the 2.4-GHz ISM band, the 5-GHz ISM band, and the 5-GHz U-NII bands; it
provides the highest power and longest range of the common unlicensed wireless
technologies. Transmission data rates can reach 54 Mbps (twice as much with the
latest 802.11n protocol). Typically, hardware implementation of some or all of 802.11
protocols comes preinstalled on most new laptop computers; the technology is often
also available for PDAs and cellular phones. Also by comparison, the IEEE 802.15.4
(ZigBee) standard supports a maximum data rate of 250 Kbps, with rates as low as
20 Kbps; however, it has the lowest power requirement of the group: ZigBee devices
are designed to run several years on a single set of batteries, making them ideal
candidates for unattended or difﬁcult-to-reach locations. See Table 6.7.
The sublayers of IEEE 802.15 are as follows: (i) RF layer; (ii) baseband layer;
(iii) the link manager (an MAC-level protocol); and (iv) the logical link control and
adaptation protocol (L2CAP) (also an MAC-level protocol). Bluetooth is designed
for high QoS applications, a variety of duty cycles, and moderate data rates in
networks with limited active nodes. Compared with WLANs, Bluetooth is limited as
a transmission technology in terms of both bandwidth and distance. The functionality
of the layers is as follows:
– RF layer: The air interface is based on antenna power range starting from 0 dBm
up to 20 dBm, 2.4 GHz band, and the link range from 0.1 to 10 m.
– Baseband layer: The baseband layer establishes the Bluetooth piconet. The
piconet is formed when two Bluetooth devices connect. In a piconet, one device
acts as the master and the other devices act as slaves.
– Link manager: The link manager establishes the link between Bluetooth
devices. Additional functions include security, negotiation of Baseband packet
sizes, power mode and duty cycle control of the Bluetooth device, and the con-
nection states of a Bluetooth device in a piconet.
– L2CAP: This sublayer provides the upper-layer protocols with connectionless
and connection-oriented services. The services provided by this layer include
protocol multiplexing capability, segmentation and reassembly of packets, and
group abstractions.

WPAN TECHNOLOGIES FOR IoT/M2M
173
TABLE 6.7
Wireless Protocol Comparison
IEEE Standard
Property
802.11 WLANs
802.15.1/
Bluetooth
802.15.4/
ZigBee
Battery life
measured in:
Minutes to hours
Hours to days
Days to
years
Data
throughput
r 802.11a: up to 54 Mbps
r 802.11b: up to 11 Mbps
r 802.11g: up to 54 Mbps
r 802.11n: up to 150 Mbps (at 40 MHz
operation at 5 GHz)
r 802.11ac: up to 867 Mbps (160 MHz
operation at 5 GHz)
∼1 Mbps
(Version 1)
to 3 Mbps
(Version 2)
∼0.25 Mbps
Power
consumption
Medium
Low
Very low
Range
∼250 m (this ﬁgure is for 802.11n,
otherwise ∼100 m)
Note: IEEE 802.11y-2008 extended
operation of 802.11a to the licensed
3.7 GHz band (co-primary basis in the
3650 to 3700 MHz band in the U.S.
band); this increased power limits
allow a range up to 5000 m. This band
has traditionally been used for satellite
communications and is known as the
C-band
∼10 to 100 m
∼10 m
BLE (originally known as WiBree and/or Bluetooth ultra low power [ULP]7) is
a low-power subset to Bluetooth v4.0, with an entirely new protocol stack for rapid
build-up of simple links. BLE is an alternative to the “power management” features
that were introduced in Bluetooth v1.0 to v3.0 as part of the standard Bluetooth
protocols. BLE is aimed at very low-power applications running off a coin cell:
it is capable of reporting data from a sensor for up to a year from a small button
battery without recharging. Although the BLE data rate and radio range are lower
than the same metrics in classic Bluetooth, the low-power and long battery life make
it suitable for short-range monitoring applications in medicine. BLE sensor devices
are typically required to operate for many years without needing a new battery; they
commonly use a coin cell, for example, the popular CR2032 (22). The aim of the BLE
technology is to enable power-sensitive devices to be permanently connected to the
Internet. BLE per se is primarily aimed at mobile telephones, where it is envisaged
7BLE started as a project in the Nokia Research Centre with the name Wibree. In 2007, the technology was
adopted by the Bluetooth SIG and renamed Bluetooth ultra low power; later, it was renamed Bluetooth
low energy.

174
LAYER 1/2 CONNECTIVITY: WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
1B
4B
1B
Overhead
Preamble
Access
Address
Advertising
Header
Payload
Length
Advertiser
Address
Payload
CRC
Overhead
1B
6B
PDU (Protocol Data Unit [packet or message])
2–39 B
Payload up to 31B
3B
FIGURE 6.7
BLE packet.
that a star network topology, similar to Bluetooth, will often be created between the
phone and an ecosystem of other devices.
Figure 6.7 depicts the BLE packet, while Figure 6.8 shows the frequency plan.
Current chip designs allow for two types of implementation—dual mode and single
mode. In a single-mode implementation, the BLE protocol stack is implemented
solely. In a dual-mode implementation, BLE functionality is integrated into an exist-
ing Classic Bluetooth controller. Most new Bluetooth chipsets from leading Bluetooth
silicon manufacturers are expected to support Bluetooth and the new BLE function-
ality; a number of companies had announced support of BLE by press time, including
Broadcom and Texas Instruments.
As implied in Figure 6.8, there are some coexistence scenarios in a corporate
setting, in a home, or in a small ofﬁce home ofﬁce (SOHO) where Wi-Fi is used. The
IEEE 802.11b and 802.11g speciﬁcations postulate a partitioning of the spectrum
into 14 overlapping, staggered channels whose center frequencies are 5 MHz apart;
within this partitioning of the ISM spectrum, channels 1, 6, and 11 (and, if available
in the regulatory domain, channel 14) do not overlap. These channels (or other
sets with similar gaps) can be used so that multiple networks can operate in close
proximity without interfering with each other. See Figure 6.9. The spectral mask
for 802.11b requires that the signal be at least 30 dB down from its peak energy at
±11 MHz from the center frequency and at least 50 dB down from its peak energy
at ±22 MHz from the center frequency. Note that if the transmitter is sufﬁciently
powerful, the signal can be quite strong even beyond the ±22 MHz point (e.g., a
powerful transmitter on channel 6 can easily overwhelm a weaker transmitter on
channel 11); in most situations, however, the signal in a given channel is sufﬁciently
attenuated to minimally interfere with a transmitter on any other channel. Each BLE
channel is 2 MHz wide, but the spacing and placement of ZigBee channels implies
that only four channels are likely to be free in the presence of average Wi-Fi network
settings (typically, channels 1, 6, and 11 are defaults). With an on-air signaling data
rate of only 250 Kbps and the inability to implement hopping, ZigBee is at risk
of nondelivery of its packets; BLE, on the other hand, makes much more efﬁcient
use of the spectrum and employs adaptive frequency hopping (AFH) as proven by

WPAN TECHNOLOGIES FOR IoT/M2M
175
0
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
37
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
38
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
39
Wi-Fi Ch. 1
Wi-Fi Ch. 6
Wi-Fi Ch. 11
Wi-Fi Ch. 1
Wi-Fi Ch. 6
Frequency
Ch
LL
Wi-Fi Ch. 11
2402 MHz
2404 MHz
2406 MHz
2408 MHz
2410 MHz
2412 MHz
2414 MHz
2416 MHz
2418 MHz
2420 MHz
2422 MHz
2424 MHz
2426 MHz
2428 MHz
2430 MHz
2432 MHz
2434 MHz
2436 MHz
2438 MHz
2440 MHz
2442 MHz
2444 MHz
2446 MHz
2448 MHz
2450 MHz
2452 MHz
2454 MHz
2456 MHz
2458 MHz
2460 MHz
2462 MHz
2464 MHz
2466 MHz
2468 MHz
2470 MHz
2472 MHz
2474 MHz
2476 MHz
2478 MHz
2480 MHz
FIGURE 6.8
Frequency spectrum. Top: BLE channel allocations (each channel is 2 MHz
wide). Bottom: ZigBee channel allocations (each channel is 2 MHz wide but there is a 5 MHz
spacing; in the presence of a multichannel Wi-Fi, only four channels may actually to be
available).
Bluetooth. As noted earlier, a device that operates Bluetooth v4.0 may not necessarily
implement other versions of Bluetooth; in such cases, it is known as a single-mode
device (5).
In the recent past, Bluetooth was used in health care mostly just for interconnection
of various medical apparatus. The situation is changing with the development of
the Bluetooth Health Device Proﬁle (HDP). Under Bluetooth, a proﬁle deﬁnes the
characteristics and features including function of a Bluetooth system. The HDP is
used for connecting application data source devices such as blood pressure monitors,
weight scales, glucose meters, thermometers, and pulse oximeters to application
data sink devices such as mobile phones, laptops, desktop computers, and health
appliances without the need for cables. This proﬁle can be combined with BLE to
make sure that medical devices can be in the operational conditions for many months
and even years (3). The topic is revisited below.

176
LAYER 1/2 CONNECTIVITY: WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
Access point
Router
Power
BT BT
BT BT BT
BT BT BT
BT
BT
Frequency
ISM
IEEE 802.11b/g frequency
IEEE 802.11b/g IEEE 802.11b/g IEEE 802.11b/g
Firewall
Internet
or WAN
Channel
WiFi
1
2
f1
f6
f11
f1
f6
f11
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
2412
2417
2422
2427
2432
2437
2442
2447
2452
2457
2462
2467
2472
2484
2434
2239
2444
2449
2454
2459
2464
2469
2474
2479
2484
2489
MHz
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
2412
2417
2422
2427
2432
2437
2442
2447
2452
2457
2462
2467
2472
2484
2434
2239
2444
2449
2454
2459
2464
2469
2474
2479
2484
2489
Channel
Bluetooth
i
ii
iii
iv
v
2412
2413
2414
2415
2413
2214
2415
MHz
Access point
Access point
Ethernet switch
Wired
LAN
f11
f6
f1
FIGURE 6.9
IEEE 802.11b/g frequency bands, typical topology, and Bluetooth interaction.

WPAN TECHNOLOGIES FOR IoT/M2M
177
6.1.3.2
Details
As noted, Bluetooth is a speciﬁcation for short-range RF-based
connectivity for portable personal devices. The speciﬁcation originally started out as
a de facto industry standard; more recently, the IEEE Project 802.15.1 developed a
wireless PAN standard based on the Bluetooth v1.1 Foundation Speciﬁcations. The
IEEE 802.15.1 standard was published in 2002. Bluetooth is principally directed to
the support of personal communication devices such as telephones, printers, headsets,
PC keyboards/mice, etc. The technology has restricted performance characteristics
by design; hence, its applicability to WSN is rather limited in most cases.
As part of its effort, the IEEE has reviewed and provided a standard adaptation of
the Bluetooth Speciﬁcation v1.1 Foundation MAC (L2CAP, LMP, and baseband) and
PHY (radio). Also speciﬁed is a clause on service access points (SAPs) that includes
an LLC/MAC interface for the ISO/IEC 8802-2 LLC. A Protocol Implementation
Conformance Statement (PICS) proforma has been developed. Also speciﬁed is an
informative high-level behavioral ITU-T Z.100 speciﬁcation and description language
(SDL) model for an integrated Bluetooth MAC sublayer (23).
The system uses omnidirectional radio waves that can transmit through walls
and other nonmetal barriers. Unlike other wireless standards, the Bluetooth wireless
speciﬁcation includes both link-layer and application layer deﬁnitions for product
developers. Radios that comply with the Bluetooth wireless speciﬁcation operate in
the unlicensed, 2.4-GHz ISM radio spectrum ensuring communication compatibility
worldwide.
Bluetooth radios use a spread spectrum, frequency-hopping, full-duplex signal.
While point-to-point connections are supported, the speciﬁcation allows up to seven
simultaneous connections to be established and maintained by a single radio (24).
AFH available with newer versions allows for better graceful coexistence with IEEE
802.11 WLAN systems. The signal hops among 79 frequencies at 1 MHz intervals
to give an acceptable degree of interference immunity between multiple Bluetooth
devices and between a Bluetooth device and a WLAN device (at least in the case
where not all the available frequencies are used by the WLAN—this is likely the case
in a SOHO environment where only one or two access points are used at a location).
Refer again to Figure 6.9. In order to minimize interference with other protocols that
use the same band, the protocol can change channels up to 1600 times per second. If
there is interference from other devices, the transmission does not stop, but its speed
is downgraded.
Bluetooth version 1.2 allowed a maximum data rate of 1 Mbps; this results in an
effective throughput of about 723 Kbps. In late 2004, a new version of Bluetooth,
known as Bluetooth Version 2, was ratiﬁed; among other features, it included EDR.
With EDR, the maximum data rate is able to reach 3 Mbps (throughput of 2.1 Mbps)
within a range of 10 m (up to 100 m with a power boost). Older and newer Bluetooth
devices can work together with no special effort (25). Because a device such as a
telephone headset can transmit the same information faster with Bluetooth 2.0+EDR,
it will use less energy since the radio is on for shorter periods of time. The data rate is
improved by more efﬁcient coding of the data sent across the air; this also means that
for the same amount of data, the radio will be active less of the time, thus reducing
the power consumption (24). Newer Bluetooth devices are efﬁcient at using small

178
LAYER 1/2 CONNECTIVITY: WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
amounts of power when not actively transmitting: for example, the headset is able to
burst two to three times more data in a transmission; it is able to sleep longer between
transmissions. Noteworthy features of Bluetooth Core Speciﬁcation Version 2.0 +
EDR include:
r Three times faster transmission speed compared with pre-existing technology
r Lower power consumption through reduced duty cycle
r Simpliﬁcation of multilink applications due to increased available bandwidth
r Backward compatibility to earlier versions
r Improved BER (bit error rate) performance
In the recent past, hardware developers were shifting from Bluetooth 1.1 to Blue-
tooth 1.2 and then Bluetooth 2.0. To be exact, Version 2.0 devices have a higher
power consumption; however, the fact that the transmission rate is three times faster
(thereby reducing the transmission burst times) effectively reduces consumption to
half that of 1.x devices.
Devices are able to establish a trusted relationship; a device that wants to commu-
nicate only with a trusted device can cryptographically authenticate the identity of
the other device. Trusted devices may also encrypt the data that they exchange over
the air.
A Bluetooth device playing the role of “master” can communicate with up to seven
devices playing the role of “slave” (these groups of up to eight devices are called
piconets). At any given instant in time, data can be transferred between the master
and one slave; but the master switches rapidly from slave to slave in a round-robin
fashion. (Simultaneous transmission from the master to multiple slaves is possible,
but not used much in practice.) The Bluetooth speciﬁcation also allows connecting
two or more piconets together to form a scatternet, with some devices acting as a
bridge by simultaneously playing the master role in one piconet and the slave role in
another piconet.
6.1.3.3
Bluetooth HDP
Until recently, Bluetooth systems for medical applica-
tion made use of proprietary implementations and data format; typically applications
are placed on top of the serial port proﬁle (SPP); however, they were not interopera-
ble across vendors. To address the interoperability issue, the Bluetooth SIG started a
program several years ago to deﬁne a new medical application, and in 2008 it released
the HDP elluded to earlier.
The end result of this work was the HDP speciﬁcation that included the multi-
channel adaptation protocol (MCAP) and that made use of the device ID (DI) proﬁle.
Figure 6.10 describes the architecture of a Bluetooth system with the HDP and appli-
cations. Table 6.8 describes the key components (26). HDP provides several critical
features; these include control channel connection/disconnection, data link creation
(reliable or streaming), data link deletion, data link abort, data link reconnection, data
transmission (over one or more data links), and clock synchronization.

WPAN TECHNOLOGIES FOR IoT/M2M
179
Medical Device Components
-10404
Pulse
Oximeter
-10407
Blood
Pressure
-10408
Themo-
meter
-10415
Weighing
Scale
-10417
Glucose
-10441
Cardio
-10442
Strength
-10471
Activity
Data
11073-00103 Technical Report - Overview
11073-20601 Optimized Exchange Protocol
Medical Application
IEEE 11073-20601 Stack
Health Device Profile (HDP)
Dl Profile
SDP
Generic Access
Profile (GAP)
Host Controller Interface HCI
Bluetooth Transport Interface
L2CAP
MCAP
FIGURE 6.10
Bluetooth protocol and a HDP in a medical device application.
TABLE 6.8
Description of the HDP Functional Blocks
Functional Block
Description
Medical application
Describes the actual device application, including its user interface,
application behavior, and integration layer to the IEEE
11073-20601 stack implementation
IEEE 11073-20601
Stack performs building, transmission, reception, and parsing of
IEEE PDU packets for the associated agent/manager being
developed. This component will directly link to the HDP
DI proﬁle
Bluetooth proﬁle designed to provide device-speciﬁc information
through the use of the service discovery protocol (SDP). If
vendor-speciﬁc information is required as part of a particular
medical device, this proﬁle provides speciﬁc behavior to acquire
this information. A good HDP implementation offers APIs to
register and query for such vendor-speciﬁc information. These
APIs can then be integrated directly into the medical application
HDP
The core Bluetooth proﬁle designed to facilitate transmission and
reception of medical device data. The APIs of this layer interact
with the lower-level MCAP layer, but also perform SDP behavior
to connect to remote HDP devices
SDP
The discovery protocol used by all Bluetooth proﬁles to register
and/or discover available services on remote devices so that
connections over L2CAP can be established
MCAP
Used by HDP and facilitates the creation of a communications link
(MCL) for exchanging generic commands, and also one or more
data links (MDL) to transfer actual medical device data. MCAP is
speciﬁc for the HDP and guarantees reliable transmission of data
Generic access
proﬁle (GAP)
Describes the required features of all core Bluetooth proﬁles
including inquiry, connection, and authentication procedures
L2CAP
Supports protocol multiplexing, packet segmentation and reassembly,
QoS, retransmission, and ﬂow control for the Bluetooth packets
transmitted through MCAP
Host controller
interface (HCI)
Describes the commands and events that all Bluetooth hardware
implementations (controllers) can understand
Bluetooth transport
interface
Describes the UART, USB, SDIO, three-wire, ABCSP, etc. transport
interface to the actual Bluetooth hardware components being used.
Typically, UART and USB are the most widely used transports

180
LAYER 1/2 CONNECTIVITY: WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
HDP devices act as sinks and/or sources. A source is the small device that will
act as the transmitter of the medical data (weight scale, glucose meter, thermometer,
etc.). The sink is the feature-rich device that will act as the receiver of the medical
data (mobile phone, desktop computer, health appliances, etc.). HDP devices acting
as a source device are weight scales, blood pressure meters, thermometers, or glucose
meters which transmit application data over a reliable data channel to a sink (PC,
mobile phone, or PDA). Other source devices such as pulse oximeter, EEG, or ECG
transmit application data over a streaming data channel to a sink (PC, mobile phone, or
PDA). Multiple source devices transmit application data over reliable and streaming
data channels to a sink. This data can then be routed on to a physician through
an alternate transport (e.g., the Internet or a mobile phone network) to a medical
server application at a hospital. A source device may be a combination device (pulse
oximeter with thermometer capability) utilizing multiple data channels (26).
HDP does not deﬁne the data format and data content. The Bluetooth SIG requires
for HDP the usage of the IEEE 11073-20601 Personal Health Device Communica-
tion Application Proﬁle as the only allowed protocol for data exchange between HDP
devices and the IEEE 11073-104xx Device Speciﬁcation. IEEE 11073-20601 deﬁnes
the data exchange protocol and IEEE 11073-104xx deﬁnes the data format including
size and coding of all data exchanged between HDP devices. The data exchange pro-
tocol includes services for a reliable communication, mechanism for event reporting,
object access via GET/SET, and the domain information (object-oriented descrip-
tion with attributes for the device conﬁguration). Device description and attribute
deﬁnitions are using ASN.1. Refer again to Figure 6.10 for the architecture of a Blue-
tooth device with IEEE 11073-20601 and device speciﬁcations with IEEE 11073
(-104xx). The length of transmitted data is in most cases 896 bytes for transmit and
224 bytes for receive. The exception is the oximeter (transmit: 9216 bytes; receive:
256 bytes).
6.1.4
IEEE 802.15.6 WBANs
At press time, the IEEE 802.15 Task Group (TG) 6 was in the process of developing
a communication standard optimized for low-power devices and operation on, in, or
around the human body (but nonetheless not limited to humans) to serve a variety
of applications including medical, CE/personal entertainment, and others. The tech-
nology is intended to support low-power in-body/on-body nodes to serve a variety of
medical and nonmedical applications. The IEEE TG postulated that for a successful
implementation of WBAN, a standard model was required, which would be able to
address both medical and CE applications.
The IEEE 802.15 TG6 was formed in November 2007 and begun operations as
TG6 in January 2008. It had received 34 proposals, which were merged into a single
candidate proposal. A draft of the standard was developed in March 2009. The draft
has undergone signiﬁcant editing and underwent ﬁve Letter Ballots; the last was
Letter Ballot 79. On July 22, 2011, the draft was approved to start Sponsor Ballot.
The standard deﬁnes an MAC layer supporting several PHY layers.

WPAN TECHNOLOGIES FOR IoT/M2M
181
The selection of the PHYs (frequency bands) was an important issue.8 Gen-
erally, the available frequencies for WBANs are regulated by communication
authorities in different countries. Medical Implant Communication Service (MICS)
band is a licensed band used for implant communication and has the same frequency
range (402–405 MHz) in most of the countries. Wireless Medical Telemetry Ser-
vices (WMTS) is a licensed band used for medical telemetry system. Both MICS
and WMTS bandwidths do not support high data rate applications. The ISM band
supports high data rate applications and is available worldwide. However, there are
high chances of interference as many wireless devices including IEEE 802.1 and
IEEE 802.15.4 operate at ISM band. The current IEEE 802.15.6 standard deﬁnes
three PHY layers as follows: the narrowband (NB) layer, the ultra wideband (UWB)
layer, and the human body communications (HBC) layer. The selection of each PHY
depends on the application requirements. On the top of the PHY layer, the stan-
dard deﬁnes a sophisticated MAC protocol that controls access to the channel. For
time-referenced resource allocations, the hub (or the coordinator) divides the time
axis (or the channel) into a series of superframes. The superframes are bounded by
beacon periods of equal length. To ensure high-level security, the standard deﬁnes
three levels: (a) level 0—unsecured communication, (b) level 1—authentication only,
(c) level 2—both authentication and encryption (27). Table 6.9, also from Reference
27, describes the PHY layers.
Regarding the MAC layer in IEEE 802.15.6, the entire channel is divided into
superframe structures. Each superframe is bounded by a beacon period of equal
length. The hub selects the boundaries of the beacon period and thereby selects the
allocation slots. The hub may also shift the offsets of the beacon period. Generally,
the beacons are transmitted in each beacon period except in inactive superframes or
unless prohibited by regulations such as in MICS band. The IEEE 802.15.6 network
operates in one of three modes listed in Table 6.10 and also from Reference 27. The
access mechanisms used in each period of the superframe are divided into three cate-
gories: (1) random access mechanism, which uses either CSMA/CA or a slotted Aloha
procedure for resource allocation, (2) improvized and unscheduled access (connec-
tionless contention-free access), which uses unscheduled polling/posting for resource
allocation, and (3) scheduled access and variants (connection-oriented contention-
free access), which schedules the allocation of slots in one or multiple upcoming
superframes. These mechanisms are described in detail in the standard.
6.1.5
IEEE 802.15 WPAN TG4j MBANs
The purpose of TG4j is to create an amendment to 802.15.4, which deﬁnes a PHY
layer for IEEE 802.15.4 in the 2360 to 2400 MHz band and complies with Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) MBAN rules. The amendment may also deﬁne
modiﬁcations to the MAC needed to support this new PHY layer. This amendment
allows 802.15.4- and MAC-deﬁned changes to be used in the MBAN band. TG4j work
8This discussion is based on and summarized from reference (7) which the reader should consult for
additional details.

182
LAYER 1/2 CONNECTIVITY: WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
TABLE 6.9
PHY Layer Speciﬁcation for the IEEE 802.15.6 Standard
PHY
Description
NB PHY
The NB PHY is responsible for activation/deactivation of the radio
transceiver, CCA within the current channel, and data
transmission/reception. The Physical Protocol Data Unit (PPDU)
frame of NB PHY contains a Physical Layer Convergence Procedure
(PLCP) preamble, a PLCP header, and a PSDU. The PLCP preamble
helps the receiver in the timing synchronization and carrier-offset
recovery; it is the ﬁrst component transmitted. The PLCP header
conveys information necessary for a successful decoding of a packet
to the receiver. The PLCP header is transmitted after PLCP preamble
using the given header data rate in the operating frequency band. The
last component of PPDU is PSDU which consists of an MAC header,
MAC frame body, and frame check sequence (FCS) and is
transmitted after PLCP header using any of the available data rates in
the operating frequency band. A WBAN device should be able to
support transmission and reception in one of the frequency bands
available, including the following: 402–405 MHz; 420–450 MHz;
863–870 MHz; 902–928 MHz; 950–956 MHz; 2360–2400 MHz; and
2400–2483.5 MHz. The table further shows the data rate-dependent
modulation parameters for PLCP header and PSDU. In NB PHY, the
standard uses differential binary phase-shift keying (DBPSK),
differential quadrature phase-shift keying (DQPSK), and differential
8-phase-shift keying (D8PSK) modulation techniques except
420–450 MHz which uses a Gaussian minimum shift keying (GMSK)
technique
UWB PHY
UWB PHY operates in two frequency bands: low band and high band.
Each band is divided into channels, all of them characterized by a
bandwidth of 499.2 MHz. The low band consists of three channels
(1–3) only. The channel 2 has a central frequency of 3993.6 MHz and
is considered a mandatory channel. The high band consists of eight
channels (4–11) where channel 7 with a central frequency
7987.2 MHz is considered a mandatory channel, while all other
channels are optional. A typical UWB device should support at least
one of the mandatory channels. The UWB PHY transceivers allow
low implementation complexity and generate signal power levels in
the order of those used in the MICS band. The UWB PPDU that
contains a synchronization header (SHR), a PHY header (PHR), and
PSDU. The SHR is composed of a preamble and a start frame
delimiter (SFD). The PHR conveys information about the data rate of
the PSDU, length of the payload, and scrambler seed. The
information in the PHR is used by the receiver in order to decode the
PSDU. The SHR is formed of repetitions of Kasami sequences of
length 63. Typical data rates range from 0.5 Mbps up to 10 Mbps,
with 0.4882 Mbps as the mandatory one

WPAN TECHNOLOGIES FOR IoT/M2M
183
TABLE 6.9
(Continued )
PHY
Description
HBC PHY
HBC PHY operates in two frequency bands centered at 16 MHz and
27 MHz with the bandwidth of 4 MHz. Both operating bands are
valid for the United States, Japan, and Korea, and the operating band
at 27MHz is valid for Europe. HBC is the electrostatic ﬁeld
communication (EFC) speciﬁcation of PHY, which covers the entire
protocol for WBAN such as packet structure, modulation,
preamble/SFD, etc. The PPDU structure of EFC that is composed of a
preamble, SFD, PHY header, and PSDU. The preamble and SFD are
ﬁxed data patterns. They are pre-generated and sent ahead of the
packet header and payload. The preamble sequence is transmitted
four times in order to ensure packet synchronization while the SFD is
transmitted only once. When the packet is received by the receiver, it
ﬁnds the start of the packet by detecting the preamble sequence, and
then it ﬁnds the start of the frame by detecting the SFD
TABLE 6.10
MAC Layer Modes for the IEEE 802.15.6 Standard
Beacon Mode
Description
Beacon mode with
beacon period
superframe
boundaries
In this mode, the beacons are transmitted by the hub in each
beacon period except in inactive superframes or unless
prohibited by regulations. The superframe structure of IEEE
802.15.6 is divided into exclusive access phase 1 (EAP1),
random access phase 1 (RAP1), type I/II phase, EAP2,
random access phase 2 (RAP2), type I/II phase, and a
contention access phase (CAP). In EAP, RAP, and CAP
periods, nodes contend for the resource allocation using
either CSMA/CA or a slotted Aloha access procedure. The
EAP1 and EAP2 are used for highest priority trafﬁc such as
reporting emergency events. The RAP1, RAP2, and CAP are
used for regular trafﬁc only. The type I/II phases are used for
uplink allocation intervals, downlink allocation intervals,
bilink allocation intervals, and delay bilink allocation
intervals. In type I/II phases, polling is used for resource
allocation. Depending on the application requirements, the
coordinator can disable any of these periods by setting the
duration length to zero
Nonbeacon mode
with superframe
boundaries
In this mode, the entire superframe duration is covered by either
a type I or a type II access phase but not by both phases
Nonbeacon mode
without superframe
boundaries
In this mode, the coordinator provides unscheduled type II
polled allocation only

184
LAYER 1/2 CONNECTIVITY: WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
started in 2010 and a standard could emerge in 2013.9 The title of the standard under
development is: IEEE Standard for Information Technology—Telecommunications
and Information Exchange Between Systems: Local and Metropolitan Area Network-
Speciﬁc Requirements. Part 15.4: Wireless Medium Access Control (MAC) and Phys-
ical Layer (PHY) Speciﬁcations for Low-Rate Wireless Personal Area Networks
(WPANs) Amendment: Alternative Physical Layer Extension to support Medical
Body Area Network (MBAN) services operating in the 2360–2400 MHz band.
IEEE 802.15.4 has always supported operation in appropriate frequency bands,
and an opportunity is now available to extend the operation of 15.4 into a band that
is reserved for MBAN use by the FCC. As noted elsewhere in this text, the FCC has
issued a Notice of Proposed Rule Making (NPRM) (FCC NPRM 09-57) to allocate
the band 2360 to 2400 MHz for MBANSs using body sensor devices. Service and
technical rules allow such devices to operate in this band either on a licensed-by-rule
basis under the Medical Device Radiocommunication Service (MedRadio Service) in
Part 95 or on a licensed and nonexclusive basis under Part 90 along with a frequency
coordination model to minimize interference to incumbent users in the band. This
project deﬁnes an alternate PHY and the necessary modiﬁcations to the MAC that
are needed to support the PHY operation according to the FCC rules in the MBAN
band (10). The proposed amendment to IEEE 802.15.4 provides a solution for the use
of the MBAN spectrum that makes use of existing silicon solutions. The proposed
amendment to IEEE 802.15.4 targets both on and off body applications.
By way of comparison, and as noted above, the IEEE P802.15.6 group is also
working on BANs with potential medical applications. The two projects address a
common application but provide a different set of capabilities. IEEE 802.15.6 is
addressing communication in the vicinity of, or inside, a human body. The proposed
amendment to IEEE 802.15.4 will address low data rate applications. IEEE P802.15.6
is targeting signiﬁcant high data rates and lower power consumption applications.
6.1.6
ETSI TR 101 557
The 2012 ETSI TR 101 557 Technical Report (TR) has been produced by the ETSI
Technical Committee, Electromagnetic Compatibility and Radiospectrum Matters
(ERM) to address bandwidth allocations for WBANs/MBANSs. Previously (in 2011)
ERM developed a system reference document (SRdoc) (TR 102 889-2) for techni-
cal characteristics for SRD equipment for wireless industrial applications using
technologies different from UWB. ETSI has also identiﬁed two of the candidate
frequency bands proposed for MBANSs (2360–2400 MHz and 2483.5–2500 MHz)
as candidate bands for these wireless industrial applications. Both applications are
9Final agreement on the features of the amendment were agreed to during the March, 2012 meeting in
Waikoloa, Letter Ballot #81 was approved by the Work Group, opened on March 28, 2012 and closed on
April 27, 2012. The Letter Ballot passed with 90.83% Yes votes and generated 575 comments. There were
2 recirculations of the letter ballot, Letter Ballot #82 and Letter Ballot #84, both of which also passed.
There were no new comments on the ﬁnal recirculation ballot and no remaining NO votes. The Work
Group has asked the Executive Committee to approve the amendment for Sponsor Ballot at the September
2012 meeting in Palm Springs, USA.

WPAN TECHNOLOGIES FOR IoT/M2M
185
license-exempt SRD applications but can be both considered as critical within their
environment and hence why the usual SRD bands are not intended to be used by
these systems. MBANSs are used to provide wireless networking of multiple body
sensors and actuators used for monitoring patient physiological parameters, patient
diagnosis, and patient treatment, primarily in healthcare facilities as well as in other
healthcare monitoring situations such as ambulances and the patient’s home; the use
of MBANSs holds the promise of improved quality and efﬁciency of patient care
by reducing or eliminating a wide array of hardwired, patient-attached cables used
by present monitoring technologies. MBANSs are intended to be used mainly in
hospitals or, at a later stage of the treatment, at the patient’s home. In any case, the
environment for the application is far away from the application of wireless sensors
used for machine automation in a factory environment. This is why these two appli-
cations in such clearly deﬁned but totally different environments will not harmfully
interfere with each other (1).
The ISM radio bands are radio bands allocated internationally for the said purpose.
The ISM bands are deﬁned by the ITU-R in 5.138, 5.150, and 5.280 of the radio
regulations. Unfortunately, individual countries’ use of the bands designated in these
sections may differ due to variations in national radio regulations. In the United States,
uses of the ISM bands are governed by Part 15 and Part 18 of the FCC rules. There
are a number of ISM bands, but the most well known is the one covering the 2400–
2500 MHz region (some other bands include allocations of 6.7 MHz, 13.5 MHz,
26.9 MHz, 40.6 MHz, 433 MHz, 902 MHz, and 5725 MHz).
In Europe, MBANS proponents (e.g., Philips, Zarlink, Texas Instruments, and
Dutch Ministry of Economic Affairs Agriculture and Innovation) have an interest
in addressing a growing market for MBANS services in the frequency range 1785–
2500 MHz, but are concerned that no speciﬁc regulatory guidance from CEPT/ECC
exists for administrations wishing to implement the MBANSs. A spectrum of 40 MHz
between 1785 MHz and 2500 MHz is required for MBANS operation. A 40 MHz
spectrum designation plays a key role in enabling MBANS devices achieve harmo-
nized coexistence with other services. It enables MBANS equipment to use low-power
and limited duty cycle while providing sufﬁcient space for MBANSs to avoid inter-
ference to/from other services. It is also needed to support MBANS coexistence
in high-density deployment scenarios. The proposed 40 MHz designation affords
meaningful frequency diversity that would allow MBANS devices to use lower trans-
mission power and therefore mitigate potential interference to other services. Initially,
only the band 2360–2400 MHz has been proposed by the SRdoc to be considered
for use by MBANS. However, during the SRdoc development process, the 1785–
1805 MHz, 2400–2483.5 MHz, and 2483.5–2500 MHz bands were suggested as
other candidate bands to be considered for designation for MBANS use. See Fig-
ure 6.11 for a view to the ITU-R radio regulations current allocation of the candidate
bands (1710–2500 MHz). Also see Reference 1 for an extensive discussion of band
availability and options, particularly for Europe.
In ETSI TR 101 557, it is proposed that the bigger portion (75%) of the required
operational band should be used only inside the healthcare facilities such as hospitals,
clinics, emergency rooms, etc. (indoor use), and the smaller portion (25%) should

186
LAYER 1/2 CONNECTIVITY: WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
Europe, Africa,
Middle East west
of the Persian Gulf,
former Soviet Union,
and Mongolia.
FIXED
MOBILE
Amateur
Radiolocation
FIXED
MOBILE
RADIOLOCATION
Amateur
FIXED
MOBILE
Radiolocation
FIXED
MOBILE
MOBILE-SATELLITE
(space-to-Earth)
Radiolocation
FIXED
MOBILE
MOBILE-SATELLITE
    (space-to-Earth)
RADIOLOCATION
RADIODETERMINATION-
SATELLITE (space-to-Earth)
FIXED
MOBILE
MOBILE-SATELLITE
    (space-to-Earth)
RADIOLOCATION
Radiodetermination-
satellite (space-to-Earth)
FIXED
MOBILE
RADIOLOCATION
Americas,
Greenland,
and some of
the eastern
Pacific Islands
Asia,
and most of
Oceania
Region 1
1710 MHz to 1930 MHz
2300 MHz to 2450 MHz
2300 MHz to 2450 MHz
2450 MHz to 2483.5 MHz
2450 MHz to 2483.5 MHz
2483.5 MHz to 2500 MHz
2483.5 MHz to 2500 MHz
2483.5 MHz to 2500 MHz
FIXED
MOBILE
Region 2
Allocation to services
Region 3
FIGURE 6.11
Current allocation of the candidate bands (1710–2500 MHz) in the ITU-R
radio regulations. Note: the ISM (industrial, scientiﬁc and medical) radio band in the 2.5 GHz
region covers the region 2400–2500 MHz. Bluetooth, 802.11/Wi-Fi, IEEE 802.15.4, and
ZigBee may use this band, possibly among other bands.
be used both inside and outside the boundaries of healthcare facilities (indoor and
outdoor). The required emission bandwidth is up to 5 MHz for proper operation of the
MBANS. The emission bandwidth used would depend on the data-rate requirement
of the particular MBANS application. For high data-rate applications (e.g., 250 Kbps
and beyond), the bandwidth would be 3–5 MHz. For low data-rate applications, the
bandwidth would be 1–3 MHz. For MBANS transmitters operating within the health-
care facility sub-band (indoor), the maximum transmitted power over the emission
bandwidth is 1 mW EIRP (effective isotropic radiated power). For MBANS transmit-
ters operating within the location-independent sub-band, the maximum transmitted
power over the emission bandwidth is 20 mW EIRP. The proposed MBANSs will
operate at limited duty cycle to reduce power consumption and avoid interference to

WPAN TECHNOLOGIES FOR IoT/M2M
187
other services. It is expected that the duty cycle of a MBANS for in-hospital use will
not be more than 25%. For location-independent MBANS applications, such as in
patient homes, a much lower duty cycle of usually less than 2% is expected (1).
6.1.7
NFC
NFC can be used for IoT/M2M applications; it provides wireless connectivity, but it
is not a WBAN technology. NFC10 is a form of contactless communication between
devices such as smartphones, tablets, and other devices. Contactless communica-
tion allows a user to wave the smartphone over an NFC-compatible device to send
information without needing to touch the devices together or go through multiple
steps setting up a connection. NFC is an offshoot of radio frequency identiﬁcation
(RFID), with the exception that NFC is designed for use by devices within close
proximity to each other. NFC utilizes electromagnetic radio ﬁelds while technolo-
gies such as Bluetooth and Wi-Fi rely on radio transmissions. NFC technology is
popular in parts of Europe and Asia and is spreading throughout the United States.
As noted elsewhere in this text, Google has launched Google Wallet that supports
MasterCard PayPass; PayPal offers money transfers between smartphones; and other
companies are expected to offer comparable services. As the technology grows, more
NFC-compatible smartphones will be available and more stores will offer NFC card
readers for customer use.
The technology behind NFC allows a device, known as a reader, interrogator, or
active device, to create an electromagnetic ﬁeld that interacts with another NFC-
compatible device or a small NFC tag holding the information the reader requires.
Passive devices, such as the NFC tag in smart posters, store information, and commu-
nicate with the reader, but these devices do not actively read other devices. Peer-to-
peer communication through two active devices is also possible with NFC, allowing
both devices to send and receive information. Three forms of NFC technology exist—
Type A, Type B, and FeliCa; all three types are similar, but communicate in slightly
different ways.
Compatibility is the key to the growth of NFC as a popular payment and data
communication method; hence, NFC-based device must be able to communicate
with other wireless technologies and be able to interact with different types of NFC
transmissions. NFC maintains interoperability between different wireless communi-
cation methods such as Bluetooth and other NFC standards (e.g., FeliCa, popular
in Japan) through the NFC Forum. Founded in 2004 by Sony, Nokia, and Philips,
the forum enforces standards that manufacturers must meet when designing NFC-
compatible devices; this ensures that NFC is secure and remains easy to use with
different versions of the technology.
Standards exist to ensure all forms of NFC technology can interact with other
NFC-compatible devices and will work with newer devices in the future. Two major
10This discussion is based on materials from the NearFieldCommunication.org, an advocacy group for NFC
applications. The organization aims at offering insightful information that keeps stakeholders informed on
both the beneﬁts and possible drawbacks of this evolving technology.

188
LAYER 1/2 CONNECTIVITY: WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
speciﬁcations exist for NFC technology: ISO/IEC 14443 and ISO/IEC 18000-3. The
ﬁrst deﬁnes the ID cards used to store information, such as that found in NFC tags. The
latter speciﬁes the RFID communication used by NFC devices. ISO/IEC 18000-3 is
an international standard for all devices communicating wirelessly at the 13.56 MHz
frequency using Type A or Type B cards, as is the case for NFC. The devices must be
within 4 cm of each other before they can transfer information. The standards deﬁne
how a device and the NFC tag it is reading should communicate with one another.
The device is known as the interrogating device while the NFC tag is simply referred
to as the tag.
To operate, the interrogator sends out a signal to the tag. If the devices are close
enough to each other, the tag becomes powered by the interrogator’s signal. Since
the interrogator’s signal powers the tag, the tag can be small in size and can function
without any battery or power source of its own. The two devices create a high-
frequency magnetic ﬁeld between the loosely coupled coils in both the interrogating
device and the NFC tag. Once this ﬁeld is established, a connection is formed and
the information can be passed between the interrogator and the tag. The interrogator
sends the ﬁrst message to the tag to ﬁnd out what type of communication the tag
uses, such as Type A or Type B. When the tag responds, the interrogator sends
its ﬁrst commands in the appropriate speciﬁcation. The tag receives the instruction
and checks if it is valid. If not, nothing occurs. If it is a valid request, the tag then
responds with the requested information. For sensitive transactions such as credit card
payments, a secure communication channel is ﬁrst established, and all information
sent is encrypted.
NFC tags function at half duplex; the interrogator functions at full duplex. Half
duplex refers to a device that can only send or receive, but not both at once; full duplex
can do both simultaneously. An NFC tag can only receive or send a signal, while
the interrogating device can receive a signal at the same time it sends a command.
Commands are transmitted from the interrogator using phase jitter modulation (PJM)
to modify the surrounding ﬁeld and send out a signal. The tag answers using inductive
coupling by sending a charge through the coils in it.
Devices using NFC may be active or passive. A passive device, such as an NFC tag,
contains information that other devices can read but does not read any information
itself; an example could be a poster or a commercial sign on a wall where other devices
can read the information, but the sign itself only transmits the stored information to
authorized devices. Active devices can read information and send it. An active NFC
device, such as a smartphone, is not only able to collect information from NFC tags,
but it is also able to exchange information with other compatible phones or devices
and could even alter the information on the NFC tag if authorized to make such
changes.
To ensure security, NFC often establishes a secure channel and uses encryption
when sending sensitive information such as credit card numbers. Users can further
protect their private data by keeping antivirus software on their smartphones and
adding a password to the phone.
As noted, NFC is limited to a distance of approximately 4 cm; Bluetooth does offer
a longer signal range for connecting during data communication and transfers. NFC

WPAN TECHNOLOGIES FOR IoT/M2M
189
technology consumes little power when compared to standard Bluetooth technology
(but not when compared with BLE which uses less power than NFC). Only when NFC
has to power a passive, unpowered source such as an NFC tag does it require more
power than a traditional Bluetooth transmission. Another beneﬁt of NFC technology
comes in its ease of use. Bluetooth requires users to manually set up connections
between smartphones and takes several seconds. NFC connects automatically in a
fraction of a second. Although the users must be close to one another to use NFC
technology, it is faster and easier to set up than a Bluetooth connection. Also see the
technical parameters depicted in Table 6.3 for this technology.
6.1.8
Dedicated Short-Range Communications (DSRC)
and Related Protocols
DSRC is a two-way short-to-medium-range wireless communications capability that
permits very high data transmission critical in communications-based active safety
applications. DSRC-based communications is a major research priority of the Joint
Program Ofﬁce (ITS JPO) at the U.S. Department of Transportation (U.S. DOT)
Research and Innovative Technology Administration (RITA). The cross-modal pro-
gram is conducting research using DSRC and other wireless communications tech-
nologies to ensure safe, interoperable connectivity to help prevent vehicular crashes
of all types and to enhance mobility and environmental beneﬁts across all transporta-
tion system modes. In Report and Order FCC-03-324, the FCC allocated 75 MHz of
spectrum in the 5.9 GHz band for use by Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS)
vehicle safety and mobility applications. Vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) and vehicle-to-
infrastructure (V2I) applications utilizing DSRC may have the potential to signiﬁ-
cantly reduce many of the most deadly types of crashes through real-time advisories
alerting drivers to imminent hazards—such as veering close to the edge of the road;
vehicles suddenly stopped ahead; collision paths during merging; the presence of
nearby communications devices and vehicles; and sharp curves or slippery patches of
roadway ahead. Convenience V2I services such as e-parking and toll payment are also
able to communicate using DSRC. Anonymous information from electronic sensors
in vehicles and devices can also be transmitted over DSRC to provide better trafﬁc
and travel condition information to travelers and transportation managers. DSRC was
developed with a primary goal of enabling technologies that support safety applica-
tions and communication between vehicle-based devices and infrastructure to reduce
collisions. DSRC is the only short-range wireless alternative today that provides (28):
r Designated licensed bandwidth: For secure, reliable communications to take
place. It is primarily allocated for vehicle safety applications by FCC Report
and Order FCC 03-324.
r Fast network acquisition: Active safety applications require the immediate
establishment of communication and frequent updates.
r Low latency: Active safety applications must recognize each other and transmit
messages to each other in milliseconds without delay.

190
LAYER 1/2 CONNECTIVITY: WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
IEEE P1556
Layer 7
Layer 6
Layer 5
Layer 4
Layer 3
Layer 2
Layer 1
IEEE P1609
WAVE
IEEE 802.11p,
ASTM 2213
DSRC
FIGURE 6.12
Relationship of WAVE, DSRC, and other protocols.
r High reliability when required: Active safety applications require a high level
of link reliability. DSRC works in high vehicle speed mobility conditions and
delivers performance immune to extreme weather conditions (e.g., rain, fog,
snow, etc.).
r Priority for safety applications: Safety applications on DSRC are given priority
over nonsafety applications.
r Interoperability: DSRC ensures interoperability, which is the key to successful
deployment of active safety applications, using widely accepted standards. It
supports both V2V and V2I communications.
r Security and privacy: DSRC provides safety message authentication and privacy.
The ASTM (American Society for Testing and Materials) Standard E2213-03,11
based on IEEE 802.11a, is planned to be used for IoT applications in ITS environ-
ments. It uses a band around 5.9 GHz allocated to DSRC applications in the ITS
environment—to be exact, the applicable band is now12 5.850–5.925 GHz range,
which is divided into seven channels (each 10 MHz—these are licensed channels).
Transmission has a range of 300–1000 m and a data rate of 6–27 Mbps. Half-duplex
operation is used: a station can only send or transmit, but not both at the same
time. DSRC devices are IEEE 802.11 systems using the WAVE (wireless access in
vehicular environments) mode of operation in the DSRC band. The 5.9 GHz DSRC
was originally developed for the U.S. market, and currently it is at the beginning of
commercialization. Figure 6.12 depicts the relationship of WAVE, DSRC, and other
support protocols.
11ASTM E2213-03 Standard Speciﬁcation for Telecommunications and Information Exchange Between
Roadside and Vehicle Systems—5 GHz Band Dedicated Short-Range Communications (DSRC) Medium
Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Speciﬁcations.
12Originally, the band was in the 915 MHz region, with a single unlicensed channel.

WPAN TECHNOLOGIES FOR IoT/M2M
191
IEEE 802.11p (802.11p-2010—IEEE Standard for Information technology: Local
and Metropolitan Area Network-Speciﬁc Requirements. Part 11: Wireless LAN
Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Speciﬁcations Amend-
ment 6: Wireless Access in Vehicular Environments) is an amendment that speciﬁes
the extensions to IEEE Standard 802.11 for WLANs providing reliable wireless
communications while in a vehicular environment. IEEE 802.11p is based on ASTM
Standard E2213-03 and deﬁnes the MAC layer for wireless communication in vehic-
ular environments. It supports two different stacks:
r IPv6, but only on service channels (not control channel)
r WAVE short message protocol (WSMP): can be sent on any channel and allows
applications to directly control physical characteristics (channel number and
transmitter power)
The IEEE 802.11p standard is positioned as an underlying protocol for car-to-car
and car-to-infrastructure applications worldwide. At the PHY layer, it has essentially
the same structure as 802.11a and 802.11g: the modulation format, based on orthog-
onal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM), the forward-error-correction (FEC),
the structure of the preamble sequences, and the pilot-symbol schemes are identical.
Furthermore, 802.11p uses the same medium access scheme common to all IEEE
802.11 standards, namely CSMA/CA (29).
WAVE is a mode of operation used by IEEE 802.11 devices to operate in the DSRC
band. WAVE is part of the IEEE 1609 speciﬁcation, which deﬁnes the architecture,
the communications model, the management structure, the security, and physical
access. The key architecture components are: (i) the on-board unit (OBU), (ii) the
road side unit (RSU), and (iii) the WAVE interface. Figure 6.13, loosely based
on Reference 30, depicts the WAVE protocol stack. Supportive standards are as
follows (31):
r P1609.1 Resource Manager describes key components of WAVE system archi-
tecture and deﬁnes data ﬂows and resources; it also deﬁnes command message
formats and data storage formats. Finally it also speciﬁes the types of devices
that may by supported by OBU;
r P1609.2 Security Services for Applications and Management Messages deﬁnes
secure message formats and processing and describes circumstances for using
secure message exchanges;
r P1609.3 Networking Services deﬁnes network and transport layer services,
including addressing and routing, in support of secure WAVE data exchange; it
deﬁnes WAVE short messages (WSMs), providing an efﬁcient WAVE-speciﬁc
alternative to IP that can be directly supported by applications. Also it deﬁnes
the MIB for WAVE protocol stack;
r P1609.4 Multichannel Operations deﬁnes enhancements to 802.11 MAC to
support WAVE.

192
LAYER 1/2 CONNECTIVITY: WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
FIGURE 6.13
WAVE elements and protocol stack.
6.1.9
Comparison of WPAN Technologies
This section makes some general comparisons between some of the key PAN tech-
nologies discussed in this chapter, following observations and conclusion made in
Reference 5. A basic comparison was already provided in Table 6.3, while Table 6.11
(also synthesized from Reference 5) describes some additional factors to take into
account when comparing PAN technologies.
ANT/ANT+ is a mass production technology, establishing itself as the “sports
and ﬁtness” space. It is a proprietary technology, and it is unlikely that it will become
pervasive. It had only been integrated into three mobile handsets at press time. ANT
endeavors at operating from limited power sources and has built a niche ecosystem.
ANT/ANT+ is not perceived to be a major IoT/M2M technology, but it is part of the
ecosystem. The same can be said about NIKE+.
BLE is the closest competitor to ANT/ANT+ from an overall raw performance
perspective. BLE is targeting the same markets as the competitive alternatives,
but it offers the mobile handset manufacturers access to a larger product oppor-
tunity environment. BLE provides the best power per bit requirements of the PAN

WPAN TECHNOLOGIES FOR IoT/M2M
193
TABLE 6.11
Some Additional Factors to Take into Account when Comparing PAN
Technologies
Issue
Description
Implementation
complexity
Implementation complexity is established by assessing the amount of
software that would be required to implement a simple program along
with hardware requirements
It was noted in the text that BLE chipsets come in two categories: single
mode and Bluetooth + BLE. Single-mode conﬁgurations are shipped
as an SoC that contains the host processor and radio. The protocol
stack is integrated in the silicon and exposes some simple application
programming interfaces (API) for a developer to use. As a result, there
is little effort required by the developer when creating a new product.
Single-mode BLE devices are often shipped from silicon vendors as
precertiﬁed units. This means that original end manufacturers
(OEMs) do not need to spend resources qualifying their new
products. If the developer decides to deviate signiﬁcantly from a
given reference design, then it is possible that some features may
need retesting. The hardware for a single-mode LE device is simple.
The main costs associated with a low-power sensor are the processor,
radio, antenna, battery, battery connector, sensor, regulator, and the
printed circuit board (PCB). A BLE device is expected to cost about
$3 in components (about $2 for the Bluetooth IC and the EEPROM)
and $1 for the rest (particularly the battery and the RF crystal); these
component costs will be lower when mass production is activated.
Dual-mode Bluetooth chipsets, as used in a mobile handset, have a host
processor present. Silicon vendors normally ship a protocol stack that
executes on the host processor and provides a simple API to access
Bluetooth and LE. Dual-mode Bluetooth chips may also contain their
own application processor. Such devices have the sensitive protocol
stack burnt into read-only memory (ROM) and expose an API as a
virtual machine. These types of chips are often found in consumer
electronics, like headsets, where more than just sensing applications
are necessary
Protocol
efﬁciency
A wireless transmission protocol consists of the payload and overhead.
The efﬁciency of the protocol can be deﬁned as the ratio of payload to
total packet length. If a protocol is inefﬁcient, it will effectively imply
that the transmission channel and the radio emanations are used to
transferring nonpayload information; this will rapidly discharge the
battery while transferring a limited amount of useful data.
Alternatively, a protocol that is very efﬁcient will transfer a larger
amount of useful data on a single charge. There is a trade-off between
reliability and efﬁciency; for example an ultra-efﬁcient protocol that
does not incorporate a checksum or error corrections; given the
intrinsic possibility of interference in the 2.4 GHz band, this may
require retransmissions (assuming that there are upper-layer protocols
to address this predicament). For example, BLE protocol efﬁciency is
around 66%
(continued )

194
LAYER 1/2 CONNECTIVITY: WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
TABLE 6.11
(Continued )
Issue
Description
Power
efﬁciency
Power efﬁciency is one of the most critical factors in selecting the PAN
technology for a given application. This efﬁciency is typically
measured as the power per bit
An ANT device is conﬁgured to transmit 32 bytes/s and consumes
61 μA. The power per bit = 0.183 mW/256 bits = 0.71 μW/bit
In BLE, connectable advertising packets (adverts) are broadcast every
500 ms. Each packet has 20 bytes of useful payload and consumes
49 μA at 3 V. For this particular setup, the power per bit is 0.153
μW/bit
For IrDA, the power per bit is 11.7 μW/bit
A NIKE+ foot pod lasts 1000 h and transmits its payload every second.
The power per bit is 2.48 μW/bit
Wi-Fi consumes approximately 116 mA at 1.8 V when transmitting a
40 Mbps user datagram protocol (UDP) payload. Power per bit is
0.00525 μW/bit. Unfortunately, current consumption does not reduce
when throughput is reduced in a Wi-Fi chipset. Hence, this measure is
not completely comparable to the other data cited here. Also Wi-FI’s
peak current consumption exceeds the capabilities of a coin battery
A Zigbee device consumes 0.035706 W when transferring 24 bytes of
data. Hence, the power per bit is 0.035706/192 = 185.9 μW/bit
Peak power
consumption
Peak power consumption is an important parameter when designing
long-life devices. The common CR2032 coin cell can only provide
about 15 mA peaks without damage (drawing 30 mA at peaks will
reduce realized capacity by about 10% of manufacturers’ stated
ﬁgures). Acceptable continuous standard loads are typically 2 mA or
less, in order to achieve published capacity ﬁgures. The PAN
technologies discussed in this chapter have peak current requirements
in the 10–50 mA, with the exception of Wi-Fi, which has a higher
requirement
Robustness and
coexistence
Packet transfer reliability impacts on battery life and the user
experience: if a data packet is undeliverable due to suboptimal
transmission environments, or interference from nearby radios, a
transmitter may keep retransmitting until the packet is successfully
delivered, expanding battery energy. A method to address these issues
is to use channel hopping (which also helps with interference). If a
wireless system is restricted to a single channel, its reliability may
deteriorate in congested environments. Bluetooth and BLE use
channel hopping: Bluetooth devices use AFH, which allows each
node to map out frequently congested areas of the spectrum to be
avoided in future transactions
Coexistence is typically thought of as the ability of technologies to
operate in the presence of other radios in the same room or building.
ZigBee can interplay with a Wi-Fi access point; as can BLEs (refer to
earlier ﬁgures on this issue). Colocation of PAN technologies with
WLANs must be carefully designed, especially as Wi-Fi output
power increases with advances in technology
(continued )

CELLULAR AND MOBILE NETWORK TECHNOLOGIES FOR IoT/M2M
195
TABLE 6.11
(Continued )
Issue
Description
BLE implements passive interference avoidance schemes. For example,
AFH can be used to keep clear of channels where interference is
detected. BLE advertising channels are also speciﬁcally chosen to be
in the least congested regions of the 2.4 GHz ISM band. Wi-Fi has
active coexistence technology implemented, when integrated with a
device containing Bluetooth, and a mechanism to reduce its data
rates, when interferers are detected from neighboring wireless
technology. ZigBee does not implement a coexistence scheme, but it
does have the ability to continuously listen for clear time on its
channel. If the channel is heavily used, ZigBee throughput and
latency are adversely affected, eventually halting. ZigBee PRO has a
feature known as frequency agility (not the same as hopping) where it
may be possible to search for a clear channel (of the 16 channels
deﬁned) and then re-establish the network
Note: Synthesized from Reference 5; consult reference for additional details.
technologies, exceeded only by Wi-Fi. BLE is likely to turn out to be an important
IoT/M2M technology in the healthcare and/or home environment, for example for
peripheral and/or smartphone connectivity.
Wi-Fi is normally intended for bulk trafﬁc transfer at high speed (HS). It should
come as no surprise that Wi-Fi is the most complicated technology to integrate into
a system. Wi-Fi requires various drivers and a full protocol stack. In addition, such
systems typically consume signiﬁcant power at the PC end of the link to minimize
latency.
ZigBee and RF4CE are practically the same technology and appear prima facia to
require more power compared with the other PAN radio technologies. These systems
are likely to turn out to be important IoT/M2M technologies in the healthcare and/or
home environment.
NFC is not seen as a competitor to most low-power wireless technologies; the
interest in this technology is that it brings new use cases to the mobile space. IR
transmit-only devices are inexpensive and may still remain a viable option in low-
end televisions for the near future, but the technology is also relatively power hungry.
IR is being replaced in many areas by non-LOS radio technology.
6.2
CELLULAR AND MOBILE NETWORK TECHNOLOGIES
FOR IoT/M2M
6.2.1
Overview and Motivations
Developers of IoT/M2M applications that are geographically dispersed over a city,
region, or nation may ﬁnd cellular networks to be the practical connectivity technol-
ogy of choice. This section looks at some key capabilities of these networks. In the

196
LAYER 1/2 CONNECTIVITY: WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
near future, M2M applications are expected to become important sources of trafﬁc
(and revenues) for cellular data networks. For example, energy suppliers routinely uti-
lize SCADA-based systems to enable remote telemetry functions in the power grid.
Traditionally, SCADA systems have used wireline networks to link remote power
grid elements with a central operations center; however, at this time an increasing
number of utilities are turning to public cellular networks to support these functions.
Naturally, reliability and security are key considerations; endpoints typically will
support virtual private network (VPN) built on IPsec mechanisms in addition to other
embedded ﬁrewall capabilities.
In starting the discussion about mobile networks, one should keep in mind that
IoT/M2M trafﬁc has speciﬁc characteristics, discussed brieﬂy in Chapter 4, which
relate to the priority of the data being communicated, the size of the data, the real-
time streaming needs on one end of the requirements spectrum to the extremely
high delay tolerance of the data on the other end of the requirements spectrum, and
varying degrees of mobility; cellular/mobile networks are characterized by varying
capacity, bandwidth, link conditions, link utilization, and overall network load, which
affect their ability to reliably transfer such M2M data (32). These details have to be
reconciled in order to be able to cost-effectively utilize cellular technologies for a
broad set of applications (while some applications may be less sensitive to cost con-
sideration, many more applications will indeed require optimized connectivity cost
metrics). Initial 3GPP efforts have focused on the ability to differentiate MTC-type
devices, allowing operators to selectively handle such devices in congestion/overload
situations. Speciﬁcally, low priority indicator has been added to the relevant UE
(user equipment)-to-network procedures; with this, overload and congestion control
is done on both core network (CN) and radio access network (RAN) based on this
indicator (33).
There are different opinions as to which cellular technologies are practical and/or
ideal for M2M. Some proponents claim that many developers are concentrating on
4G products. However, the cost of 4G modules is two times more expensive than 3G
modules and three times more expensive than 2G modules; hence some proponents
only recommend a 4G device if it is going to be deployed in an urban setting and
the cost of connectivity was unimportant. Others argue that if a service provider or
organization wanted to deploy an inexpensive system with a short lifespan of 1 or
2 years, they could go with 2G; but if a service provider or organization wanted to
build a device to have longevity of around 10 years, then they should consider using
3G (34).
6.2.2
Universal Mobile Telecommunications System
UMTS is a 3G mobile cellular technology for networks supporting voice and data (IP)
based on the GSM standard developed by the 3GPP (Third-Generation Partnership
Project). UMTS is a component of the ITU IMT-2000 standard set and is functionally
comparable with the CDMA2000 standard set for networks based on the competing
cdmaOne technology. UMTS can carry many trafﬁc types from real-time circuit
switched to IP-based packet switched.

CELLULAR AND MOBILE NETWORK TECHNOLOGIES FOR IoT/M2M
197
FIGURE 6.14
UTRAN.
Universal terrestrial radio access network (UTRAN) is a collective term for the
NodeBs (base stations) and radio network controllers (RNC) that comprise the UMTS
RAN. NodeB is the equivalent to the base transceiver station (BTS) concept used
in GSM. The UTRAN allows connectivity between the UE and the CN. As seen in
Figure 6.14, UTRAN contains the base stations, which are called NodeBs, and the
RNC; the RNC provides control functionalities for one or more NodeBs.
As noted earlier, video can be supported over the data (IP) capability of a 3G
system; mobility is generally supported at the PHY level, but could also be supported
with the MIPv6 mechanisms. The challenge of 3G system is related to bandwidth
availability.
6.2.3
LTE
6.2.3.1
Overview
LTE is the 3GPP initiative to evolve the UMTS technology
toward a 4G. LTE can be viewed as an architecture framework and a set of ancillary
mechanisms that aims at providing seamless IP connectivity between UE and the
packet (IPv4, IPv6) data network without any disruption to the end-users’ applications
during mobility. In contrast to the circuit-switched model of previous-generation
cellular systems, LTE has been designed to support only packet-switched services.
System architecture evolution (SAE) is the corresponding evolution of the
GPRS/3G packet CN evolution. LTE/SAE standards are deﬁned in 3GPP Rel.8
speciﬁcations. Colloquially, the term LTE is typically used to represent both LTE
and SAE.

198
LAYER 1/2 CONNECTIVITY: WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
NAS security
Inter-cell RRM
Mobile anchoring
UW IP
address allocation
Packet filtering
EPC
Internet
RRC
PDCP
RLC
MAC
PHY
E-UTRAN
RB control
Connection Mobility Control
Radio Admission Control
eNB measurement
configuration and provision
Dynamic resource
allocation (scheduler)
HSS
MME
PCRF
P-GW
UE
S-GW
Operator’s
IP services (for example,
IMS, PSS)
eNodeB
S6a
S11
Gx
Rx
Sl-U
SGI
S11-MME
LTE-Uu
EPS Bearer Control
Idle state mobility
handling
FIGURE 6.15
The EPS network elements.
The key element provided by LTE/SAE is the EPS (evolved packet system), that is,
together LTE and SAE comprise the EPS. EPS provides the user with IP connectivity
to a packet data network for accessing the Internet, as well as for supporting services
such as streaming video. Figure 6.15 shows the overall network architecture, including
the network elements and the standardized interfaces. The EPS consists of the:
r New air interface E-UTRAN (evolved UTRAN) and
r The evolved packet core (EPC) network

CELLULAR AND MOBILE NETWORK TECHNOLOGIES FOR IoT/M2M
199
TABLE 6.12
Basic Comparison Between Two Generations of Cellular Technologies
3G Systems
4G/LTE/SAE Systems
Competing standards
Limited set of devices
Lack of applications
Multiple bands and frequency
Slow rollout
Interoperability and
interworking
– Complex technology
r 130+ 3GPP speciﬁcations
r 35 specs for devices, 56 specs for eNodeB, 41 specs
for EPC
r New network and functional elements (e.g., MME,
SGW, PGW, PCRF, . . .)
r New interfaces (S6a, S8, S9, S13, S13’, . . .)
r S6a/S6d in LTE is the equivalent of MAP-based Gr
and D in Pre-Rel.8
r S13/S13’ in LTE is the equivalent of MAP-based Gf
in Pre-Rel.8
r New protocols (PMIP, GTPv2, diameter, SIP, . . .)
– Limited availability of network/user devices
– Voice, video, data, and messaging
r Lack of voice support in early LTE networks
– Multiple frequency/spectrum fragmentation
– Expanded ecosystem
– Interoperability and interworking
r 15 network types with which to interoperate
r Access networks
r Converged core
r CS core and PS core
– Billing and settlement capabilities
Hence, while the term “LTE” encompasses the evolution of the UMTS radio
access through the E-UTRAN, it is accompanied by an evolution of the nonradio
aspects under the term SAE, which includes, as just noted, the EPC network.
Table 6.12 (based on observations made in Reference 35) provides a short com-
parison between two generations of cellular technologies.
In principle, LTE promises the following beneﬁts:
r Simpliﬁed network architecture (Flat IP based);
r Efﬁcient interworking;
r Robust QoS framework;
r Common evolution for multiple technologies;
r Real-time, interactive, low-latency true broadband;
r Multisession data;
r End-to-end enhanced QoS management (see below);
r Policy control and management;
r High level of security.

200
LAYER 1/2 CONNECTIVITY: WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
S-GW
S-GW
PDN-GW
APN # 1
Application
Server#1
Application
Server#2
APN # 2
APN # 3
PDN-GW
AS
AS #3
AS #4
AS #5
Packet Data Network
Single Bearer
Session
Separate Bearer
Sessions
PDN = Packet Data Network
FRPS = General packet radio service
AS = Application Servers
AS
AS
Service Data flow - Video
Service Data flow - IM
Service Data flow - VolP
GPRS
BIT Pipe
General APN
internet
Flow Based
Charging
FIGURE 6.16
Bearers in EPS.
The EPS uses the concept of bearers to route IP trafﬁc from a gateway in the
packet data network to the UE. A bearer is an IP packet ﬂow with a deﬁned QoS
between the gateway and the UE. The E-UTRAN and EPC together set up and release
bearers as required by applications. An EPS bearer is often associated with a QoS.
Multiple bearers can be established for an end-user in order to provide different QoS
streams or connectivity to different packet data networks or applications reachable
via that network. For example, a user might be engaged in watching a video clip while
at the same time performing web browsing or FTP download; a video bearer would
provide the necessary QoS for the video stream, while a best-effort bearer would be
suitable for the web browsing or ﬁle transfer session (see Fig. 6.16). This is achieved
by means of several EPS network elements that have different roles.
6.2.3.2
Core Network
At a high level, the network is comprised of the CN (i.e.,
the EPC) and the access network E-UTRAN. While the CN consists of many logical
nodes, the access network is comprised of essentially just one node, the evolved
NodeB (eNodeB), which connects to the UEs. Each of these network elements is
interconnected over interfaces that are standardized in order to allow multivendor
interoperability.
The logical CN nodes are shown in Figure 6.15 and brieﬂy discussed in Table 6.13
(36, 37). The CN is responsible for the overall control of the UE and establishment
of the bearers. The main logical nodes of the CN are: (i) PDN gateway (P-GW); (ii)
serving gateway (S-GW); and (iii) mobility management entity (MME). In addition
to these nodes, the CN also includes other logical nodes and functions such as the
Home Subscriber Server (HSS) and the Policy Control and Charging Rules Function

CELLULAR AND MOBILE NETWORK TECHNOLOGIES FOR IoT/M2M
201
TABLE 6.13
CN Nodes
Function
Description
Policy Control
and Charging
Rules Function
(PCRF)
The PCRF is responsible for policy control decision-making, as well as
for controlling the ﬂow-based charging functionalities in the Policy
Control Enforcement Function (PCEF), which resides in the P-GW.
The PCRF provides the QoS authorization (QCI and bit rates) that
decides how a certain data ﬂow will be treated in the PCEF and ensures
that this is in accordance with the user’s subscription proﬁle
Home Subscriber
Server (HSS)
The HSS contains users’ Systems Architecture Evolution (SAE)
subscription data such as the EPS-subscribed QoS proﬁle and any
access restrictions for roaming. It also holds information about the
packet data networks to which the user can connect. This could be in
the form of an access point name (APN) (which is a label according to
DNS naming conventions describing the access point to the PDN) or a
PDN address (indicating subscribed IP address(es)). In addition, the
HSS holds dynamic information such as the identity of the MME to
which the user is currently attached or registered. The HSS may also
integrate the authentication center (AUC), which generates the vectors
for authentication and security keys
Packet data
network
Gateway
(P-GW)
The P-GW is responsible for IP address allocation for the UE, as well as
QoS enforcement and ﬂow-based charging according to rules from the
PCRF. It is responsible for the ﬁltering of downlink user IP packets
into the different QoS-based bearers. This is performed based on trafﬁc
ﬂow templates (TFTs). The P-GW performs QoS enforcement for GBR
bearers. It also serves as the mobility anchor for interworking with
non-3GPP technologies such as CDMA2000 and WiMAX
R⃝networks
Serving Gateway
(S-GW)
All user IP packets are transferred through the S-GW, which serves as the
local mobility anchor for the data bearers when the UE moves between
eNodeBs. It also retains the information about the bearers when the UE
is in the idle state (known as “EPS Connection Management — IDLE”
[ECM-IDLE]) and temporarily buffers downlink data while the MME
initiates paging of the UE to re-establish the bearers. In addition, the
S-GW performs some administrative functions in the visited network
such as collecting information for charging (e.g., the volume of data
sent to or received from the user) and lawful interception. It also serves
as the mobility anchor for interworking with other 3GPP technologies
such as GPRS and UMTS
Mobility
Management
Entity (MME)
The MME is the control node that processes the signaling between the
UE and the CN. The protocols running between the UE and the CN are
known as the nonaccess stratum (NAS) protocols. The main functions
supported by the MME can be classiﬁed as: (i) Functions related to
bearer management—This includes the establishment, maintenance,
and release of the bearers and is handled by the session management
layer in the NAS protocol and (ii) Functions related to connection
management—This includes the establishment of the connection and
security between the network and UE and is handled by the connection
or mobility management layer in the NAS protocol layer

202
LAYER 1/2 CONNECTIVITY: WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
MME/S-GW
MME/S-GW
E-UTRAN
eNodeB#3
eNodeB#2
eNodeB#1
X2
X2
X2
S1
S1
S1
S1
FIGURE 6.17
E-UTRAN.
(PCRF). Since the EPS only provides a bearer path of a certain QoS, control of
multimedia applications such as packet video is provided by the IP multimedia
subsystem (IMS), which is considered to be outside the EPS itself.
6.2.3.3
Access Network
The access network of LTE, E-UTRAN, consists of a
network of eNodeBs, as illustrated in Figure 6.17. For normal user trafﬁc (as opposed
to broadcast), there is no centralized controller in E-UTRAN; hence the E-UTRAN
architecture is said to be ﬂat. The eNodeBs are normally interconnected with each
other by means of an interface known as “X2” and to the EPC by means of the S1
interface—more speciﬁcally, to the MME by means of the S1–MME interface and
to the S-GW by means of the S1–U interface. The protocols that run between the
eNodeBs and the UE are known as the “AS protocols.” The E-UTRAN is responsible
for all radio-related functions, as depicted in Table 6.14 (36, 37). On the network
side, all of these functions reside in the eNodeBs, each of which can be responsible
for managing multiple cells. Unlike some of the previous second-generation and 3G
technologies, LTE integrates the radio controller function into the eNodeB; this allows
tight interaction between the different protocol layers of the RAN, thus reducing
latency and improving efﬁciency. Such distributed control eliminates the need for
a high-availability, processing-intensive controller, which in turn has the potential
to reduce costs and avoid “single points of failure.” Furthermore, as LTE does not
support soft handover, there is no need for a centralized data-combining function in
the network. One consequence of the lack of a centralized controller node is that,
as the UE moves, the network must transfer all information related to a UE, that

CELLULAR AND MOBILE NETWORK TECHNOLOGIES FOR IoT/M2M
203
TABLE 6.14
E-UTRAN Functions
Function
Description
Radio resource
management (RRM)
This function covers all activities related to the radio bearers,
such as radio bearer control, radio admission control, radio
mobility control, scheduling, and dynamic allocation of
resources to UEs in both uplink and downlink
Header compression
This function is used to ensure efﬁcient use of the radio
interface by compressing the IP packet headers that could
otherwise represent a signiﬁcant overhead, especially for
small packets such as Voice Over IP (VoIP) or video
Security
All data sent over the radio interface is encrypted
Connectivity to the EPC
This function consists of the signaling toward MME and the
bearer path toward the S-GW
is, the UE context, together with any buffered data, from one eNodeB to another;
mechanisms are, therefore, needed to avoid data loss during handover.
6.2.3.4
Roaming
A network run by one operator in a jurisdiction (or service
area) is known as a “public land mobile network (PLMN).” Roaming is the capability
where users are allowed to connect to PLMNs other than those to which they are
directly subscribed, as shown in Figure 6.18. A roaming user is connected to the
E-UTRAN, MME, and S-GW of the visited LTE network; however, LTE/SAE allows
the P-GW of either the visited or the home network to be used (36, 37). Using the
home network’s P-GW allows the user to access the home operator’s services even
while in a visited network.
6.2.3.5
Interworking
Interworking with other networks is also critically impor-
tant. The EPS also supports interworking and mobility (handover) with networks
such as GSM, UMTS, CDMA2000, and WiMAX (worldwide interoperability for
microwave access). The architecture for interworking with 2G and 3G GPRS/UMTS
networks is depicted in Figure 6.19; in Figure 6.19 the S-GW acts as the mobility
anchor for interworking with other 3GPP technologies such as GSM and UMTS,
while the P-GW serves as an anchor allowing seamless mobility to non-3GPP net-
works such as CDMA2000 or WiMAX. The P-GW may also support a Proxy Mobile
Internet Protocol (PMIPv6)-based interface.
6.2.3.6
Protocol Architecture
The protocol architecture spans the user plane
and the control plane. The user plane protocols operate as follows: an IP packet for a
UE is encapsulated in an EPC-speciﬁc protocol and tunneled between the P-GW and
the eNodeB for transmission to the UE. Different tunneling protocols are used across
different interfaces; A 3GPP-speciﬁc tunneling protocol called the GPRS tunneling
protocol (GTP) is used over the CN interfaces, S1, and S5/S8. The E-UTRAN user
plane protocol stack is shown in Figure 6.20 top, consisting of the packet data

204
LAYER 1/2 CONNECTIVITY: WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
Control
Plane
User
Plane
User
Plane
User
Plane
User
Plane
UE
UE
S1-MME
S1-U
S11
LTE-Uu
Control
Plane
Home Network
HPMN: Home Public Mobile Network
VPMN: Visited Public Mobile Network
Visited Network
Control
Plane
Control
Plane
Control
Plane
Control
Plane
E-UTRA
Control
Plane
Control
Plane
S-6a
S8
S9
HSS
MME
SGW
V-PDN
GW
V-PCRF
H-PCRF
Services
H-PDN
GW
FIGURE 6.18
Roaming architecture for 3GPP accesses with P-GW in home network.
3GPP technologies such
as GSM and UMTS
non-3GPP networks such
as CDMA2000 or WiMAX.
UTRAN
3G-SGSN
MME
S-GW
S3
S4
S5/S8
S11
S1-U
S1-MME
LTE-Uu
E-UTRAN
UE
P-GW
FIGURE 6.19
LTE and pre-LTE interworking mechanisms.

CELLULAR AND MOBILE NETWORK TECHNOLOGIES FOR IoT/M2M
205
FIGURE 6.20
LTE protocol stack at the E-UTRAN.
convergence protocol (PDCP), radio link control (RLC) and MAC sublayers that are
terminated in the eNodeB on the network side. The protocol stack for the control plane
between the UE and MME is shown in Figure 6.12 bottom. The lower layers perform
the same functions as for the user plane; the radio resource control (RRC) protocol
is known as “layer 3” in the AS protocol stack and it is the key controlling function
in the AS, being responsible for establishing the radio bearers and conﬁguring all the
lower layers using RRC signaling between the eNodeB and the UE (36,37).
6.2.3.7
Multiple QoS Management
In order to support multiple QoS require-
ments, different bearers are set up within the EPS, each being associated with a QoS,
being that in a typical environment, multiple applications may be running in a UE at
any time, each one having different QoS requirements. In the access network, it is
the responsibility of the eNodeB to ensure the necessary QoS for a bearer over the
radio interface. Bearers can be classiﬁed into two categories:
r Minimum guaranteed bit rate (GBR) bearers that can be used for applications
such as mobile video. These bearers have an associated GBR value for which
dedicated transmission resources are permanently allocated at bearer establish-
ment or modiﬁcation (bit rates higher than the GBR may be allowed for a GBR
bearer if resources are available).

206
LAYER 1/2 CONNECTIVITY: WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
r Non-GBR bearers that do not guarantee any particular bit rate. These bearers
can be used for applications such as, but not limited to, web browsing or FTP
transfer. For these bearers, no bandwidth resources are allocated permanently
to the bearer.
Each bearer has an associated QoS class identiﬁer (QCI), and an allocation and
retention priority (ARP). The QCI is a scalar identifying a set of transport charac-
teristics and used to infer node-speciﬁc parameters that control packet-forwarding
treatment. Each packet ﬂow is mapped to a QCI value based on the level of service
required by the application. Transport characteristics include bearer with/without
GBR, priority, packet loss rate, packet latency budget, and so on. Packet-forwarding
treatment includes scheduling weights, admission thresholds, queue management
thresholds, and link-layer protocol conﬁguration. Nine QCI values were deﬁned and
standardized in the Release 8 version of the speciﬁcations, as depicted in Table 6.15;
standardization ensures that an LTE operator can expect uniform trafﬁc-handling
behavior throughout the network regardless of the manufacturers of the eNodeB
equipment. The usage of the QCI avoids the transmission of a full set of QoS-related
parameters over the network interfaces and reduces the complexity of QoS negotia-
tion. The QCI, along with ARP and, if where needed, GBR and maximum bit rate
(MBR), determines the QoS associated to an EPS bearer. Hence, each QCI is charac-
terized by priority, packet delay budget, and acceptable packet loss rate; the QCI label
for a bearer determines how it is handled in the eNodeB. A mapping between EPS
and pre-Release 8 QoS parameters has been deﬁned to allow proper interworking
with legacy networks.
TABLE 6.15
Standardized QCIs in LTE (Current List)
Resource Type
QCI
APP
Packet Delay
Budget (ms)
Packet Loss
Rate
Examples
GBR
1
2
100
10−2
Voice
GBR
2
4
150
10−3
Video streaming (live)
GBR
3
5
300
10−6
Video streaming
(buffered)
GBR
4
3
50
10−3
Interactive gaming
Non-GBR
5
1
100
10−6
IMS signaling
Non-GBR
6
7
100
10−3
Voice, video (live
streaming),
interactive gaming
Non-GBR
7
6
300
10−6
Video streaming
(buffered)
Non-GBR
8
8
300
10−6
WWW, e-mail, FTP,
progressive video,
p2p ﬁle sharing,
TCP-based apps
Non-GBR
9
9
300
10−6

CELLULAR AND MOBILE NETWORK TECHNOLOGIES FOR IoT/M2M
207
The priority and packet delay budget (and to some extent the acceptable packet
loss rate) from the QCI label determine the RLC mode conﬁguration and how the
scheduler in the MAC handles packets sent over the bearer (e.g., in terms of scheduling
policy, queue management policy, and rate-shaping policy). For example, a packet
with higher priority can be expected to be scheduled before a packet with lower
priority. For bearers with a low acceptable loss rate, an acknowledged mode can be
used within the RLC protocol layer to ensure that packets are delivered successfully
across the radio interface. The ARP of a bearer is used for call admission control—
that is, to decide whether or not the requested bearer should be established in case
of radio congestion. It also governs the prioritization of the bearer for pre-emption
with respect to a new bearer establishment request. Once successfully established,
a bearer’s ARP does not have any impact on the bearer-level packet-forwarding
treatment (e.g., for scheduling and rate control). Such packet-forwarding treatment
should be solely determined by the other bearer-level QoS parameters such as QCI,
GBR, and MBR (36,37).
6.2.3.8
Signaling
2G/3G networks use SS7-MAP protocol for the following
functions:
r location
r subscriber access
r handover
r authentication
r security/identity management
r handover services
In LTE/SAE (3GPP Rel.8), Diameter Base Protocol (RFC 3588) has been chosen
by 3GPP for many of these procedures and is increasingly used for interoperator
signaling network and roaming infrastructure. For example, registration messages
received will be based on diameter (rather than SS7-MAP). The LTE interfaces based
on diameter include the following (35):
r Packet core-related interfaces toward HSS and EIR
r S6a (MME to HSS) and S6d (SGSN to HSS)
r S6b, S6c (external AAA functions for non-3GPP accesses)
r S13 (MME to EIR) and S13’ (SGSN to EIR)
r Network signaling for policy control and charging
1. S9 (H-PCRF to V-PCRF)
2. S7 (PCRF to P-GW)
3. Gx (PCRF to PCEF)
4. Gxc (PCRF to S-GW)
5. Rx (AF to PCRF)
6. Gy (PCEF to OCS)

208
LAYER 1/2 CONNECTIVITY: WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
GSM
EDGE
WCDMA
Non-3GPP
technologies
HSPA
LTE
FIGURE 6.21
Evolution to LTE.
6.2.3.9
Evolution Paths to 4G/LTE
Mobile operators are evolving toward
LTE/SAE using different evolution paths, as follows (see Fig. 6.21):
r 3GPP environments: GSM, GPRS, EDGE, WCDMA, HSPA
r Non-3GPP environments: 1xRTT, EV-DO, 3xRTT, WLAN, WiMAX
Some of the challenges in LTE deployment were hinted in Table 6.12, the key
factors being the complexity of the technology and the plethora of interfaces that
have to be supported. The evolution from a 2G/3G baseline will also be nontrivial.
Network element evolution from 2G/3G to LTE includes the following upgrades in
the provider network:
r GERAN and UTRAN -> E-UTRAN
r SGSN/PDSN-FA ->S-GW
r GGSN/PDSN-HA ->PDN-GW
r HLR/AAA ->HSS
r VLR ->MME
In addition, the following signaling evolution from 2G/3G to LTE is needed:
r SS7-MAP/ANSI-41/RADIUS ->Diameter
r GTPc-v0 and v1 ->GTPc-v2
r MIP ->PMIP

APPENDIX 6.A: NON-WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR IoT
209
FIGURE 6.22
EPS and support of legacy environments.
After the LTE environment is established in a portion of the provider’s environ-
ment, legacy components of the provider’s network can be supported by the LTE
infrastructure as depicted pictorially in Figure 6.22 (35).
APPENDIX 6.A: NON-WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR IoT:
POWERLINE COMMUNICATIONS
This appendix provides a brief description of some non-wireless networking tech-
nologies that have been considered for IoT/M2M. See Table 6A.1 for a listing of
some of the key technologies. SCADA was discussed in the context of standards in
the Appendix to Chapter 5. Here we focus on PLC.
PLC refers to any technology that enables data transfer through powerlines by
using advanced modulation technology. Data communication can take place at NB or
broadband speeds. The technology has been around since the 1950s, but initially only
supported NB applications for relay management, for example for public lighting.
Broadband over PLC only began at the end of the 1990s. PLC is thus a term used
to identify technologies, equipments, applications and services aiming at providing
users with communication means over existing “powerlines” (cables transmitting
electricity). The term broadband over powerline (BPL) is used to underline the
technology capability to address broadband services. As for the term access PLC, it

210
LAYER 1/2 CONNECTIVITY: WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
TABLE 6A.1
Listing of Some of the Key Non-Wireless Technologies used for IoT-Like
Services Over the Years
Technology/Concept
Description
KNX and KNX-RF
KNX (administered by the KNX Association) is an OSI-based
network communications protocol for intelligent buildings
deﬁned in standards CEN EN 50090 and ISO/IEC 14543. KNX
is the follow-on standard built on the European Home Systems
Protocol (EHS), BatiBUS, and the European Installation Bus
(EIB or Instabus). Effectively, KNX uses the communication
stack of EIB but augmented with the PHY layers and
conﬁguration modes BatiBUS and EHS; thus, KNX includes the
following PHYs:
r Twisted pair wiring (inherited from the BatiBUS and EIB
Instabus standards). This approach uses differential
signaling with a signaling speed of 9.6 Kbps. MAC is
controlled with the CSMA/CA method;
r Powerline networking (inherited from EIB and EHS);
r Radio (KNX-RF);
r IR; and,
r Ethernet (also known as EIBnet/IP or KNXnet/IP).
M-Bus
The M-Bus is a European standard for remote reading of gas and
electric meters; it is also usable for all other types of
consumption meters. It is speciﬁed as follows:
r EN 13757-2 (PHY and link layer)
r EN 13757-3 (application layer)
r Note: the frame layer uses IEC 870 and the network
(packet layer) is optional
A radio variant of M-Bus (wireless M-Bus) is also speciﬁed in EN
13757-4
PLC
PLC (also called powerline communication as a singular term;
also called powerline telecommunications [or PLT]) refers to
any technology that enables data transfer through powerlines.
Data communication can take place at NB or broadband speeds.
The technology has been around since the 1950s, but initially
only supported NB applications for relay management, for
example for public lighting. Broadband over PLC only began at
the end of the 1990s. PLC is thus a term used to identify
technologies, equipments, applications, and services aiming at
providing users with communication means over existing
“powerlines” (cables transmitting electricity). The term BPL is
used to underline the technology capability to address
broadband services. As for the term access PLC, it is used to
identify those PLC solutions aiming at providing consumers
with broadband services through the external electricity grid,
while in-home PLC is used to identify PLC solutions aiming at
applications within the home (38)

APPENDIX 6.A: NON-WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR IoT
211
TABLE 6A.1
(Continued )
Technology/Concept
Description
SCADA
A long-existing industrial control system (ICS). It is a centralized
system used to monitor and control systems deployed over large
geographic areas, such as a power grid. There are three main
elements in a SCADA system, multiple RTUs (remote telemetry
units), a communications apparatus, and a HMI (human
machine interface) mechanism
xDSL
A 1990s technology that exploits unused frequencies on copper
telephone lines to transmit trafﬁc typically at multimegabit
speeds. DSL can allow voice and HS data to be sent
simultaneously over the same line. Because the service is
“always available,” end-users do not need to dial in or wait for
call set-up. Asymmetrical variations include ADSL, G.lite
ADSL (or simply G.lite), VDSL (ITU-T G.993.1), and VDSL2
(ITU-T G.993.2). The standard forms of ADSL (ITU G.992.3,
G.992.5, and ANSI T1.413—Issue 2) are all built upon the same
technical foundation, discrete multitone (DMT). The suite of
ADSL standards facilitates interoperability between all standard
forms of ADSL (39)
is used to identify those PLC solutions aiming at providing consumers with broadband
services through the external electricity grid, while in-home PLC is used to identify
PLC solutions aiming at applications within the home (38). A brief history is as
follows (40):
r 1950: at a frequency of 10 Hz, 10 kW of power, one-way: town lighting, relay
RC;
r Mid-1980s: beginning of research into the use of the electrical grid to support
data transmission; on bands between 5 and 500 KHz, always in a one-way
direction;
r 1997: ﬁrst tests for bidirectional data signal transmission over the electrical
supply network and the beginning of research by Ascom (Switzerland) and
Norweb (United Kingdom);
r 2000: ﬁrst tests carried out in France by EDF R&D and Ascom;
r 2011-12: Publication of IEEE 1901 standards.
PLC transmission works by superimposing a high-frequency signal at low-energy
levels over the 50 Hz electrical signal. The powerline is transformed into a commu-
nication network through the superposition of a low-energy information signal to the
power wave. In order to ensure a suited coexistence and separation between the two
systems, the frequency range used for communication is very far from the one used

212
LAYER 1/2 CONNECTIVITY: WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
for the power wave (50 Hz in Europe): 3–148.5 kHz for PLC NB applications and
from 1–30 MHz for PLC broadband applications. The modulated signal is transmitted
via the power infrastructure and can be received and decoded remotely. Thus, the
PLC signal is received by any PLC receiver located on the same electrical network.
An integrated coupler at the PLC receiver entry points eliminates low frequency
components before the signal is treated.
There now is standardization work underway in the PLC Forum and in ETSI.
CENELEC has issued regulations for transmission in deﬁned bands. The CENELEC
A-band is reserved by law in CENELEC regulated countries for the exclusive use
of utilities and their licensees. The CENELEC C-band is available for consumer and
commercial use without restriction, but a common access protocol and coexistence
protocol is mandated (41).
A plethora of NB (some Kbps) and broadband (tens or even hundreds of Mbps)
applications can be provided through access and in-home PLC solutions, for the
beneﬁt of end consumers and of utilities (to increase their performances and improve
their service quality). NB applications include home control, home automation, auto-
matic meter reading, remote surveillance, and control of home appliances. Broadband
applications include (for access PLC) Internet access, telephony, TV and (for in-home
PLC) Internet access sharing, computer resource sharing, and AV whole-house dis-
tribution. PLC can be used in places where radio frequency (RF) cannot be used or is
unreliable; for example, smart meters in the basement of a building are unlikely to be
able to use RF to communicate with the neighborhood data concentrator—PLC com-
munication can utilize the power wires to reach the data concentrator. It is estimated
today that more than 80 PLC initiatives in more than 40 countries have been launched,
worldwide, by electric utilities. Pilot sites, technological or commercial trials, and
deployments are numerous in Europe. Among the most important initiatives are the
ones developed by EDF (France), EDP (Portugal), EEF (Switzerland), ENDESA and
IBERDROLA (Spain), PPC (Germany), and SSE (Scotland) (38).
IEEE 1901 is a group of PLC standards that enables transmission of data over AC
electrical powerlines. Its goal was to replace a set of different powerline specs now
in existence but maintaining a mandatory coexistence with legacy PLC approaches.
There are two basic standards: (i) a BPL standard and (ii) a low-frequency narrowband
(LF NB) standard.
r The IEEE 1901TM BPL standard was ﬁnalized and published in December
2010. The standard was sponsored by the IEEE Communications Society. The
BPL standard is designed for use in a wide range of applications including
SE, transportation, and LANs in both the home and the enterprise. Networking
products that fully comply with IEEE 1901 will deliver data rates in excess of
500 Mbps in LAN applications. In ﬁrst-mile/last-mile applications, IEEE 1901-
compliant devices will achieve ranges of up to 1500 m. The technology speciﬁed
by IEEE 1901 uses sophisticated modulation techniques to transmit data over
standard AC powerlines of any voltage at transmission frequencies of less than
100 MHz. In the transportation sector, for example, the standard’s data rates and
range make it possible to deliver A/V entertainment to the seats of airplanes,

APPENDIX 6.A: NON-WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR IoT
213
trains, and other mass transit vehicles. Electric vehicles (EVs) can download a
new entertainment playlist to the A/V system while the car is charging overnight.
In the home, PLC will complement wireless LANs by providing a link through
walls and other RF impediments as well as over distances beyond the normal
range of wireless networks. It will complement wireless networks in hotels and
other multistory buildings by carrying multimedia data over the longer distances
and allowing wireless to complete the communication link over the last few
meters. IEEE 1901 may also beneﬁt utilities, service providers, and consumer
electronics companies—anyone with a stake in smart grid technologies—as
well as smart-meter providers and home appliance manufacturers (42).
r The IEEE has been working on IEEE P1901.2TM, a standard for LF NB (less
than 500 kHz) PLC for smart grid applications. The speciﬁcation entered its
ﬁnal approval process in early 2012 and was expected to be ratiﬁed soon there-
after. LF NB PLC is needed, according to proponents, to accelerate wider-scale
rollout of smart grids. IEEE P1901.2 is designed to support smart grid applica-
tions such as grid to utility meter, EV to charging station, home area networking,
and solar-panel communications. More than 30 semiconductor manufacturers,
meter and systems manufacturers, software developers, service providers, and
utilities have contributed to the work of the IEEE P1901.2 Working Group since
its inception in fall 2009. The work was sponsored by the Powerline Communi-
cations Standards Committee of the IEEE Communications Society (ComSoc).
IEEE P1901.2 is designed to specify secure PLC at data rates up to 500 Kbps
and at transmission frequencies of less than 500 kHz for applications such as
grid to utility meter, EV to charging station, home area networking and light-
ing, and solar-panel communications. The standard addresses LF NB PLC over
low-voltage lines of less than 1000 V between transformer and meter, through
transformer low-voltage to medium-voltage (1000 V up to 72 kV) and through
transformer medium-voltage to low-voltage powerlines in both urban and long-
distance (multikilometer) rural communications. IEEE P1901.2 supports the
balanced and efﬁcient use of the PLC channel by all classes of LF NB devices
by deﬁning detailed mechanisms for coexistence among standard technologies
operating in the same ﬁeld, data rate, and frequency band. This standard assures
coexistence with broadband powerline (BPL) devices by minimizing out-of-
band emissions in frequencies greater than 500 kHz. The standard addresses the
necessary security requirements that assure communication privacy and allow
use for security sensitive services. This standard deﬁnes the PHY layer and the
medium access sublayer of the data link layer, as deﬁned by the International
Organization for Standardization (ISO) Open Systems Interconnection (OSI)
Basic Reference Model (43).
The PLCforum is a leading international association that represents the inter-
ests of manufacturers, energy utilities, and other organizations (universities, other
PLC associations, consultants, etc.) active in the ﬁeld of access and in-home PLC
technologies.

214
LAYER 1/2 CONNECTIVITY: WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
Beyond the PLCforum, a number of industry groups and electric utilities, all
around the world, are supporting the development of the PLC technology. Among
industry groups are UPLC and PLCA (in the United States), PLC-J (in Japan), APTEL
(in South America), PUA (PLC Utilities Alliance) in Europe, Utilitel in Australia,
the Universal Powerline Alliance, and the HomePlug R⃝Powerline Alliance, among
others.
The HomePlug Alliance’s mission13 is to enable and promote rapid availability,
adoption, and implementation of cost-effective, interoperable, and standards-based
home powerline networks and products. By working with utility companies and
the Wi-Fi Alliance and ZigBee Alliance, the HomePlug Alliance aims at helping
to build the home area network (HAN) ecosystem that enables intelligent energy
management and efﬁciency in the home and small businesses. With the goal of
providing a complimentary wireless (ZigBee) and wired (HomePlug) infrastructure,
the coverage for large homes and multidwelling units can be assured.
Basic applications include the use of in-home wires to distribute signals to support
Smart Grid & Smart Energy, HDTV Networking, Whole Home Audio, and Gaming.
Technology standards deﬁned by the Alliance include the following:
r HomePlug Green PHYTM (“GP”)
r IEEE 1901 Powerline Networking Standard
r HomePlug Broadband-Speed Technologies
r SE Proﬁle 2
HomePlug Green PHY Speciﬁcation. This is a new powerline networking spec-
iﬁcation that targets smart grid/SE applications. HomePlug GP is based on customer
requirements for cost, coverage, and performance and driven by input from utility
companies, as well as from companies that manufacture meters, automobiles, and
appliances. In addition to low cost and power consumption, IPv6 networking and
interoperability with the installed base of powerline products are critical to the suc-
cess of products. As such, HomePlug GP will be interoperable with both HomePlug
AV and IEEE 1901, just cited; this means that HomePlug Green PHY is a certiﬁcation
proﬁle of IEEE 1901. HomePlug Green PHY has ample bandwidth to support critical
functionality such as IP networking, but with power consumption estimated to be
75% lower than HomePlug AV, with similar cost savings projected. The speciﬁcation
is designed to the speciﬁc requirements of Smart Grid applications while interoper-
ating with HomePlug AV and AV2 products and the IEEE 1901 standard. GP chips
are already available; certiﬁed products are expected to ship in early 2013.
r Principal applications: Monitor and control devices via low speed, low-cost
PLC, including smart energy applications such as demand response, load
control, energy efﬁciency Home/Building Automation. It targets smart grid
13This section is based on material from The HomePlug R⃝Powerline Alliance (44).

APPENDIX 6.A: NON-WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR IoT
215
applications such as HVAC/thermostats, smart meters, home appliances, and
plug-in electric vehicles (PEVs).
r Features: (i) interoperable with HomePlug AV; (ii) HomePlug GP is a proﬁle of
IEEE P1901; and (iii) low-power consumption, low cost
r Estimated, up to 75% lower cost, 75% less power consumption than Home-
Plug AV
r Internet (IP) networking: 802.2, IPv6 support
r Minimum 1 Mbps effective data rate (3.8 Mbps peak PHY rate)
r Support for ﬁrmware updates
IEEE 1901 Powerline Networking Standard. Regarding IEEE 1901.2010—For
HS communication devices (HomePlug AV), the HomePlug Alliance and its members
ﬁrst collaborated with IEEE in 2005 with the inception of the P1901 workgroup,
tasked to develop a standard for HS communication devices. In December 2008, the
IEEE P1901 working group voted to include HomePlug technology in the baseline
standard for PLC. The IEEE 1901.2010 standard was ratiﬁed in September 2010,
and multiple semiconductor vendors are now shipping integrated circuits (ICs) based
on the standard. In addition, the installed base of tens of millions of HomePlug AV
products are fully interoperable with the 1901 standard, ensuring a seamless roadmap
for existing users of HomePlug technology. The HomePlug Alliance conducts a
comprehensive compliance and interoperabilty (C&I) program for products based
on the HomePlug AV IEEE P1901 standard, ensuring that reliable, interoperable
products are available from multiple suppliers. Additionally, the HomePlug Alliance
plans to launch a new certiﬁcation program—Netricity PLC—to provide C&I testing
of products built on the IEEE P1901.2 LF NB PLC standard.
HomePlug Broadband-Speed Technologies. In June 2011, the HomePlug
Alliance put its support behind the IEEE P1905 working group’s efforts to deﬁne the
ﬁrst standard for hybrid home networks. A P1905 network would include combina-
tions of stationary home networking devices such as set-top boxes, home gateways,
Blu-Ray players and televisions, and mobile devices such as laptops, tablets, and
smartphones. The IEEE P1905 standard provides an abstraction layer to established
powerline, wireless, coaxial cable, and Ethernet home networking technologies. The
standard enables consumers and service providers to combine the capabilities of
otherwise disparate networks to maximize a home network’s overall performance
and reliability. IEEE P1905’s abstraction layer common interface allows applications
and upper-layer protocols to be agnostic to the underlying home networking tech-
nologies. Packets can arrive and be transmitted over any technology according to
QoS priorities. IEEE P1905 also simpliﬁed the network set-up by providing common
set-up procedures for adding devices, establishing secure links, implementing QoS,
and managing the network.
SE Initiative. In 2008, a number of utility companies (American Electric Power,
Consumers Energy, Paciﬁc Gas and Electric Company, Reliant Energy, Sempra, and
Southern California Edison) announced that they are working with the ZigBee and

216
LAYER 1/2 CONNECTIVITY: WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
HomePlug alliances to develop a common application layer integrated solution for
advanced metering infrastructure (AMI) and HANs. The three groups are expanding
the application layer, enabling it to run on HomePlug technology, and providing
utilities with industry standards for both wireless and wired HAN options when
implementing new AMI programs. Shortly after the formation of the group, the
Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI) began to collaborate to develop a common
language for HAN devices to utilize the AMI. This arrangement further expands the
Smart Grid by creating a standard communication approach between AMI systems
and HANs, as well as a common set of certiﬁcation procedures. As noted elsewhere,
the term “smart energy” refers generally to actions and technologies that are used
to improve the efﬁciency of energy consumption. Energy demand and costs are
increasing rapidly, so utility companies are focusing on adopting communications
and networking technologies to help consumers monitor and reduce their energy
consumption.
REFERENCES
1. ETSI TR 101 557 V1.1.1 (2012-02), Electromagnetic Compatibility and Radio spectrum
Matters (ERM); System Reference document (SRdoc); Medical Body Area Network
Systems (MBANSs) in the 1785 MHz to 2500 MHz range.
2. Coronel P, Schott W, Schwieger K, Zimmermann E, Zasowski T, Chevillat P, editors.
Brieﬁng on Wireless Body Area and Sensor Networks, 8th Wireless World Research
Forum (WWRF8bis) Meeting, Beijing, China, February 2004; (ii) 11th Wireless World
Research Forum Meeting, Oslo, Norway, June 2004.
3. Practel, Inc., Role of Wireless ICT in Health Care and Wellness—Standards, Technologies
and Markets, May 2012, Published by Global Information, Inc. (GII), 195 Farmington
Avenue, Suite 208 Farmington, CT 06032 USA.
4. Gainspan, Gainspan Low-Power Embedded WI-FI VS ZigBee. GainSpan Corporation,
3590 N. First Street, Suite 300, San Jose, CA 95134, Available at http://www.gainspan
.com.
5. Smith P. Comparing Low-Power Wireless Technologies. Tech Zone, Digikey Online Mag-
azine, Digi-Key Corporation, 701 Brooks Avenue, South Thief River Falls, MN 56701
USA.
6. 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) Organization, Available at www.3gpp.org.
7. Third Generation Partnership Project 2 Organization, Available at http://www.3gpp2.org.
8. Bormann C. Getting Started with IPv6 in Low-Power Wireless. “Personal Area” Networks
(6LoWPAN), Universit¨at Bremen TZI, IETF 6lowpan WG and CoRE WG Co-Chair, IAB
Tutorial on Interconnecting Smart Objects with the Internet, Prague, Saturday, 2011-03-26,
Available at http://www.iab.org/about/workshops/smartobjects/tutorial.html.
9. ETSI Documentation, ETSI, 650 Route des Lucioles F-06921 Sophia Antipolis Cedex—
FRANCE.
10. Krasinski R, Nikolich P, Heile RF. IEEE 802.15.4j Medical Body Area Networks
Task Group PAR, IEEE P802.15 Working Group for Wireless Personal Area Networks
(WPANs), January18, 2011.

REFERENCES
217
11. ISA, 67 Alexander Drive, P.O. Box 12277, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709,
info@isa.org.
12. Minoli D. Satellite Systems Engineering in an IPv6 Environment. Boca Raton, FL: Francis
and Taylor; 2009.
13. Minoli D. Hotspot Networks: Wi-Fi for Public Access Locations. New York, NY: McGraw-
Hill; 2002.
14. Minoli D, Wireless Sensor Networks (co-authored with K. Sohraby and T. Znati). Hoboken,
NJ: Wiley; 2007.
15. Emerson Process Management, IEC 62591 WirelessHART, System Engineering Guide,
Revision 2.3, Emerson Process Management, 2011.
16. ZigBee Alliance, Available at http://www.zigbee.org/.
17. ZigBee Wireless Sensor Applications for Health, Wellness and Fitness, March 2009,
ZigBee Alliance, Available at www.zigbee.org.
18. Duffy P. Zigbee IP: Extending the Smart Grid to Consumers. Cisco Blog – The Plat-
form, June 4, 2012, Cisco Systems, Inc., 170 West Tasman Dr., San Jose, CA 95134
USA.
19. Shandle J. What does ZigBee Pro mean for your application?. EETimes Online Magazine,
11/27/2007, Available at http://www.eetimes.com.
20. Drake J, Najewicz D, Watts W. Energy efﬁciency comparisons of wireless communica-
tion technology options for smart grid enabled devices. White Paper, General Electric
Company, GE Appliances & Lighting, December 9, 2010.
21. Montenegro G, Kushalnagar N, Hui J, Culler D. Transmission of IPv6 Packets over IEEE
802.15.4 Networks, RFC 4944, Updated by RFC 6282, RFC 6775 (was draft-ietf-6lowpan-
format), September 2007.
22. Kingsley S. Personal Body Networks go Wireless at 2.4GHz. ElectronicsWeekly Online
Magazine, 16 May 2012, Available at http://www.electronicsweekly.com.
23. IEEE 802.15 WPAN Task Group 1 (TG1), WPAN Home Page, Monday, June 20, 2005.
24. Bluetooth SIG Home page, Available at www.bluetooth.com (more info at www.bluetooth
.org).
25. Fleishman G. Inside Bluetooth 2.0., Macworld, February 9, 2005.
26. Latuske R. Bluetooth Health Device Proﬁle (HDP). White Paper, September 2009, ARS
Software GmbH, Stanberger Strasse 22, D-82131, Gauting/Munchen, Germany, Available
at http://www.ars2000.com/.
27. Kwak KS, Ullah S, Ullah N An Overview of IEEE 802.15.6 Standard (Invited Paper),
ISABEL 2010 in Rome, Italy. UWB-ITRC Center, Inha University, 253 Yonghyun-dong,
Nam-gu, Incheon (402–751), South Korea.
28. U.S. Department of Transportation, Research and Innovative Technology Administration.
Intelligent Transportation Systems. December 2012, Available at http://www.its.dot.gov.
29. Fuxj¨ager P, Costantini A, et al. IEEE 802.11p Transmission Using GNURadio.
Forschungszentrum Telekommunikation Wien, Donau-City-Strasse 1, A-1220 Vienna,
Austria. And, University of Salento, 73100 Lecce, Italy. 2007.
30. TechnoCom. The WAVE Communications Stack: IEEE 802.11p, 1609.4 and, 1609.3.
Presentation, September, 2007, TechnoCom, 2030 Corte del Nogal, Suite 200, Carlsbad,
CA 92011 Available at http://www.ieeevtc.org/plenaries/vtc2007fall/34.pdf.

218
LAYER 1/2 CONNECTIVITY: WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
31. Weigle M. Standards: WAVE / DSRC /802.11p in Vehicular Networks, CS 795/895, Spring
2008, Old Dominion University.
32. IEEE WoWMoM 2012 Panel, San Francisco, California, USA June 25–28, 2012.
33. Rao YS, Pica F, Krishnaswamy D. 3GPP Enhancements for Machine Type Communi-
cations Overview. IEEE WoWMoM 2012 Panel, San Francisco, California, USA June
25–28, 2012.
34. Principi B. CTIA: Should M2M skip 3G and go right to 4G?. May 9, 2012, Online Article,
Available at http://www.telecomengine.com.
35. Clark M, Neal BJ, Gullstrand C. Preparing for LTE Roaming. Syniverse Technolo-
gies, 120 Moorgate London, EC2M 6UR United Kingdom, March 2011, Available at
www.syniverse.com.
36. Alcatel-Lucent. LTE—The UMTS Long Term Evolution: From Theory to Practice. Strate-
gic Whitepaper, Available at www.alcatel-lucent.com, Wiley; 2009.
37. Sesia S, Touﬁk I, Baker M, editors, LTE – The UMTS Long Term Evolution: From Theory
to Practice. Wiley; 2009.
38. PLCforum. Available at http://www.plcforum.org/frame_plc.html.
39. DSL Forum, DSL Forum, 48377 Fremont Blvd, Suite 117, Fremont, CA 94538, Available
at http://www.dslforum.org.
40. Cacciaguerra F. Introduction to Power Line Communications (PLC). November
2003, Kioskea.net Online Magazine, Available at http://en.kioskea.net/contents/cpl/cpl-
intro.php3.
41. Power Line Communications (PLC), Echelon Corporation, 550 Meridian Ave., San Jose,
CA 95126 USA. Available at http://www.echelon.com.
42. Yu S. Final IEEE 1901 Broadband Over Power Line Standard Now Published. IEEE Press
Release, February 1, 2011.
43. Yu S. IEEE P1901.2TM Standard FOR Low-Frequency, Narrowband Power Line Commu-
nications Enters Letter Balloting, IEEE Press Release, January 2012.
44. The HomePlug
R⃝Powerline Alliance, Available at http://www.homeplug.org.
45. 3GPP2 X.S0011-002-D. cdma2000 Wireless IP Network Standard: Simple IP and Mobile
IP Access Services. Available at http://www.3gpp2.org/Public_html/specs/X.S0011-002-
D_v1.0_060301.pdf, February 2006.
46. Alcatel-Lucent. Alcatel-Lucent Researches Opportunities for Delivering Enhanced Video
Sharing Services with DOCOMO Euro-Labs. Press Release, Paris and Barcelona, February
15, 2011. Available at www.alcatel-lucent.com.
47. California Software Labs. Basic Streaming Technology and RTSP Protocol—A Technical
Report, 2002. California Software Labs, 6800 Koll Center Parkway, Suite 100 Pleasanton
CA 94566, USA.
48. Machine-to-Machine Communications (M2M); M2M Service Requirements. ETSI TS
102 689 V1.1.1 (2010-08). ETSI, 650 Route des Lucioles F-06921 Sophia Antipolis
Cedex—FRANCE.
49. Machine-to-Machine Communications (M2M); Functional Architecture Technical Spec-
iﬁcation, ETSI TS 102 690 V1.1.1 (2011-10), ETSI, 650 Route des Lucioles F-06921
Sophia Antipolis Cedex—FRANCE.
50. H.720. Overview of IPTV Terminal Devices and End-Systems. (also known as ex H.IPTV-
TDES.0), October 2008. ITU-T Study Group 16. International Telecommunication Union,
Telecommunication Standardization Bureau, Place des Nations, CH-1211 Geneva 20.

REFERENCES
219
51. Near Field Communication.org, Advocacy Group, Available at http://www.nearﬁeld
communication.or.
52. Patil B, Dommety G. Why the Authentication Data Suboption is Needed for Mobile IPv6
(MIPv6). RFC 5419, January 2009.
53. WiMAX Network Architecture—WiMAX End-to-End Network Systems Architecture.
May 2008, Available at http://www.wimaxforum.org/documents/documents/WiMAX_
Forum_Network_Architecture_Stage_23_Rel_1v1.2.zip.

CHAPTER 7
LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY:
IPv6 TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
7.1
OVERVIEW AND MOTIVATIONS
Internet Protocol Version 6 (IPv6) is a newer version of the network layer protocol that
is designed to coexist (but not directly interwork) with IPv4. In the long term, IPv6 is
expected to replace IPv4, but that will not happen overnight. IPv6 provides improved
internetworking capabilities compared to what is presently available with IPv4. The
current IPv4 has been in use for over 30 years, but it exhibits some challenges in
supporting emerging demands for address space cardinality, high-density mobility,
multimedia, and strong security. IPv6 offers the potential of achieving scalability,
reacheability, end-to-end interworking, quality of service (QoS), and commercial-
grade robustness that is needed for contemporary and emerging web services, data
services, mobile video, and Internet of things (IoT) applications.
We retain the position stated in Chapter 1 that IoT may well become the “killer-
app” for IPv6. Using IPv6 with its abundant address spaces, globally unique object
(thing) identiﬁcation and connectivity can be provided in a standardized manner
without additional status or address (re)processing; hence, its intrinsic advantage
over IPv4 or other schemes. We are not implying in this text that IPv6 is strictly and
uniquely required to support IoT, just that it provides an ideal, future-proof, scalable
mechanism for such services, whether in a terrestrial mode or in a satellite-based
mode (1,2).
Building the Internet of Things with IPv6 and MIPv6: The Evolving World of M2M Communications,
First Edition. Daniel Minoli.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
220

OVERVIEW AND MOTIVATIONS
221
IP was designed as a packet-based technology (protocol) in the late 1970s–early
1980s for the purpose of connecting computers that were in separate geographic loca-
tions. Starting in the early 1990s, developers realized that the communication needs
of the twenty-ﬁrst century needed a protocol with some new features and capabilities,
while at the same time retaining the useful features of the existing protocol. IPv6
was initially developed in the early 1990s because of the anticipated need for more
end-system addresses based on anticipated Internet growth, encompassing mobile
phone deployment, smart home appliances, and billions of new users in developing
countries (e.g., BRIC: Brazil, Russia, India, China). Technologies and applications
such as voice over IP (VoIP), “always-on access” (e.g., cable modems), broadband
and/or ethernet-to-the-home, converged networks, evolving ubiquitous computing
applications, and IoT will be driving this need even more in the next few years (3).
IPv6 is now being slowly deployed worldwide: there is documented institutional
and commercial interest and activity in Europe and Asia, and there also is evolving
interest in the United States. The expectation is that in the next few years deployment
of this new protocol will occur worldwide. For example, the U.S. Department of
Defense (DoD) announced that from October 1, 2003, all new developments and
procurements needed to be IPv6 capable; the DoD’s goal was to complete the tran-
sition to IPv6 for all intra- and internetworking across the agency by 2008, which
was accomplished. The U.S. Government Accountability Ofﬁce (GAO) has recom-
mended that all agencies become proactive in planning a coherent transition to IPv6.
The current expectation is that IPv4 will continue to exist for the foreseeable future,
while IPv6 will be used for new broad-scale applications. The two protocols are not
directly interworkable, but tunneling and dual-stack techniques allow coexistence
and co-working.
While the basic function of the network layer internetworking protocol is to move
information across networks, IPv6 has more capabilities built into its foundation than
IPv4. Link-level communication does not generally require a node identiﬁer (address)
since the device is intrinsically identiﬁed with the link-level address; however, com-
munication over a group of links (a network) does require unique node identiﬁers
(addresses). The IP address is an identiﬁer that is applied to each device connected
to an IP network. In this setup, different entities taking part in the network (servers,
routers, user computers, and so on) communicate among each other using their IP
address, as an entity identiﬁer. The current IPv4 naming scheme was developed in
the 1970s and had capacity for about 4.3 billion addresses, which were grouped into
255 blocks of 16 million addresses each. In IPv4, addresses consist of four octets.
With IPv4, the 32-bit address can be represented as AdrClass|netID|hostID. The
network portion can contain either a network ID or a network ID and a subnet. Every
network and every host or device has a unique address, by deﬁnition. For ease of
human conversation, IP addresses are represented as separated by periods, for exam-
ple: 166.74.110.83, where the decimal numbers are a shorthand and corresponds to
the binary code described by the byte in question (an 8-bit number takes a value
in the 0–255 range). Since the IPv4 address has 32 bits, there are nominally 232
different IP addresses (as noted, approximately 4.3 billion nodes, if all combinations
are used).

222
LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY: IPv6 TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
TABLE 7.1
Projected RIR Unallocated Address Pool Exhaustion (as of April 2011)
RIR
Assigned Addresses (/8s)
Remaining Addresses (/8s)
AFRINIC
8.3793
4.6168
APNIC
53.7907
1.2093
ARIN
77.9127
6.0130
LACNIC
15.6426
4.3574
RIPE NCC
45.0651
3.9349
RIR, regional Internet registry; AFRINIC, African Network Information Centre; ARIN, American Registry
for Internet Numbers; APNIC, Asia-Paciﬁc Network Information Centre; LACNIC, Latin America and
Caribbean Network Information Centre; RIPE NCC, R´eseaux IP Europ´eens Network Coordination Centre
(the RIR for Europe, the Middle East, and parts of Central Asia).
IPv4 has proven, by means of its long life, to be a ﬂexible and powerful networking
mechanism. However, IPv4 is starting to exhibit limitations, not only with respect to
the need for an increase of the IP address space, driven, for example, by new popula-
tions of users in countries such as China and India; by new technologies with “always
connected devices” (e.g., cable modems, networked PDAs, 3G/4G mobile smart-
phones, and so on); and by new services such as global rollout of VoIP, IP Television
(IPTV), and social networking. A full deployment of IoT applications will certainly
stress the IPv4 environment. A regional Internet registry (RIR) manages the alloca-
tion and registration of Internet resources such as IPv4 addresses, IPv6 addresses, and
autonomous system (AS) numbers, in a speciﬁc region of the world. As of February
1, 2011, only 1% of all possible IPv4 addresses were left unassigned. This has led
to a predicament known as IPv4 Run-Out. The entire address space was expected
to be more or less exhausted by September 2011, according to the IPv4 Address
Report (see Table 7.1) (4,5). The IPv4 address allocation is based on the following
hierarchy:
Internet assigned numbers authority (IANA) →RIRs →internet service providers
(ISPs) →the public (including businesses).
Thus, a key desirable capability is the increase in address space such that it is able to
cover all elements of the universe set under consideration. For example, all computing
devices could have a public IP address, so that they can be uniquely tracked1; today
inventory management of dispersed IT assets cannot be achieved with IP mechanisms
alone. With IPv6, one can use the network to verify that such equipment is deployed
in place and active; even non-IT equipment in the ﬁeld can be tracked by having an IP
address permanently assigned to it. IPv6 creates a new IP address format, such that the
number of IP addresses will not exhaust for several decades or longer, even though an
entire new crop of devices are expected to connect to Internet over the coming years.
1Note that this has some potential negative security issues as attackers could be able to own a machine and
then exactly know how to go back to that same machine again. Therefore, reliable security mechanisms
need to be understood and put in place in IPv6 environments.

OVERVIEW AND MOTIVATIONS
223
IPv6 also adds improvements in areas such as routing and network conﬁguration. IPv6
has extensive automatic conﬁguration (autoconﬁguration) mechanisms and reduces
the IT burden, making conﬁguration essentially plug-and-play. Speciﬁcally, new
devices that connect to intranet or Internet will be “plug-and-play” devices. With
IPv6, one is not required to conﬁgure dynamic non-published local IP addresses,
the gateway address, the subnetwork mask, or any other parameters. The equipment
automatically obtains all requisite conﬁguration data when it connects to the network.
Autoconﬁguration implies that a dynamic host conﬁguration protocol (DHCP) server
is not needed and/or does not have to be conﬁgured (2, 6, 7).
IPv6 was originally deﬁned in RFC 1883 that was then obsolete by RFC 2460,
“Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6) Speciﬁcation,” S. Deering, R. Hinden (Decem-
ber 1998).2 A large body of additional RFCs has emerged in recent years to add
capabilities and reﬁne the concept.
The advantages of IPv6, some of which we already noted in Chapter 1, can be
summarized as follows:
r Scalability and expanded addressing capabilities: IPv6 has 128-bit addresses
versus 32-bit IPv4 addresses. With IPv4, the theoretical number of available IP
addresses is 232∼1010. IPv6 offers a 2128 space. Hence, the number of available
unique node addressees is 2128∼1039. IPv6 has more than 340 undecillion
(340,282,366,920,938,463,463,374,607,431,768,211,456) addresses, grouped
into blocks of 18 quintillion addresses.
r “Plug-and-play”: IPv6 includes a “plug-and-play” mechanism that facilitates
the connection of equipment to the network. The requisite conﬁguration is
automatic; it is a serverless mechanism.
r IPv6 makes it easy for nodes to have multiple IPv6 addresses on the same net-
work interface. This can create the opportunity for users to establish overlay or
communities of interest (COI) networks on top of other physical IPv6 networks.
Department, groups, or other users and resources can belong to one or more
COIs, where each can have its own speciﬁc security policy (8).
r Security: IPv6 includes security in its speciﬁcations such as payload encryption
and authentication of the source of the communication. It calls for end-to-end
security, with built-in, strong IP-layer encryption and authentication (embedded
security support with mandatory IP Security [IPsec] implementation). It follows
that IPv6 network architectures can easily adapt to an end-to-end security model
where the end hosts have the responsibility of providing the security services
necessary to protect any data trafﬁc between them; this results in greater ﬂexibil-
ity for creating policy-based trust domains that are based on varying parameters
including node address and application (9).
r In IPv6, creating a Virtual Private Network (VPN) is easier and more standard
than in IPv4, because of the (authentication header [AH] and encapsulating
2The “version 5” reference was employed for another use—an experimental real-time streaming protocol—
and to avoid any confusion, it was decided not to use this nomenclature.

224
LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY: IPv6 TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
security protocol [ESP]) extension headers. The performance penalty is lower
for the VPN implemented in IPv6 compared to those built in IPv4 (10).
r Optimized protocol: IPv6 embodies IPv4 best practices but removes unused or
obsolete IPv4 characteristics. This results in a better-optimized IP. Also, merging
two IPv4 networks with overlapping addresses (say, if two organizations merge)
is complex; it will be much easier to merge networks with IPv6.
r Real-time applications: To provide better support for real-time trafﬁc (e.g.,
VoIP, IPTV), IPv6 includes “labeled ﬂows” in its speciﬁcations. By means of
this mechanism, routers can recognize the end-to-end ﬂow to which transmitted
packets belong. This is similar to the service offered by multiprotocol label
switching (MPLS), but it is intrinsic with the IP mechanism rather than an
add-on. Also, it preceded this MPLS feature by a number of years.
r Mobility: IPv6 includes more efﬁcient and robust mobility mechanisms
(enhanced support for mobile IP, mobile computing devices, and mobile video).
Speciﬁcally, mobile IPv6 (MIPv6) as deﬁned in RFC 3775 is now starting to be
deployed (11).
r Streamlined header format and ﬂow identiﬁcation.
r Extensibility: IPv6 has been designed to be extensible and offers support for
new options and extensions.
ISPs and carriers have been preparing for IP-address exhaustion for a number of
years, and there are transition plans in place. The expectation is that IPv6 can make
IP devices less expensive, more powerful, and even consume less power; the power
issue is not only important for environmental reasons, but also improves operability
(e.g., longer battery life in portable devices, such as mobile phones).
7.2
ADDRESS CAPABILITIES
7.2.1
IPv4 Addressing and Issues
IPv4 addresses can be from an ofﬁcially assigned public range or from an internal
intranet private (but not globally unique) block. As noted, IPv4 theoretically allows up
to 232 addresses, based on a four-octet address space. Hence, there are 4,294,967,296
unique values, which can be considered as a sequence of 256 “/8s,” where each “/8”
corresponds to 16,777,216 unique address values. Public, globally unique addresses
are assigned by IANA. IP addresses are addresses of network nodes at layer 3; each
device on a network (whether the Internet or an intranet) must have a unique address.
In IPv4, it is a 32-bit (4-byte) binary address used to identify a host’s network ID.
It is represented by the nomenclature a.b.c.d (each of a, b, c, and d being from 1 to
255) (0 has a special meaning). Examples are 167.168.169.170, 232.233.229.209,
and 200.100.200.100.
The problem is that during the 1980s, many public, registered addresses were
allocated to ﬁrms and organizations without any consistent control. As a result, some

ADDRESS CAPABILITIES
225
organizations have more addresses that they actually might need, giving rise to the
present dearth of available “registerable” layer 3 addresses. Furthermore, not all IP
addresses can be used due to the fragmentation described above.
One approach to the issue would be a renumbering and a reallocation of the
IPv4 addressing space. However, this is not as simple as it appears since it requires
worldwide coordination efforts. Moreover, it would still be limited for the human
population and the quantity of devices that will be connected to Internet in the
medium-term future. At this juncture, and as a temporary and pragmatic approach
to alleviate the dearth of addresses, network address translation (NAT) mechanisms
are employed by organizations and even home users. This mechanism consists of
using only a small set of public IPv4 addresses for an entire network to access the
Internet. The myriad of internal devices are assigned IP addresses from a speciﬁcally
designated range of Class A or Class C address that are locally unique but are
duplicatively used and reused within various organizations. In some cases (e.g.,
residential Internet access use via Digital Subscriber Line [DSL] or cable), the legal
IP address is only provided to a user on a time-lease basis, rather than permanently.
Internal intranet addresses may be in the ranges 10.0.0.0/8, 172.16.0.0/12, and
192.168.0.0/16. In the internal intranet private address case, a NAT function is
employed to map the internal addresses to an external public address when the
private-to-public network boundary is crossed. This, however, imposes a number of
limitations, particularly since the number of registered public addresses available to
a company is almost invariably much smaller (as small as 1) than the number of
internal devices requiring an address. A number of protocols cannot travel through a
NAT device, and hence the use of NAT implies that many applications (e.g., VoIP)
cannot be used effectively in all instances. As a consequence, these applications can
only be used in intranets. Examples include:
r Multimedia applications such as videoconferencing, VoIP, or video-on-
demand/IPTV do not work smoothly through NAT devices. Multimedia applica-
tions make use of real-time transport protocol (RTP) and real-time control pro-
tocol (RTCP). These in turn use User Datagram Protocol (UDP) with dynamic
allocation of ports and NAT does not directly support this environment.
r IPsec is used extensively for data authentication, integrity, and conﬁdentiality.
However, when NAT is used, IPsec operation is impacted, since NAT changes
the address in the IP header.
r Multicast, although possible in theory, requires complex conﬁguration in a NAT
environment and hence, in practice, is not utilized as often as could be the case.
The need for obligatory use of NAT disappears with IPv6.
7.2.2
IPv6 Address Space
The IPv6 addressing architecture is described in RFC 4291 February 2006 (12).
One of the major modiﬁcations in the addressing scheme in IPv6 is a change to the

226
LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY: IPv6 TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
• Unicast
• Brodacast
• Multicast
• Multicast
• Anycast (new)
• Special
• Special
• Unicast
- An ID for an interface
- Explict assignment
- Limited: 255.255.255.255
- Directed: <net>11.1
- An ID For a set of
  interfaces.
- Deliver to all of them
  class D:
- An ID for a set of
  interfaces. Deliver to the 
  nearest one.
- Undistinguishable from unicast
224.0.0.0 -
239.255.255.255
- 0.0.0.0, 127.0.0.1
- ::, ::1
IPv4
IPv6
- N per interface
- Based on IEEE EUI-64 
FIGURE 7.1
Address comparison between IPv4 and IPv6.
basic types of addresses and how they are utilized. Unicast addresses are utilized for a
majority of traditional (enterprise) communications, as was the case in IPv4. However,
Broadcast as a speciﬁc addressing type has been eliminated; in its place support for
multicast addressing has been expanded and made a required part of the protocol. A
new type of addressing called anycast has also been implemented. In addition, there
are a number of special IPv6 addresses. Figure 7.1 compares the two address formats.
Figure 7.2 provides a pictorial comparison of these three transmission (and address)
modes. Logically, one can interpret the types of transmissions as follows3:
r Unicast transmission: “send to this one speciﬁc address”
r Multicast transmission: “send to every member of this speciﬁc group”
r Anycast transmission: “send to any one member of this speciﬁc group.” Typi-
cally (motivated by efﬁciency goals), the transmission occurs to the closest (in
routing terms) member of the group. Generally one interprets anycast to mean
“send to the closest member of this speciﬁc group.”
ETSI standards on the M2M system require support for anycast, unicast, multi-
cast and broadcast communication modes; whenever possible, a global broadcast is
3Broadcast, by contrast, means “send this information/content to the entire universe of users in the address
space.”

ADDRESS CAPABILITIES
227
1
2
3
1
1
1
1
Unicast
Unicast
a
a
a
a
b
c
c
b
1
1
2
2
3
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
Mulitcast
Mulitcast
a
a
a
a
a
3
Unicast
Unicast
64˚
72˚
64˚
72˚
64˚
72˚
64˚
72˚
64˚
72˚
64˚
72˚
64˚
72˚
Note: Device 1 and 2
are part of the same
group
Note: Device 1,2  and
3 are part of the same
Group
FIGURE 7.2
Comparison of transmissions to IPv6 nodes.

228
LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY: IPv6 TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
expected to be replaced by a multicast or anycast in order to minimize the load on
the communication network (13).
The format of IPv6 addressing is described in RFC 2373. As noted, an IPv6
address consists of 128 bits, rather than 32 bits as with IPv4 addresses; the number
of bits correlates to the address space, as follows:
IP Version
Size of Address Space
IPv6
128 bits, which allows for 2128 or
340,282,366,920,938,463,463,374,607,431,768,211,456 (3.4 × 1038)
possible addresses
IPv4
32 bits, which allows for 232 or 4,294,967,296 possible addresses
The relatively large size of the IPv6 address is designed to be subdivided into
hierarchical routing domains that reﬂect the topology of the modern-day Internet.
The use of 128 bits provides multiple levels of hierarchy and ﬂexibility in designing
hierarchical addressing and routing. The IPv4-based Internet currently lacks this
ﬂexibility (14).
The IPv6 address is represented as eight groups of 16 bits each, separated by the
“:” character. Each 16-bit group is represented by 4 hexadecimal digits, that is, each
digit has a value between 0 and f (0,1, 2, . . . a, b, c, d, e, f with a = 10, b = 11, and
so on, to f = 15). What follows is an IPv6 address example
3223:0ba0:01e0:d001:0000:0000:d0f0:0010
An abbreviated format exists to designate IPv6 addresses when all endings are 0. For
example
3223:0ba0::
is the abbreviated form of the following address:
3223:0ba0:0000:0000:0000:0000:0000:0000
Similarly, only one 0 is written, removing 0’s in the left side, and four 0’s in the
middle of the address. For example the address
3223:ba0:0:0:0:0::1234
is the abbreviated form of the following address
3223:0ba0:0000:0000:0000:0000:0000:1234

ADDRESS CAPABILITIES
229
There is also a method to designate groups of IP addresses or subnetworks that
is based on specifying the number of bits that designate the subnetwork, beginning
from left to right, using remaining bits to designate single devices inside the network.
For example, the notation
3223:0ba0:01a0::/48
indicates that the part of the IP address used to represent the subnetwork has 48 bits.
Since each hexadecimal digit has 4 bits, this points out that the part used to represent
the subnetwork is formed by 12 digits, that is: “3223:0ba0:01a0.” The remaining
digits of the IP address would be used to represent nodes inside the network.
As noted, anycast addresses are a new type of address deﬁned in IPv6 (as originally
deﬁned in RFC 1546). The purpose of the anycast address functionality is to enable
capabilities that were difﬁcult to implement in IPv4 environments. Datagrams sent
to the anycast address are automatically delivered to the device in the network that is
the easiest to reach. Anycast addresses can be used to deﬁne a group of devices, any
one of which can support a service request from the user sent to a single speciﬁc IP
address. One example is situations where one needs a service that can be provided by
a set of different (dispersed) servers, but where one does not speciﬁcally care which
one provides it; a speciﬁc example here may be an Internet or video (streaming)
cache. Another example of anycast addressing is a router arrangement that allows
datagrams to be transmitted to whichever router in a group of equivalent routers
is closest to the point of transmission; a speciﬁc example here may be to allow
load sharing between routers. It should be noted that there is no special anycast
addressing format: anycast addresses are the same as unicast addresses from an
address format perspective. In practicality, an anycast address is deﬁned and created
in a self-declarative manner when a unicast address is assigned to more than one device
interface.
Special IPv6 addresses, as follows (see Table 7.2 for additional details) (15):
r Auto-return or loopback virtual address. This address is speciﬁed in IPv4 as the
127.0.0.1 address. In IPv6, this address is represented as ::1.
r Not speciﬁed address (::). This address is not allocated to any node since it is
used to indicate absence of address.
r IPv6 over IPv4 dynamic/automatic tunnel addresses. These addresses are des-
ignated as IPv4-compatible IPv6 addresses and allow the sending of IPv6 trafﬁc
over IPv4 networks in a transparent manner. They are represented as, for exam-
ple, ::156.55.23.5.
r IPv4 over IPv6 addresses automatic representation. These addresses allow for
IPv4-only nodes to still work in IPv6 networks. They are designated as “mapped
from IPv4 to IPv6 addresses” and are represented as ::FFFF:, for example
::FFFF.156.55.43.3.

230
LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY: IPv6 TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
TABLE 7.2
A Set of IPv6 Addresses of Particular Note
Node-scoped
unicast
::1/128 is the loopback address (per RFC 4291)
::/128 is the unspeciﬁed address (per RFC 4291)
Addresses within this block should not appear on the public Internet
IPv4-mapped
addresses
::FFFF:0:0/96 are the IPv4-mapped addresses (per RFC 4291).
Addresses within this block should not appear on the public Internet
IPv4-compatible
addresses
::ipv4-address/96 are the IPv4-compatible addresses (per RFC4291).
These addresses are deprecated and should not appear on the public
Internet
Link-scoped
unicast
FE80::/10 are the link-local unicast (per RFC 4291) addresses.
Addresses within this block should not appear on the public Internet
Unique local
FC00::/7 are the unique-local addresses (per RFC 4193). Addresses
within this block should not appear by default on the public Internet
Documentation
preﬁx
The 2001:db8::/32 are the documentation addresses (per RFC 3849).
They are used for documentation purposes such as user manuals,
RFCs, and so on. Addresses within this block should not appear on
the public Internet
6to4
2002::/16 are the 6to4 addresses (per RFC 3056). The 6to4 addresses
may be advertised when the site is running a 6to4 relay or offering
a 6to4 transit service. However, the provider of this service should
be aware of the implications of running such service (per RFC
3964), which include some speciﬁc ﬁltering rules for 6to4. IPv4
addresses disallowed in 6to4 preﬁxes are listed in (per RFC 3964)
Teredo
2001::/32 are the Teredo addresses (per RFC 4380). The Teredo
addresses may be advertised when the site is running a Teredo relay
or offering a Teredo transit service
6bone
5F00::/8 were the addresses of the ﬁrst instance of the 6bone
experimental network (per RFC 1897)3FFE::/16 were the addresses
of the second instance of the 6bone experimental network (per RFC
2471)Both 5F00::/8 and 3FFE::/16 were returned to IANA (per
RFC 3701). These addresses are subject to future allocation, similar
to current unallocated address space. Addresses within this block
should not appear on the public Internet until they are reallocated
ORCHID
2001:10::/28 are ORCHID addresses (per RFC 4843). These
addresses are used as identiﬁers and are not routable at the IP layer.
Addresses within this block should not appear on the public Internet
Default route
::/0 is the default unicast route address
IANA special-
purpose IPv6
address block
An IANA registry (iana-ipv6-special-registry) is set (per RFC 4773)
for special-purpose IPv6 address block assignments used for
experiments and other purposes. Addresses within this registry
should be reviewed for Internet routing considerations
Multicast
FF00::/8 are multicast addresses (per RFC 4291). They have a 4-bit
scope in the address ﬁeld where only some values are of global
scope (per RFC 4291). Only addresses with global scope in this
block may appear on the public Internet
Multicast routes must not appear in unicast routing tables

IPv6 PROTOCOL OVERVIEW
231
7.3
IPv6 PROTOCOL OVERVIEW
Table 7.3 summarizes the core protocols that comprise IPv6. IPv6 basic protocol
capabilities include the following:
r Addressing
r Anycast
r Flow Labels
r ICMPv6
r Neighbor discovery (ND)
Like IPv4, IPv6 is a connectionless datagram protocol used primarily for address-
ing and routing packets between hosts. Connectionless means that a session is not
established before exchanging data. “Unreliable” means that delivery is not guaran-
teed. IPv6 always makes a best-effort attempt to deliver a packet. An IPv6 packet
might be lost, delivered out of sequence, duplicated, or delayed. IPv6 per se does
not attempt to recover from these types of errors. The acknowledgment of packets
delivered and the recovery of lost packets is done by a higher-layer protocol, such as
TCP (14). From a packet-forwarding perspective, IPv6 operates in a similar, nearly
identical manner to IPv4.
TABLE 7.3
Key IPv6 Protocols
Protocol (Current Version)
Description
IPv6: RFC 2460
Updated by RFC 5095, RFC 5722,
RFC 5871
IPv6 is a connectionless datagram protocol used
for routing packets between hosts
Internet control message protocol
for IPv6 (ICMPv6): RFC 4443
Updated by RFC 4884
A mechanism that enables hosts and routers that
use IPv6 communication to report errors and
send status messages
Multicast listener discovery (MLD):
RFC 2710
Updated by RFC 3590, RFC 3810
A mechanism that enables one to manage subnet
multicast membership for IPv6. MLD uses a
series of three ICMPv6 messages. MLD
replaces the Internet group management
protocol (IGMP) v3 that is employed for IPv4
ND: RFC 4861
Updated by RFC 5942
A mechanism that is used to manage node-to-node
communication on a link. ND uses a series of
ﬁve ICMPv6 messages. ND replaces address
resolution protocol (ARP), ICMPv4 router
discovery, and the ICMPv4 redirect message
ND is implemented using the neighbor discovery
protocol (NDP)

232
LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY: IPv6 TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
Version
1
16
32
Traffic Class
Flow Label
Source Address
Destination Address
Extension headers/Payload
Payload Length
Next Header
Hop Limit
FIGURE 7.3
IPv6 packet.
An IPv6 packet, also known as an IPv6 datagram, consists of an IPv6 header and
an IPv6 payload, as shown Figure 7.3. The IPv6 header consists of two parts, the IPv6
base header and optional extension headers. See Figure 7.4. Functionally, the optional
extension headers and upper-layer protocols, for example TCP, are considered part
of the IPv6 payload. Table 7.4 shows the ﬁelds in the IPv6 base header. IPv4 headers
and IPv6 headers are not directly interoperable: hosts and/or routers must use an
implementation of both IPv4 and IPv6 in order to recognize and process both header
formats (see Fig. 7.5). This gives rise to a number of complexities in the migration
process between the IPv4 and the IPv6 environments. The IP header in IPv6 has
been streamlined and deﬁned to be of a ﬁxed length (40 bytes). In IPv6, header ﬁelds
from the IPv4 header have been removed, renamed, or moved to the new optional
IPv6 extension headers. The header length ﬁeld is no longer needed since the IPv6
header is now a ﬁxed-length entity. The IPv4 “type of service” is equivalent to the
IPv6 “trafﬁc class” ﬁeld. The “total length” ﬁeld has been replaced with the “payload
length” ﬁeld. Since IPv6 only allows for fragmentation to be performed by the IPv6
source and destination nodes, and not individual routers, the IPv4 segment control

IPv6 PROTOCOL OVERVIEW
233
Version
Traffic Class
Flow Label
Payload Length
Next Header
Next Header
Source IPv6 Address (128 Bits)
Extension Header Information
Payload
Variable
Length
40
Octets
Destination IPv6 Address (128 Bits)
Hop Limit
IPv6 extension headers are optional headers that may follow the basic IPv6 header.  
An IPv6 PDU may include zero, one, or multiple extension headers.  When multiple 
extension headers are used, they form a chained list of headers identified by the 
Next Header field of the previous header.  
FIGURE 7.4
IPv6 extension headers.
ﬁelds (identiﬁcation, ﬂags, and fragment offset ﬁelds) have been moved to similar
ﬁelds within the fragment extension header. The functionality provided by the “time
to live (TTL4)” ﬁeld has been replaced with the “hop limit” ﬁeld. The “protocol”
ﬁeld has been replaced with the “next header type” ﬁeld. The “header checksum”
ﬁeld was removed, which has the main advantage of not having each relay spend
time processing the checksum. The “options” ﬁeld is no longer part of the header
as it was in IPv4. Options are speciﬁed in the optional IPv6 extension headers.
The removal of the options ﬁeld from the header enables more efﬁcient routing; only
the information that is needed by a router needs to be processed (16).
One area requiring consideration, however, is the length of the IPv6 PDU: the
40-octet header can be a problem for real-time IP applications such as VoIP and
IPTV. Header compression (HC) becomes critical for many applications, as noted
in Section 7.4. Also, there will be some bandwidth inefﬁciency in general, which
could be an issue in limited-bandwidth environments or applications (e.g., wireless
networks, sensor networks, IoT networks).
Stateless address autoconﬁguration (described in RFC 4862) deﬁnes how an IPv6
node generates addresses without the use of a DHCP for IPv6 (DHCPv6) server
(17). “Autoconﬁguration” is a new characteristic of the IPv6 protocol that facili-
tates network management and system set-up tasks by users. This characteristic is
4TTL has been used in many attacks and intrusion detection system (IDS) tricks in IPv4.

234
LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY: IPv6 TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
TABLE 7.4
IPv6 Base Header
IPv6 Header Field
Length (bits) Function
Version
4
Identiﬁes the version of the protocol. For IPv6, the
version is 6
Trafﬁc class
8
Intended for originating nodes and forwarding routers to
identify and distinguish between different classes or
priorities of IPv6 packets
Flow label
20
(sometimes referred to as ﬂow ID) Deﬁnes how trafﬁc is
handled and identiﬁed. A ﬂow is a sequence of packets
sent either to a unicast or to a multicast destination. This
ﬁeld identiﬁes packets that require special handling by
the IPv6 node. The following list shows the ways the
ﬁeld is handled if a host or router does not support ﬂow
label ﬁeld functions:
r If the packet is being sent, the ﬁeld is set to zero
r If the packet is being received, the ﬁeld is
ignored
Payload length
16
Identiﬁes the length, in octets, of the payload. This ﬁeld
is a 16-bit unsigned integer. The payload includes the
optional extension headers, as well as the upper-layer
protocols, for example, TCP
Next header
8
Identiﬁes the header immediately following the IPv6
header. The following shows examples of the next
header:
r 00 = Hop-by-hop options
r 01 = ICMPv4
r 04 = IP in IP (encapsulation)
r 06 = TCP
r 17 = UDP
r 43 = Routing
r 44 = Fragment
r 50 = Encapsulating security payload
r 51 = Authentication
r 58 = ICMPv6
Hop limit
8
Identiﬁes the number of network segments, also known
as links or subnets, on which the packet is allowed to
travel before being discarded by a router. The hop
limit is set by the sending host and is used to prevent
packets from endlessly circulating on an IPv6
internetwork
When forwarding an IPv6 packet, IPv6 routers must
decrease the hop limit by 1 and must discard the IPv6
packet when the hop limit is 0
Source address
128
Identiﬁes the IPv6 address of the original source of the
IPv6 packet
Destination address
128
Identiﬁes the IPv6 address of intermediate or ﬁnal
destination of the IPv6 packet

IPv6 PROTOCOL OVERVIEW
235
IPv4 Header
IPv6 Header
0
012
Verslon IHL
Flags
Identification
Time to Live
Protocol
Header Checksum
Fragment Offset
Total Length
Version
Traffic Class
Flow Label
Payload Length (16 bits)
Next Header
Type
Hop Limit
Source Address (128 bits)
Options
Version (4-bit)
Version (4-bit)
IPv6 header contains a new value
Removed in IPv6, the basic IPv6 header
has fixed length of 40 octets
New field added to tag a flow for IPv6 packets
Same function for both headers
Removed in IPv6 because fragmentation is no
longer done by intermediate routers in the networks,
but by the source node that originates the packet
Removed in IPv6 because fragmentation is no
longer done by intermediate routers in the networks,
but by the source node that originates the packet
Removed in IPv6 because fragmentation is no
longer done by intermediate routers in the networks,
but by the source node that originates the packet
Same function for both headers
Same function for both headers
Removed in IPv6; upper-layer protocols handle
checksums
Same function, but source address is expanded in IPv6
Same function, but destination address is expanded in
IPv6
Removed in IPv6. Options handled differently
Removed in IPv6. Options handled differently
New way in IPv6 to handle Options fields, security
Same function for both headers
Header length (4-bit)
Type of service (8-bit)
Total PDU length (16-bit)
Identification (16-bit)
Flags (3-bit)
Fragment offset (13-bit)
Time to live (8-bit)
Protocol number (8-bit)
Header checksum (16-bit)
Source address (32-bit)
Destination address (32-bit)
Extension headers
Hop limit (8-bit)
Payload length (16-bit)
Flow label (20-bit)
Traffic class (8-bit)
Next header (8-bit)
Source address (128-bit)
Destination address (128-bit)
Padding (variable)
Options (variable)
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
— 
Padding
Destination Address (128 bits)
Destination Address
Source Address
Type of
Service
34567890123456789012345678901 01234567890123456789012345678901
1
2
3
0
1
2
3
FIGURE 7.5
Comparison of IPv4 and IPv6 headers.
often called “plug-and-play” or “connect-and-work.” Autoconﬁguration facilitates
initialization of user devices: after connecting a device to an IPv6 network, one or
several IPv6 globally unique addresses are automatically allocated. Note, however,
that an IPv6 address must be conﬁgured on a router’s interface for the interface to
forward IPv6 trafﬁc. Conﬁguring a site-local or global IPv6 address on a router’s
interface automatically conﬁgures a link-local address (LLA) and activates IPv6 for
that interface.
DHCP allows systems to obtain an IPv4 address and other required informa-
tion (e.g., default router or domain name system [DNS] server); a similar protocol,
DHCPv6, has been published for IPv6. DHCP and DHCPv6 are known as stateful
protocols because they maintain tables on (specialized) servers. However, IPv6 also
has a new stateless autoconﬁguration protocol that has no equivalent in IPv4. The
stateless autoconﬁguration protocol does not require a server component because
there is no state to maintain (a DHCP server may typically run in a router or ﬁrewall).
Every IPv6 system (other than routers) is able to build its own unicast global address

236
LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY: IPv6 TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
(18). “Stateless” autoconﬁguration is also described as “serverless.” The acronym
SLAAC is also used; it expands to stateless address autoconﬁguration. SLAAC was
originally deﬁned in RFC 2462. With SLAAC, the presence of conﬁguration servers
to supply proﬁle information is not required.
The host generates its own address using a combination of the information that it
possesses (in its interface or network card) and the information that is supplied by the
router. As noted in RFC 4941, nodes use IPv6 SLAAC to generate addresses using a
combination of locally available information and information advertised by routers.
Addresses are formed by combining network preﬁxes with an interface identiﬁer.
On an interface that contains an embedded IEEE identiﬁer, the interface identiﬁer is
typically derived from it. On other interface types, the interface identiﬁer is generated
through other means, for example, via random number generation (19). Some types
of network interfaces come with an embedded IEEE identiﬁer (i.e., a link-layer media
access control [MAC] address), and in those cases, SLAAC uses the IEEE identiﬁer
to generate a 64-bit interface identiﬁer (12). By design, the interface identiﬁer is likely
to be globally unique when generated in this fashion. The interface identiﬁer is in
turn appended to a preﬁx to form a 128-bit IPv6 address. Not all nodes and interfaces
contain IEEE identiﬁers. In such cases, an interface identiﬁer is generated through
some other means (e.g., at random), and the resultant interface identiﬁer may not be
globally unique and may also change over time. Routers determine the preﬁx that
identiﬁes networks associated to the link under discussion. The “interface identiﬁer”
identiﬁes an interface within a subnetwork and is often, and by default, generated
from the MAC address of the network card. The IPv6 address is built combining the
64 bits of the interface identiﬁer with the preﬁxes that routers determine as belonging
to the subnetwork. If there is no router, the interface identiﬁer is self-sufﬁcient to
allow the PC to generate a “link-local” address. The “link-local” address is sufﬁcient
to allow the communication between several nodes connected to the same link (the
same local network).
In summary, all nodes combine interface identiﬁers (whether derived from an
IEEE identiﬁer or generated through some other technique) with the reserved link-
local preﬁx to generate LLAs for their attached interfaces. Additional addresses can
then be created by combining preﬁxes advertised in router advertisements via ND
(deﬁned in RFC 4861) (20) with the interface identiﬁer.
Note: As seen addresses generated using SLAAC contain an embedded interface
identiﬁer that remains constant over time. Whenever a ﬁxed identiﬁer is used in
multiple contexts, a security exposure could theoretically result. A correlation can
be performed by an attacker who is in the path between the node in question and the
peer(s) to which it is communicating, and who can view the IPv6 addresses present in
the datagrams. Because the identiﬁer is embedded within the IPv6 address, which is
a fundamental requirement of communication, it cannot be easily hidden. Solutions
to this issue have been proposed by generating interface identiﬁers that vary over
time (19).
IPv6 addresses are “leased” to an interface for a ﬁxed established time (including
an inﬁnite time). When this “lifetime” expires, the link between the interface and

IPv6 PROTOCOL OVERVIEW
237
the address is invalidated and the address can be reallocated to other interfaces. For
the suitable management of addresses expiration time, an address goes through two
states (stages) while is afﬁliated to an interface (21):
(a) At ﬁrst, an address is in a “preferred” state, so its use in any communication
is not restricted.
(b) After that, an address becomes “deprecated,” indicating that its afﬁliation with
the current interface will (soon) be invalidated.
When it is in a “deprecated” state, the use of the address is discouraged, although it
is not forbidden. However, when possible, any new communication (e.g., the opening
of a new TCP connection) must use a “preferred” address. A “deprecated” address
should only be used by applications that have already used it before and in cases
where it is difﬁcult to change this address to another address without causing a
service interruption.
To ensure that allocated addresses (granted either by manual mechanisms or by
autoconﬁguration) are unique in a speciﬁc link, the link duplicated address detection
algorithm is used. The address to which the duplicated address detection algorithm
is being applied to is designated (until the end of this algorithmic session) as an
“attempt address.” In this case, it does not matter that such address has been allocated
to an interface and received packets are discarded.
Next we describe how an IPv6 address is formed. The lowest 64 bits of the address
identify a speciﬁc interface, and these bits are designated as “interface identiﬁer.”
The highest 64 bits of the address identify the “path” or the “preﬁx” of the network
or router in one of the links to which such interface is connected. The IPv6 address
is formed by combining the preﬁx with the interface identiﬁer.
It is possible for a host or device to have IPv6 and IPv4 addresses simultaneously.
Most of the systems that currently support IPv6 allow the simultaneous use of both
protocols. In this way, it is possible to support communication with IPv4-only net-
works as well as with IPv6-only networks and the use of the applications developed
for both protocols (21).
Is it possible to transmit IPv6 trafﬁc over IPv4 networks via tunneling methods.
This approach consists of “wrapping” the IPv6 trafﬁc as IPv4 payload data: IPv6
trafﬁc is sent “encapsulated” into IPv4 trafﬁc, and at the receiving end this trafﬁc is
parsed as IPv6 trafﬁc. Transition mechanisms are methods used for the coexistence
of IPv4 and/or IPv6 devices and networks. For example, an “IPv6-in-IPv4 tunnel”
is a transition mechanism that allows IPv6 devices to communicate through an IPv4
network. The mechanism consists of creating the IPv6 packets in a normal way
and encapsulating them in an IPv4 packet. The reverse process is undertaken in the
destination machine that de-encapsulates the IPv6 packet.
There is a signiﬁcant difference between the procedures to allocate IPv4 addresses,
which focus on the parsimonious use of addresses (since addresses are a scare
resource and should be managed with caution), and the procedures to allocate IPv6

238
LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY: IPv6 TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
addresses, which focus on ﬂexibility. ISPs deploying IPv6 systems follow the RIRs’
policies relating to how to assign IPv6 addressing space among their clients. RIRs are
recommending ISPs and operators allocate to each IPv6 client a /48 subnetwork; this
allows clients to manage their own subnetworks without using NAT. (The implication
is that the obligatory need for NAT for intranet-based devices disappears in IPv6.)
In order to allow its maximum scalability, the IPv6 protocol uses an approach
based on a basic header, with minimum information. This differentiates it from IPv4
where different options are included in addition to the basic header. IPv6 uses a header
“concatenation” mechanism to support supplementary capabilities. The advantages
of this approach include the following:
r The size of the basic header is always the same and is well known. The basic
header has been simpliﬁed compared with IPv4, since only eight ﬁelds are used
instead of 12. The basic IPv6 header has a ﬁxed size; hence, its processing by
nodes and routers is more straightforward. Also, the header’s structure aligns to
64 bits, so that new and future processors (64 bits minimum) can process it in
a more efﬁcient way.
r Routers placed between a source point and a destination point (i.e., the route
that a speciﬁc packet has to pass through) do not need to process or understand
any “following headers.” In other words, in general, interior (core) points of
the network (routers) only have to process the basic header, while in IPv4 all
headers must be processed. This ﬂow mechanism is similar to the operation in
MPLS, yet precedes it by several years.
r There is no limit to the number of options that the headers can support (the IPv6
basic header is 40 octets in length, while IPv4 one varies from 20 to 60 octets,
depending on the options used).
In IPv6, interior/core routers do not perform packet fragmentation, but the frag-
mentation is performed end-to-end. That is, source and destination nodes perform,
by means of the IPv6 stack, the fragmentation of a packet and the reassembly, respec-
tively. The fragmentation process consists of dividing the source packet into smaller
packets or fragments (21).
The IPv6 speciﬁcation deﬁnes a number of extension headers (16) (also see
Table 7.5) (22):
r Routing header—Similar to the source routing options in IPv4. The header is
used to mandate a speciﬁc routing.
r AH—A security header that provides authentication and integrity.
r Encapsulating security payload (ESP) header—A security header that provides
authentication and encryption.
r Fragmentation header—The Fragmentation Header is similar to the fragmenta-
tion options in IPv4.

IPv6 TUNNELING
239
TABLE 7.5
IPv6 Extension Headers
Header
(Protocol ID)
Description
Hop-by-hop options
header (protocol 0)
The hop-by-hop options header is used for Jumbogram packets
and the router alert. An example of applying the hop-by-hop
options header is resource reservation protocol (RSVP). This
ﬁeld is read and processed by every node and router along the
delivery path
Destination options
header (protocol 60)
This header carries optional information that is speciﬁcally
targeted to a packet’s destination address. The MIPv6 protocol
speciﬁcation makes use of the destination options header to
exchange registration messages between MNs and the HA.
Mobile IP is a protocol allowing MNs to keep permanent IP
addresses even if they change point of attachment
Routing header
(protocol 43)
This header can be used by an IPv6 source node to force a packet
to pass through speciﬁc routers on the way to its destination. A
list of intermediary routers may be speciﬁed within the routing
header when the routing type ﬁeld is set to 0
Fragment header
(protocol 44)
In IPv6, the path MTU discovery (PMTUD) mechanism is
recommended to all IPv6 nodes. When an IPv6 node does not
support PMTUD and it must send a packet larger than the
greatest MTU along the delivery path, the fragment header is
used. When this happens, the node fragments the packets and
sends each fragment using fragment headers; then the
destination node reassembles the original packet by
concatenating all the fragments
AH (protocol 51)
This header is used in IPsec to provide authentication, data
integrity, and replay protection. It also ensures protection of
some ﬁelds of the basic IPv6 header. This header is identical
in both IPv4 and IPv6
Encapsulating security
payload (ESP)
header (protocol 50)
This header is also used in IPsec to provide authentication, data
integrity, replay protection, and conﬁdentiality of the IPv6
packet. Similar to the AH, this header is identical in both IPv4
and IPv6
r Destination options header—Header that contains a set of options to be pro-
cessed only by the ﬁnal destination node. MIPv6 is an example of an environ-
ment that uses such a header.
r Hop-by-hop options header—A set of options needed by routers to perform
certain management or debugging functions.
7.4
IPv6 TUNNELING
IPv6 tunneling is used in a variety of settings, including in MIPv6. MIPv6 tunnels
payload packets between the mobile node (MN) and the home agent (HA) in both
directions. This tunneling uses IPv6 encapsulation discussed below.

240
LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY: IPv6 TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
IPv6 tunneling as deﬁned in RFC 2473 (23) is a technique for establishing a
“virtual link” between two IPv6 nodes for transmitting data packets as payloads of
IPv6 packets. From the perspective of the two nodes, this “virtual link,” called an
IPv6 tunnel, appears as a point-to-point link on which IPv6 acts like a link-layer
protocol. The two IPv6 nodes support speciﬁc roles. One node encapsulates original
packets received from other nodes or from itself and forwards the resulting tunnel
packets through the tunnel. The other node decapsulates the received tunnel packets
and forwards the resulting original packets toward their destinations, possibly itself.
The encapsulator node is called the tunnel entry-point node, and it is the source of
the tunnel packets. The decapsulator node is called the tunnel exit point, and it is the
destination of the tunnel packets. An IPv6 tunnel is a unidirectional mechanism—
tunnel packet ﬂow takes place in one direction between the IPv6 tunnel entry-point and
exit-point nodes (see Fig. 7.6, top). Bidirectional tunneling is achieved by merging
two unidirectional mechanisms, that is, conﬁguring two tunnels, each in opposite
direction to the other—the entry-point node of one tunnel is the exit-point node of
the other tunnel (see Fig. 7.6, bottom).
Note: while tunnels between two nodes identiﬁed by unicast addresses are typical
(such tunnels look like “virtual point to point links”), one can also deﬁne tunnels
where the exit-point nodes are identiﬁed by anycast or multicast addresses.
Tunneling Mechanism
Tunnel from node B to node C
Tunnel from node B to node C
Tunnel from node C to node B
Original
Packet
Source
Node
Original
Packet
Source
Node
Original
Packet
Destination
Node
Original
Packet
Destination
Node
Original
Packet
Destination
Node
Original
Packet
Source
Node
Tunnel
Entry-Point
Node
Tunnel
Entry-Point
Node
Tunnel
Entry-Point
Node
Tunnel
Exit-Point
Node
Tunnel
Exit-Point
Node
Tunnel
Exit-Point
Node
A
A
D
D
B
C
C
Tunnel
B
Tunnel
FIGURE 7.6
IPv6 tunneling. Top: Unidirectional. Bottom: Bidirectional.

IPv6 TUNNELING
241
Original
Original Packet
Original Packet
Original Packet
Tunnel IPv6 Headers
Tunnel IPv6 Packet
Original Packet Payload
Header
IPv6
Header
IPv6
Extension
Headers
FIGURE 7.7
Encapsulating a packet.
IPv6 encapsulation entails prepending an IPv6 header to the original packet,
and, optionally, a set of IPv6 extension headers, as depicted in Figure 7.7 that are
collectively called tunnel IPv6 headers. The encapsulation takes place in an IPv6
tunnel entry-point node, as a result of an original packet being forwarded onto
the virtual link represented by the tunnel. The original packet is processed during
forwarding according to the forwarding rules of the protocol of that packet. At
encapsulation, the source ﬁeld of the tunnel IPv6 header is ﬁlled with an IPv6 address
of the tunnel entry-point node and the destination ﬁeld with an IPv6 address of the
tunnel exit point. Subsequently, the tunnel packet resulting from encapsulation is sent
toward the tunnel exit-point node.
IPv6 intermediate processing by intermediate nodes in the tunnel processes the
IPv6 tunnel packets according to the IPv6 protocol. For example, a tunnel hop-by-hop
options extension header is processed by each receiving node in the tunnel; a tunnel
routing extension header identiﬁes the intermediate processing nodes and controls
at a ﬁner granularity the forwarding path of the tunnel packet through the tunnel; a
tunnel destination options extension header is processed at the tunnel exit-point node.
IPv6 decapsulation is the opposite process of encapsulation. Upon receiving an
IPv6 packet destined to an IPv6 address of a tunnel exit-point node, its IPv6 protocol
layer processes the tunnel headers. The strict left-to-right processing rules for exten-
sion headers are applied. When processing is complete, control is handed to the next
protocol engine, which is identiﬁed by the next header ﬁeld value in the last header
processed. If this is set to a tunnel protocol value, the tunnel protocol engine discards
the tunnel headers and passes the resulting original packet to the Internet or lower-
layer protocol identiﬁed by that value for further processing. For example, in the case
the next header ﬁeld has the IPv6 tunnel protocol value, the resulting original packet
is passed to the IPv6 protocol layer. (The tunnel exit-point node, which decapsulates
the tunnel packets, and the destination node, which receives the resulting original
packets, can be the same node.)

242
LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY: IPv6 TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
7.5
IPsec IN IPv6
As noted, IPsec provides network-level security where the application data is encap-
sulated within the IPv6 packet. IPsec itself is a set of two protocols: ESP, which
provides integrity and conﬁdentiality and AH, which provides integrity. IPsec uti-
lizes the AH and/or ESP header to provide security (the AH and ESP header may be
used separately or in combination). IPsec, with ESP, offers integrity and data origin
authentication, conﬁdentiality, and optional (at the discretion of the receiver) anti-
replay features (using conﬁdentiality without integrity is discouraged by the RFCs);
in addition, ESP provides limited trafﬁc ﬂow conﬁdentiality. Both the AH and ESP
header may be employed as follows (16):
– “Tunnel mode”—The protocol is applied to the entire IP packet. This method is
needed to ensure security over the entire packet, where a new IPv6 header and
an AH or ESP header are wrapped around the original IP packet.
– “Transport mode”—The protocol is just applied to the transport layer (i.e., TCP,
UDP, ICMP) in the form of an IPv6 header and AH or ESP header, followed by
the transport protocol data (header, data). (see Fig. 7.8).
It should be noted that although the basic IPv6 standards have long been stable,
considerable work continues in the IETF, particularly to resolve the issue of highly
scalable multihoming support for IPv6 sites, and to resolve the problem of IP-layer
interworking between IPv6-only and IPv4-only hosts. IPv6/IPv4 interworking at the
application layers is handled within the original dual-stack model of IPv6 deployment:
either one end of an application session will have dual-stack connectivity or a dual-
stack intermediary such as a hypertext transfer protocol (HTTP) proxy or simple mail
transfer protocol (SMTP) server will interface to both IPv4-only and IPv6-only hosts
or applications (24).
7.6
HEADER COMPRESSION SCHEMES
Implementation of IPv6 gives rise to concerns related to expanded packet headers,
especially for video and wireless (low bandwidth channel) applications. As noted
in earlier sections, the packet header size doubled from 20 bytes in IPv4 to at least
40 bytes in IPv6. The use of network-layer encryption mechanism nearly doubles
IP operational overhead. HC is, therefore, of interest. Currently, the use of HC in
commercial networks is generally rare, but wireless and video applications (especially
in an IPv6 environment) may well drive future deployment of the technology.
HC algorithms can reduce the performance and throughput impact of expanded
IPv6 packet headers and protocol-imposed overhead. Consider the illustrative case
where packets with constant 20 byte payloads are transmitted using a 40-byte IPv6
header. Consider a 1 Mbps link. Then during a 1-s period, about 666 kb transmitted
over the link is IPv6 overhead, and only about 333 kb transmitted over the link is

HEADER COMPRESSION SCHEMES
243
IPsec
IPsec
IPsec
Session/Tunnel
FN
Foreign Network
(e.g., Internet)
IP HDR
IPsec Authenticated session
AH Protocol (RFC 2402)
IPsec Encrypted session
ESP Transport Mode (RFC 2406)
IPsec Tunnel
ESP Tunnel Mode (RFC 2406)
Data
Data
Data
encrypted
Data
encrypted
IP HDR
IP HDR
New IP HDR
IP HDR
AH HDR
ESP HDR
ESP HDR
IP HDR
Data
IP HDR
Data
IP HDR
Data
IP HDR
Data
IP HDR
Data
FIGURE 7.8
IPsec network environment.
actual user data. This implies that 66% of data transmitted is overhead. Now con-
sider the case where the same packet of payload is sent with a 2-byte compressed
header. Now over a 1-s period, about 90 kb transmitted is IPv6 overhead, and about
910 kb transmitted is actual user data. This implies that only 9% of data transmitted is
overhead. This example shows that HC can theoretically decrease header overhead by
95%. Overhead is deﬁned as “IP header bytes” divided by “total bytes transmitted.”
Naturally, the overhead for larger packets will be less as a total percentage. Studies
show that although the average packet length of packets traveling over the Internet is
around 350–400 bytes, a considerable portion of the Internet trafﬁc is short (say,
40 bytes or less) (25). Depending on the encapsulation protocol, video packets
can also be small. For example, under the DVB standard (e.g., DVB-T, DVB-C,
DVB-S, DVB-S2), basic packets have a length of 204 bytes. This implies a sig-
niﬁcant percentage of overhead is incurred without HC. (For illustration, a 40-byte
IPv6 header on a DVB packet would result in an overhead of 40/244 = 16.39%;
if one assumes that header size is reduced to 2 bytes per packet, the overhead is
2/206 = 0.97%.)

244
LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY: IPv6 TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
Compressed
Header
2-4
B
60 Byte RTP/UDP/IPv6 Header
Payload
Payload
FIGURE 7.9
HC for IPv6.
There is additional protocol overhead. Applications carrying data carried within
RTP will, in addition to link-layer framing, have an IPv4 header (20 octets), a UDP
header (8 octets), and an RTP header (12 octets), for a total of 40 octets. With IPv6,
the IPv6 header is 40 octets for a total of 60 octets. Applications transferring data
using TCP have 20 octets for the transport header, for a total size of 40 octets for
IPv4 and 60 octets for IPv6 (26).
Usually HC techniques are applied to a link, on a per-hop basis. Application
of hop-by-hop HC techniques to network backbones is relatively rare because to
achieve compression over the network, multiple compression–decompression cycles
are required. This represents a scalability and resource issues on core network nodes.
Developments in the IETF in the past few years provide a framework for applying
HC over multiple-hop to backbone networks. For example, work has been done HC
techniques to MPLS backbones and mobile ad hoc networks (MANETs) (where
trade needs to be made between computational processing, power requirements, and
bandwidth savings).
Traditionally, compression is applied to layer 3 (IP) and several layer 4 proto-
col headers; for example, RTP/UDP/IPv6 headers can be compressed from 60 bytes
to 2–4 bytes. See Figure 7.9. HC algorithms can also reduce the additional over-
head introduced by network-layer encryption mechanisms (e.g., IPsec). Compression
algorithms that address encryption/decryption have the ability to: (i) compress inner
headers before encryption and (ii) compress outer ESP/IP headers after encryption.
Two compression protocols emerged from the IETF in recent years:
(i) Internet protocol header compression (IPHC), a scheme designed for low bit
error rate (BER) links (compression proﬁles were originally deﬁned in RFC
2507 and RFC 2508, and further discussed in RFC 4995, 4996, and 4497); it
provides compression of TCP/IP, UDP/IP, RTP/UDP/IP, and ESP/IP header;
“enhanced” compression of RTP/UDP/IP (ECRTP) headers is deﬁned in RFC
3545.

QUALITY OF SERVICE IN IPv6
245
(ii) Robust header compression (ROHC) is a scheme designed for wireless links
that provides greater compression compared to IPHC at the cost of greater
implementation complexity (compression proﬁles were originally deﬁned in
RFC 3095 and RFC 3096 with further developments in other RFCs) (26–28);
this is more suitable for high BER, long RTT links and supports compression
of ESP/IP, UDP/IP, and RTP/UDP/IP headers.
Compression is applied over a link between a source node (i.e., compressor) and
a destination node (i.e., decompressor). HC algorithms make use of protocol inter-
packet header ﬁeld redundancies to improve overall efﬁciency. Both compressor and
decompressor store header ﬁelds of each packet stream and associate each stream
with a context identiﬁer (CID). Upon reception of a packet with an associated context,
the compressor removes the IPv6 header ﬁelds from packet header and appends a
CID. Upon reception of a packet with a CID, the decompressor inserts IPv6 header
ﬁelds back into packet header and transmits packet (25). IPHC and ROHC are both
speciﬁed in Release 4 and Release 5 of the Third-Generation Partnership Project
(3GPP). Cisco Systems router Internetwork Operating System (IOS) provides IPHC
implementation.
Point-to-point protocol (PPP) (deﬁned in RFC 1661) provides (i) a method for
encapsulating datagrams over serial links; (ii) a link control protocol (LCP) for
establishing, conﬁguring, and testing the data-link connection; and (iii) a family of
network control protocols (NCPs) for establishing and conﬁguring different network-
layer protocols. In order to establish communications over a point-to-point link, each
end of the PPP link must ﬁrst send LCP packets to conﬁgure and test the data link.
After the link has been established and optional facilities have been negotiated as
needed by the LCP, PPP must send NCP packets to choose and conﬁgure one or
more network-layer protocols. Once each of the chosen network-layer protocols has
been conﬁgured, datagrams from each network-layer protocol can be sent over the
link. The link will remain conﬁgured for communications until explicit LCP or NCP
packets close the link down, or until some external event occurs (power failure at the
other end, carrier drop, and so on) (29).
In RFC 5072, the NCP for establishing and conﬁguring IPv6 over PPP, called
IPV6CP, is deﬁned. In RFC 5172, the compression parameter for use in IPv6 datagram
compression is deﬁned. The conﬁguration option described in this just-cited RFC
provides a way to negotiate the use of a speciﬁc IPv6 packet compression protocol.
The IPv6-compression protocol conﬁguration option is used to indicate the ability
to receive compressed packets. IPv6-compression protocol ﬁeld values have been
assigned in for IPHC (0061) and for ROHC (0003).
7.7
QUALITY OF SERVICE IN IPv6
ETSI standards on the M2M system require that the M2M system should be able to
make use of the QoS supported by underlying networks; M2M applications or service
capabilities may use QoS capabilities of the underlying networks when implemented

246
LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY: IPv6 TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
by the system (13). QoS is supported in IPv6. The IPv6 header has two QoS-related
ﬁelds:
r 20-bit ﬂow label, usable in IntServ-based environments. In IntServ environ-
ments, performance guarantees to trafﬁc and resource reservations are provided
on per-ﬂow basis. A guaranteed and controlled load service capability is sup-
ported. IntServ approaches have scalability issues;
r 8-bit trafﬁc class indicator usable in DiffServ-based environments. DiffServ
environments are more common. The trafﬁc class ﬁeld may be used to set
speciﬁc precedence or differentiated services code point (DSCP) values. These
values are used in the exact same way as in IPv4. Performance guarantees
are provided to trafﬁc aggregates rather than to ﬂows. DiffServ classiﬁes all
the network trafﬁc into classes. Two distinct types (per hop behaviors) are
supported:
r Expedited forwarding (EF): aims at providing QoS for the class by minimizing
jitter and is generally focused on providing stricter guarantees;
r Assured forwarding (AF): inserts at most four classes with at most three levels
of packets dropping categories.
There are no signaling protocol for resource allocation (admission control) and
QoS mechanisms control. The following priority levels are typical, but variances are
possible:
r Level 0—No specify priority
r Level 1—Background trafﬁc (news)
r Level 2—Unattended data transfer (email)
r Level 3—Reserved
r Level 4—Attended bulk transfer (FTP)
r Level 5—Reserved
r Level 6—Interactive trafﬁc (Telnet, Windowing)
r Level 7—Control trafﬁc (routing, network management)
7.8
MIGRATION STRATEGIES TO IPv6
7.8.1
Technical Approaches
While the infrastructure is in place for IPv4 systems and IPv6 systems to run in
parallel, widespread adoption of IPv6 has been slow because the two systems are
not directly compatible (IPv6 and IPv4 protocols can coexist, but they cannot inter-
communicate directly), and there been so far rather limited economic incentive for
providers and end-user ﬁrms to introduce the technology (4). Therefore, migration
to IPv6 environments is expected to be fairly complex. However, with the growth in
the number of users and the IPv4 address exhaustion, large-scale deployment will

MIGRATION STRATEGIES TO IPv6
247
invariably happen in the near future. IoT/M2M applications are expected to provide
an impetus to the deployment of IPv6. Initially, internetworking between the two
environments will be critical (6). Existing IPv4-endpoints and/or nodes will need to
run dual-stack nodes or convert to IPv6 systems. Fortunately, the new protocol sup-
ports an IPv4-compatible IPv6 address that is an IPv6 address employing embedded
IPv4 addresses. Tunneling, which we already described in passing, will play a major
role in the beginning. There are a number of requirements that are typically applicable
to an organization wishing to introduce an IPv6 service (30):
r The existing IPv4 service should not be adversely disrupted (e.g., as it might be
by router loading of encapsulating IPv6 in IPv4 for tunnels);
r The IPv6 service should perform as well as the IPv4 service (e.g., at the IPv4
line rate, and with similar network characteristics);
r The service must be manageable and be able to be monitored (thus tools should
be available for IPv6 as they are for IPv4);
r The security of the network should not be compromised, due to the additional
protocol itself or a weakness of any transition mechanism used; and
r An IPv6 address allocation plan must be drawn up.
Well-known interworking mechanisms include the following, as described in RFC
2893:
r Dual IP layer (also known as dual stack): A technique for providing complete
support for both IPs—IPv4 and IPv6—in hosts and routers;
r Conﬁgured tunneling of IPv6 over IPv4: Point-to-point tunnels made by encap-
sulating IPv6 packets within IPv4 headers to carry them over IPv4 routing
infrastructures; and
r Automatic tunneling of IPv6 over IPv4: A mechanism for using IPv4-compatible
addresses to automatically tunnel IPv6 packets over IPv4 networks.
Tunneling techniques include the following approaches, as described in RFC 2893:
r IPv6-over-IPv4 tunneling: The technique of encapsulating IPv6 packets within
IPv4 so that they can be carried across IPv4 routing infrastructures.
r Conﬁgured tunneling: IPv6-over-IPv4 tunneling where the IPv4 tunnel end-
point address is determined by conﬁguration information on the encapsulating
node. The tunnels can be either unidirectional or bidirectional. Bidirectional
conﬁgured tunnels behave as virtual point-to-point links.
r Automatic tunneling: IPv6-over-IPv4 tunneling where the IPv4 tunnel endpoint
address is determined from the IPv4 address embedded in the IPv4-compatible
destination address of the IPv6 packet being tunneled.
r IPv4 multicast tunneling: IPv6-over-IPv4 tunneling where the IPv4 tunnel end-
point address is determined using ND. Unlike conﬁgured tunneling, this does

248
LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY: IPv6 TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
not require any address conﬁguration, and unlike automatic tunneling it does
not require the use of IPv4-compatible addresses. However, the mechanism
assumes that the IPv4 infrastructure supports IPv4 multicast.
Applications (and the lower-layer protocol stack) need to be properly equipped.
Some examples of interoperability techniques include dual stacks and tunneling—
IPv6-in-IPv4 (e.g., 6-to-4, 6rd, protocol 41), IPv4-in-IPv6, and IPv6-in-UDP (Teredo,
TSP). There are four cases, as described in RFC 4038:
Case 1: IPv4-only applications in a dual-stack node. IPv6 protocol is introduced in
a node, but applications are not yet ported to support IPv6. The protocol stack
is as follows:
+----------------------+
|
appv4
| (appv4 - IPv4-only applications)
+----------------------+
|
TCP / UDP / others
| (transport protocols - TCP,
+----------------------+
UDP, and so on)
|
IPv4 | IPv6
| (IP protocols supported/enabled
+----------------------+
in the OS)
Case 2: IPv4-only applications and IPv6-only applications in a dual-stack node.
Applications are ported for IPv6 only. Therefore, there are two similar applica-
tions, one for each protocol version (e.g., ping and ping6). The protocol stack
is as follows:
+----------------------+ (appv4 - IPv4-only applications)
|
appv4 | appv6
| (appv6 - IPv6-only applications)
+----------------------+
|
TCP / UDP / others
| (transport protocols - TCP,
+----------------------+
UDP, and so on)
|
IPv4 | IPv6
| (IP protocols supported/
+----------------------+
enabled in the OS)
Case 3: Applications supporting both IPv4 and IPv6 in a dual-stack node. Appli-
cations are ported for both IPv4 and IPv6 support. Therefore, the existing IPv4
applications can be removed. The protocol stack is as follows:
+----------------------+
|
appv4/v6
| (appv4/v6 - applications
+----------------------+
supporting both IPv4 and IPv6)
|
TCP / UDP / others
| (transport protocols - TCP,
+----------------------+
UDP, and so on)
|
IPv4 | IPv6
| (IP protocols supported/
+----------------------+
enabled in the OS)

MIGRATION STRATEGIES TO IPv6
249
Case 4: Applications supporting both IPv4 and IPv6 in an IPv4-only node. Appli-
cations are ported for both IPv4 and IPv6 support, but the same applications
may also have to work when IPv6 is not being used (e.g., disabled from the
OS). The protocol stack is as follows:
+----------------------+
|
appv4/v6
| (appv4/v6 - applications
+----------------------+
supporting both IPv4 and IPv6)
|
TCP / UDP / others
| (transport protocols - TCP,
+----------------------+
UDP, and so on)
|
IPv4
| (IP protocols supported/
+----------------------+
enabled in the OS)
The ﬁrst two cases are not interesting in the longer term; only a few applications
are inherently IPv4 or IPv6 speciﬁc and should work with both protocols without
having to care about which one is being used.
It should be noted that the transition from a pure IPv4 network to a network where
IPv4 and IPv6 coexist brings a number of extra security considerations that need to
be taken into account when deploying IPv6 and operating the dual-protocol network
and the associated transition mechanisms (7, 31).
Figure 7.10 depicts some basic scenarios of carrier-based IPv6 support. Case (a)
and (b) represent traditional environments where the carrier link supports either a
clear channel that is used to connect, say, two IPv4 routers, or is IP aware. (In each
case, the “cloud” on the left could also be the IPv4 Internet or the IPv6 Internet.)
In Case (c), the carrier link is used to connect as a transparent link two IPv6
routers; the carrier link is not (does not need to be) aware that it is transferring IPv6
PDUs. In Case (d), the carrier system is IPv4 aware, so the use of that environment
to support IPv6 requires IPv6 to operate in a tunneled mode over the non-IPv6 cloud,
which is a capability of IPv6.
In Case (e), the carrier infrastructure needs to provide a gateway function between
the IPv4 and the IPv6 world (this could entail re-packing the IP PDUs from the v4
format to the v6 format). Case (f) is the ideal long-term scenario where the “world
has converted to IPv6” and “so did the carrier network.”
In Case (g), the carrier IP-aware network provides a conversion function to support
both IPv4 (as a baseline) and IPv6 (as a “new technology”) handoffs. Possibly a dual-
stack mechanism is utilized. In Case (h), the carrier IPv6-aware network provides a
support function for IPv6 (as a baseline) and also a conversion function to support
legacy IPv4 islands.
Some user organizations have expressed concerns about security in an IPv6 envi-
ronment, fundamentally because of tunneling and ﬁrewall issues. The interested
reader should consult Reference 7 for an extensive discussion of this topic and for
tools and techniques to address the issues. Even network/security administrators that
operate in a pure IPv4 environment need to be aware of IPv6-related security issues.
In a standard IPv4 environment where IPv6 is not explicitly supported, any form
of IPv6-based tunneling trafﬁc must be considered abnormal, malicious trafﬁc. For

250
LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY: IPv6 TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
(a)
(IPv4
(IPv4
Network
(PHY)
(b)
(IPv4
(IPv4
Network
(IPv4-based)
(c)
IPv6
IPv6
Network
(PHY)
(d)
IPv6
IPv6
Network
(IPv4-based)
(e)
(IPv4
IPv6
Network
IPv4 to IPv6
(f)
IPv6
IPv6
Network
(IPv6-based)
(g)
(IPv4
IPv6
(IPv4
Network
IPv4 to IPv6
(h)
IPv6
IPv6
(IPv4
Network
IPv6 to IPv4
Carrier (telco)
Carrier (telco)
Carrier (telco)
Carrier (telco)
Carrier (telco)
Carrier (telco)
Carrier (telco)
Carrier (telco)
FIGURE 7.10
Support of IPv6 in carrier networks.
example, unconstrained 6to4-based trafﬁc should be blocked (as noted elsewhere
6to4 is a transitional mechanism intended for individual independent nodes to con-
nect IPv6 over the greater Internet). Most commercial-grade IPv4 ﬁrewalls block
the IP protocol 41, the 6to4, and the tunnel protocol, unless it has been explicitly
enabled (32).
7.8.2
Residential Broadband Services in an IPv6 Environment
One of the challenges related to the deployment of IPv6 is how to continue to
support IPv4 services in residential broadband environments at the same time as
the users migrate to a mixed IPv4 and IPv6 operational model. This is especially
critical as IPv6 is technically incompatible with IPv4; this forces the introduction of
some new concepts that change the present operation of broadband networks and has
ramiﬁcations on how IPv6 can be offered to residential subscribers. Three approaches
can be used, as covered in Reference 33 on which this discussion is based:
1. IPv6 support in telco environments using PPP over Ethernet (PPPoX) and/or
asynchronous transfer mode (ATM) as deﬁned in TR-187 of the Broadband
Forum.

MIGRATION STRATEGIES TO IPv6
251
2. IPv6 support using PPPoX in conjunction with the bridged residential gateway
(RG).
3. IPv6 support using IP over ethernet (IPoE) as deﬁned in the Broadband Forum
speciﬁcation TR-177.
Approach 1. The introduction of IPv6 using PPPoX/layer 2 tunneling protocol
(L2TP) has no implications on the access and aggregation network elements. PPP
session authentication for IPv6 is identical to IPv4, using password authentication
protocol/challenge handshake authentication protocol (PAP/CHAP) or option 82.
IPv4 and IPv6 authentication can be done in a single authentication phase to RADIUS
(remote authentication dial-in user service). Since PPPoX IPv6 control protocol
(CP) is only deﬁning the LLA, global IPv6 addresses are typically assigned using
DHCP or SLAAC. To support an IPv6 routed RG using the PPP termination and
aggregation/L2TP network server (PTA/LNS) model, the following mechanisms are
required between the RG and the broadband network gateway/broadband remote
access server (BNG/BRAS) to ensure IPv6 connectivity:
r PPPoX IPv6 CP is used for LLA assignment
r DHCPv6 preﬁx delegation (IA-PD—identity association for preﬁx delegation)
is used to obtain a preﬁx for LAN address assignment
r Stateless DHCPv6 is used to obtain additional conﬁguration parameters
r When the numbered RG model is deployed, stateful DHCPv6 (identity associa-
tion for non-temporary addresses [IA-NA]) is used to obtain an RG management
IPv6 address; in case of an unnumbered RG model, this is not required
r Route advertisements are required to assign the default gateway assignment
Approach 2. The utilization of the Bridged RG requires the following:
r PPPoX IPv6CP is used for LLA assignment
r SLAAC is used for the host to obtain a global-Unicast IPv6 address
r Stateless DHCP is used to obtain additional conﬁguration parameters
r Route advertisements are used to assign the default gateway assignment
Therefore, to support IPv6 in a telco environment, PPPoX for IPv6 imposes no
different requirements on N:1 virtual local area network (VLAN) or 1:1 VLAN
architectures or on a bridged gateway model, compared to IPv4. However, PPPoX
for IPv6 will always impact the BNG/BRAS, CPE, and home gateway using a routed
gateway model.
Approach 3. The implications for introducing IPv6 IPoE mainly depend on the
VLAN model used (1:1 or N:1) and the operational model of the home gateway
(bridged or routed). The impact of IPv6 support for IPoE in a bridged RG model
depends on whether DHCP or SLAAC is used to the end device. When deploying
DHCP, the key difference from the routed RG IPoE model arises from the fact that

252
LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY: IPv6 TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
there is no DHCP PD address required and only an IA address is assigned to the
host. Care must be taken to ensure communication between IPv6 devices in the home
remains local and is not sent through the BNG.
7.8.3
Deployment Opportunities
There was a lack of ubiquitous IPv6 utilization as of early 2013; this is partly due
to the fact that the number of IPv6 nodes is rather low. However, IPv6 rollout has
started to get traction. The approaching exhaustion of IPv4 address space will bring
about a situation where ISPs are faced with a choice between one or more of three
major alternatives (24):
1. Squeeze the use of IPv4 addresses even harder than today, using smaller and
smaller address blocks per enterprise customer, and possibly trading address
blocks with other ISPs.
2. Install multiple layers of NAT or share IPv4 addresses by other methods, such
as address-plus-port mapping.
3. Deploy IPv6 and operate IPv4–IPv6 coexistence and interworking mechanisms.
RFC 5514 (April 2009) proposed to vastly increase the number of IPv6 hosts
by transforming all social networking platforms into IPv6 networks. This would
immediately add millions of IPv6 hosts to the existing IPv6 Internet.
Hosts (PCs, servers) and network infrastructure (routers, switches) are generally
IPv6 ready at this time, but organizations may need to upgrade their overall end-to-end
environment. Service providers such as Google have already rolled out an IPv6 site
for customers already on that system. In fact, Google, Facebook, Yahoo!, Akamai, and
Limelight Networks are among some of the larger companies that planed a one-day
test run of IPv6 addresses as part of World IPv6 Day, on June 8, 2011, to encourage
the transition to the new namespace. These organizations were planning to offer
their content over IPv6 for a 24-hour “test ﬂight,” with the goal of the Test Flight
Day being to motivate organizations across the industry—ISPs, hardware makers,
operating system (OS) vendors, and web companies—to prepare their services for
IPv6 to ensure a successful transition as IPv4 addresses run out. Internet users did
not need to do anything different on World IPv6 Day. Web services, ISPs, and OS
manufacturers were planning to be updating their systems to ensure Internet users
receive uninterrupted service. In rare cases, users may still experience connectivity
issues when visiting participating websites. Users were able to visit an IPv6 test site
to check if their connectivity was impacted. Organizations that wanted to bring their
company’s website online using IPv6 during the World IPv6 Day needed to make it
IPv6 accessible using dual-stack technology and provide an AAAA record for the
site. Of course, IPv4 websites continued to be accessible over IPv4 during the event.
According to the Internet Society (ISOC), the World IPv6 Day saw more than
1000 major website operators switch over to IPv6-compatible main pages in the most
extensive live run of the next-generation addressing protocol so far. The day turned

MIGRATION STRATEGIES TO IPv6
253
out to be a technological success. Approximately two-thirds of the participants were
reportedly so pleased with the results they left IPv6 enabled on their equipment going
forward. Nonetheless, just 0.16% of Facebook users were IPv6 natives and 0.04%
were using 6to4 tunneling capabilities, delivering around 1 million IPv6 visitors over
the course of the day.
In DNS, host names are mapped to IPv6 addresses by AAAA (also known as
Quad A) resource records (RRs). The IETF speciﬁes the use AAAA RR for forward
mapping and pointer RRs (PTRs) for reverse mapping. The IPv6 AAAA RR approach
is described in RFC 3596. The forward DNS entry for an IPv6 entry in entered using
AAAA. It can be entered using the full IPv6 address or by using the shorthand ::
notation. PTRs are the opposite of AAAA RRs and are used in reverse map zone ﬁles
to map an IPv6 address to a host name.
Tier 1 telecommunication ﬁrms have been upgrading their infrastructure over the
past few years in anticipation of the eventual transition. The same has occurred for
content providers. For example, Comcast has begun assigning IPv6 addresses to
its cable modem customers in a “native dual-stack” conﬁguration as of early 2011;
under this conﬁguration, customers have both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses and can access
content and services over both systems. Comcast’s ﬁrst 25 IPv6-enabled customers
went live January 11, 2011, in the Littleton, Colo. TimeWarner Cable has already
signed up commercial customers on IPv6 and was planning to begin residential IPv6
trials in early 2011. TimeWarner Cable is also expected to adopt a dual-stack approach
similar to that of Comcast. Domain infrastructure company VeriSign will also provide
business services to assist companies with the transition in 2011 (4).
Having ISPs deploy IPv6 to customers’ sites, in addition to IPv4 and without extra
charge, is a way to break the existing impasse that has delayed IPv6 deployment:
ISPs wait for customer demand before deploying IPv6; customers do not demand
IPv6 as long as application vendors announce that their products work on existing
infrastructures (that are based on IPv4 with NATs); application vendors focus their
investments on NAT traversal compatibility as long as ISPs do not deploy IPv6.
However, most ISPs are not willing to add IPv6 to their current offerings at no charge
unless incurred investment and operational costs are small. For this, ISPs that provide
router customer premise equipment (CPE) to their customers have the most favorable
conditions: they can upgrade their router CPEs and can operate gateways between
their IPv4 infrastructures and the global IPv6 Internet to support IPv6 encapsulation
in IPv4. They then need no additional routing plans than those that already exist on
these IPv4 infrastructures. Encapsulation using 6to4 methods, as speciﬁed in RFC
3056, is nearly sufﬁcient for this: (i) it is simple; (ii) it is supported on many platforms
including PC-compatible appliances; (iii) open-source portable code is available; and
(iv) its stateless nature ensures good scalability. There is, however, a limitation of
6to4 that prevents ISPs from using it to offer full IPv6 unicast connectivity to their
customers. While an ISP that deploys 6to4 can guarantee that IPv6 packets outgoing
from its customer sites will reach the IPv6 Internet, and also can guarantee that packets
coming from other 6to4 sites will reach its customer sites, it cannot guarantee that
packets from native IPv6 sites will reach them. The problem is that a packet coming
from a native IPv6 address needs to traverse (somewhere on its way) a 6to4 relay

254
LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY: IPv6 TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
router to do the required IPv6/IPv4 encapsulation. There is no guarantee that routes
toward such a relay exist from everywhere, nor is there a guarantee that all such
relays do forward packets toward the IPv4 Internet. Also, if an ISP operates one or
several 6to4 relay routers and opens IPv6 routes toward them in the IPv6 Internet,
for the 6to4 preﬁx 2002::/16, it may receive in these relays packets destined to an
unknown number of other 6to4 ISPs. If it does not forward these packets, it creates
a “black hole” in which packets may be systematically lost, breaking some of the
IPv6 connectivity. If it does forward them, it can no longer dimension its 6to4 relay
routers in proportion to the trafﬁc of its own customers; QoS, at least for customers
of other 6to4 ISPs, will then not be guaranteed (34). To address these issues RFC
5569, 6rd—IPv6 Rapid Deployment, also known simply as 6rd, proposes to slightly
modify 6to4 so that:
1. Packets coming from the global Internet, entering 6rd gateways of an ISP are
only packets destined to customer sites of this ISP.
2. All IPv6 packets destined to 6rd customer sites of an ISP, and coming from
anywhere else on the IPv6 Internet, traverse a 6rd gateway of this ISP.
The principle of the RFC 5569 proposal is that to build on 6to4 and suppress its
limitation, it is sufﬁcient that:
1. 6to4 functions are modiﬁed to replace the standard 6to4 preﬁx 2002::/16 by an
IPv6 preﬁx that belongs to the ISP-assigned address space, and to replace the
6to4 anycast address by another anycast address chosen by the ISP.
2. The ISP operates one or several 6rd gateways (upgraded 6to4 routers) at its
border between its IPv4 infrastructure and the IPv6 Internet.
3. CPEs support IPv6 on their customer-site side and support 6rd (upgraded 6to4
function) on their provider side.
There is no guarantee that this proposal will be broadly accepted, but it represents
one press-time approach for IPv6 deployment.
REFERENCES
1. Minoli D. IP Multicast with Applications to IPTV and Mobile DVB-H. New York: Wiley;
2008.
2. Minoli D. Satellite Systems Engineering in an IPv6 Environment. Francis and Taylor;
2009.
3. Minoli D. Voice Over IPv6 – Architecting the Next-Generation VoIP. New York: Elsevier;
2006.
4. Rashid FY. IPv4 Address Exhaustion Not Instant Cause for Concern with IPv6 in Wings,
Eweek, 2011-02-01.
5. The IPv4 Address Report, Online resource, http://www.potaroo.net.

REFERENCES
255
6. Minoli D, Amoss J. Handbook of IPv4 to IPv6 Transition Methodologies For Institutional
& Corporate Networks. New York: Auerbach/CRC; 2008.
7. Minoli D, Kouns J. Security in an IPv6 Environment. Taylor and Francis; 2009.
8. An IPv6 Security Guide for U.S. Government Agencies—Executive Summary, The IPv6
World Report Series, Volume 4 February 2008, Juniper Networks, 1194 North Mathilda
Avenue, Sunnyvale, CA 94089 USA.
9. Kaeo M, Green D, Bound J, Pouffary, Y. IPv6 Security Technology Paper. North American
IPv6 Task Force (NAv6TF) Technology Report, July 22, 2006.
10. Lioy A. Security Features of IPv6Security Features of IPv6, Chapter 8 of Internet-
working IPv6 with Cisco Routers by Silvano Gai McGraw-Hill, 1998; also available
at www.ip6.com/us/book/Chap8.pdf.
11. Johnson D, Perkins C, Arkko J. Mobility Support in IPv6. RFC 3775, June 2004.
12. Hinden R, Deering S. IP Version 6 Addressing Architecture. RFC 4291, February 2006.
13. Machine-to-Machine Communications (M2M); M2M Service Requirements. ETSI TS
102 689 V1.1.1 (2010-08). 650 Route des Lucioles F-06921 Sophia Antipolis Cedex—
FRANCE.
14. Microsoft Corporation, MSDN Library, Internet Protocol, 2004, http://msdn.microsoft.
com.
15. Blanchet M. Special-Use IPv6 Addresses. draft-ietf-v6ops-rfc3330-for-ipv6-04.txt, Jan-
uary 15, 2008.
16. Hermann-Seton, P. Security Features in IPv6, SANS Institute 2002, As part of the Infor-
mation Security Reading Room.
17. Thomson S, Narten T, Jinmei T. IPv6 Stateless Address Autoconﬁguration. RFC 4862,
September 2007.
18. Donz´e F. IPv6 Autoconﬁguration. The Internet Protocol Journal, June 2004;7 (2). Pub-
lished Online, http://www.cisco.com.
19. Narten T, Draves R, Krishnan S. Privacy Extensions for Stateless Address Autoconﬁgu-
ration in IPv6. RFC 4941, September 2007.
20. Narten T, Nordmark E, Simpson W, Soliman H. Neighbor Discovery for IP version 6
(IPv6). RFC 4861, September 2007.
21. IPv6 Portal, http://www.ipv6tf.org.
22. Desmeules R. Cisco Self-Study: Implementing Cisco IPv6 Networks (IPv6). Cisco Press;
June 6, 2003.
23. Conta A, Deering S. Generic Packet Tunneling in IPv6 Speciﬁcation. RFC 2473, December
1998.
24. Carpenter B, Jiang S. Emerging Service Provider Scenarios for IPv6 Deployment. RFC
6036, October 2010.
25. Ertekin E, Christou C. IPv6 Header Compression. North American IPv6 Summit, June
2004.
26. Jonsson L-E, Pelletier G, Sandlund K. The RObust Header Compression (ROHC) Frame-
work. RFC 4995, July 2007.
27. Pelletier G, Sandlund K, Jonsson L-E, West M. RObust Header Compression (ROHC): A
Proﬁle for TCP/IP (ROHC-TCP). RFC 4996, July 2007.
28. Finking R, Pelletier G. Formal Notation for RObust Header Compression (ROHC-FN).
RFC 4997, July 2007.

256
LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY: IPv6 TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
29. Varada S, editor. IPv6 Datagram Compression. RFC 5172, March 2008.
30. 6NET. D2.2.4: Final IPv4 to IPv6 Transition Cookbook for Organizational/ISP (NREN)
and Backbone Networks. Version: 1.0 (4th February 2005), Project Number: IST-2001-
32603, CEC Deliverable Number: 32603/UOS/DS/2.2.4/A1.
31. Davies E, Krishnan S, Savola P. IPv6 Transition/Co-existence Security Considerations.
RFC 4942, September 2007.
32. Warﬁeld MH. Security Implications of IPv6”, 16th Annual FIRST Conference on Com-
puter Security Incident Handling, June 13–18, 2004—Budapest, Hungary.
33. Henderickx W. Making the Move to IPv6, alcatel-lucent White Paper, September 20, 2011.
34. Despres R. 6rd - IPv6 Rapid Deployment. RFC 5569, January 2010.

CHAPTER 8
LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY: MOBILE IPv6
TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
This chapter provides an in-depth view of mobile IPv6 (MIPv6). It starts with an
overview of the key concepts (Section 8.1) and then provides a more detailed protocol-
level description (Section 8.2). MIPv6 is speciﬁed in RFC 3775; this RFC is known as
the “MIPv6 base speciﬁcation.” For a more complete description of MIPv6 and several
extensions to the base speciﬁcation, the reader may wish to refer to Reference 1.
MIPv6 is one of several approaches that can be utilized to manage mobility in an
IoT/machine-to-machine (M2M) environment.
8.1
OVERVIEW
MIPv6 speciﬁes a protocol that allows nodes to remain reachable while moving
around in the IPv6 Internet. An entity that implements the MIPv6 protocol is a
MIPv6 entity. There are three types of entities deﬁned in the MIPv6 protocol:
r Mobile node (MN): A node that can change its point of attachment from one
link to another while still being reachable via its home address.
r Correspondent node (CN): A peer node with which an MN is communicating.
The CN may be either mobile or stationary. A CN does not necessarily require
MIPv6 support, but it does require IPv6 support.
Building the Internet of Things with IPv6 and MIPv6: The Evolving World of M2M Communications,
First Edition. Daniel Minoli.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
257

258
LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY: MOBILE IPv6 TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
r Home agent (HA): A router on an MN’s home link with which the MN has
registered its current care-of address (CoA) described below. While the MN is
away from home, the HA intercepts packets on the home link destined to the
MN’s home address, encapsulates them, and routes them to the MN’s CoA.
If an MN is not currently attached to its home network (also called the home
link1), the MN is said to be “away from home.” Each MN is identiﬁed by its home
address (which we also call stationary home address), regardless of its current point
of attachment to the remote network (e.g., the Internet); this is a globally unique,
explicit IPv6 address. While situated away from its home, on a foreign link (also
known as foreign network [FN]2), an MN is also associated with an “in-care-of-
address” known, in fact, as care-of address, or CoA, which provides information
about the MN’s current location. Clearly, the CoA changes depending on the cur-
rent location of the MN. The CoA is used for routing (i.e., delivering) IPv6 packets
addressed to an MN’s home address; packets sent to the MN’s home address are
transparently routed to the MN via its current CoA. The CoA must be a unicast
routable address, typically speciﬁed by the source address ﬁeld in the IPv6 header;
the IPv6 source address must be a topologically correct source address. The MN
is assumed to be seeking to communicate with a CN, also an IPv6-ready node.
The MIPv6 protocol enables IPv6 nodes to cache the binding of an MN’s home
address with its CoA; these underlying mechanisms ascertain that communications
(e.g., TCP sessions) are maintained while the MN is physically moving, and, thus,
connecting via an FNs. MIPv6 operations involve movement detection, IP address
conﬁguration, and location update. Table 8.1 provides some basic MIPv6 nomencla-
ture used in this chapter as deﬁned in Reference 2. Figure 8.1 depicts the basic MIPv6
environment.
The binding (association) between the two IP addresses utilized in MIPv6 (the
home address and the CoA) is kept at a well-known location, the HA, which is used to
support connectivity; the HA is a router in the MN’s home network. The CN performs
packet routing toward the MN using the routing header. The CN learns the position of
an MN by processing binding updates (BUs). Whenever the MN connects to an FN,
it sends a BU to the HA and CNs; an MN keeps a list of the CNs to which it sent a
BU. The recipients of the BUs reply with a binding acknowledgement (BA). Security
is a consideration; therefore, BU information requires protection and authentication;
broadly speaking, IP Security (IPsec) can be used for this.3 Figure 8.2 depicts the
basic routing/forwarding operation of the HA (this is the tunnel mode).
Note: The MN may have multiple CoAs. The CoA sent to the HA in the BU is
called the primary CoA. For example, in the case of a wireless networks, an MN
might be reachable through multiple links at the same time (e.g., with overlapping
1The home link is deﬁned as the link on which a mobile node’s home subnet preﬁx is deﬁned.
2The FN can be the Internet or a network that is connected to the Internet.
3BUs can be protected using IPSec extensions headers (as covered in Chapter 2), or by the use of the
binding authorization data option (this option employs a binding management key [known as Kbm] which
can be established through the return-routability procedure).

OVERVIEW
259
TABLE 8.1
Basic MIPv6 Terminology
Term
Description
Binding
The association of the home address of an MN with an in-CoA for that
MN, along with the remaining lifetime of that association
Binding
authorization
Mechanism where correspondent’s registration is authorized, enabling
the recipient to conclude that the sender has the right to specify a new
binding
Binding cache
A cache of bindings for other nodes. This cache is maintained by HAs)
and CNs. The cache contains both “correspondent registration”
entries and “home registration” entries
Binding
management
key
(also known as Kbm) A key used for authorizing a binding cache
management message (e.g., BU or BA). Return-routability provides a
way to create a binding management key
BU list
A list that is maintained by each MN. The list has an item for every
binding that the MN has or is trying to establish with a speciﬁc other
node. Both correspondent and home registrations are included in this
list. Entries from the list are deleted as the lifetime of the binding
expires
Care-of address
(CoA)
A unicast routable IPv6 address associated with an MN while visiting a
foreign link; the subnet preﬁx of this IP address is a foreign subnet
preﬁx. Among the multiple CoAs that an MN may have at any given
time (e.g., with different subnet preﬁxes), the one registered with the
MN’s HA for a given home address is called its “primary” CoA
Care-of init
cookie
A cookie sent to the CN in the care-of test init message, to be returned
in the care-of test message
Care-of keygen
token
A keygen token sent by the CN in the Care-of test message
Cookie
A cookie is a random number used by an MN to prevent spooﬁng by a
bogus CN in the return-routability procedure
Correspondent
node (CN)
A peer node with which an MN is communicating. The CN may be
either mobile or stationary
Correspondent
registration
A return-routability procedure followed by a registration, run between
the MN and a CN
Destination option
Options that are carried by the IPv6 DESTINATION OPTIONS
extension header. Destination options include optional information
that is examined only by the IPv6 node given as the destination
address in the IPv6 header, not by routers in between. MIPv6 deﬁnes
one new destination option, the home address destination option
Foreign link
Any link other than the MN’s home link. Also known as FN
Foreign subnet
preﬁx
Any IP subnet preﬁx other than the MN’s home subnet preﬁx
Home address
A unicast routable address assigned to an MN, used as the permanent
address of the MN; this address is within the MN’s home link.
Standard IP routing mechanisms will deliver packets destined for an
MN’s home address to its home link. MNs can in principle have
multiple home addresses, for instance when there are multiple home
preﬁxes on the home link
(continued )

260
LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY: MOBILE IPv6 TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
TABLE 8.1
(Continued)
Term
Description
Home agent (HA)
A router on an MN’s home link with which the MN has registered its
current CoA. While the MN is away from home, the HA intercepts
packets on the home link destined to the MN’s home address,
encapsulates them, and tunnels them to the MN’s registered CoA
HA list
HAs need to know which other HAs are on the same link. This
information is stored in the HA list; the list is used for informing
MNs during dynamic HAAD
Home init cookie
A cookie sent to the CN in the home test init (HoTi) message, to be
returned in the home test (HoT) message
Home keygen token
A keygen token sent by the CN in the HoT message
Home registration
A registration between the MN and its HA, authorized by the use of
IPsec
Home subnet preﬁx
The IP subnet preﬁx corresponding to an MN’s home address
Interface identiﬁer
A number used to identify a node’s interface on a link. The interface
identiﬁer is the remaining low-order bits in the node’s IP address
after the subnet preﬁx
IP Security (IPsec)
security
association
A cooperative relationship formed by the sharing of cryptographic
keying material and associated context. SAs are simplex; that is,
two SAs are needed to protect bidirectional trafﬁc between two
nodes, one for each direction
Keygen token
A number supplied by a CN in the return-routability procedure to
enable the MN to compute the necessary binding management key
for authorizing a BU
Layer 2 (L2)
handover
A process by which the MN changes from one link-layer connection
to another
Layer 3 (L3)
handover
Subsequent to an L2 handover, an MN detects a change in an on-link
subnet preﬁx that would require a change in the primary CoA. For
example, a change of access router subsequent to a change of
wireless access point typically results in an L3 handover
Link-layer address
A link-layer identiﬁer for an interface, such as IEEE 802 addresses on
Ethernet links
Mobility message
A message containing a mobility header
Nonce
Random numbers used internally by the CN in the creation of keygen
tokens related to the return-routability procedure. The nonces are
not speciﬁc to an MN and are kept secret within the CN
Registration
The process during which an MN sends a BU to its HA or a CN,
causing a binding for the MN to be registered
Return-routability
procedure
A procedure that authorizes registrations by the use of a cryptographic
token exchange
Routing header
A routing header may be present as an IPv6 header extension and
indicates that the payload has to be delivered to a destination IPv6
address in some way that is different from what would be carried
out by standard Internet routing
Unicast routable
address
An identiﬁer for a single interface such that a packet sent to it from
another IPv6 subnet is delivered to the interface identiﬁed by that
address

OVERVIEW
261
MN
Home
Network
Destination IPv6 Host in
Session with a MN
Access Router (AR):
The MN’s default router
Interconnecting Network
(e.g., Internet)
Foreign Network
FN
MN
Home Agent
An IPv6-enabled router that
maintains an association between
the MN’s “Home Address” and its
“Care-of address” while
“away from home”
An IPv6 Host that Maintains network
connectivity using its “Home Address”,
regardless of which link (or network) it is
connected to
HA
Correspondent Node
CN
Mobile Node
MN
FIGURE 8.1
Basic MIPv6 environment.
wireless cells). The MN must ensure that its primary CoA always has a preﬁx that is
advertised by its current default router.
Note: An MN may use various and multiple types of network interfaces to obtain
durable and wide-area network connectivity, for example using protocols such as
IEEE 802.2, 802.11, 802.16, cellular radios, etc. Note, however, that while an MN
may have several CoA but only one, called the primary CoA, can be registered with
its HA and the CNs. There are cases where it is desirable for the MN to get Internet
access through multiple accesses simultaneously, in which case the MN would be
conﬁgured with multiple active IPv6 CoAs. In RFC 5648, MIPv6 and Network
Mobility (NEMO) basic support are extended to allow the binding of more than one
CoA to a home address.
At least one IPv6-capable router on the home network must be able to act as HA.
The HA supports the following functions:
– Maintains the MN’s binding information;
– Intercepts packets that arrive at the MN’s home network and whose destination
address is its HA;
– Tunnels (i.e., provides IPv6 encapsulation) these packets to the MN; and
– Provides reverse tunneling from the MN to the CN (i.e., provides IPv6 de-
encapsulation).
– MIPv6 makes use of IPv6 packet formats and procedures, and, furthermore,

262
LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY: MOBILE IPv6 TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
Internet
Internet
Tunnel
Header
Tunnel
Header
IPsrc = HA address
IPdst = HA address
IPdst = CoA address
IPsrc = CoA address
IPsrc = Stationary H(ome) address
IPdst = CN address
de-encapsulate as follows
Header
IPsrc = CN address
IPdst = Stationary H(ome) address
Header
Data
Header
Header
Data
Data
Data
IPsrc = CN address
IPdst = Stationary H(ome) address
Correspondent Node
Header
Data
Home Network
3
3
2
2
encapsulate (tunnel) 
as follows
1
1
IPsrc = Stationary H(ome) address
IPdst = CN address
Correspondent Node
Header
Data
3
3
1
2
HA
Data
Data
MN
Foreign
Network
1
MN
Foreign
Network
Home
Agent
Home Network
2
HA
Home
Agent
FIGURE 8.2
HA tunneling.
1. Establishes new extension header, speciﬁcally the mobility header (described
further in Section 8.2).
2. Adds a new routing header type (routing header type 2); MIPv6 deﬁnes a
routing header that allows packets to be routed directly from a CN to MN via
the MN’s CoA. This is achieved by inserting the MN’s CoA into the IPv6
destination address ﬁeld. Once the packet arrives at the location speciﬁed by
the CoA, the MN retrieves its home address from the routing header; this is then
used as the ﬁnal destination of the packet. The newly deﬁned routing header
uses a different type than the type used for “regular” IPv6 routing; this, for
example, allows ﬁrewalls to utilize different security rules for MIPv6 packets
that would be used for source-routed IPv6 packets (see Fig. 8.3). And,

OVERVIEW
263
Next Header = 43
Routing Header
IPv6 Basic Header
Routing Header
Next Header
Reserved
Home Address
Hdr Ext Length
Routing Type = 2
Segments Left = 1
FIGURE 8.3
New routing header type for MIPv6.
3. Adds a new destination option; The destination option extension header is used
to support home address option. This option is utilized in a packet sent by an
MN while it is on an FN to inform the recipient of the MN’s home address (see
Fig. 8.4).
HA address discovery (HAAD) is an important mechanism. MIPv6 introduces
four new Internet control message protocol version 6 (ICMPv6) messages to support
its processes. Two of the new ICMPv6 messages are employed in the dynamic
home agent address discovery (DHAAD) process; these messages support the (i)
HAAD request (using the HA’s anycast address of its own home subnet preﬁx)
and (ii) HAAD reply. The other two ICMPv6 are used for renumbering and mobile
conﬁguration mechanisms; these messages support (i) mobile preﬁx solicitation and
(ii) mobile preﬁx advertisement. The utilization of these four ICMPv6 messages plus
the neighbor discovery protocol (NDP) makes MIPv6 independent of the underlying
(layer 2) networking technology.
The NDP is modiﬁed with MIPv6 to support requisite mobility functions, as fol-
lows. The modiﬁed router advertisement message format has a single ﬂag indicating
HA service. The modiﬁed preﬁx information option format allows a router to adver-
tise its global address. Other modiﬁcations include: (i) a new advertisement interval
option format; (ii) a new HA information option format; and (iii) changes to sending
router advertisements.
Next Header = 60
Destination Header
IPv6 Basic Header
Destination Header
Next Header
Home Address
Hdr Ext Length
Option Type
Option Length
FIGURE 8.4
Destination option extension header.

264
LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY: MOBILE IPv6 TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
Communications with MNs takes place in two ways:
1. Bidirectional tunneling. In this approach, the HA plays a crucial role, although
this implies that the network trafﬁc to this node can be high; however, the CN
has no requirements related to mobility support—also, the MNs have no direct
visibility related to the CN. This approach was depicted in Figure 8.2.
2. Direct routing (aka route optimization). In this approach, the HA plays a lesser
role, but the overall mechanism is more complex. To support this operation,
the MNs have three basic functions to manage communication (in addition
to gaining access to the FN): (i) perform IPv6 packet encapsulation and de-
encapsulation; (ii) send BUs and receive BAs (this entails processing the mobil-
ity header); and (iii) keep track of BUs that are sent. To support this operation,
the CNs have three basic functions to manage communication: (i) process the
mobility header (BUs, BAs); (ii) process/use routing headers type 2; and, (iii)
maintain a binding cache. This approach is depicted in Figure 8.5.
If a binding exists, the MN will send the packets directly to the CN; otherwise, if
a binding does not exist, the MN must use tunneling. MIPv6 route optimization as
described in RFC 3775 enables MNs and CNs to communicate via a direct routing
path despite changes in IP connectivity on the MN side. Both end nodes use a stable
“home address” in identifying the MN at stack layers above IP, while payload packets
are sent or received via a CoA that routes to the MN’s current network attachment.
MIPv6 swaps the home address and COA when a payload packet traverses the IP
layer. The association between an MN’s home address and CoA is the “binding” for
the MN. It is the responsibility of the MN to update its binding at the CN through
a “correspondent registration” when it changes IP connectivity. A correspondent
registration further involves the MN’s HA, which proxies the MN at the home address
and mainly serves as a relay for payload packets exchanged with CNs that do not
support route optimization. The MN keeps the HA up to date about its current CoA
by means of “home registrations” (3). See Figure 8.6.
Higher-layer protocols, for example user datagram protocol (UDP), transmission
control protocol (TCP), real-time streaming protocol (RTSP), real-time transport
protocol (RTP), generally treat the MN’s home address as its IP address for most
packets. For packets sent that are part of transport-level connections established
while the MN was at home, the MN must use its home address; for packets sent that
are part of transport-level connections that the MN may still be using after moving
to a new location, the MN also uses its home address.
In summary, the MIPv6 protocol requires the MN to own a home address and
to have an assigned HA to the MN. The MN needs to register with the HA in
order to enable its reachability and mobility, when away from its home link. The
registration process itself may require an establishment of IPsec security associations
(SAs) and cryptographic material between the MN and the HA. Alternatively, the
registration process may be secured using a mobility message authentication option,
which enables IPv6 mobility in an MN without having to establish an IPsec SA
with its HA. According to the latest RFCs, the only SA that is preconﬁgured is

Internet
Direct Routing: MN → CN
Direct Routing: CN → MN
Internet
IPdst = HA address
IPsrc = CoA address
Header
Data
Correspondent Node
Correspondent Node
Home Network
Stationary
H(ome) address
IPdst = CoA address
IPsrc = CN address
Header
Data
Stationary
H(ome) address
IPdst = CN address
IPsrc = CoA address
Header
BU
Stationary
H(ome) address
Correspondent Node
1
2
1
H A
BA
BU
BU
BU : Binding Update
BA : Binding Acknowledgment
Data
Data
IPv6 header
Dest text
(MIP options)
IPv6 Header
Op. Dest.
Mobility
Header
IPv6 Header Routing Ext. Hdr
(type 2)
MN
Foreign
Network
1
MN
Foreign
Network
Home
Agent
Home Network
H A
Home
Agent
Internet
1
MN
Foreign
Network
Home Network
HA
Home
Agent
FIGURE 8.5
Direct communication.

266
LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY: MOBILE IPv6 TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
FIGURE 8.6
CoA registration.
a shared secret between the MN and the home authentication, authorization, and
accounting (AAA) server; this is in contrast with an earlier version of the MIPv6
model. Automatically providing the collection of home address, HA address, and
keying material is generally referred to as the MIPv6 bootstrapping problem (4).
Table 8.2 provides a listing (from reference 5) of MIPv6 implementations as
available in the recent past.
The sections that follow provide more in-depth information about MIPv6 processes
and procedures.
8.2
PROTOCOL DETAILS
The sections that follow are summarized from relevant RFCs, including RFC 3775.
Only a subset of concepts is described; the interested reader should always consult the

PROTOCOL DETAILS
267
TABLE 8.2
Recent Implementations on MIPv6 Technology (Partial List)
r 6 Wind
r Cisco—HA
r Elmic systems now Treck Inc.
r Ericsson
r HP—HP-UX (HA, CN) and Tru64 (HA, CN)
r Keio University (wide) —HA, MN, CN, and IPsec
r Microsoft Window XP, Vista
r NEC-MN, HA, CN, and IPsec
r Nokia-MN, HA, CN
r Samsung—MN, CN
r Siemens
r University of Helsinski (Linux) —MN, CN
r 6NET MIPv6 implementation survey
primary RFC for complete and detailed information. The key concepts were already
discussed in Section 8.1, but this section provides additional details.
8.2.1
Generic Mechanisms
8.2.1.1
MIPv6 Basic Operation
As noted, an MN is always addressable at its
home address, whether it is currently attached to its home link or is away from home.
The “home address” is an IP address assigned to the MN within its home subnet preﬁx
on its home link. While an MN is at home, packets addressed to its home address
are routed to the MN’s home link using traditional routing mechanisms. While an
MN is attached to some foreign link away from home, it is also addressable at one
or more CoAs. A CoA is an IP address associated with an MN that has the subnet
preﬁx of a particular foreign link. The MN acquires its CoA using traditional IPv6
mechanisms, such as stateless or stateful autoconﬁguration. As long as the MN stays
in this location, packets addressed to this CoA will be routed to the MN. The MN
may also accept packets from several CoAs, this being the case, for example, when
it is moving to a new location but still reachable at the previous link. The MIPv6
speciﬁcation requires that home and CoAs must be unicast routable addresses. The
association between an MN’s home address and CoA is known as a “binding” for
the MN. While away from home, an MN registers its primary CoA with a router
on its home link, requesting this router to function as the “HA” for the MN. The
MN performs this binding registration by sending a BU message to the HA. The HA
replies to the MN by returning a BA message. The exchange of BUs, BAs, and other
control messages is referred to as “signaling.”
Note: In addition to the binding cache, each HA also maintains an HA list. This
list has information about routers on the same link that is acting as an HA and is
used by the HAAD mechanism—a router is known to be acting as an HA, if it sends

268
LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY: MOBILE IPv6 TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
TABLE 8.3
Binding Cache Content
Content
Description
Home address
The home address of the MN for which this is the binding cache entry.
This ﬁeld is used as the key for searching the binding cache for the
destination address of a packet being sent
CoA
The CoA for the MN indicated by the home address ﬁeld in this
binding cache entry
Lifetime value
The lifetime value indicates the remaining lifetime for this binding
cache entry. The lifetime value is initialized from the lifetime ﬁeld
in the BU that created or last modiﬁed this binding cache entry
Flag
This ﬂag indicates whether or not this binding cache entry is a home
registration entry (applicable only on nodes that support HA
functionality)
Maximum value
The maximum value of the sequence number ﬁeld received in
previous BUs for this home address. The sequence number ﬁeld is
16 bits long (it uses modulo 216 math)
Usage information
Usage information for this binding cache entry. This is needed to
implement the cache replacement policy in use in the binding
cache. Recent use of a cache entry also serves as an indication that a
BRR should be sent when the lifetime of this entry nears expiration
a router advertisement in which the HA (H) bit is set. The HA maintains a separate
HA list for each link on which it is serving as an HA.
Any node communicating with an MN is referred to as a “correspondent node” of
the MN and may itself be either a stationary device or a mobile device. MNs are also
able to provide information about their current location to CNs. This happens through
the correspondent registration. As a part of this procedure, a return-routability test is
performed in order to authorize the establishment of the binding.
There are two possible modes for communications between the MN and a CN, as
previously noted, as follows:
r The ﬁrst mode, “bidirectional tunneling,” does not require MIPv6 support from
the CN and is available even if the MN has not registered its current binding with
the CN. Packets from the CN are routed to the HA and then tunneled to the MN.
Packets to the CN are tunneled from the MN to the HA (“reverse tunneled”)
and then routed normally from the home network to the CN. In this mode, the
HA uses proxy neighbor discovery to intercept any IPv6 packets addressed to
the MN’s home address on the home link. Each intercepted packet is tunneled
to the MN’s primary CoA.
r The second mode, “route optimization4” (also called above, “direct routing”),
requires the MN to register its current binding at the CN. Packets from the CN
can be routed directly to the CoA of the MN. When sending a packet to any IPv6
destination, the CN checks its cached bindings (see Table 8.3) for an entry for
4The acronym RO is also used by some practitioners.

PROTOCOL DETAILS
269
the packet’s destination address. If a cached binding for this destination address
is found, the node uses a new type of IPv6 routing header to route the packet to
the MN by way of the CoA indicated in this binding. Routing packets directly
to the MN’s CoA allows the shortest communications path to be used. It also
eliminates congestion at the MN’s HA and home link. In addition, the impact of
any possible failure of the HA or networks on the path to or from it is reduced.
When routing packets directly to the MN, the CN sets the destination address in
the IPv6 header to the CoA of the MN. A new type of IPv6 routing header is also
added to the packet to carry the desired home address. Similarly, the MN sets the
source address in the packet’s IPv6 header to its current CoAs. The MN adds a new
IPv6 “home address” destination option to carry its home address. The inclusion of
home addresses in these packets makes the use of the CoA transparent above the
network layer (e.g., at the transport layer).
Note: MIPv6 requires the MN to know its HA address, its own home address, and
the cryptographic materials (e.g., shared keys or certiﬁcates) needed to set up IPsec
SAs with the HA in order to protect MIPv6 signaling. The MIPv6 base protocol does
not specify any method to automatically acquire this information, which means that
network administrators are normally required to manually set conﬁguration data on
MNs and HAs. However, in real deployments, manual conﬁguration does not scale
as the MNs increase in number (6). A bootstrapping process can be beneﬁcial. Also,
according to the latest RFCs, the only SA that is preconﬁgured is a shared secret
between the MN and the home AAA server; this is in contrast with an earlier version
of the MIPv6 model.
8.2.1.2
IPv6 Protocol Extensions
MIPv6 deﬁnes a new IPv6 protocol, using
the mobility header. This header is used to carry the messages summarized in
Table 8.4.
8.2.1.3
New IPv6 Destination Option
MIPv6 deﬁnes a new IPv6 destination
option, the home address destination option. This option is described in more detail
in Section 8.2.2.
8.2.1.4
New IPv6 ICMP Messages
As alluded to earlier, MIPv6 also intro-
duces four new ICMPv6 message types, two for use in the dynamic HAAD mecha-
nism and two for renumbering and mobile conﬁguration mechanisms.
r HAAD request. The ICMP HAAD request message is used by an MN to initiate
the dynamic HAAD mechanism. The MN sends the HAAD request message to
the MIPv6 HA anycast address for its own home subnet preﬁx.
r HAAD reply. The ICMP HAAD reply message is used by an HA to respond to
an MN that uses the dynamic HAAD mechanism.
r Mobile preﬁx solicitation. The ICMP mobile preﬁx solicitation message is sent
by an MN to its HA while it is away from home. The purpose of the message is
to solicit a mobile preﬁx advertisement from the HA, which will allow the MN

270
LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY: MOBILE IPv6 TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
TABLE 8.4
Mobility Header Messages
Message
Description
HoTi
HoT
These messages are used to perform the return-routability procedure
from the MN to a CN
Care-of test init
Care-of test
BU
Message is used by an MN to notify a CN or the MN’s HA of its current
binding. The BU sent to the MN’s HA to register its primary CoA is
marked as a “home registration”
BA
Message is used to acknowledge receipt of a BU, if an acknowledgement
was requested in the BU, the BU was sent to an HA, or an error
occurred
BRR
Message is used by a CN to request an MN to re-establish its binding
with the CN. This message is typically used when the cached binding
is in active use, but the binding’s lifetime is close to expiration. The
CN may use, for instance, recent trafﬁc and open transport layer
connections as an indication of active use
Binding error
Message is used by the CN to signal an error related to mobility, such as
an inappropriate attempt to use the home address destination option
without an existing binding
to gather preﬁx information about its home network. This information can be
used to conﬁgure and update home address(es) according to changes in preﬁx
information supplied by the HA.
r Mobile preﬁx advertisement. An HA will send a mobile preﬁx advertisement
to an MN to distribute preﬁx information about the home link while the MN
is traveling away from the home network. This occurs in response to a mobile
preﬁx solicitation with an advertisement, or by an unsolicited advertisement.
8.2.1.5
Mobile IPv6 Security
MIPv6 incorporates a number of security fea-
tures. These include the protection of BUs both to HAs and to CNs, the protection of
mobile preﬁx discovery, and the protection of the mechanisms that MIPv6 uses for
transporting data packets:
r BUs are protected by the use of IPsec extension headers, or by the use of the
binding authorization data option (this option employs a binding management
key, Kbm, which can be established through the return-routability procedure).
r Mobile preﬁx discovery is protected through the use of IPsec extension headers.
r Mechanisms related to transporting payload packets—such as the home address
destination option and type 2 routing header—have been speciﬁed in a manner
that restricts their use in attacks.
Although these basic security mechanisms are adequate for some environments
and applications, there are limitations with these for other environments.

PROTOCOL DETAILS
271
8.2.2
New IPv6 Protocol, Message Types, and Destination Option
8.2.2.1
Mobility Header
The mobility header is an extension header used by
MNs, CNs, and HAs in all messaging related to the creation and management of
bindings. The subsections within this section describe the message types that may
be sent using the mobility header. The mobility header is identiﬁed by a next header
value of 135 in the immediately preceding header and has the format depicted in
Figure 8.7.
Payload
Proto
8-bit selector.  Identifies the type of header immediately following the 
mobility header.  Uses the same valu es as the IPv6 next header field. 
This field is intended to be used by a future extension. 
Header 
Len
8-bit unsigned integer, representing the length of the mobility header in 
units of 8 octets, excluding the first 8 octets. 
MH Type 
8-bit selector.  Identifies the particular mobility message in question. 
Reserved 
8-bit field reserved for future use.  The value must be initialized to zero by 
the sender and must be ignored by the receiver. 
Checksum 
16-bit unsigned integer.  This field contains the checksum of the mobility 
header.   
Message 
Data
A variable length field containing the data specific to the indicated mobility 
header type. 
The message types are as follows: 
Binding refresh 
request (BRR) 
Message
The BRR message requests a mobile node to update its mobility binding.  This message is sent 
by correspondent nodes. The BRR message uses the MH Type value 0.   
Home test init (HoTI) 
message
A mobile node uses the HoTI message to initiate the return-routability procedure and request a 
home keygen token from a correspondent node.  The Home test init message uses the MH 
type value 1.  This message is tunneled through the home agent when the mobile node is away 
from home.  Such tunneling should employ IPsec ESP in tunnel mode between the HA and the
mobile node.  This protection is indicated by the IPsec security policy database.   
Care-of test init 
(CoTI) message 
A mobile node uses the CoTI message to initiate the return-routability procedure and request a 
care-of keygen token from a correspondent node.  The Care-of test init message uses the MH 
type value 2.   
Home test (HoT) 
message
The HoT message is a response to the Home test init message and is sent from the 
correspondent node to the mobile node.  The HoT message uses the MH type value 3. 
Care-of test (CoT) 
message
The CoT message is a response to the CoT Init message and is sent from the 
correspondent node to the mobile node.  The CoT message uses the MH type value 4.  
Binding update (BU) 
message
The BU message is used by a mobile node to notify other nodes of a new CoA for 
itself.  The BU uses the MH type value 5.   
Binding
acknowledgement 
(BA) message 
The BA is used to acknowledge receipt of a BU. The BA has the MH type value 6.   
Binding error (BE) 
message
The BE message is used by the correspondent node to signal an error related to mobility, such 
as an inappropriate attempt to use the home address destination option without an existing 
binding.  The BE message uses the MH type value 7.    
FIGURE 8.7
Mobility header (details).

272
LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY: MOBILE IPv6 TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
FIGURE 8.8
Message data ﬁeld for BU (BU) message.
Two important messages are the BU message and the BA message.
The BU message is used by an MN to notify other nodes of a new CoA it has
acquired. The format of the message data ﬁeld in the mobility header for the BU
message is shown in Figure 8.8. The ﬁelds/ﬂags are described next.
– Acknowledge (A). The acknowledge (A) bit is set by the sending MN to request
a BA be returned upon receipt of the BU.
– Home registration (H). The home registration (H) bit is set by the sending MN
to request that the receiving node should act as this node’s HA. The destination
of the packet carrying this message must be that of a router sharing the same
subnet preﬁx as the home address of the MN in the binding.
– Link-local address compatibility (L). The link-local address compatibility (L)
bit is set when the home address reported by the MN has the same interface
identiﬁer as the MN’s link-local address.
– Key management mobility capability (K). If this bit is cleared, the protocol used
for establishing the IPsec SAs between the MN and the HA does not survive
movements; it may then have to be rerun.
– Reserved. These ﬁelds are unused. They must be initialized to zero by the sender
and must be ignored by the receiver.
– Sequence number. A 16-bit unsigned integer used by the receiving node to
sequence BUs and by the sending node to match a returned BA with this BU.
– Lifetime. 16-bit unsigned integer. The number of time units remaining before the
binding must be considered expired. A value of zero indicates that the binding
cache entry for the MN must be deleted.
– Mobility options. Variable-length ﬁeld of such length that the complete mobility
header is an integer multiple of 8 octets long. This ﬁeld contains zero or more
Type/Length/Value (TLV)-encoded5 mobility options. The following options are
valid in a BU:
5Type, Length, Value.

PROTOCOL DETAILS
273
Sequence
Status
Reserved
Lifetime
Mobility options
| K |
¨number
FIGURE 8.9
Message data ﬁeld for BA message.
r Binding authorization data option (this option is mandatory in BUs sent to
a CN);
r Nonce indices option;
r Alternate CoA option
The CoA is speciﬁed either by the source address ﬁeld in the IPv6 header or by the
alternate CoA option, if present. IPv6 source address must be a topologically correct
source address. BUs for a CoA that is not a unicast routable address must be silently
discarded. Similarly, the BU must be silently discarded if the CoA appears as a home
address in an existing binding cache entry, with its current location creating a circular
reference back to the home address speciﬁed in the BU (possibly through additional
entries).
The BA message is used to acknowledge the receipt of a BU. The format of the
message data ﬁeld in the mobility header for the BA message is shown in Figure 8.9.
The ﬁelds/ﬂags are described next.
– Key management mobility capability (K). If this bit is cleared, the protocol used
by the HA for establishing the IPsec SAs between the MN and the HA does not
survive movements (it may then have to be rerun).
– Reserved. These ﬁelds are unused. They must be initialized to zero by the sender
and must be ignored by the receiver.
– Status. 8-bit unsigned integer indicating the disposition of the BU. Values of
the status ﬁeld less than 128 indicate that the BU was accepted by the receiving
node. Values greater than or equal to 128 indicate that the BU was rejected by
the receiving node. The following status values were originally deﬁned:
0
BU accepted
1
Accepted but preﬁx discovery necessary
128
Reason unspeciﬁed
129
Administratively prohibited
130
Insufﬁcient resources

274
LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY: MOBILE IPv6 TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
131
Home registration not supported
132
Not home subnet
133
Not HA for this MN
134
Duplicate address detection failed
135
Sequence number out of window
136
Expired home nonce index
137
Expired care-of nonce index
138
Expired nonces
139
Registration type change disallowed
– Sequence number. The sequence number in the BA is copied from the sequence
number ﬁeld in the BU. It is used by the MN in matching this BA with an
outstanding BU.
– Lifetime. The granted lifetime, in time units of 4 s, for which this node should
retain the entry for this MN in its binding cache.
– Mobility options. Variable-length ﬁeld of such length that the complete mobility
header is an integer multiple of 8 octets long. This ﬁeld contains zero or more
TLV-encoded mobility options. The receiver must ignore and skip any options
which it does not understand.
BUs and BAs follow the rules discussed in RFC 37766 (7) and summarized in
Table 8.5.
A CN registration involves six message transmissions at the MN, totaling about
376 bytes. This signaling overhead may be acceptable if movements are infrequent.
For example, an MN that moves once every 30 min generates an average of 1.7 bps
of signaling trafﬁc. Higher mobility causes more substantial overhead, however. A
cell size of 100 m and a speed of 120 km/h yields a change in IP connectivity every
3 s and about 1000 bps of signaling trafﬁc. This is signiﬁcant compared to a highly
compressed voice stream with a typical data rate of 10,000 to 30,000 bps. Furthermore,
base MIPv6 requires MNs to renew a correspondent registration at least every 7 min.
The signaling overhead amounts to 7.16 bps if the MN communicates with a stationary
node. It doubles if both peers are mobile. This overhead may be negligible when the
nodes communicate, but it can be an issue for MNs that are inactive and stay at the
same location for a while because these MNs are typically designed to go to standby
mode to conserve battery power. Also, the periodic refreshments consume a fraction
of the wireless bandwidth that one could use more efﬁciently (3).
8.2.2.2
Mobility Options
Mobility messages can include zero or more mobility
options. This allows optional ﬁelds that may not be needed in every use of a particular
mobility header, as well as future extensions to the format of the messages. Such
options are included in the message data ﬁeld of the message itself, after the ﬁxed
portion of the message data. The presence of such options is be indicated by the
header Len of the mobility header. See Figure 8.10.
6RFC 3776 has been updated in RFC 4877.

PROTOCOL DETAILS
275
TABLE 8.5
BUs and BAs
MN Status
Message
Description
MN is away
from its home
BUs
When the MN is away from its home, the BUs sent by it to the
HA must support at least the following headers in the following
order:
IPv6 header (source = CoA, destination = HA)
Destination options header
Home address option (home address)
ESP header in transport mode
Mobility header
BU
Alternate CoA option (CoA)
BAs
The BA sent back to the MN when it is away from home must
support at least the following headers in the following order:
IPv6 header (source = HA, destination = CoA)
Routing header (type 2)
Home address
ESP header in transport mode
Mobility header
BA
MN is at home
BUs
When the MN is at home, the above rules are different since the
MN can use its home address as a source address; this typically
happens for the de-registration BU when the mobile is
returning home. Here the BUs must support at least the
following headers in the following order:
IPv6 header (source = home address, destination = HA)
ESP header in transport mode
Mobility header
BU
BAs
The BA messages sent to the home address must support at
least the following headers in the following order:
IPv6 header (source = HA, destination = home address)
ESP header in transport mode
Mobility header
BA

276
LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY: MOBILE IPv6 TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
FIGURE 8.10
Format of mobility options.
8.2.2.3
Home Address Option
The home address option is carried by the
destination option extension header (next header value = 60). It is used in a packet
sent by an MN while away from home, to inform the recipient of the MN’s home
address. See Figure 8.11.
8.2.2.4
Type 2 Routing Header
MIPv6 deﬁnes a new routing header variant,
the type 2 routing header, to allow the packet to be routed directly from a correspon-
dent to the MN’s CoA. The MN’s CoA is inserted into the IPv6 destination address
ﬁeld. Once the packet arrives at the CoA, the MN retrieves its home address from
the routing header; this address is used as the ﬁnal destination address for the packet.
The type 2 routing header is shown in Figure 8.12.
The new routing header uses a different type than deﬁned for “regular” IPv6
source routing, enabling ﬁrewalls to apply different rules to source routed packets
than to MIPv6. This routing header type (type 2) is restricted to carry only one IPv6
address. All IPv6 nodes that process this routing header must verify that the address
contained within is the node’s own home address in order to prevent packets from
being forwarded outside the node. The IP address contained in the routing header must
be a unicast routable address, being that it is the MN’s home address. Furthermore,
if the scope of the home address is smaller than the scope of the CoA, the MN must
discard the packet.
FIGURE 8.11
Format of home address option.

PROTOCOL DETAILS
277
8-bit selector.  Identifies the type of header immediately following the routing header.  
Next header 
Uses the same values as the IPv6 next header field. 
2 (8-bit unsigned integer); length of the routing header in 8-octet units, not including the 
Hdr ext Len 
first 8 octets. 
2 (8-bit unsigned integer). 
Routing type 
Segments
left
1 (8-bit unsigned integer). 
32-bit reserved field.  The value must be initialized to zero by the sender and must be 
Reserved 
ignored by the receiver. 
Home
address
The home address of the destination mobile node. 
FIGURE 8.12
Type 2 routing header.
8.2.3
Modiﬁcations to IPv6 Neighbor Discovery
Modiﬁcations to existing protocols are described herewith as described in RFC 3775.
8.2.3.1
Modiﬁed Router Advertisement Message
MIPv6 modiﬁes the for-
mat of the router advertisement message by the addition of a single ﬂag bit to indicate
that the router sending the advertisement message is serving as an HA on this link.
8.2.3.2
Modiﬁed Preﬁx Information Option
MIPv6 requires knowledge of
a router’s global address in building an HA list as part of the dynamic HAAD
mechanism. MIPv6 extends neighbor discovery deﬁned in RFC 2461 (8) to allow a
router to advertise its global address by the addition of a single ﬂag bit in the format
of a preﬁx information option for use in router advertisement messages.
8.2.3.3
New Advertisement Interval Option
MIPv6 deﬁnes a new advertise-
ment interval option, used in router advertisement messages to advertise the interval
at which the sending router sends unsolicited multicast router advertisements.

278
LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY: MOBILE IPv6 TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
8.2.3.4
New HA Information Option
MIPv6 deﬁnes a new HA information
option, used in router advertisements sent by an HA to advertise information speciﬁc
to this router’s functionality as an HA.
8.2.3.5
Changes to Sending Router Advertisements
The basic NDP
speciﬁcation limits routers to a minimum interval of 3s between sending unso-
licited multicast router advertisement messages from any given network interface
(limited by MinRtrAdvInterval and MaxRtrAdvInterval). This limitation, however,
is not suitable to providing timely movement detection for MNs. MNs detect their
own movement by learning the presence of new routers as the MN moves into wire-
less transmission range of them (or physically connects to a new wired network),
and by learning that previous routers are no longer reachable. MNs must be able
to quickly detect when they move to a link served by a new router, so that they
can acquire a new CoA and send BUs to register this CoA with their HA and to
notify CNs as needed. One method that can provide for faster movement detection
is to increase the rate at which unsolicited router advertisements are sent. MIPv6
relaxes this limit such that routers may send unsolicited multicast router advertise-
ments more frequently. This method can be applied where the router is expecting to
provide service to visiting MNs (e.g., wireless network interfaces), or on which it is
serving as an HA to one or more MNs (who may return home and need to hear its
advertisements).
8.2.4
Requirements for Various IPv6 Nodes
MIPv6 imposes speciﬁc requirements on the functions provided by different types of
IPv6 nodes (except for a generic IPv6 node acting as CN). These are summarized in
Table 8.6.
8.2.5
Correspondent Node Operation
IPv6 nodes with route optimization support must maintain a binding cache of bindings
for other nodes (as shown in Table 8.3); a separate Binding Cache is typically
maintained by each IPv6 node for each of its unicast routable addresses. Speciﬁcally,
CNs are required to support the following functionality:
r Processing mobility headers
r Packet processing
r Return-routability procedure
r Processing bindings
r Cache replacement policy
8.2.5.1
Processing Mobility Headers
Mobility header processing follows
the process of Figure 8.13. Subsequent checks depend on the particular mobility
header.

PROTOCOL DETAILS
279
TABLE 8.6
Requirements for Various IPv6 Nodes
Nodes
Requirement
IPv6 nodes
Any IPv6 node may at any time be a CN of an MN,
either sending a packet to an MN or receiving a
packet from an MN. There are no MIPv6-speciﬁc
requirements for such nodes and basic IPv6
capabilities are sufﬁcient. If an MN attempts to set
up route optimization with a node with only basic
IPv6 support, an ICMP error will signal that the
node does not support such optimizations and
communications will ﬂow through the HA
IPv6 nodes with support for
route optimization.
Nodes that implement route
optimization are a subset of all
IPv6 nodes on the Internet.
The ability of a CN to
participate in route
optimization is essential for
the efﬁcient operation of the
IPv6 environment
The node must be able to validate a home address
option using an existing binding cache entry
The node must be able to insert a type 2 routing header
into packets being sent to an MN
Unless the CN is also acting as an MN, it must ignore
type 2 routing headers and silently discard all
packets that it has received with such headers
The node should be able to interpret ICMP messages.
The node must be able to send Binding Error messages.
The node must be able to process Mobility Headers.
The node must be able to participate in a
return-routability procedure.
The node must be able to process BU messages.
The node must be able to return a BA.
The node must be able to maintain a Binding Cache of
the bindings received in accepted BUs.
The node should allow route optimization to be
administratively enabled or disabled. The default
should be enabled.
IPv6 routers. All IPv6 routers,
even those not serving as an
HA for MIPv6, have an effect
on how well MNs can
communicate
Every IPv6 router should be able to send an
advertisement interval option in each of its router
advertisements, to aid movement detection by MNs.
The use of this option in router advertisements
should be conﬁgurable
Every IPv6 router should be able to support sending
unsolicited multicast router advertisements at a fast
rate (the used rate should then be conﬁgurable)
Each router should include at least one preﬁx with the
router address (R) bit set and with its full IP address
in its router advertisements
Routers supporting ﬁltering packets with routing
headers should support different rules for type 0 and
type 2 routing headers so that ﬁltering of source
routed packets (type 0) will not necessarily limit
MIPv6 trafﬁc which is delivered via type 2 routing
headers
(continued )

280
LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY: MOBILE IPv6 TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
TABLE 8.6
(Continued)
Nodes
Requirement
IPv6 routers that serve as an
HA.
In order for an MN to
operate correctly while away
from home, at least one IPv6
router on the MN’s home
link must function as an HA
for the MN
Every HA must be able to maintain an entry in its binding
cache for each MN for which it is serving as the HA
Every HA must be able to intercept packets (using proxy
neighbor discovery) addressed to an MN for which it is
currently serving as the HA, on that MN’s home link,
while the MN is away from home
Every HA must be able to encapsulate such intercepted
packets in order to tunnel them to the primary CoA for
the MN indicated in its binding in the HA’s binding
cache
Every HA must support decapsulating reverse tunneled
packets sent to it from an MN’s home address. Every
HA must also check that the source address in the
tunneled packets corresponds to the currently
registered location of the MN
The node must be able to process mobility headers.
Every HA must be able to return a BA in response to a BU
Every HA must maintain a separate HA list for each link
on which it is serving as an HA
Every HA must be able to accept packets addressed to the
MIPv6 HA anycast address for the subnet on which it
is serving as an HA and must be able to participate in
dynamic HAAD
Every HA should support a conﬁguration mechanism to
allow a system administrator to manually set the value
to be sent by this HA in the HA preference ﬁeld of the
HA information option in router advertisements that it
sends
Every HA should support sending ICMP mobile preﬁx
advertisements and should respond to mobile preﬁx
solicitations. If supported, this behavior must be
conﬁgurable, so that HAs can be conﬁgured to avoid
sending such preﬁx advertisements according to the
needs of the network administration in the home
domain
Every HA must support IPsec encapsulating security
payload (ESP) for protection of packets belonging to
the return-routability procedure
Every HA should support the multicast group
membership control protocols. If this support is
provided, the HA must be capable of using it to
determine which multicast data packets to forward via
the tunnel to the MN
HAs may support stateful address autoconﬁguration for
MNs

PROTOCOL DETAILS
281
TABLE 8.6
(Continued)
Nodes
Requirement
IPv6 MNs
The node must maintain a BU list
The node must support sending packets containing a home address option
and follow the required IPsec interaction
The node must be able to perform IPv6 encapsulation and decapsulation
The node must be able to process type 2 routing header
The node must support receiving a binding error message
The node must support receiving ICMP errors
The node must support movement detection, CoA formation, and
returning home
The node must be able to process mobility headers
The node must support the return-routability procedure
The node must be able to send BUs
The node must be able to receive and process BAs
The node must support receiving a BRR by responding with a BU
The node must support receiving mobile preﬁx advertisements and
reconﬁguring its home address based on the preﬁx information
contained therein
The node should support use of the dynamic HAAD mechanism
The node must allow route optimization to be administratively enabled or
disabled. The default should be enabled
The node may support the multicast address listener part of a multicast
group membership protocol. If this support is provided, the MN must
be able to receive tunneled multicast packets from the HA
The node may support stateful address autoconﬁguration mechanisms
such as dynamic host conﬁguration protocol version 6 (DHCPv6) on
the interface represented by the tunnel to the HA
8.2.5.2
Packet Processing
Packet processing covers the following subactivi-
ties:
r Receiving packets with home address option
r Sending packets to an MN
r Sending binding error messages
r Receiving ICMP error messages
These subactivities are described next.
Receiving packets with home address option. The CN must process the option in
a manner consistent with exchanging the home address ﬁeld from the home address
option into the IPv6 header and replacing the original value of the source address
ﬁeld there. After all IPv6 options have been processed, the upper layers can process
the packet without the knowledge that it came originally from a CoA or that a home
address option was used.
Packets containing a home address option must be dropped if the given home
address is not a unicast routable address. MNs can include a home address destination

282
LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY: MOBILE IPv6 TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
Header Checksum 
Successful?
MH Type is a 
known value?
Is the Payload 
Proto field = 59 
(decimal)?
Is Header length 
correct?
yes
no
yes
yes
no
no
no
Discard Message
Discard Message & Issue 
Binding Error Message
Discard Message & Issue 
ICMP Parameter Problem Message
Discard Message & Issue 
ICMP Parameter Problem Message
Start
End
FIGURE 8.13
Mobility header processing.

PROTOCOL DETAILS
283
option in a packet if they believe the CN has a binding cache entry for the home address
of an MN. Packets containing a home address option must be dropped if there is no
corresponding binding cache entry. A corresponding binding cache entry must have
the same home address as appears in the home address destination option, and the
currently registered CoA must be equal to the source address of the packet. These
actions are not done for packets that contain a home address option and a BU. If
the packet is dropped due to these conditions, the CN must send the binding error
message.
Sending packets to an MN. Before sending any packet (except when sending an
IPv6 neighbor discovery packet), the sending node should examine its binding cache
for an entry for the destination address to which the packet is being sent. If the sending
node has a binding cache entry for this address, the sending node should use a type
2 routing header to route the packet to this MN (the destination node) by way of its
CoA. For example, if there are no additional routing headers in this packet beyond
those needed by MIPv6, the CN could set the ﬁelds in the packet’s IPv6 header and
routing header as follows:
r The destination address in the packet’s IPv6 header is set to the MN’s
home address (the original destination address to which the packet was being
sent).
r The routing header is initialized to contain a single route segment, containing
the MN’s CoA copied from the binding cache entry. The segments left ﬁeld is,
however, temporarily set to zero.
If, on the other hand, the sending node has no binding cache entry for the desti-
nation address to which the packet is being sent, the sending node simply sends the
packet normally, with no routing header. If the destination node is not an MN (or is an
MN that is currently at home), the packet will be delivered directly to this node and
processed normally by it. If, however, the destination node is an MN that is currently
away from home, the packet will be intercepted by the MN’s HA and tunneled to the
MN’s current primary CoA.
Sending binding error messages. A binding error message is sent directly to
the address that appeared in the IPv6 source address ﬁeld of the offending packet
(if the source address ﬁeld does not contain a unicast address, the binding error
message must not be sent). The home address ﬁeld in the binding error message is
copied from the home address ﬁeld in the home address destination option of the
offending packet, or set to the unspeciﬁed address if no such option appeared in the
packet.
Receiving ICMP error messages. When the CN has a binding cache entry for an
MN, all trafﬁc destined to the MN goes directly to the current CoA of the MN using a
routing header. Any ICMP error message caused by packets on their way to the CoA
will be returned in the normal manner to the CN. On the other hand, if the CN has no
binding cache entry for the MN, the packet will be routed through the MN’s home
link. In all cases, any meaningful ICMP error messages caused by packets from a CN
to an MN will be returned to the CN.

284
LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY: MOBILE IPv6 TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
TABLE 8.7
Return-Routability Actions of the CN
Action
Description
Receiving HoTi
messages
Upon receiving a HoTi message, the CN veriﬁes that the packet does
not include a home address destination option. Any packet carrying
a HoTi message that fails to satisfy all of these tests must be silently
ignored. Otherwise, in preparation for sending the corresponding
HoT message, the CN checks that it has the necessary material to
engage in a return-routability procedure. The CN must have a
secret Kcn and a nonce; it does not have this material yet, it must
produce it before continuing with the return-routability procedure
Receiving care-of
test init messages
Upon receiving a HoTi message, the CN veriﬁes that the packet does
not include a home address destination option. Any packet carrying
a care-of test init message that fails to satisfy all of these tests must
be silently ignored. Otherwise, in preparation for sending the
corresponding care-of test message, the CN checks that it has the
necessary material to engage in a return-routability procedure
Sending HoT
messages
The CN creates a home keygen token and uses the current nonce
index as the home nonce index; it then creates a HoT message and
sends it to the MN at the latter’s home address
Sending care-of test
messages
The CN creates a care-of keygen token and uses the current nonce
index as the care-of nonce index; it then creates a care-of test
message and sends it to the MN at the latter’s CoA
8.2.5.3
Return-Routability Procedure
Actions taken by a CN during the
return-routability procedure are listed in Table 8.7.
8.2.5.4
Processing Bindings
Messages related to bindings are as follows:
r Receiving BUs. Before accepting a BU, the receiving node must validate the
BU. This validation entails the following: the packet must contain a unicast
routable home address, either in the home address option or in the source
address if the home address option is not present; also, the sequence number
ﬁeld in the BU is greater than the sequence number received in the previous
valid BU for this home address, if any (if the receiving node has no BINDING
CACHE entry for the indicated home address, it must accept any sequence
number value in a received BU from this MN); also, other tests must pass.
r Requests to cache a binding. There is a need to process a valid BU that requests
a node to cache a binding, for which the home registration (H) bit is not set in
the BU. In this case, the receiving node should create a new entry in its binding
cache for this home address, or update its existing binding cache entry for this
home address, if such an entry already exists. The lifetime for the binding cache
entry is initialized from the lifetime ﬁeld speciﬁed in the BU, although this
lifetime may be reduced by the node caching the binding; the lifetime for the
binding cache entry cannot be greater than the lifetime value speciﬁed in the

PROTOCOL DETAILS
285
BU. Any binding cache entry must be deleted after the expiration of its lifetime.
The CN may refuse to accept a new binding cache entry if it does not have
sufﬁcient resources.
r Requests to delete a binding. There is a need to process a valid BU that requests
a node to delete a binding when the home registration (H) bit is not set in the BU.
Any existing binding for the given home address must be deleted. A binding
cache entry for the home address must not be created in response to receiving
the BU. If the binding cache entry was created by use of return-routability
nonces, the CN must ensure that the same nonces are not used again with the
particular home and CoA. If both nonces are still valid, the CN has to remember
the particular combination of nonce indexes, addresses, and sequence number
as illegal until at least one of the nonces has become too old.
r Sending BAs. A BA may be sent to indicate receipt of a BU. If the node accepts
the BU and creates or updates an entry for this binding, the status ﬁeld in the
BA must be set to a value less than 128. Otherwise, the status ﬁeld must be set
to a value greater than or equal to 128.
r Sending binding refresh requests (BRRs). If a binding cache entry being
deleted is still in active use when sending packets to an MN, then the next
packet sent to the MN will be routed normally to the MN’s home link. Com-
munication with the MN continues, but the tunneling from the home network
creates additional overhead and latency in delivering packets to the MN. If the
sender is aware that the binding cache entry is still in active use, it may send a
BRR message to the MN in an attempt to avoid this overhead and latency due to
deleting and recreating the binding cache entry. This message is always sent to
the home address of the MN. The CN may retransmit BRR messages as long as
the rate limitation is applied. The CN must stop retransmitting when it receives
a BU.
8.2.5.5
Cache Replacement Policy
A node may maintain a separate timer
for each entry in its binding cache. When creating or updating a binding cache entry
in response to a received and accepted BU, the node sets the timer for this entry to
the speciﬁed lifetime period; entries in a node’s binding cache are deleted after the
expiration of the lifetime speciﬁed in the BU from which the entry was created or last
updated. A node may also opt to drop any entry already in its binding cache in order
to make space for a new entry. If the node sends a packet to a destination for which
it has dropped the entry from its binding cache, the packet will be routed through the
MN’s home link; the MN can detect this and establish a new binding if necessary.
8.2.6
HA Node Operation
HA operations entail the following functions:
r Maintaining the binding cache and the HA list
r Processing mobility headers

286
LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY: MOBILE IPv6 TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
r Processing bindings
◦Primary CoA registration
◦Primary CoA de-registration
r Packet processing
◦Intercepting packets for an MN
◦Processing intercepted packets
◦Multicast membership control
◦Stateful Address autoconﬁguration
◦Handling reverse tunneled packets
◦Protecting return-routability packets
r Dynamic HAAD
r Sending preﬁx information to the MN
We have generally described this (or comparable) functionality earlier in this
chapter; hence we will not discuss it further herewith.
8.2.7
Mobile Node Operation
MN operations entail the following functions:
r Maintaining the BU list
r Processing bindings
◦Sending BUs to the HA
◦Correspondent registration
◦Receiving BAs
◦Receiving BRRs
r Processing mobility headers
r Packet processing
◦Sending packets while away from home
◦Interaction with outbound IPsec processing
◦Receiving packets while away from home
◦Routing multicast packets
◦Receiving ICMP error messages
◦Receiving binding error messages
r HA and preﬁx management
◦Dynamic HAAD
◦Sending mobile preﬁx solicitations
◦Receiving mobile preﬁx advertisements
r Movement support
◦Movement detection

PROTOCOL DETAILS
287
◦Forming new CoA
◦Using multiple CoA
◦Returning home
r Return-routability procedure
◦Sending test init messages
◦Receiving test messages
◦Protecting return-routability packets
r Retransmissions and rate limiting
The BU list records information for each BU sent by this MN, in which the lifetime
of the binding has not yet expired. The BU list includes all bindings sent by the MN
either to its HA or to remote CNs; it also contains BUs which are waiting for the
completion of the return-routability procedure before they can be sent. However,
for multiple BUs sent to the same destination address, the BU list contains only
the most recent BU (i.e., with the greatest sequence number value) sent to that
destination.
Other aspects of the MN operations are covered next; however, only some key
highlights are covered here; for additional details, consult RFC 3775 (2).
8.2.7.1
Packet Processing
For packets sent by an MN while it is at home, no
special MIPv6 processing is required.
While an MN is away from home, it can continue to use its home address or it
can use one or more CoAs as the source of the packet (thus eliminating the use of
a home address option in the packet.) Using the MN’s CoA as the source generally
has a lower overhead than using the MN’s home address, given that no extra options
need be used. Such packets can be routed normally, that is, directly between their
source and destination without relying on MIPv6 mechanisms. Summarizing this,
if the MN uses an address other than one of its home addresses as the source of
a packet sent while away from home, no special MIPv6 processing is required:
packets are simply addressed and transmitted in the same way as any normal IPv6
packet.
For packets sent by the MN while away from home using the MN’s home address
as the source, MIPv6 processing of the packet is required. As we noted, this can be
done in one of two ways:
r Route optimization: This approach to the delivery of packets does not require
going through the home network, and such, typically enables faster and more
reliable transmission. The MN needs to ensure that a binding cache entry exists
for its home address so that the CN can process the packet. An MN should
arrange to supply the home address in a home address option and must set the
IPv6 header’s source address ﬁeld to the CoA which the MN has registered to
be used with this CN. The CN will then use the address supplied in the home
address option to serve the function traditionally done by the source IP address

288
LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY: MOBILE IPv6 TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
in the IPv6 header. The MN’s home address is then supplied to higher protocol
layers and applications.
r Reverse tunneling. This is the mechanism that tunnels the packets via the HA,
being needed if there is no binding yet with the CN; as such, it is not as efﬁcient
as the route optimization mechanism. This mechanism is used for packets that
have the MN’s home address as the source address in the IPv6 header, or with
multicast control protocol. The process is as follows: (i) the packet is sent to
the HA using IPv6 encapsulation; (ii) the source address in the tunnel packet
is the primary CoA as registered with the HA; (iii) the destination address in
the tunnel packet is the HA’s address. Then, the HA will pass the encapsulated
packet to the CN.
During packet processing, there will be an interaction between outbound MIPv6
processing and outbound IPsec processing for packets sent by an MN while away
from home. This interaction is shown in Figure 8.14; in Figure 8.14, it is assumed that
IPsec is being used in transport mode and that the MN is using its home address as the
source for the packet. Note that the treatment of destination options (in RFC 2402)
is extended as follows: the authentication header (AH) authentication data must be
calculated as if the following were true: (i) the IPv6 source address in the IPv6 header
contains the MN’s home address; (ii) the home address ﬁeld of the home address
destination option contains the new CoA.
While away from home, an MN will receive packets addressed to its home address,
by one of two methods:
r Packets sent by a CN, which does not have a binding cache entry for the MN,
will be sent to the home address, captured by the HA, and tunneled to the MN.
Here the MN must check that the IPv6 source address of the tunneled packet
is the IP address of its HA. In this method, the MN may also send a BU to the
originalsenderofthepacketandsubjecttorate-limitingprocesses.TheMNmust
also process the received packet in the manner deﬁned for IPv6 encapsulation,
which will result in the encapsulated (inner) packet being processed normally
by upper-layer protocols within the MN as if it had been addressed (only) to the
MN’s home address.
r Packets sent by a CN that has a binding cache entry for the MN that contains
the MN’s current CoA will be sent by the CN using a type 2 routing header.
The packet will be addressed to the MN’s CoA, with the ﬁnal hop in the routing
header directing the packet to the MN’s home address; the processing of this
last hop of the routing header is entirely internal to the MN, since the CoA and
home address are both addresses within the MN.
8.2.7.2
Home Agent Address Discovery
Sometimes when the MN needs to
send a BU to its HA to register its new primary CoA, the MN may not know the
address of any router on its home link that can serve as an HA for it. In this case, the
MN may attempt to discover the address of a suitable HA on its home link. To do so,

PROTOCOL DETAILS
289
The packet is created by higher- 
layer protocols and applications as if 
the MNs were at home and MIPv6 
were not being used
Determine the outgoing interface for 
the packet
As part of outbound packet 
processing, the packet is compared 
against the IPsec security policy 
database to determine what 
processing is required for the packet
If IPsec processing is required, the 
packet is either mapped to an 
existing Security Association (or SA 
bundle), or a new SA (or SA bundle) 
is created for the packet, according 
to the procedures defined for IPsec
Since the 
MN is away from home, 
it is either using reverse tunneling
or route optimization to 
reach the CN
The packet is constructed in the 
normal manner and then tunneled 
through the HA
The MN inserts a home address 
destination option into the packet, 
replacing the source address in the 
packet's IP header with the CoA 
used with this correspondent node
route optimization
reverse tunneling     
The destination options header in which the home address 
destination option is inserted appears in the packet after the 
routing header, if present, and before the IPsec (AH or ESP) 
header, so that the home address destination option is 
processed by the destination node before the IPsec header 
is processed
The packet is fully assembled and
the necessary IPsec authentication 
(and encryption, if required) 
processing is performed on the 
packet, initializing the Authentication 
Data in the IPsec header
FIGURE 8.14
Interaction with outbound IPsec processing.
the MN sends an ICMP HAAD request message to the MIPv6 HA anycast address
for its home subnet preﬁx. The HA on its home link that receives this request message
will return an ICMP HAAD reply message. This message gives the addresses for the
HAs operating on the home link. The MN, upon receiving this HAAD reply message,
may then send its home registration BU to any of the unicast IP addresses listed in
the HA addresses ﬁeld in the reply.

290
LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY: MOBILE IPv6 TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
8.2.7.3
Movement Support
The goal of movement detection is to detect Layer
3 handovers. While full-function roaming mechanisms might be useful in this context,
as a minimum, one needs some generic method of detecting handoffs. Methods that
make use of the facilities of IPv6 neighbor discovery, including router discovery
and neighbor unreachability detection, may be of interest. Table 8.8 depicts some
mechanisms for movement support. Due to the temporary packet ﬂow disruption and
signaling overhead involved in updating mobility bindings, the MN should avoid
performing an L3 handover until it is strictly necessary.
TABLE 8.8
Basic Mechanisms for Movement Support
Activity
Description
Movement
detection
Generic movement detection can use neighbor unreachability
detection to detect when the default router is no longer
bidirectionally reachable, in which case the MN must discover a
new default router. However, this detection only occurs when
the MN has packets to send, and in the absence of frequent
router advertisements or indications from the link layer, the MN
might become unaware of an L3 handover that occurred. Hence,
the MN should supplement this method with other information
whenever it is available to the MN (e.g., from lower protocol
layers)
When the MN detects an L3 handover, it selects a new default
router as a consequence of router discovery and then performs
preﬁx discovery with that new router to form new CoA(es). It
then registers its new primary CoA with its HA. After updating
its home registration, the MN then updates associated mobility
bindings in CNs that it is performing route optimization
Forming new
CoA
After detecting that it has moved an MN is expected to generate a
new primary CoA using normal IPv6 mechanisms. This should
also be done when the current primary CoA becomes deprecated
After selecting a new primary CoA, the MN must send a BU
containing that CoA to its HA. The BU must have the home
registration (H) and acknowledge (A) bits set its HA. In order to
form a new CoA, an MN may use either stateless or stateful
(e.g., DHCPv6) address autoconﬁguration
Using multiple
CoAs
An MN may use more than one CoA at a time. To assist with
smooth handovers, an MN should retain its previous primary
CoA as a (non-primary) CoA and should still accept packets at
this address, even after registering its new primary CoA with its
HA
Whenever an MN determines that it is no longer reachable through
a given link, it should invalidate all CoAs associated with
address preﬁxes that it discovered from routers on the
unreachable link which are not in the current set of address
preﬁxes advertised by the (possibly new) current default router

PROTOCOL DETAILS
291
8.2.8
Relationship to IPV4 Mobile IPv4 (MIP)
A question might be “what is the relationship of MIPv6 to IPV4 MIPv4 deﬁned in
RFC 3344 (9)?” RFC 3775 (2) notes that the design of MIPv6 beneﬁts both from
the experiences gained from the development of MIP and also from the opportunities
provided by IPv6. Therefore, MIPv6 shares many features with MIP, but is integrated
into IPv6 and offers other improvements. The notable differences between MIP and
MIPv6 are as follows:
– There is no need to deploy special routers as “foreign agents,” as in MIP. MIPv6
operates in any location without any special support required from the local
router.
– Support for route optimization is a fundamental part of the protocol, rather than
a nonstandard set of extensions.
– MIPv6 route optimization can operate securely even without prearranged SAs.
It is expected that route optimization can be deployed on a global scale between
all MNs and CNs.
– Support is also integrated into MIPv6 for allowing route optimization to coexist
efﬁciently with routers that perform “ingress ﬁltering.”
– The IPv6 neighbor unreachability detection assures symmetric reachability
between the MN and its default router in the current location.
– Most packets sent to an MN while away from home in MIPv6 are sent using
an IPv6 routing header rather than IP encapsulation, reducing the amount of
resulting overhead compared to MIP.
– MIPv6 is decoupled from any particular link layer, as it uses IPv6 neighbor
discovery instead of Address Resolution Protocol (ARP); this also improves the
robustness of the protocol.
– The use of IPv6 encapsulation (and the routing header) removes the need in
MIPv6 to manage “tunnel soft state.”
– The dynamic HAAD mechanism in MIPv6 returns a single reply to the MN.
The directed broadcast approach used in IPv4 returns separate replies from
each HA.
MIPv6offers anumber of improvements over MIPv4principallyduetocapabilities
inherited from IPv6. For example, route optimization and dynamic HA discovery can
only be achieved with MIPv6. One of the advantages of the large address space
provided by IPv6 is that it allows MNs to obtain a globally unique CoA wherever
they are; therefore, there is no need for network address translator (NAT) traversal
techniques designed for MIPv4. This allows MIPv6 to be a signiﬁcantly simpler and
more bandwidth-efﬁcient mobility management protocol. At the same time, during
the transition toward IPv6, NAT traversal for existing private IPv4 networks needs to
be considered (10).

292
LAYER 3 CONNECTIVITY: MOBILE IPv6 TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE IoT
REFERENCES
1. Minoli D. Mobile Video with Mobile IPv6. New York: Wiley; 2012.
2. Johnson D, Perkins C, Arkko J. Mobility Support in IPv6. RFC 3775, June 2004.
3. Arkko J, Vogt C, Haddad W. Enhanced Route Optimization for Mobile IPv6. RFC 4866,
May 2007.
4. Korhonen J, editor. Bournelle J, Giaretta G, NakhjiriM. Diameter Mobile IPv6: Support
for Home Agent to Diameter Server Interaction. February 2010, RFC 5778.
5. 6deploy.org. IPv6 Workshop – IPv6 Mobility Module. October 2008.
6. Giaretta G, Devarapalli V. Mobile IPv6 Bootstrapping in Split Scenario, RFC 5026,
October 2007.
7. Arkko J, Devarapalli V, Dupont F. Using IPsec to Protect Mobile IPv6 Signaling Between
Mobile Nodes and Home Agents. RFC 3776, June 2004.
8. Narten T, Nordmark E, Simpson W. Neighbor Discovery for IP Version 6 (IPv6). RFC
2461, December 1998.
9. Perkins C. editor. IP Mobility Support for IPv4. RFC 3344, August 2002.
10. Soliman H, editor. Mobile IPv6 Support for Dual Stack Hosts and Routers. RFC 5555,
June 2009.

CHAPTER 9
IPv6 OVER LOW-POWER WPAN
(6LoWPAN)
As we have seen at various points in this text, most (but certainly not all) IoT/M2M
nodes have noteworthy design constraints. Developers make the case that the IEEE
802.15.4-2003 standard is very promising for the lower (physical and link) layers.
As for higher layer functions, the goal is to utilize IP technology, speciﬁcally IPv6,
considering the v6 capabilities and beneﬁts described in Chapter 7. To that end, an
IETF Working Group (WG) was chartered in 2005 to deﬁne IPv6 over IEEE 802.15.4,
that is to say, IPv6 over low-power WPANs; the outcome is known as 6LoWPAN.
Two initial deliverables were generated in 2007: (i) problem statement (“Goals and
Assumptions”) and (ii) format speciﬁcation (“IPv6 over 802.15.4”). 6LoWPAN is
now a widely accepted approach to run IP on 802.15.4 based on the just cited format
speciﬁcation. It is already supported in TinyOS, Contiki, and in standards such as ISA
SP 100, ZigBee Smart Energy (SE) 2.0, and the IEEE 1451.5 standard for wireless
transducers. The basic RFC makes 802.15.4 look like an IPv6 link; it provides basic
encapsulation and efﬁcient representation of packets smaller than 100 octets. Some
highlights of this work are provided in this chapter. The material is abstracted and
synthesized from the basic RFCs. The reader is referred to the original material for a
more detailed description of the speciﬁcations.
Building the Internet of Things with IPv6 and MIPv6: The Evolving World of M2M Communications,
First Edition. Daniel Minoli.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
293

294
IPv6 OVER LOW-POWER WPAN (6LoWPAN)
9.1
BACKGROUND/INTRODUCTION
The requirement for IPv6 connectivity in a LoWPAN is driven by the following (1):
r The many devices in a LoWPAN make network autoconﬁguration and state-
lessness highly desirable; as we have seen, IPv6 offers ready solutions;
r The large number of devices poses the need for a large address space, well met
by IPv6;
r Given the limited packet size of LoWPANs, the IPv6 address format allows
subsuming of IEEE 802.15.4 addresses, if so desired;
r Given the limited packet size, headers for IPv6 and layers above must be
compressed whenever possible; and
r Simple interconnectivity of the LoWPANs to other IP networks including the
Internet.
The WG has completed two RFCs: (i) “IPv6 over Low-Power Wireless Per-
sonal Area Networks (6LoWPANs): Overview, Assumptions, Problem Statement, and
Goals” (RFC 4919) that documents and discusses the problem space, and (ii) “Trans-
mission of IPv6 Packets over IEEE 802.15.4 Networks” (RFC 4944) that deﬁnes the
format for the adaptation between IPv6 and 802.15.4. 6LoWPAN has also worked
closely with the routing over low-power and lossy networks (LLNs) (roll) WG, which
is developing IPv6 routing solutions for LLNs. See Table 9.1 for a detailed listing of
the 6LoWPAN family of documents and speciﬁcations.
Recent additional work items of the WG include the following (2):
1. Produce “6LoWPAN Bootstrapping and 6LoWPAN IPv6 ND Optimizations”
to deﬁne limited extensions to IPv6 neighbor discovery (RFC 4861) for use
speciﬁcally in low-power networks. This document deﬁnes how to bootstrap a
6LoWPAN network and explore ND optimizations such as reusing the structure
of the 802.15.4 network (e.g., by using the coordinators) and reduce the need
for multicast by having devices talk to coordinators (without creating a single
point of failure or changing the semantics of the IPv6 ND multicasts).
2. Produce “6LoWPAN Improved Header Compression” to describe mechanisms
to allow enhancements to the 6LoWPAN headers. Speciﬁcally, this document
describes the compression of addresses that are not link local. Additionally,
the document may include other enhancements or optimizations of the HC1 or
HC2 6LoWPAN headers.
3. Produce “6LoWPAN Architecture” to describe the design and implementation
of 6LoWPAN networks. This document covers the concepts of “Mesh Under”
and “Route Over,” 802.15.4 design issues such as operation with sleeping
nodes, network components (both battery and line powered), addressing, and
IPv4/IPv6 network connections.

BACKGROUND/INTRODUCTION
295
TABLE 9.1
6LoWPAN Family of Documents and Speciﬁcations
Title
Date
Status
Active Internet Drafts
draft-ietf-
6LoWPAN-btle-11
Transmission of IPv6 packets
over Bluetooth low energy
2012-10-12
IESG evaluation:
AD follow-up
(for 106 days)
Submitted to
IESG for
publication
RFCs
RFC 4919 (draft-ietf-
6LoWPAN-
problem)
IPv6 over Low-Power Wireless
Personal Area Networks
(6LoWPANs): Overview,
Assumptions, Problem
Statement, and Goals
2007-08
RFC 4919
(informational)
errata
RFC 4944 (draft-ietf-
6LoWPAN-format)
Transmission of IPv6 packets
over IEEE 802.15.4 networks
2007-09
RFC 4944
(proposed
standard)
updated by
RFC 6282, RFC
6775
RFC 6282 (draft-ietf-
6LoWPAN-hc)
Compression format for IPv6
datagrams over IEEE
802.15.4-based networks
2011-09
RFC 6282
(proposed
standard)
RFC 6568 (draft-ietf-
6LoWPAN-
usecases)
Design and Application Spaces
for IPv6 over Low-Power
Wireless Personal Area
Networks (6LoWPANs)
2012-04
RFC 6568
(informational)
RFC 6606 (draft-ietf-
6LoWPAN-
routing-
requirements)
Problem Statement and
Requirements for IPv6 over
Low-Power Wireless Personal
Area Network (6LoWPAN)
Routing
2012-05
RFC 6606
(informational)
RFC 6775 (draft-ietf-
6LoWPAN-nd)
Neighbor Discovery
Optimization for IPv6 over
Low-Power Wireless Personal
Area Networks (6LoWPANs)
2012-11 (new)
RFC 6775
(proposed
standard)
Related Documents/Active Internet Drafts
draft-bormann-
6LoWPAN-ghc-05
6LoWPAN Generic Compression
of Headers and Header-like
Payloads
2012-09-06
I-D exists
draft-bormann-
6LoWPAN-
roadmap-03
6LoWPAN Roadmap and
Implementation Guide
2012-10-22
I-D exists
draft-schoenw-
6LoWPAN-mib-01
Deﬁnition of Managed Objects
for IPv6 over Low-Power
Wireless Personal Area
Networks (6LoWPANs)

296
IPv6 OVER LOW-POWER WPAN (6LoWPAN)
4. As a separate Internet Draft, “6LoWPAN Routing Requirements” is aimed
at describing 6LoWPAN-speciﬁc requirements on routing protocols used in
6LoWPANs, addressing both the “route-over” and “mesh-under” approach.
5. Produce “Use Cases for 6LoWPAN” to deﬁne, for a small set of applications
with sufﬁciently unique requirements, how 6LoWPANs can solve those require-
ments, and which protocols and conﬁguration variants can be used for these
scenarios. The use cases will cover protocols for transport, application layer,
discovery, conﬁguration, and commissioning.
6. Produce “6LoWPAN Security Analysis” to deﬁne the threat model of 6LoW-
PANs, to document the suitability of existing key management schemes, and
to discuss bootstrapping/installation/commissioning/setup issues.
9.2
6LoWPANS GOALS
LoWPANs1 in general and IEEE 802.15.4-2003-based systems in particular have
design constraints that need to be taken into consideration when developing a protocol
stack. These constraints fall into two categories:
r Communication constraints deﬁned by the underlying personal area network
(PAN):
◦Small packet size. Given that the maximum physical layer packet is 127 bytes,
the resulting maximum frame size at the media access control layer is 102
octets. Link-layer security imposes further overhead, leaving 81 octets for data
packets. Adding all layers for IP connectivity should still allow transmission
in one frame, without incurring excessive fragmentation and reassembly.
Furthermore “control/protocol packets” ﬁt within a single 802.15.4 frame;
◦Support for both 16-bit short or IEEE 64-bit extended media access control
addresses;
◦Low bandwidth. Data rates of 250 Kbps, 40 Kbps, and 20 Kbps for each
of the currently deﬁned physical layers (2.4 GHz, 915 MHz, and 868 MHz,
respectively);
◦Topologies include star and mesh operation;
◦Other issues to address include limited conﬁguration and management capa-
bilities, need for service discovery, and need for security (conﬁdentiality and
integrity protection).
r System constraints driven by the intended application parameters:
◦Characteristic examples include low/battery power, low cost, low processing
capabilities, small memory size, large population of devices, ad-hoc loca-
tions/logical topology, mobility, and unreliable nodal behaviors (e.g., due to
uncertain radio connectivity, interference, sleep state, battery drain, device,
etc.)
1This discussion is summarized and synthesized from Reference 1.

TRANSMISSION OF IPv6 PACKETS OVER IEEE 802.15.4
297
While many LoWPAN devices in a network are expected to have limited function-
ality (the “reduced function devices” or RFDs discussed in Chapter 6), other, more
capable “full function devices” (FFDs) will also be present in the network. FFDs
are expected to “aid” RFDs by providing functions such as network coordination,
packet forwarding, interfacing with other types of networks, and so on. LoWPANs
must support various topologies including mesh and star. Mesh topologies imply
multihop routing to a desired destination. In this case, intermediate devices act as
packet forwarders at the link layer (akin to routers at the network layer). Typically,
these are “FFDs” that have more capabilities in terms of power, computation, etc.
The requirements on the routing protocol are:
r Given the minimal packet size of LoWPANs, the routing protocol must impose
low (or no) overhead on data packets.
r The routing protocols should have low routing overhead (low chattiness) bal-
anced with topology changes and power conservation.
r The computation and memory requirements in the routing protocol should be
minimal to satisfy the low-cost and low-power objectives. Thus, storage and
maintenance of large routing tables is detrimental.
r Support for network topologies in which either FFDs or RFDs may be battery
or mains powered. This implies the appropriate considerations for routing in
the presence of sleeping nodes.
Table 9.2 summarizes IP Protocol considerations for LoWPANs as deﬁned in RFC
4919.
9.3
TRANSMISSION OF IPv6 PACKETS OVER IEEE 802.15.4
RFC 49442 describes the frame format for transmission of IPv6 packets and the
method of forming IPv6 link-local addresses and statelessly autoconﬁgured addresses
on IEEE 802.15.4 networks. Additional speciﬁcations include a simple header com-
pression scheme using shared context and provisions for packet delivery in IEEE
802.15.4 meshes.
IEEE 802.15.4 deﬁnes four types of frames: beacon frames, MAC command
frames, acknowledgement frames, and data frames, as noted in Chapter 6. IPv6
packets must be carried on data frames. Data frames may optionally request that they
be acknowledged. IPv6 packets will be carried in frames for which acknowledgements
are requested so as to aid link-layer recovery. IEEE 802.15.4 networks can either be
nonbeacon enabled or beacon enabled. 6LoWPAN (RFC 4944) does not require
that IEEE networks run in beacon-enabled mode. In nonbeacon-enabled networks,
data frames (including those carrying IPv6 packets) are sent via the contention-
based channel access method of unslotted Carrier Sense Multiple Access/Collision
Avoidance (CSMA/CA). In nonbeacon-enabled networks, beacons are not used for
2This discussion is summarized and synthesized from Reference 3.

298
IPv6 OVER LOW-POWER WPAN (6LoWPAN)
TABLE 9.2
IP Protocol Considerations for LoWPANs as Deﬁned in RFC 4919 (Partial
List)
Item
Issues and Approaches
Fragmentation and
reassembly layer
The PDUs in IEEE 802.15.4-2003 may be as small as 81 bytes.
This is far below the minimum IPv6 packet size of 1280 octets
and consistent with Section 5 of the IPv6 speciﬁcation in RFC
2460; a fragmentation and reassembly adaptation layer must be
provided at the layer below IP
Header
compression
In the worst case the maximum size available for transmitting IP
packets over an IEEE 802.15.4 frame is 81 octets, and that the
IPv6 header is 40 octets long (without optional headers); this
leaves only 41 octets for upper-layer protocols, such as UDP
and TCP. UDP uses 8 octets in the header and TCP uses 20
octets. This leaves 33 octets for data over UDP and 21 octets for
data over TCP. Additionally, as pointed above, there is also a
need for a fragmentation and reassembly layer, which will use
even more octets leaving very few octets for data. Thus, if one
were to use the protocols as is, it would lead to excessive
fragmentation and reassembly, even when data packets are just
10s of octets long. This mandated the need for header
compression. 6LoWPAN expects using existing header
compression techniques, but, if necessary, speciﬁes new ones
Address autocon-
ﬁguration
6LoWPAN needs to deﬁne methods for creating IPv6 stateless
address autoconﬁguration. Stateless autoconﬁguration (as
compared to stateful) is attractive for 6LoWPANs, because it
reduces the conﬁguration overhead on the hosts. There is a need
for a method to generate an “interface identiﬁer” from the
EUI-64 assigned to the IEEE 802.15.4 device
Mesh routing
protocol
A routing protocol to support a multihop mesh network is
necessary. There is much published work on ad-hoc multihop
routing for devices, but these protocols are designed to use
IP-based addresses that have large overheads. For example, the
ad-hoc on-demand distance vector (AODV) routing protocol
described in RFC 3561 uses 48 octets for a route request based
on IPv6 addressing. Given the packet-size constraints,
transmitting this packet without fragmentation and reassembly
may be difﬁcult. Thus, care should be taken when using existing
routing protocols (or designing new ones) so that the routing
packets ﬁt within a single IEEE 802.15.4 frame
synchronization; however, they are still useful for link-layer device discovery to aid
in association and disassociation events. RFC 4944 recommends that beacons be
conﬁgured so as to aid these functions.
As we noted in Chapter 6, IEEE 802.15.4 allows the use of either IEEE 64-bit
extended addresses or (after an association event) 16-bit addresses unique within the
PAN. 6LoWPAN/RFC 4944 supports both 64-bit extended addresses and 16-bit short

TRANSMISSION OF IPv6 PACKETS OVER IEEE 802.15.4
299
addresses; however, the RFC imposes additional constraints (beyond those imposed
by IEEE 802.15.4) on the format of the 16-bit short addresses. Short addresses
are transient in nature and are assigned by the PAN coordinator function during
an association event; hence their validity and uniqueness is limited by the lifetime of
that association. It should also be noted that because of the scalability issues posed
by such a centralized allocation and single point of failure at the PAN coordina-
tor, deployers should carefully weigh the trade-offs (and implement the necessary
mechanisms) of growing such networks based on short addresses.
RFC 4944 assumes that a PAN maps to a speciﬁc IPv6 link. Note that multicast
is not supported natively in IEEE 802.15.4; hence, IPv6 level multicast packets must
be carried as link-layer broadcast frames in IEEE 802.15.4 networks.
The maximum transmission unit (MTU) size for IPv6 packets over IEEE 802.15.4
is 1280 octets. However, a full IPv6 packet does not ﬁt in an IEEE 802.15.4 frame.
802.15.4 protocol data units (PDUs) have different sizes depending on how much
overhead is present. Starting from a maximum physical layer packet size of 127 octets
(aMaxPHYPacketSize) and a maximum frame overhead of 25 (aMaxFrameOver-
head), the resultant maximum frame size at the media access control layer is 102
octets. Link-layer security imposes further overhead, which in the maximum case
(21 octets of overhead in the AES-CCM-128 case, versus 9 and 13 for AES-CCM-32
and AES-CCM-64, respectively) leaves only 81 octets available. This implies that
fragmentation and reassembly adaptation layer must be provided at the layer below IP.
Furthermore, the IPv6 header is 40 octets long and this leaves only 41 octets for
upper-layer protocols, such as UDP. The latter uses 8 octets in the header, which
leaves only 33 octets for application data. Additionally, as just noted, there is a need
for a fragmentation and reassembly layer, which will use even more octets.
The encapsulation formats deﬁned in the RFC (also called the “LoWPAN encap-
sulation”) are the payload in the IEEE 802.15.4 MAC PDU. The LoWPAN payload
(e.g., an IPv6 packet) follows this encapsulation header.
All LoWPAN-encapsulated datagrams transported over IEEE 802.15.4 are pre-
ﬁxed by an encapsulation header stack. Each header in the header stack contains a
header type followed by zero or more header ﬁelds. While in an IPv6 header, the
stack would contain, in the following order, addressing, hop-by-hop options, routing,
fragmentation, destination options, and ﬁnally payload; in a LoWPAN header, the
analogous header sequence is mesh (layer 2) addressing, hop-by-hop options (includ-
ing layer 2 broadcast/multicast), fragmentation, and ﬁnally payload. Figure 9.1 shows
typical header stacks that may be used in a LoWPAN network.
When more than one LoWPAN header is used in the same packet, they must
appear in the following order:
1. Mesh addressing header
2. Broadcast header
3. Fragmentation header
All protocol datagrams (e.g., IPv6, compressed IPv6 headers, etc.) are preceded
by one of the valid LoWPAN-encapsulation headers, examples of which are given

300
IPv6 OVER LOW-POWER WPAN (6LoWPAN)
A LoWPAN-encapsulated IPv6 datagram 
+---------------+-------------+---------+
| IPv6 Dispatch | IPv6 Header | Payload | 
+---------------+-------------+---------+
A LoWPAN-encapsulated LOWPAN_HC1 compressed IPv6 datagram 
+--------------+------------+---------+
| HC1 Dispatch | HC1 Header | Payload | 
+--------------+------------+---------+
A LoWPAN-encapsulated LOWPAN_HC1 compressed IPv6 datagram that requires mesh 
addressing
+-----------+-------------+--------------+------------+---------+
| Mesh Type | Mesh Header | HC1 Dispatch | HC1 Header | Payload | 
+-----------+-------------+--------------+------------+---------+
A LoWPAN-encapsulated LOWPAN_HC1 compressed IPv6 datagram that requires 
fragmentation
+-----------+-------------+--------------+------------+---------+
| Frag Type | Frag Header | HC1 Dispatch | HC1 Header | Payload | 
+-----------+-------------+--------------+------------+---------+
A LoWPAN-encapsulated LOWPAN_HC1 compressed IPv6 datagram that requires both 
mesh addressing and fragmentation 
+-------+-------+-------+-------+---------+---------+---------+
| M Typ | M Hdr | F Typ | F Hdr | HC1 Dsp | HC1 Hdr | Payload | 
+-------+-------+-------+-------+---------+---------+---------+
A LoWPAN-encapsulated LOWPAN_HC1 compressed IPv6 datagram that requires both 
mesh addressing and a broadcast header to support mesh broadcast/multicast: 
+-------+-------+-------+-------+---------+---------+---------+
| M Typ | M Hdr | B Dsp | B Hdr | HC1 Dsp | HC1 Hdr | Payload | 
+-------+-------+-------+-------+---------+---------+---------+
FIGURE 9.1
Typical header stacks that may be used in a LoWPAN network.
above. This allows uniform software treatment of datagrams without regard to the
mode of their transmission.
The deﬁnition of LoWPAN headers, other than mesh addressing and fragmenta-
tion, consists of the dispatch value, the deﬁnition of the header ﬁelds that follow,
and their ordering constraints relative to all other headers. Although the header stack
structure provides a mechanism to address future demands on the LoWPAN adapta-
tion layer, it is not intended to provide general-purpose extensibility.
Refer to the RFC 4944 as well as to the other RFCs and drafts identiﬁed in Table
9.1 for an extensive discussion of the 6LoWPAN technology.

REFERENCES
301
REFERENCES
1. Kushalnagar N, Montenegro G, Schumacher C. RFC 4919: IPv6 over Low-Power Wireless
Personal Area Networks (6LoWPANs): Overview, Assumptions, Problem Statement, and
Goals. IETF, August 2007.
2. Mulligan G. IPv6 over Low power WPAN (6LoWPAN). Description of Working Group,
IETF,
2012,
http://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/6lowpan/charter/,
http://www.ietf.org/mail-
archive/web/6lowpan/.
3. Montenegro G, Kushalnagar N, Hui J, Culler, D. Transmission of IPv6 Packets over
IEEE 802.15.4 Networks, RFC 4944, Updated by RFC 6282, RFC 6775 (was draft-ietf-
6LoWPAN-format), September 2007.

GLOSSARY
3GPP (Third-Generation Partnership Project) The Third-Generation Partnership
Project unites (six) telecommunications standards bodies, known as “organiza-
tional partners,” and provides their members with a stable environment to produce
the Reports and Speciﬁcations that deﬁne 3GPP technologies. Wireless technolo-
gies are constantly evolving through—what have become known as—generations
of commercial cellular/mobile systems. 3GPP was originally the standards partner-
ship evolving global system for mobile (GSM) systems toward the third generation.
However, since the completion of the ﬁrst LTE and the evolved packet core speci-
ﬁcations, 3GPP has become the focal point for mobile systems beyond 3G. From
3GPP Release 10 onward, 3GPP is compliant with the latest ITU-R requirements
for IMT-advanced “Systems beyond 3G.” The standard now allows for opera-
tion at peak speeds of 100 Mbps for high-mobility and 1 Gbps for low-mobility
communication.
The original scope of 3GPP was to produce Technical Speciﬁcations and Tech-
nical Reports for a 3G Mobile System based on evolved GSM core networks and
the radio access technologies that they support (i.e., Universal Terrestrial Radio
Access [UTRA] both frequency division duplex [FDD] and time division duplex
[TDD] modes). The scope was subsequently amended to include the mainte-
nance and development of the GSM communication Technical Speciﬁcations and
Building the Internet of Things with IPv6 and MIPv6: The Evolving World of M2M Communications,
First Edition. Daniel Minoli.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
302

GLOSSARY
303
Technical Reports including evolved radio access technologies (e.g., general
packet radio service [GPRS] and enhanced data rates for GSM evolution [EDGE])
(1). The term “3GPP speciﬁcation” covers all GSM (including GPRS and EDGE),
W-CDMA, and LTE (including LTE-advanced) speciﬁcations. The following
terms are also used to describe networks using the 3G speciﬁcations: UTRAN,
universal mobile telecommunications system (UMTS) (in Europe), and FOMA
(in Japan).
3GPP2 (Third-Generation Partnership Project 2) The Third-Generation Part-
nership Project 2 is a collaborative third-generation (3G) telecommunications
speciﬁcations-setting project comprising North American and Asian interests
developing global speciﬁcations for ANSI/TIA/EIA-41 cellular radiotelecommu-
nication intersystem operations network evolution to 3G and global speciﬁcations
for the radio transmission technologies (RTTs) supported by ANSI/TIA/EIA-41.
3GPP2 was born out of the International Telecommunication Union’s (ITU) Inter-
national Mobile Telecommunications “IMT-2000” initiative, covering high-speed,
broadband, and internet protocol (IP)-based mobile systems featuring network-to-
network interconnection, feature/service transparency, global roaming, and seam-
less services independent of location. IMT-2000 is intended to bring high-quality
mobile multimedia telecommunications to a worldwide mass market by achieving
the goals of increasing the speed and ease of wireless communications, responding
to the problems faced by the increased demand to pass data via telecommunica-
tions, and providing “anytime, anywhere” services (2). 3GPP2 provides globally
applicable Technical Speciﬁcations for a 3G mobile system based on the evolving
ANSI-41 core network and the relevant radio access technologies to be transposed
by standardization bodies (organizational partners) into appropriate deliverables
(e.g., standards).
6LoWPAN: IPv6 Over Low-Power Area Networks (IEEE 802.15.4) 6LoWPAN
is now a widely accepted approach to run IP on 802.15.4 based on RFC 4944
(September 2007.) It is supported in TinyOS, Contiki, and in standards such as
ISA100, ZigBee Smart Energy (SE) 2.0. RFC 4944 makes 802.15.4 look like an
IPv6 link. It provides basic encapsulation and efﬁcient representation of packets
< ∼100 bytes. It addresses topics such as (3):
r Fragmentation (how to map 1280 byte MTU to packets 128 bytes or less);
r First approach to stateless header compression;
r Datagram tag/datagram offset;
r Mesh forwarding;
r Identify originator/ﬁnal destination;
r Minimal use of complex MAC (media access control) layer concepts.
6over4 An IPv6 transition technology that provides IPv6 unicast and multicast con-
nectivity through an IPv4 infrastructure with multicast support, using the IPv4
network as a logical multicast link.

304
GLOSSARY
6over4 Link-Local Address An IPv6 address of the form FE80::WWXX:YYZZ,
where WWXX:YYZZ is the hexadecimal representation of w.x.y.z, a public or
private IPv4 address assigned to the 6over4 device interface.
6over4 Unicast Address An IPv6 address of the form 64-bit preﬁx:0:0:WWXX:
YYZZ, where WWXX:YYZZ is the hexadecimal representation of w.x.y.z, a
public or private IPv4 address assigned to the 6over4 device interface.
6to4 An IPv6 transition technology that provides unicast connectivity between IPv6
networks and devices through an IPv4 infrastructure. 6to4 uses a public IPv4
address to build a global IPv6 preﬁx.
6to4
Address A
global
IPv6
address
of
the
form
2002:WWXX:YYZZ:
SLA_ID:interface ID, where WWXX:YYZZ is the hexadecimal representation
of w.x.y.z, a public IPv4 address assigned to a 6to4 router’s IPv4 interface and
SLA_ID is the site-level aggregation identiﬁer (SLA ID). The address space
2002::/16 is assigned to 6to4 addresses.
6to4 Host An IPv6 device that is conﬁgured with at least one 6to4 address (a global
address with a 2002::/16 preﬁx). 6to4 devices do not require manual conﬁgu-
ration and they create 6to4 addresses by means of standard autoconﬁguration
mechanisms.
6to4 Relay Router An IPv6/IPv4 router that forwards trafﬁc between 6to4 routers
and IPv6 Internet devices.
6to4 Router A router that participates in the 6to4 transition technology, providing
unicast connectivity between IPv6 networks and devices through an IPv4 infras-
tructure.
Actuator An actuator is a mechanized device of various sizes (from ultra-small to
very large) that accomplishes a speciﬁed physical action, for example controlling
a mechanism or system, opening or closing a valve, starting some kind or rotary
or linear motion, and initiating physical locomotion. It is the mechanism by which
an entity acts upon an environment. The actuator embodies a source of energy,
such as an electric current (battery, solar, motion), a hydraulic ﬂuid pressure, or
a pneumatic pressure; the device converts that energy into some kind of action or
motion upon external command.
Address In this context a network-layer identiﬁer assigned to an interface or set of
interfaces that can be used as source or destination ﬁeld in IP datagrams. An IP
layer identiﬁer for an interface or a set of interfaces.
The IPv6 128-bit address is divided along 16-bit boundaries. Each 16-bit block
is then converted to a 4-digit hexadecimal number, separated by colons. The
resulting representation is called colon-hexadecimal. This is in contrast to the
32-bit IPv4 address represented in dotted-decimal format, divided along 8-bit
boundaries, and then converted to its decimal equivalent, separated by periods (4).
The following example shows a 128-bit IPv6 address in binary form:
0010000111011010000000001101001100000000000000000010111100111011
000000101 0101010000000001111111111111110001010001001110001011010

GLOSSARY
305
The following example shows this same address divided along 16-bit boundaries:
0010000111011010
0000000011010011
0000000000000000
0010111100111011
0000001010101010
0000000011111111
1111111000101000
1001110001011010
The following example shows each 16-bit block in the address converted to hex-
adecimal and delimited with colons.
21DA:00D3:0000:2F3B:02AA:00FF:FE28:9C5A
IPv6 representation can be further simpliﬁed by removing the leading zeros within
each 16-bit block. However, each block must have at least a single digit. The
following example shows the address without the leading zeros:
21DA:D3:0:2F3B:2AA:FF:FE28:9C5A
Address Autoconﬁguration The automatic conﬁguration process for IPv6 addresses
on an interface; speciﬁcally, the process for conﬁguring IP addresses for interfaces
in the absence of a stateful address conﬁguration server, such as dynamic host
conﬁguration protocol version 6 (DHCPv6).
Address Maximum Valid Time Time period during which a unicast address,
obtained by means of stateless autoconﬁguration mechanism, is valid.
Address Resolution Procedure used by a node for determining the link-layer address
of other nodes on a link. In an IPv6 context, the process by which a node resolves
a neighboring node’s IPv6 address to its link-layer address. In IPv4, the procedure
is accomplished via the ARP protocol. In IPv6, the procedure is accomplished via
neighbor advertisement and neighbor solicitation ICMPv6 messages.
Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) Cryptographic algorithm; National Insti-
tute of Standards and Technology (NIST)-approved standard. It was chosen by
NIST because it is considered to be both faster and smaller than its competitors
(5).
Advanced Meter Infrastructure (AMI) system An infrastructure that contains
meters capable of two-way communications with a centralized grid control system.
These are meters that can receive signals, including the cost of electricity and status
of the grid, track electricity usage on a short-term basis, and automatically report
the meter readings back to the utility (6).
Aggregatable Global Unicast Address Also known as global addresses, these
addresses are identiﬁed by means of the 3-bit format preﬁx 001 (2000::/3). IPv6
global addresses are equivalent to IPv4 public addresses and they are routable in
the IPv6 Internet.
Air Interface In radio-frequency identiﬁcation (RFID) environments, the complete
communication link between an interrogator and a tag including the physical layer,

306
GLOSSARY
collision arbitration algorithm, command and response structure, and data-coding
methodolog (7).
Ambient Intelligence Ambient intelligence is a vision where environment becomes
smart, friendly, context aware, and responsive to any type of human needs. In such a
world, computing and networking technology coexist with people in a ubiquitous,
friendly, and pervasive way. Numerous miniature and interconnected smart devices
create a new intelligence and interact with each other seamlessly. For health care,
this translates into proliferation of remote monitoring and telemedicine (8).
AMI (Advanced Metering Infrastructure) The electric information service infras-
tructure between the end-user or end device and the electric company. A system for
implementing smart grid (SG) and a principal means of realizing demand response.
AMI has several methods to connect from end device to applications of utility,
and there are many standards communication protocols. To communicate between
physical service layers, some combinations and transformations of the protocols
are required. AMI environment is very complex because it should be considered
the area of home area network (HAN) and demand respond application (9).
AMR Automated meter reader
ANTTM/ANT+TM ANT is a low-power proprietary wireless technology introduced
in 2004 by the sensor company Dynastream. The system operates in the 2.4 GHz
band. ANT devices can operate for years on a coin cell. ANT’s goal is to allow
sports and ﬁtness sensors to communicate with a display unit. ANT+ extends the
ANT protocol and makes the devices interoperable in a managed network. ANT+
recently introduced a new certiﬁcation process as a prerequisite for using ANT+
branding (10).
Anycast Address A unicast address that is assigned to several interfaces and is
used for the delivery of IP datagrams to one of the several interfaces. With an
appropriate route, datagrams addressed to an anycast address will be delivered to
a single interface—the nearest one.
Asymmetric Encryption Type of encryption in which encryption keys are different
from decryption keys, and one key is computationally difﬁcult to determine from
the other. Uses an asymmetric algorithm (5).
Attempt Address Unicast address where uniqueness is no longer checked.
Authentication The process of proving the genuineness of an entity (such as a smart
card) by means of a cryptographic procedure. Authentication entails using a ﬁxed
procedure to determine whether someone is actually the person he or she claims
to be (5).
Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting (AAA) Authentication refers to
the conﬁrmation that a user who is requesting services is a valid user of the network
services requested. Authorization refers to the granting of speciﬁc types of service
(including “no service”) to a user, based on their authentication, what services
they are requesting, and the current system state. Accounting refers to the tracking
of the consumption of network resources by users. This information may be used
for management, planning, billing, or other purposes (11).

GLOSSARY
307
Authorization An authorization provides access (or legal power) to some protected
service. In a CA system, the authorization gives access to encrypted services
(channels, movies, and so on) (5).
Automatic IPv6 Tunnel Automatic creation of tunnels, generally through the use
of various IPv6 address formats that contain the IPv4 tunnel endpoints.
Autonomous System (AS) A network domain that belongs to the same administra-
tive authority.
Bandwidth The amount of information that can be sent through a connection. In
digital settings, it is measured in bits-per-second. Full-motion full-screen video
requires 2.5–12 Mbps depending on compression (e.g., MPEG-2, MPEG-4) and
format (SD or HD).
Bluetooth Bluetooth is a personal area network (PAN) technology based on IEEE
802.15.1. It is a speciﬁcation for short-range wireless connectivity for portable
personal devices, initially developed by Ericsson. The Bluetooth special inter-
est group (SIG) made their speciﬁcations publicly available in the late 1990s;
soon thereafter the IEEE 802.15 group has took the Bluetooth work developed
a vendor-independent standard. The sublayers of IEEE 802.15 are: (i) RF layer,
(ii) baseband layer, (iii) the link manager, and (iv) the logical link control and
adaptation protocol (L2CAP). Bluetooth has evolved through four versions; all
versions of the Bluetooth standards maintain downward compatibility. Bluetooth
low energy (BLE) is a subset to Bluetooth v4.0, with an entirely new protocol
stack for rapid build-up of simple links. BLE is an alternative to the “power man-
agement” features that were introduced in Bluetooth v1.0 to v3.0 as part of the
standard Bluetooth protocols.
The functionality is as follows:
r RF layer: The air interface is based on antenna power range starting from
0 dBm up to 20 dBm, 2.4 GHz band, and the link range from 0.1 to 10 m.
r Baseband layer: The baseband layer establishes the Bluetooth piconet. The
piconet is formed when two Bluetooth devices connect. In a piconet, one device
acts as the master and the other devices act as slaves.
r Link manager: The link manager establishes the link between Bluetooth devices.
Additional functions include security, negotiation of baseband packet sizes,
power mode and duty cycle control of the Bluetooth device, and the connection
states of a Bluetooth device in a piconet.
r Logical link control and adaptation protocol (L2CAP): This sublayer provides
the upper-layer protocols with connectionless and connection-oriented services.
The services provided by this layer include protocol multiplexing capability,
segmentation and reassembly of packets, and group abstractions.
(Bluetooth is a trademark of the Bluetooth Alliance, a commercial organization that
certiﬁes the interoperability of speciﬁc devices designed to the respective IEEE
standard.)

308
GLOSSARY
Broadcasting Satellite Service (BSS) A satellite service that (for ITU Region 2
segments covering the majority of the Americas) operates at 17.3–17.8 GHz for
the uplink and 12.2 to 12.7 GHz for the downlink. High-power geostationary
satellites are utilized.
Buffering The temporary storing data before playing it back. A buffer is a temporary
holding area in memory for data; buffers can be on the input or output side of a
data-carrying link.
Certiﬁcate A digital certiﬁcate consists of three things, as follows: (1) The public-
key portion of the certiﬁcate holder’s public and private key pair. (2) Information
that identiﬁes the holder of the certiﬁcate (the owner of the corresponding private
key). (3) The digital signature of a trusted entity attesting to the validity of the
certiﬁcate (i.e., that the key and the certiﬁcate information truly go together) (5).
Circular Orbit (Satellite) A satellite orbit where the distance between the center of
mass of the satellite and of the earth is constant.
Clarke Belt (Satellite) The circular orbit (geostationary orbit [GEO]) at approxi-
mately 35,786 km above the equator, where the satellites travel at the same speed as
the earth’s rotation and thus appear to be stationary to an observer on earth (named
after Arthur C. Clarke who was the ﬁrst to describe the concept of geostationary
communication satellites).
Client The originating endpoint of a request; the destination endpoint of a response.
Cloud Computing The latest term to describe a grid/utility computing service. Such
service is provided in the network. From the perspective of the user, the service is
virtualized. In turn, the service provider will most likely use virtualization tech-
nologies (virtualized computing, virtualized storage, etc.) to provide the service
to the user.
Codec (COmpressor/DECompressor)—The system (hardware, software, or combi-
nation of both) used to compress/decompress an audio and/or video ﬁle for storage
or transmission. Codecs convert data between uncompressed and compressed for-
mats, thereby reducing the bandwidth a clip consumes.
Collocated Satellites Two or more satellites occupying approximately the same
geostationary orbital position such that the angular separation between them is
effectively zero when viewed from the ground. To a small receiving antenna, the
satellites appear to be exactly collocated; in reality, the satellites are kept several
kilometers apart in space to avoid collisions. Different operating frequencies and/or
polarizations are used.
Colon Hexadecimal Notation The notation used to represent IPv6 addresses.
The 128-bit address is divided into eight blocks of 16 bits. Each block is
represented as a hexadecimal number and is separated from the next block
by means of a colon (:). Inside each block, left zeros placed are removed. An
example of an IPv6 unicast address represented in hexadecimal notation is
3FFE:FFFF:2A1D:48C:2AA:3CFF:FE21:81F9.
Compatibility Addresses IPv6 addresses used when IPv6 trafﬁc is sent through
an IPv4 infrastructure. Some examples are IPv4 compatible addresses, 6to4
addresses, and ISATAP addresses.

GLOSSARY
309
Compressing Zeros Some IPv6 addresses expressed in colon-hexadecimal contain
long sequences of zeros. A contiguous sequence of 16-bit blocks set to 0 in the
colon-hexadecimal format can be compressed to :: (known as double-colon). The
following shows examples of compressing zeros (4):
The link-local address of FE80:0:0:0:2AA:FF:FE9A:4CA2 can be compressed
to FE80::2AA:FF:FE9A:4CA2.
The multicast address of FF02:0:0:0:0:0:0:2 can be compressed to FF02::2.
Zero compression can only be used to compress a single contiguous series of
16-bit blocks expressed in colon-hexadecimal notation.
Conﬁdentiality The property that information is not made available or disclosed to
unauthorized individuals, entities, or processes.
Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP) CoAP is a simple application layer
protocol targeted to simple electronics devices (e.g., IoT/M2M things) to allow
them to communicate interactively over the Internet. CoAP is designed for low-
power sensors and for actuators that need to be controlled or monitored remotely,
using IP/Internet networks.
Continuous Wave In RFID environments, typically a sinusoid at a given frequency,
but more generally any interrogator waveform suitable for powering a passive
tag without amplitude and/or phase modulation of sufﬁcient magnitude to be
interpreted by a tag as transmitted data (7).
Correspondent Node Refers to a node that is communicating with a node that is
using mobile IP.
Cover-coding In RFID environments, a method by which an interrogator obscures
information that it is transmitting to a tag. To cover-code data or a password, an
interrogator ﬁrst requests a random number from the tag. The interrogator then
performs a bit-wise EXOR of the data or password with this random number
and transmits the cover-coded (also called ciphertext) string to the tag. The tag
uncovers the data or password by performing a bit-wise EXOR of the received
cover-coded string with the original random number (7).
DASH7 A long range low-power wireless networking technology, with the following
features:
r Range: dynamically adjustable from 10 m to 10 km;
r Power: <1 milliwatt power draw;
r Data rate: dynamically adjustable from 28 Kbps to 200 Kbps;
r Frequency: 433.92 MHz (available worldwide);
r Signal propagation: penetrates walls, concrete, water;
r Real-time locating precision: within 4 m;
r Latency: conﬁgurable, but worst case is less than 2 s;
r P2P messaging;
r IPv6 support;
r Security:128-bit AES, public key; and
r Standard: ISO/IEC 18000-7; advanced by the DASH7 Alliance.

310
GLOSSARY
DASH7 Alliance The DASH7 Alliance was formed to advance the use of DASH7
wireless data technology by developing extensions to the ISO 18000-7 standard,
ensuring interoperability among devices, and educating the market about DASH7
technology. Formed in 2009, the Alliance had more than 20 members at press
time. Manufacturers, systems integrators, developers, regulators, academia, and
end-users all work together to promote the use of DASH7 technology in a wide
array of industries and applications.
Data Encryption Standard (DES) A 64-bit block cipher, symmetric algorithm also
known as data encryption algorithm (DEA) by ANSI and DEA-1 by ISO. Widely
used for over two decades, adopted in 1976 as FIPS 46 (5).
Data Origin Authentication The corroboration that the source of data received is
as claimed.
Datagram Another name for an IP-level packet.
Decoding The decompression of an encoded ﬁle for playback or use.
Decoding Time Stamp (DTS) Time stamps are inserted close to the material to
which they refer (normally in the PES packet header). They indicate the exact
moment where a video frame or an audio frame has to be decoded or presented to
the user respectively. These rely on reference time stamps for operation (12).
Default Route The route with a ::/0 preﬁx. The default route is the route used to
obtain the next destination address when there are no other matching routes.
Default Routers List A list of routers that can be used as a default router. The list is
populated based on router advertisement messages received that have a non-null
router lifetime.
Delay-Tolerant Network (DTN) An architecture being developed by the Delay-
Tolerant Networking Research Group (DTNRG), which is a research group char-
tered as part of the Internet Research Task Force (IRTF). Members of DTNRG
are concerned with how to address the architectural and protocol design prin-
ciples arising from the need to provide interoperable communications with and
among extreme and performance-challenged environments where continuous end-
to-end connectivity cannot be assumed. Stated another way, one is concerned with
interconnecting highly heterogeneous networks together even if end-to-end con-
nectivity may never be available. Examples of such environments include space-
craft, military/tactical, some forms of disaster response, underwater, and some
forms of ad-hoc sensor/actuator networks. It may also include Internet connec-
tivity in places where performance may suffer such as developing parts of the
world (13). This work is also related to DARPA’s disruption tolerant networking
program.
Delay-tolerant networks make use of store-and-forward techniques within
the network in order to compensate for intermittent link connectivity. In the
DTN, the fundamental concept is an architecture based on Internet-independent
middleware where protocols at all layers are used that best suit the operation
within each environment, with a new overlay network protocol (bundle proto-
col) inserted between the applications and the locally optimized communications
stacks. Many applications can beneﬁt from the reliable delivery of messages in

GLOSSARY
311
a disconnected network. The Internet, in contrast, is a connected network where
IPs, most notably transmission control protocol/IP (TCP/IP), are dependent upon
(low) latencies of approximately milliseconds. This low latency, coupled with low
bit error rates (BERs), allows TCP to reliably transmit and receive acknowledge-
ments for messages traversing the terrestrial Internet. One of the best examples of
high latency, high BER links, with intermittent connectivity is that of space com-
munications. One-way trip times, at the speed of light, from the Earth to the moon
incur a delay of 1.7 s, while one-way trip times to Mars incur a minimum delay of
8 min. Military applications in the DTN arena are substantial, allowing the retrieval
of critical information in mobile battleﬁeld scenarios using only intermittently
connected network communications (14).
Denial of Service (DoS) The prevention of authorized access to resources or the
delaying of time-critical operations.
Device Lower Layer (DLL) Component of the lower layer in an M2M device.
Digital Signature Data appended to, or a cryptographic transformation of a data
unit that allows a recipient of the data unit to prove the source and integrity of the
data unit and protect against forgery for example, by the recipient.
Digital Subscriber Line (DSL) A 1990s technology that exploits unused frequen-
cies on copper telephone lines to transmit trafﬁc typically at multi-megabit speeds.
DSL can allow voice and high-speed data to be sent simultaneously over the same
line. Because the service is “always available,” end-users do not need to dial in or
wait for call setup. Asymmetrical variations include ADSL, G.lite ADSL (or sim-
ply G.lite), VDSL (ITU-T G.993.1), and VDSL2 (ITU-T G.993.2). The standard
forms of ADSL (ITU G.992.3, G.992.5, and ANSI T1.413—Issue 2) are all built
upon the same technical foundation, discrete multitone (DMT). The suite of ADSL
standards facilitates interoperability between all standard forms of ADSL (15).
Digital Subscriber Line Access Multiplexer (DSLAM) Telephone carrier equip-
ment typically residing at the Central Ofﬁce that terminates multiple DSL lines
(usually 96, 192, or 384) and multiplexes the combined output to an ATM, MPLS,
or IP uplink. The uplink is typically an OC-3 (155 Mbps) or an OC-12 (622 Mbps).
Distance Vector Routing Protocol A routing protocol in which a router periodically
informs its neighbors of topology changes. This is in contrast to link state routing
protocols, which require a router to inform all the nodes in a network of topology
changes (16).
DNP3 DNP3 is a protocol for transmission of point-to-point data using serial com-
munications. It has been used primarily by utilities, but can also be used in other
areas. The DNP3 is speciﬁcally developed for interdevice communication involv-
ing SCADA RTUs. It is based on the three-layer model contained in the IEC
60870-5 standards.
Domain Name System (DNS) A hierarchical storage system and its associated
protocol to store and retrieve information about names and IP addresses.
Double Colon Notation used in compressing continuous series of 0 blocks in IPv6
addresses. For example, the FF02:0:0:0:0:0:0:2 multicast address is expressed as
FF02::2.

312
GLOSSARY
Dual Stack Architecture A node architecture in which two complete protocols
stack implementations exist, one for IPv4 and one for IPv6, each with its own
implementation of the transport layer (TCP and UDP).
Dynamic Host Conﬁguration Protocol (DHCP) A conﬁguration protocol that pro-
vides IP addresses and other conﬁguration parameters when connected to an IP
network.
Dynamic Host Registration A mechanism that informs the network that a host
(receiver) is a member of a particular group (otherwise, the network would have
to ﬂood rather than multicast the transmissions for each group.) For IP networks,
the Internet Group Multicast Protocol (IGMP) serves this purpose.
EDGE (Enhanced Data Rates for Global Evolution) An enhancement of the
GSMTM radio access technology to provide faster bit rates for data applications,
both circuit and packet switched. As an enhancement of the existing GSM phys-
ical layer, EDGE is realized via modiﬁcations of the existing layer 1 speciﬁ-
cations rather than by separate, stand-alone speciﬁcations. Other than providing
improved data rates, EDGE is transparent to the service offering at the upper lay-
ers, but is an enabler for high-speed circuit switched data (HSCSD) and enhanced
GPRS (EGPRS). GPRS can offer a data rate of 115 Kbps, whereas EDGE can
increase this to 384 Kbps. This is comparable with the rate for early implemen-
tations of wideband code division multiple access (W-CDMA), leading some
parties to consider EDGE as a 3G technology rather than 2G (a capability of
384 Kbps allows EDGE systems to meet the ITU’s IMT-2000 requirements).
EDGE is generally viewed as a bridge between the two generations: a sort of
2.5G (17).
eHealth A term for healthcare practice supported by electronic processes and com-
munication.
Electronic Product Code (EPC) A unique identiﬁer for a physical object, unit load,
location, or other identiﬁable entity playing a role in business operations. EPCs are
assigned the following rules designed to ensure uniqueness despite decentralized
administration of code space and to accommodate legacy coding schemes in
common use. EPCs have multiple representations, including binary forms suitable
for use on RFID tags and text forms suitable for data exchange among enterprise
information systems.
Encapsulating Security Payload An IPv6 extension header that provides data
source authentication, data integrity, and conﬁdentiality.
Encapsulator A network device that receives PDUs (also known as SNDUs) (Eth-
ernet frames or IP datagrams) and formats these for output as a transport stream
of TS packets (18).
Encoder A device that converts an audio or video signal to a speciﬁc streaming
format, for example, MPEG-4 (or MPEG-2). The conversion typically includes
compression and generation on an IP packet.
Encoding Converting a ﬁle into a compressed format.

GLOSSARY
313
Encryption The process of making a message unintelligible for all who do not have
the proper key.
Entitlement Access criteria authorizations.
EPCglobal Architecture Framework A collection of interrelated standards (“EPC-
global Standards”), together with services operated by EPCglobal, its delegates,
and others (“EPC Network Services”), all in service of a common goal of enhanc-
ing business ﬂows and computer applications through the use of EPCs.
ESN Electronic serial number.
Ethernet Over an MPLS (EoMPLS) Transport of native Ethernet over an MPLS
pseudowire.
ETSI Machine-to-Machine (M2M) Machine-to-machine (M2M) communications
is the communication between two or more entities that do not necessarily need any
direct human intervention. M2M services intend to automate decision and com-
munication processes. Deﬁned in ETSI TS 102 689 V1.1.1 (2010-08) and ETSI
TS 102 690 V1.1.1 (2011-10) (and elsewhere). Basic applications include, but
are not limited to, smart meters, eHealth, track and trace, monitoring, transaction,
control, home automation, city automation, connected consumers, and automotive
(19,20).
EUI-64 Address 64-bit link-layer address that is used as the basis to generate inter-
face identiﬁers in IPv6.
eUICC A certiﬁed tamper-resistant hardware component, performing the role of a
traditional UICC (universal integrated circuit card), which may be soldered into
mobile devices, to run the secure network access application (s) and enable the
secure changing of subscription identity and other subscription data.
European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) An independent, non-
proﬁt European-focused organization whose mission is to produce telecommuni-
cations standards.
Extended Access Barring (EAB) 3GPP-deﬁned capability that extends legacy
access control barring (ACB), which can bar all User Equipment (UEs) in a
cell.
Extended Unique Identiﬁer (EUI) Link-layer address deﬁned by the Institute of
Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE).
Extension Headers Headers placed between the IPv6 header and higher-level pro-
tocols headers to provide additional functionalities to IPv6.
Fibre Channel (FC) The dominant storage networking protocol used in the enter-
prise data center and for (multimedia) content storage. A high-speed stor-
age/networking interface that offers a high performance, large transfer capacity,
long cabling distance, system conﬁguration ﬂexibility and scalability, and sim-
pliﬁed cabling. The current operating speed is 8 Gbps; the expectation is that a
16 Gbps rate will be achievable by mid-decade (by comparison, 10 Gbps Ether-
net is expected to move up to a 40 Gbps or even 100 Gbps rates over the same
period).

314
GLOSSARY
File Formats Container ﬁle formats for various platforms. The more common for-
mats include:
avi (audio video interleave)—A multimedia container ﬁle format developed by
Microsoft to allow synchronous audio-with-video playback.
.ﬂv—Flash video ﬁle format; used to deliver video over the Internet.
.mov—A video publishing ﬁle format developed by Apple for use with their
QuickTime video players.
.wmv (windows media video)—An audio and video ﬁle encoded for use with
Windows media player.
Fixed Satellite Service (FSS) A satellite service that (for ITU Region 2 segments
covering the majority of the Americas) operates at 14.0–14.5 GHz for the uplink
and 11.7–12.2 GHz the downlink. Geostationary satellites are utilized. The service
is utilized by television stations/broadcast networks/cable TV systems to distribute
signals to afﬁliates across a wide geographic region, as well as for other traditional
telecommunications (voice and data communications) applications. Typical video
applications include content distribution from a content-generation center (e.g.,
studios) to local cable headends. FSS satellites have also been used for direct-
to-home (DTH) applications, although Direct Broadcast Satellite (DBS) services
at the ku-BSS frequencies (such as those used by DirecTV and Dish Network)
are speciﬁcally intended for those applications. The term “ﬁxed” is used to imply
that the sending station is ﬁxed and the receiving stations are generally (but not
always) ﬁxed. This is in contrast to the mobile satellite services (MSSs), which
refer to communications satellites intended for use with mobile and portable wire-
less devices/telephones. MSS-supporting services can be delivered using GEO,
medium earth orbit (MEO), or low earth orbit (LEO) satellites.
Flow A series of IP datagrams exchanged between a source and a destination.
Format Preﬁx Variable number of high-order bits of an IPv6 address that deﬁnes
an IPv6 address type.
Forward Direction The dominant direction of data transfer over a network path.
Data transfer in the forward direction is called “forward transfer.” Packets traveling
in the forward direction follow the forward path through the IP network (18).
Forward Error Correction (FEC) FEC is a family of well-known simplex error
correction techniques that add “coding” bits to the information bits at the transmit
end (encoder) that enables the decoder to determine which bits are in error and
correct them (up to a limit); for example, R 4/5 FEC means 1 coding bit is added
for every 4 information bits (thereby transmitting 5 bits); the more coding bits, the
“stronger” the code (requires less transmit power or link quality to get the same per-
formance), but more coding bits mean more bandwidth required. Because satellite
transmission can attenuate the signal by up to 200 db, FEC is critical. High cod-
ing: R 1/2; low coding: R 7/8. Typical satellite FEC is either convolutional/viterbi
with Reed–Solomon or Turbo coding. Typical Turbo codes provide about a 2 dB
advantage over conventional codes. ‘Viterbi’ soft-decision decoding has been the
norm (<4.4dB gain). “Turbo coding” has been advanced recently (<6.3dB gain).
“Low Density Parity Check” (LDPC) is the newest algorithm (<7.8dB gain).

GLOSSARY
315
Fragment A portion of a message sent by a host in an IPv6 datagram. Fragments
contain a fragmentation header to allow reassembly at the destination.
Fragmentation Process in which the source device divides a message into some
number of smaller messages, termed fragments.
Fragmentation Header An IPv6 extension header that contains information that
allows the receiving node to reassemble fragments into the original message.
Frame Rate The rate at which video frames are displayed. The frame rate for movies
on ﬁlm is 24 frames per second (24 fps). Standard NTSC video has a frame rate of
30 fps (actually 60 ﬁelds per second). The frame rate of a progressive-scan video
format is twice that of an interlaced-scan format. For example, interlaced formats
like 480i and 1080i deliver 30 complete frames per second; progressive formats
like 480p, 720p and 1080p provide 60 (21).
Full-Rate Asymmetrical DSL (ADSL) Access technology that offers differing
upload and download speeds and can be conﬁgured to deliver up to six megabits
of data per second (6000 Kbps) from the network to the customer that is up to 120
times faster than dialup service and 100 times faster than integrated services digital
network (ISDN). ADSL enables voice and high-speed data to be sent simultane-
ously over the existing telephone line. This type of DSL is the most predominant
in commercial use for business and residential customers around the world. Good
for general Internet access and for applications where downstream speed is most
important, such as video-on-demand. ITU-T Recommendation G.992.1 and ANSI
Standard T1.413-1998 specify full-rate ADSL. ITU Recommendation G.992.3
speciﬁes ADSL2 that provides advanced diagnostics, power-saving functions,
PSD shaping, and slightly better performance than G.992.1. ITU Recommenda-
tion G.992.5 speciﬁes ADSL2Plus that provides the beneﬁts of ADSL2Plus twice
the bandwidth so that bit rates as high as 20 Mbps downstream can be achieved
on relatively short lines (15).
Fully Qualiﬁed Domain Name (FQDN) FQDN gives the full location of a resource
within the whole DNS name space. When interpreting the FQDN, one starts at the
root and then follows the sequence of domain labels from right to left, going top
to bottom within the name space tree. An FQDN includes the top-level domain.
For example, www.cnn.com is an FQDN. www is the host, cnn is the second-level
domain, and com is the top-level domain. This is in contrast to a partially qualiﬁed
domain name (PQDN), which does not give the full path to the domain. One can
only use a PQDN within the context of a particular parent domain.
Future Network (FN) The ITU-T FN is a network that will be able to provide
revolutionary services, capabilities, and facilities that are hard to support using
existing network technologies. Also, it is expected that the FN will overcome
the limitations of the current networks. The FN includes core technologies that
are necessary for constructing future networking infrastructure and application
service infrastructure. In 2009, ITU-TSG13 established “Focus Group on Future
Networks (FG-FN)” to share the discussion on FNs and ensure global common
understanding about FNs with collaboration and harmonization with relevant enti-
ties and activities. The FG successfully completed its work in 2010. The FG, by

316
GLOSSARY
collaborating with worldwide FN communities (e.g., research institutes, forums,
academia), aims to
r collect and identify visions of FNs, based on new technologies,
r assess the interactions between FNs and new services,
r familiarize ITU-T and standardization communities with emerging attributes of
FNs, and
r encourage collaboration between ITU-T and FN communities.
G.lite ADSL (or Simply G.lite A standard that was speciﬁcally developed to meet
the plug-and-play requirements of the consumer market segment. G.lite is a
medium bandwidth version of ADSL that allows Internet access at up to 30
times the speed of the fastest 56K analog modems—up to 1.5 Mbps downstream
and up to 500 Kbps upstream. G.lite is an International Telecommunications
Union (ITU) standard, globally standardized interoperable ADSL system per ITU
G.992.2. G.lite has seen comparatively little use, but it did introduce the valuable
concept of splitterless installation (15).
Gateway Lower Layer (GLL) Component of the lower layer in an M2M gateway.
General Packet Radio Service (GPRS) Packet-switched functionality for GSM,
which is essentially circuit switched. GPRS is the essential enabler for always-
on data connection for applications such as web browsing and push-to-talk over
cellular. GPRS was introduced into the GSM speciﬁcations in Release 97, and
usability was further approved in Releases 98 and 99. It offers faster data rates
than plain GSM by aggregating several GSM time slots into a single bearer,
potentially up to eight, giving a theoretical data rate of 171 Kbps. Most operators
do not offer such high rates, because obviously if a slot is being used for a
GPRS bearer, it is not available for other trafﬁc. Also, not all mobiles are able
to aggregate all combinations of slots. The “GPRS class number” indicates the
maximum speed capability of a terminal, which might be typically 14 Kbps in the
uplink direction and 40 kbit/s in the downlink, comparable with the rates offered by
current wireline dial-up modems. Mobile terminals are further classiﬁed according
to whether or not they can handle simultaneous GSM and GPRS connections: class
A = both simultaneously, class B = GPRS connection interrupted during a GSM
call, automatically resumed at end of call, class C = manual GSM/GPRS mode
switching. Further data rate increases have been achieved with the introduction of
EDGE (17).
Geostationary Orbit/Satellite The orbit of a geosynchronous satellite whose orbit
lies in the plane of the earth’s equator. A satellite orbiting the earth at such speed
that it permanently appears to remain stationary with respect to the earth’s surface.
Geosynchronous Object An object orbiting the earth at the earth’s rotational speed
and with the same direction of rotation. The object appears at the same position
in the sky at a particular time each day, but will not appear stationary if it is not
orbiting in the equatorial plane.

GLOSSARY
317
GLOB Addressing RFC 2770 recommended that the 233.0.0.0/8 address range be
reserved for statically deﬁned addresses by organizations that already have an AS
number reserved. The AS number of the domain is embedded into the second and
third octets of the 233.0.0.0/8 range. GLOP is a mechanism that allocates multicast
addresses to ASs. (GLOP is neither an acronym nor an abbreviation.)
Global Address See aggregatable global unicast address.
GPRS (General Packet Radio Service) A mobile packet data service available to
users of GSM. It provides data rates of up to 40–170 Kbps, depending upon device
capabilities, network conﬁgurations, and system load.
Group-Based Machine-Type Communications (MTC) Feature A group-based
MTC feature is an MTC feature that applies to an MTC group. This is a 3GPP
concept (22).
Group Identiﬁer Last 112 bits (for predeﬁned multicast addresses) or last 32 bits
(for new multicast addresses) of an IPv6 multicast address used to identify a
multicast group (RFC2373).
GSM (Global System for Mobile Communications) GSM is a global cellular
network standard, but used mostly outside the U.S.
GSM EDGE Radio Access Network (GERAN) GERAN is a radio access net-
work architecture, based on GSM/EDGE radio access technologies. GERAN is
the term given to the second-generation digital cellular GSM radio access tech-
nology, including its evolutions in the form of EDGE and, for most purposes,
the GPRS. The GERAN is harmonized with the UMTS terrestrial radio access
network (UTRAN) through a common connectivity to the UMTS core network
making it possible to build a combined network for GSM/GPRS and UMTS.
GERAN is also the name of the 3GPPTM Technical Speciﬁcation Group responsi-
ble for its development. The Technical Speciﬁcations which together comprise a
3GPP system with a GERAN are listed in 3GPP TS 41.101.
HDSL (High Data Rate DSL) A DSL variety created in the late 1980s delivers
symmetric service at speeds up to 2.3 Mbps in both directions. Available at 1.5
or 2.3 Mbps, this symmetric ﬁxed rate application does not provide standard
telephone service over the same line and is already standardized through ETSI
and ITU. Seen as an economical replacement for T1 or E1, it uses one, two, or
three twisted copper pairs (15).
HDSL2 (Second-Generation HDSL) A variant of DSL that delivers 1.5 Mbps ser-
vice each way, supporting voice, data, and video using either ATM (asynchronous
transfer mode), private-line service, or frame relay over a single copper pair.
This ATIS standard (T1.418) for this symmetric service gives a ﬁxed 1.5 Mbps
rate both up and downstream. HDSL2 does not provide standard voice telephone
service on the same wire pair. HSDL2 differs from HDSL in that HDSL2 uses one
pair of wires to convey 1.5 Mbps, whereas ANSI HDSL uses two wire pairs (15).
HDSL4 A HDSL that is virtually the same as HDSL2 except it achieves about 30%
greater distance than HDSL or HDSL2 by using two pairs of wire (thus, four
conductors), whereas HDSL2 uses one pair of wires (15).

318
GLOSSARY
Hierarchical Storage Management (HSM) A storage system in which new, fre-
quently used data is stored on the fastest, most accessible (and generally more
expensive) media (e.g., RAID) and older, less frequently used data is stored on
slower (less expensive) media (e.g., tape) (23).
Higher-Level Checksum A checksum based on the IPv6 pseudo-header, used in
ICMPv6, TCP, and UDP.
Higher-Level Protocol Protocol that uses IPv6 as transport and is carried as a
payload in IPv6, such as ICMPv6, TCP, and UDP.
Home Area Network (HAN) A local area network (LAN) applicable to a residential
home. Can be wired or wireless.
Home Network (HN) A communication system designed for the residential envi-
ronment, in which two or more devices exchange information.
Hop-By-Hop Option Header An IPv6 extension header that contains options that
must be processed by all intermediate routers as well as ﬁnal router.
Host Any node that is not a router.
Host-To-Host Tunnel An IPv6 over IPv4 tunnel where endpoints are hosts.
Host-To-Router Tunnel An IPv6 over IPv4 tunnel in which the tunnel begins at a
host and ends at an IPv6/IPv4 router.
HTTP Streaming The default higher-layer protocol for streaming audio and video
over the Internet. It involves the simultaneous download and viewing/listening of
the ﬁle through HTTP (24).
Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) An application-level, stateless, object-
oriented protocol for distributed, collaborative, hypermedia information systems.
ICC Terminal/integrated circuit card
ICMPv6 See Internet control message protocol for IPv6.
IEEE 802.11v 802.11v, wireless network management, is an extension of existing
802.11 Wi-Fi devices ﬁrst proposed in 2004 to add some networking capabilities
to Wi-Fi systems and to address power management issues. 802.11v automati-
cally cutting power to the Wi-Fi chip when it is not being used. Speciﬁcally, it
provides further extension to base 802.11 power saving, which allows for longer
power-off times for 802.11 radios; it enables “wake on WLAN.” The access point
responds to address resolution protocol (ARP) requests to enable stations to power
down for longer periods (25). As of press time, balloting on P802.11v D15.0 had
closed; however, an additional recirculation ballot had taken place to address
assigned number issues discovered subsequently in industry interoperability
testing.
IEEE 802.15.4 IEEE standard for local and metropolitan area networks—Part
15.4: Low-Rate Wireless Personal Area Networks (LR-WPANs). IEEE 802.15.4-
conformant devices support a wide range of industrial and commercial appli-
cations. The amended MAC sublayer facilitates industrial applications such
as process control and factory automation in addition to the MAC behav-
iors that support the Chinese wireless personal area network (CWPAN)
standard.

GLOSSARY
319
IEEE 802.15.4j (TG4j) Medical Body Area Networks The purpose of Task Group
4j (TG4j) is to create an amendment to 802.15.4, that deﬁnes a physical layer
for IEEE 802.15.4 in the 2360 to 2400 MHz band and complies with Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) MBAN rules. The amendment may also
deﬁne modiﬁcations to the MAC needed to support this new physical layer. This
amendment allows 802.15.4- and MAC-deﬁned changes to be used in the MBAN
band (26).
IEEE 802.1ad IEEE 802.1ad (provider bridges) is an amendment to IEEE standard
IEEE 802.1Q-1998, intended to develop an architecture and bridge protocols to
provide separate instances of the MAC services to multiple independent users of
a bridged LAN in a manner that does not require cooperation among the users
and requires a minimum of cooperation between the users and the provider of the
MAC service. This is a standard version of the Q-in-Q protocol used by Cisco for
carrier Ethernet service (11).
IEEE 802.1ah Provider backbone bridges (PBBs) is being formalized by IEEE
802.1ah standards. It allows for layering the Ethernet network into customer and
provider domains with complete isolation among their MAC addresses. It deﬁnes
a B-DA and B-SA to indicate the backbone source and destination address. It also
deﬁnes B-VID (backbone Virtual LAN (VLAN) ID) and I-SID (service instance
VLAN ID).
IEEE 802.1q IEEE 802.1Q was a project in the IEEE 802 standards process to
develop a mechanism to allow multiple bridged networks to transparently share
the same physical network link without leakage of information between networks
(i.e., trunking). IEEE 802.1Q is also the name of the standard issued by this
process, and in common usage the name of the encapsulation protocol used to
implement this mechanism over Ethernet networks. IEEE 802.1Q also deﬁnes the
meaning of a virtual LAN or VLAN with respect to the speciﬁc conceptual model
underpinning bridging at the MAC layer and to the IEEE 802.1D-spanning tree
protocol. This protocol allows for individual VLANs to communicate with one
another with the use of a layer 3 (network) router (11).
IETF-Constrained RESTful Environments (CoRE) Working Group IETF
Working Group that is working on standardization for constrained networks,
such as, but not limited to, low-power and lossy networks (LLNs). LLN is class
of networks in which both the routers and their interconnects are constrained.
LLN routers typically operate with constraints on processing power, memory, and
energy (battery power).
IMEI International mobile equipment identity.
IMEISV International mobile equipment identity and software version.
Inclination (Satellite) The angle between the plane of the orbit of a satellite and
the earth’s equatorial plane. An orbit of a perfectly geostationary satellite has an
inclination of 0.
Inclined Orbit An orbit that approximates the GEO but whose plane is tilted slightly
with respect to the equatorial plane. The satellite appears to move about its
nominal position in a daily “ﬁgure-of-eight” motion when viewed from the ground.

320
GLOSSARY
Spacecrafts (satellites) are often allowed to drift into an inclined orbit near the
end of their nominal lifetime in order to conserve on-board fuel, which would
otherwise be used to correct this natural drift caused by the gravitational pull of
the sun and moon. North–South maneuvers are not conducted, allowing the orbit
to become highly inclined.
Incoming Interface (iif) In protocol-independent multicast-sparse mode (PIM-SM),
the iif of a multicast route entry indicates the interface from which multicast data
packets are accepted for forwarding. The iif is initialized when the entry is created
(27).
Industrial, Scientiﬁc, and Medical (ISM) Radio Bands The ISM radio bands are
radio bands allocated internationally for the said purpose. The ISM bands are
deﬁned by the ITU-R in 5.138, 5.150, and 5.280 of the radio regulations. In the
United States, uses of the ISM bands are governed by Part 15 and Part 18 of the
FCC rules. There are a number of ISM bands, but the most well known is the one
covering the 2400–2500 MHz region (some other bands include allocations a 6.7
MHz, 13.5 MHz, 26.9 MHz, 40.6 MHz, 433 MHz, 902 MHz, and 5725 MHz.)
Infrared Data Association (IrDA R⃝) IrDA is an SIG consisting of about 40 members
at press time. The SIG is pursuing a 1 Gbps connectivity link; however, this link
only operates over a distance of less than 10 cm. One of the challenges with
infrared (IR) signaling is its requirement for line-of-sight (LOS) requirement.
Additionally, IrDA is also not very power efﬁcient (power per bit) when compared
with radio technologies.
Integrated Services Digital Network DSL (ISDL) A form of DSL that supports
symmetric data rates of up to 144 Kbps using existing phone lines. It is unique
in that it has the ability to deliver services through a DLC (digital loop carrier: a
remote device often placed in newer neighborhoods to simplify the distribution
of cable and wiring from the phone company). While DLCs provide a means of
simplifying the delivery of traditional voice services to newer neighborhoods, they
also provide a unique challenge in delivering DSL into those same neighborhoods.
IDSL addresses this market along with ADSL and G.lite as they are implemented
directly into those DLCs. IDSL differs from its relative ISDN in that it is an
“always-available” service, but capable of using the same terminal adapter, or
modem, used for ISDN (15).
Integrity The property that data has not been altered or destroyed in an unauthorized
manner.
Interface A node’s attachment to a link. A representation of a physical or logical
link of a node to a link. An example of a physical interface is a network interface.
An example of a logical interface is a tunnel interface.
Interface Identiﬁer Last 64 bits of a unicast or anycast IPv6 address.
Intermediary (in the CoAP Environment) A CoAP endpoint that acts both as a
server and as a client toward (possibly via further intermediaries) an origin server.
There are two common forms of intermediary: proxy and reverse proxy. In some
cases, a single endpoint might act as an origin server, proxy, or reverse proxy,
switching behavior based on the nature of each request (28).

GLOSSARY
321
Internet-Based TV (IBTV) Video distribution approaches such as Web television,
Internet television, and/or user-generated video (UGV).
Internet Control Message Protocol for IPv6 (ICMPv6) Protocol for internet con-
trol messages for IPv6. A protocol that provides error messages for the routing and
delivery of IPv6 datagrams and information messages for diagnostics, neighbor
discovery (ND), multicast receiver discovery, and IPv6 mobility.
Interrogator In
RFID
environments,
a
device
that
modulate/transmit
and
receive/demodulate a sufﬁcient set of the electrical signals deﬁned in the signaling
layer to communicate with conformant tags while conforming to all local radio
regulations. A typical interrogator is a passive-backscatter, interrogator-talks-ﬁrst
(ITF), RFID system operating in the 860 MHz–960 MHz frequency range. An
interrogator transmits information to a tag by modulating an RF signal in the 860
MHz–960 MHz frequency range. The tag receives both information and operating
energy from this RF signal. Tags are passive, meaning that they receive all of their
operating energy from the interrogator’s RF waveform. An interrogator receives
information from a tag by transmitting a continuous-wave (CW) RF signal to
the tag; the tag responds by modulating the reﬂection coefﬁcient of its antenna,
thereby backscattering an information signal to the interrogator (7).
Interworking Mechanisms for IPv6 and IPv4 Well-known interworking mecha-
nisms include (29):
r Dual stack: A technique for providing complete support for both protocols—
IPv4 and IPv6—in hosts and routers.
r Conﬁgured tunneling of IPv6 over IPv4: Manually conﬁgured point-to-point
tunnels for encapsulating IPv6 packets within IPv4 headers to carry them over
an IPv4 routing infrastructures.
r Automatic tunneling of IPv6 over IPv4: Mechanisms for automatically tunnel-
ing IPv6 packets over IPv4 networks.
r Translation: Refers to the direct conversion of protocols.
Intra-Site Automatic Tunnel Addressing Protocol (ISATAP) An IPv6 transition
technology that provides IPv6 unicast connectivity between devices placed in an
IPv4 intranetwork. ISATAP obtains an interface identiﬁer from the IPv4 address
(public or private) assigned to the device. This identiﬁer is used for the establish-
ment of automatic tunnels through the IPv4 infrastructure (16).
Intra-Site Automatic Tunnel Addressing Protocol (ISATAP) Address An IPv6
address of the form 64-bit preﬁx:0:5EFE:w.x.y.z, where w.x.y.z is a public or
private IPv4 address allocated to an ISATAP device.
Intra-Site Automatic Tunnel Addressing Protocol (ISATAP) Device A device to
which an ISATAP address is assigned to.
Intra-Site Automatic Tunnel Addressing Protocol (ISATAP) Name The name
“ISATAP” is resolved by computers with Windows XP or Windows Server 2003
operating system to automatically discover the ISATAP router address for initial
conﬁguration.

322
GLOSSARY
Intra-Site Automatic Tunnel Addressing Protocol (ISATAP) Router An
IPv6/IPv4 router that answers ISATAP node requests and routes trafﬁc to and
from ISATAP nodes.
IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS) IMS is a 3GPP/3GPP2 initiative to deﬁne an all
IP-based wireless network as an evolution from historically distinct voice, data,
signaling, and control network elements.
IP Over Ethernet (IPoE) IP over Ethernet is used in DSL and PON access networks
in place of PPPoE.
IP Storage Using IP and gigabit Ethernet to build storage area networks (SANs).
Traditional SANs were developed using the FC transport, because it provided
gigabit speeds compared to 10 and 100 Mbps Ethernet used to build messaging
networks at that time. FC equipment has been costly, and interoperability between
different vendors’ switches was not completely standardized. Since gigabit Eth-
ernet and IP have become commonplace, IP storage enables familiar network
protocols to be used, and IP allows SANs to be extended throughout the world.
Variants include:
r Internet FCP (iFCP)
r Metro ﬁber channel protocol (mFCP)
r Internet small computer system interface (iSCSI)
r Fiber channel over Internet protocol (FCIP)
IP6.arpa The DNS domain created for the IPv6 reverse resolution (RFC 3596). The
reverse resolution has the purpose of “reverse mapping” of IPv6 addresses to DNS
names.
IPoDWDM Optical Network Carriage of IP packets directly over the optical layer
provided by a dense-wavelength division multiplexing optical system.
IPSO Alliance The IPSO Alliance is an advocate for IP networked devices for use
in energy, consumer, healthcare, and industrial applications. The objective of the
Alliance is not to deﬁne technologies or standards, but to document the use of
IP-based technologies deﬁned at the standard organizations such as IETF with
focus on support by the Alliance of various use cases.
IPv4 Node A node that implements IPv4; it can send and receive IPv4 packets. It
can be an IPv4-only node or a dual IPv4/IPv6 node.
IPv4-Compatible IPv6 Address A 0:0:0:0:0:0:w.x.y.z or ::w.x.y.z address, where
w.x.y.z is the decimal representation of a public IPv4 address. For example,
::131:107:89:42 is an IPv4-compatible address. IPv6 transition mechanisms no
longer use IPv4-compatible address scheme.
IPv4-Mapped IPv6 Address A 0:0:0:0:0:FFFF:w.x.y.z (or ::FFFF:w.x.y.z) address,
where w.x.y.z is the IPv4 address of an IPv4-only node. Mapped IPv4 addresses
are used to represent an IPv4-only host.
IPv6 in IPv4 See IPv6 over IPv4 tunnel.

GLOSSARY
323
IPv6 Node Node that implements IPv6; it can send and receive IPv6 packets. An
IPv6 node can be an IPv6-only node or a dual IPv6/IPv4 node.
IPv6 Over IPv4 Tunnel Encapsulating IPv6 packets into an IPv4 datagram and
transporting the datagram over an IPv4 infrastructure. In the IPv4 header, the
protocol ﬁeld value is 41.
IPv6 Preﬁxes The initial bits of an IP address. The number of bits is represented
via the preﬁx-length notation. Preﬁxes for IPv6 routes and subnet identiﬁers are
expressed in the same way as classless interdomain routing (CIDR) notation for
IPv4. For example, 21DA:D3::/48 is a route preﬁx and 21DA:D3:0:2F3B::/64 is
a subnet preﬁx. IPv4 implementations commonly use a dotted decimal represen-
tation of the network preﬁx known as the subnet mask. A subnet mask is not used
in IPv6. Only the preﬁx-length notation is used (4).
IPv6 Routing Protocol for LLNs (RPL) A mechanism proposed by the IETF to
support multipoint-to-point trafﬁc from devices inside LLNs toward a central
control point, as well as point-to-multipoint trafﬁc from the central control point
to the devices inside the LLN (30).
IPv6 Routing Table Set of routes used to determine the next node address and
interface when forwarding IPv6 trafﬁc.
IPv6/IPv4 Node A node that has both IPv4 and IPv6 implementations.
ISA100.11a ISA SP100 standard for wireless industrial networks developed by the
International Society of Automation (ISA) to address all aspects of wireless tech-
nologies in a plant. The ISA100 Committee addresses wireless manufacturing and
control systems in the areas of the: (i) environment in which the wireless technol-
ogy is deployed; (ii) technology and life cycle for wireless equipment and systems;
and (iii) application of wireless technology. The wireless environment includes the
deﬁnition of wireless, radio frequencies (starting point), vibration, temperature,
humidity, EMC, interoperability, coexistence with existing systems, and physical
equipment location. ISA100.11a Working Group Charter addresses (31):
r Low-energy consumption devices, with the ability to scale to address large
installations
r Wireless infrastructure, interfaces to legacy infrastructure and applications,
security, and network management requirements in a functionally scalable man-
ner
r Robustness in the presence of interference found in harsh industrial environ-
ments and with legacy systems
r Coexistence with other wireless devices anticipated in the industrial work
space
r Interoperability of ISA100 devices
Key A digital code used to encrypt, sign, decrypt, and verify messages and ﬁles. A
sequence of symbols that controls the operations of encipherment and decipher-
ment.

324
GLOSSARY
Key Management Generation, distribution, storage, replacement, and destruction
of keys.
Key Pair A public key and its complementary private key. In public-key systems,
each user has at least one key pair.
KNX and KNX-RF KNX (administered by the KNX Association) is an OSI-based
network communications protocol for intelligent buildings deﬁned in standards
CEN EN 50090 and ISO/IEC 14543. KNX is the follow-on standard built on the
European Home Systems Protocol (EHS), BatiBUS, and the European Installation
Bus (EIB or Instabus). Effectively, KNX uses the communication stack of EIB but
augmented with the physical layers and conﬁguration modes BatiBUS and EHS;
thus, KNX includes the following PHYs:
r Twisted pair wiring (inherited from the BatiBUS and EIB Instabus standards).
This approach uses differential signaling with a signaling speed of 9.6 Kbps.
MAC is controlled with the CSMA/CA method;
r Powerline networking (inherited from EIB and EHS);
r Radio (KNX-RF);
r IR; and
r Ethernet (also known as EIBnet/IP or KNXnet/IP).
Layer 2 Layer 2 of the protocol stack. This typically refers to the set of Ethernet
protocols that operate below the IP layer of the protocol stack.
Layer 2 Tunneling Protocol (L2TP) Layer 2 tunneling protocol (L2TP) is a tun-
neling protocol used to support virtual private networks (VPNs).
Layer 3 Layer 3 of the open systems interconnection (OSI) protocol stack. This
refers to the IP used for routing in the Internet.
Lifetime in Preferred State Time during which a unicast address, obtained by
means of stateless autoconﬁguration mechanism, stays in the preferred state. This
time is speciﬁed by the preferred lifetime ﬁeld in Routers Advertisement message
preﬁx information option.
Limited Scope Addresses (also known as Administratively Scoped Addresses)
The range of addresses from 239.0.0.0 through 239.255.255.255. RFC2365 deﬁnes
these addresses to be limited to a local group or organization (RFC2365). Routers
are required to be conﬁgured with packet ﬁlters to prevent multicast trafﬁc in this
address range from ﬂowing outside of an AS.
Link A communication facility or medium over which nodes can communicate at
the link layer, i.e., the layer immediately below IPv6. Examples include Ethernet
environments (simple or bridged); PPP links; X.25 Packet Switching, Frame Relay,
Cell Relay/ATM; or IPv4.
Link-Local Addresses IP multicast addresses that have been reserved for speciﬁc
functions. Addresses in the 224.0.0.0 through 224.0.0.255 are reserved to be used
by network protocols on a local network segment. Network protocols make use

GLOSSARY
325
of these addresses for automatic router discovery and to communicate routing
information (e.g., OSPF uses 224.0.0.5 and 224.0.0.6 to exchange link state infor-
mation). IP packets with these addresses are not forwarded by a router; they
remain local on a particular LAN segment (they have a time-to-live [TTL] param-
eter set to 1; even if the TTL is different from 1, they still are not forwarded by
the router).
Link State Routing Protocol A routing protocol in which a router informs all
the nodes in a network of topology changes. Information exchanged consists
of preﬁxes of networks connected to the router and their associated cost. This
is in contrast to distance vector routing protocols that exchange routing table
information but only with neighboring nodes.
Link-Layer Identiﬁer A link-layer identiﬁer for an interface. Examples include
IEEE 802 addresses for Ethernet or token ring network interfaces and E.164
addresses for ISDN links.
Link-Local Address An IPv6 address having a link-only scope, indicated by the
preﬁx (FE80::/10), which can be used to reach neighboring nodes attached to the
same link. Every interface has a link-local address.
Local Address An IPv6 unicast address that is not reachable on IPv6 Internet. Local
addresses include “link-local” and “site-local” addresses.
Local Interface Internal interface that allows a node to send packets to itself.
Long-Term Evolution (LTE) (aka 4G) LTE is a project named an “all IP” standard
for mobile trafﬁc that will increase the broadband capabilities beyond current 3G
mobile technologies. LTE is the 3GPP initiative to evolve the UMTS technology
toward a fourth generation (4G.) LTE can be viewed as an architecture framework
and a set of ancillary mechanisms that aims at providing seamless IP connectivity
between User Equipment (UE) and the packet (IPv4, IPv6) data network without
any disruption to the end-users’ applications during mobility. In contrast to the
circuit-switched model of previous-generation cellular systems, LTE has been
designed to support only packet-switched services.
Loopback Address The IPv6 address—0:0:0:0:0:0:0:1 or ::1—assigned to the local
interface.
Low-Power and Lossy Networks (LLNs) A class of network in which both the
routers and their interconnects are constrained. LLN routers typically operate
with constraints on processing power, memory, and energy (battery power). Their
interconnects are characterized by high loss rates, low data rates, and instability
(30).
Lower Layer (LL) Allows DSCL, GSCL, and NSCL components to exchange data
on behalf of applications and perform other appropriate communication.
M2M (Machine-to-Machine) Term used to refer to M2M communication, i.e.,
automated data exchange between machines. (“Machine” may also refer to virtual
machines such as software applications.) M2M is an enabler of the Internet of
things (IoT).

326
GLOSSARY
M2M Area Network Layer Provides the communication between DA/GA compo-
nents and DSCL/GSCL components.
M2M Service Provider’s Domain Domain that includes the network application
domain and any standardized systems under the control of the M2M service
provider which interact with the M2M service capabilities.
M2M System Comprises network application domain, M2M devices domain, and
any interfaces or networks required to connect those entities.
MAC Address A link-layer address for LAN technologies such as Ethernet and
token ring. It is also referred to as a physical address, hardware address, or network
adapter address.
MAC Header The link-layer header of the IEEE 802.3 standard or Ethernet v2. It
consists of a 6B destination address, 6B source address, and 2B type ﬁeld (see
also NPA, LLC) (32).
Machine (Host) A node that cannot send datagrams not created by itself. A machine
(host) is both the source and destination of IPv6 trafﬁc and will discard trafﬁc that
is not speciﬁcally addressed to it.
Machine-to-Machine (M2M) Communication Communication between remotely
deployed (generally low-end) devices with speciﬁc responsibilities and requiring
little or no human intervention, which are all connected to an application server
via the mobile network data communications.
Machine-Type
Communications
(MTC) M2M
system
communication
as
described by the 3GPP.
Machine-Type Communications (MTC) Device An MTC device is a UE equipped
for MTC, which communicates through a public land mobile network (PLMN)
with MTC server(s) and/or other MTC device(s).
NOTE: An MTC device might also communicate locally (wirelessly, possibly
through a PAN, or hardwired) with other entities which provide the MTC device
“raw data” for processing and communication to the MTC server(s) and/or other
MTC device(s). This is a 3GPP concept (22).
Machine-Type Communications (MTC) Feature MTC features are network func-
tions to optimize the network for use byM2M applications. This is a 3GPP concept
(22).
Machine-Type Communications (MTC) Group An MTC group is a group of MTC
devices that share one or more group-based MTC features and that belong to the
same MTC subscriber. This is a 3GPP concept (22).
Machine-Type Communications (MTC) Server An MTC server is an entity, which
communicates to the PLMN itself, and to MTC devices through the PLMN. The
MTC server also has an interface that can be accessed by the MTC user. The MTC
server performs services for the MTC user. This is a 3GPP concept (22).
Machine-Type Communications (MTC) User An MTC user uses the service pro-
vided by the MTC server. This is a 3GPP concept (22).
Maximum Transmission Unit (MTU) Maximum transmission unit (MTU) refers
to the size (in bytes) of the largest packet that a given layer of a communications

GLOSSARY
327
protocol can pass onward. MTUs are deﬁned at the link layer (frame maximum
size) and at the network or Internet layer (maximum IPv6 packet size).
Maximum-Level Aggregation Identiﬁer (aka top-level aggregation identiﬁer—
TLA ID). Thirteen-bit ﬁeld inside the global unicast address reserved for large
organizations or ISP by the IANA; hence, it identiﬁes the address range that they
have delegated. The TLA scheme has been obsolete by RFC 3587.
M-BUS The M-Bus (“Meter-Bus”) is a European standard for remote reading of gas
and electric meters; it is also usable for all other types of consumption meters. It
is speciﬁed as follows:
r EN 13757-2 (physical and link layer)
r EN 13757-3 (application layer)
r Note: the frame layer uses IEC 870 and the network (packet layer) is optional.
A radio variant of M-Bus (wireless M-Bus) is also speciﬁed in EN 13757-4.
Media Access Control (MAC) Media access and control of the Ethernet IEEE 802
standard and protocols (18). Its functionalities include the creation of frames and
the management of medium sharing and access.
Medical Body Area Network System (MBANS) Low-power radio system used for
the transmission of non-voice data to and from medical devices for the purposes
of monitoring, diagnosing, and treating patients as prescribed by duly authorized
healthcare professionals (33).
MEO satellite A satellite with an earth orbit within the range from a few hundred
miles to a few thousand miles above the earth’s surface; this orbit is called medium
earth orbit, hence MEO. MEO satellites orbit higher than LEO satellites, but lower
than geostationary (GEO) satellites.
MEID Mobile equipment identiﬁer.
mHealth A term for eHealth services using mobile phones or cellular networks.
Mobility The ability for the end-user or other mobile entities to communicate and
access services irrespective of changes of the location or technical environment.
Motion Picture Expert Group (MPEG) A family of standards used for coding
audio-visual information (e.g., movies, video, music) in a digitally compressed
format. There are three major MPEG standards: MPEG-1, MPEG-2, and the newer
MPEG-4. Both MPG-2 and MPEG-4 are important for IPTV, but the recent trend
is in favor of MPEG-4.
MPEG-2 (Motion Picture Experts Group-2) A set of multiplexing/encoding stan-
dards speciﬁed by the Motion Picture Experts Group (MPEG) and standardized
by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO/IEC 113818-1) and
ITU-T (H.220).
MPLS VPN A layer 3 virtual IP network speciﬁed by RFC2547bis. It used a combi-
nation of border gateway protocol (BGP) routing and MPLS forwarding to create

328
GLOSSARY
a virtual IP network on top of a service provider’s physical IP network. MPLS
VPN services are replacing frame relay and ATM services (11).
Multicast A methodology and supporting mechanisms, technologies, and standards
for distribution of information (including video content) over the Internet. Multi-
cast allows a server to inject a single copy of a given content into the Internet and
many receivers (computers, smart phones, Internet-ready TV sets, and so on), but
not the entire universe of receivers as would be the case in broadcast, to receive
and play the same stream simultaneously.
Multicast Address An address that identiﬁes several interfaces and is used to deliver
data from one source to several destinations. That is, an identiﬁer for a set of
interfaces typically belonging to different nodes. By means of the multicast routing
topology, packets to a multicast address will be delivered to all interfaces identiﬁed
by that address.
An identiﬁer for a group of nodes. An IP multicast address or group address, as
deﬁned in “Host Extensions for IP Multicasting,” STD 5, RFC 1112, August 1989,
and in “IP Version 6 Addressing Architecture,” RFC2373, July 1998. The Internet
Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) controls the assignment of IP multicast
addresses. IANA has allocated what has been known as the Class D address
space to be utilized for IP multicast. IP multicast group addresses are in the range
224.0.0.0 through 239.255.255.255.
Multicast Address Dynamic Client Allocation Protocol (MADCAP) A protocol
deﬁned in RFC2730 that allows hosts to request multicast addresses from multicast
address allocation servers. This protocol is part of the IETF Multicast Address
Allocation Architecture (34).
Multicast Address Set Claim Protocol (MASC) Protocol deﬁned in RFC2909 that
can be used for interdomain multicast address set allocation. MASC is used by a
node (typically a router) to claim and allocate one or more address preﬁxes to that
node’s domain. While a domain does not necessarily need to allocate an address
set for hosts in that domain to be able to allocate group addresses, allocating an
address set to the domain does ensure that interdomain group-speciﬁc distribution
trees will be locally rooted, and that trafﬁc will be sent outside the domain only
when and where external receivers exist (35).
Multicast Environment Environment where one system communicates to a select
group of other systems.
Multicast Group Set of interfaces listening to a speciﬁc multicast address.
Multicast IPv4 Tunnel See 6over4.
Multicast Listener Discovery Protocol (MLDv2) MLDv2 is an MLD protocol that
is used by an IPv6 router to discover the presence of multicast listeners on directly
attached links, and to discover which multicast addresses are of interest to those
neighboring nodes. MLDv2 is designed to be interoperable with MLDv1. MLDv2
adds the ability for a node to report interest in listening to packets with a particular
multicast address only from speciﬁc source addresses or from all sources except
for speciﬁc source addresses (36).

GLOSSARY
329
The Internet Group Management Protocol (IGMP) (RFC1112, IGMPv2,
IGMPv3) allows an IPv4 host to communicate IP multicast group membership
information to its neighboring routers; IGMPv3 provides the ability for a host
to selectively request or ﬁlter trafﬁc from individual sources within a multicast
group. MLD deﬁned in RFC2710 (MLDv2) offers similar functionality for IPv6
hosts. MLDv2 provides the analogous “source ﬁltering” functionality of IGMPv3
for IPv6 (37).
Multicast OSPF (MOSPF) Protocol deﬁned in RFC 1584 that provides enhance-
ments to OSPF Version 2 to support IP multicast routing. With MOSPF, an IP
multicast packet is routed based both on the packet’s source and on its multicast
destination (commonly referred to as source/destination routing). As it is routed,
the multicast packet follows a shortest path to each multicast destination. During
packet forwarding, any commonality of paths is exploited; when multiple hosts
belong to a single multicast group, a multicast packet will be replicated only when
the paths to the separate hosts diverge.
OSPF, a link-state routing protocol, provides a database describing the AS’s
topology. A new OSPF link state advertisement has been added describing the
location of multicast destinations. A multicast packet’s path is then calculated by
building a pruned shortest-path tree (SPT) rooted at the packet’s IP source. These
trees are built on demand, and the results of the calculation are cached for use by
subsequent packets (38).
Multicast Payload Forwarding Communication mechanism to forward payload.
Almost invariably, this is IP based at the network layer. Typical IP multicast
applications make use of user datagram protocol (UDP) at the transport layer;
however, TCP can also be used in same applications.
Multicast Routing A mechanism to build distribution trees that deﬁne a unique for-
warding path between the subnet of the content source and each subnet containing
members of the multicast group, speciﬁcally, receivers.
Multicast Routing Information Base (MRIB) This is the multicast topology
table, which is typically derived from the unicast routing table, or from rout-
ing protocols such as MBGP that carry multicast-speciﬁc topology informa-
tion. PIM-DM uses the MRIB to make decisions regarding RPF interfaces
(39).
Multicast Scope A range of multicast addresses conﬁgured so that trafﬁc sent to
these addresses is limited to some subset of the internetwork. Deﬁned in “Admin-
istratively Scoped IP Multicast,” BCP 23, RFC2365, July 1998.
Multicast Source Discovery Protocol (MSDP) A protocol that allows multi-
ple PIM-SM domains to share information about active sources. The protocol
announces active sources to MSDP peers. It is a BGP-like protocol that allows a
rendezvous point (RP) to forward source and multicast group information to other
RPs (e.g., to support redundant RPs or multidomain applications where each ISP
can each have its own RP(s)) (40).
Multichannel audio Audio signal with more than two channels.

330
GLOSSARY
Multiprotocol Border Gateway Protocol (MP-BGP) (also referred to by the
acronym form MBGP) A protocol that deﬁnes multiprotocol extensions to the
BGP, the unicast interdomain protocol that supports multicast-speciﬁc routing
information. MP-BGP augments BGP to enable multicast routing policy and
connect multicast topologies within and between BGP ASs. It carries multiple
instances of routes for unicast routing as well as multicast routing. Protocol that
carries routing information about several protocols, including IP multicast (and
also IPv6 and MPLS VPN information, among others). In IP multicast, MP-BGP
carries a separate copy of unicast routes. MP-BGP helps establish which links
the PIM join messages use, which in turn allows us to control which links the
multicast trafﬁc traverses (40).
Name Resolution Procedure to obtain an IP address from a name.
Named Data Networking (NDN) A proposed architecture that moves the communi-
cation paradigm from today’s focus on “where,” i.e., addresses, servers, and hosts,
to “what,” i.e., the content that users and applications care about. By naming data
instead of their location (IP address), NDN transforms data into ﬁrst-class entities.
While the current Internet secures the communication channel or path between
two communication points and sometimes the data with encryption, NDN secures
the content and provides essential context for security. This approach allows the
decoupling of trust in data from trust in hosts and servers, enabling trustworthi-
ness as well as several radically scalable communication mechanisms, for example,
automatic caching to optimize bandwidth and the potential to move content along
multiple paths to the destination (41). This architecture may be applicable to the
IoT.
Near-Field Communication (NFC) A group of standards for devices such as PDAs,
smartphones, and tablets that support the establishment of wireless communication
when such devices are in immediate proximity of a few inches. These standards
encompass communications protocols and data exchange formats; they are based
on existing RFID standards including ISO/IEC 14443 and FeliCa (a contactless
RFID smart card system developed by Sony, for example utilized in electronic
money cards in use in Japan). NFC standards include ISO/IEC 18092, as well
as other standards deﬁned by the NFC Forum. NFC standards allow two-way
communication between endpoints (earlier generation systems were one-way sys-
tems only). Unpowered NFC-based tags can also be read by NFC devices; hence
this technology can substitute for earlier one-way systems. Applications of NFC
include contactless transactions.
Neighbor Discovery (ND) A set of messages and ICMPv6 processes that ﬁxes the
relations between neighbor nodes. ND replaces ARP, ICMP routes discovery, and
ICMP redirection messages used in IPv4. It also provides inaccessible neighbor
detection.
Neighbor Discovery Options Options in an ND message that show link-layer
addresses, information about preﬁxes, MTU, and routes and conﬁguration infor-
mation for IPv6 mobility.
Neighbors Nodes connected to the same link.

GLOSSARY
331
Neighbors Cache A cache supported by each IPv6 node that stores the IP address of
its neighbors on the link, its corresponding link-layer address, and an indication
of its accessibility state. Neighbors cache is equivalent to the ARP cache in IPv4.
Network Address Translation-Protocol Translation (NAT-PT) Process per-
formed by a network device on the boundary of an IPv4 and IPv6 network.
NAT-PT uses a pool of IPv4 addresses for dynamic assignment to the IPv6 nodes.
NAT-PT also allows the multiplexing of multiple sessions on a single IPv4 address
via the “port” ﬁeld.
Network Addresses Translator (NAT) A device that translates IP addresses and
port numbers when forwarding packets between a network with private addresses
and the Internet.
Network Point of Attachment (NPA) A 6-byte destination address (resembling an
IEEE MAC address) within the MPEG-2 transmission network that is used to
identify individual receivers or groups of receivers (32).
Network-Attached Storage (NAS) A disk array storage system that is attached
directly to a network rather than to the network server (i.e., host attached). It func-
tions as a server in a client/server relationship; has a processor, an operating system,
or micro-kernel; and processes ﬁle I/O protocols such as SMB and NFS (23).
Next-Generation Network (NGN) According to ITU-T Recommendation Y.2001
(12/2004) “General overview of NGN,” an NGN is a packet-based network able
to provide Telecommunication Services to users and able to make use of multiple
broadband, QoS-enabled transport technologies and in which service-related func-
tions are independent of the underlying transport-related technologies. It enables
unfettered access for users to networks and to competing service providers and ser-
vices of their choice. It supports generalized mobility, which will allow consistent
and ubiquitous provision of services to users.
The NGN is characterized by the following fundamental aspects:
r Packet-based transfer
r Separation of control functions among bearer capabilities, call/session, and
application/service
r Decoupling of service provision from transport and provision of open interfaces
r Support for a wide range of services, applications, and mechanisms based on
service building blocks (including real-time/streaming/non-real-time services
and multimedia)
r Broadband capabilities with end-to-end QoS and transparency
r Interworking with legacy networks via open interfaces
r Generalized mobility
r Unfettered access by users to different service providers
r A variety of identiﬁcation schemes which can be resolved to IP addresses for
the purposes of routing in IP networks
r Uniﬁed service characteristics for the same service as perceived by the user

332
GLOSSARY
r Converged services between ﬁxed and mobile networks
r Independence of service-related functions from underlying transport technolo-
gies
r Support of multiple last mile technologies
r Compliant with all regulatory requirements, for example concerning emergency
communications and security/privacy.
Next-Level Aggregation Identiﬁer (NLA ID) 24-bit ﬁeld inside the global unicast
aggregatable address that allows the creation of several hierarchical levels of
addressing to organize addresses and routing to other ISPs, as well as to identify
organization sites. The NLA scheme has been obsolete by RFC 3587.
NIKE+ R⃝A proprietary wireless technology developed by Nike and Apple to allow
users to monitor their activity levels while exercising. Its power consumption
is relatively high, returning only 40 days of battery life from a coin cell. It is a
proprietary radio that only works between Nike and Apple devices. Nike+ devices
are shipped as a single unit: processor, radio, and sensor (10).
NIT (Network Information Table) MPEG signaling table that contains details of
the bearer network used to transmit the MPEG multiplex, including the carrier
frequency (PID=10) (12).
Node A device that implements IP.
Node Types Node types in an IPv6 environment include the following (29):
r IPv4-only node: A host or router that implements only IPv4. An IPv4-only node
does not understand IPv6. The installed base of IPv4 hosts and routers existing
before the transition to IPv6 begins are IPv4-only nodes.
r IPv6/IPv4 node: A host or router that implements both IPv4 and IPv6.
r IPv6-only node: A host or router that implements IPv6 and does not implement
IPv4.
r IPv6 node: Any host or router that implements IPv6. IPv6/IPv4 and IPv6-only
nodes are both IPv6 nodes.
r IPv4 node: Any host or router that implements IPv4. IPv6/IPv4 and IPv4-only
nodes are both IPv4 nodes.
Non-Broadcast Multiple Access (NBMA) A link-layer technology that supports
links with more than two nodes, but without allowing the sending of a packet
to all nodes on the link (broadcast). Example technologies include X.25 packet-
switching service, frame relay service, and cell relay service/ ATM.
Non-Broadcast Networks A network supporting the attachment of more than two
stations, but not supporting the delivery of a single physical datagram to multiple
destinations (i.e., not supporting data-link multicast). OSPF describes these net-
works as non-broadcast, multiaccess networks. An example of a non-broadcast
network is an X.25 public data network (38).

GLOSSARY
333
Non-Multicast router In the context of MOSPF, a router running OSPF Version 2,
but not the multicast extensions. These routers do not forward multicast datagrams,
but can interoperate with MOSPF routers in the forwarding of unicast packets.
Routers running the MOSPF protocol are referred to as either multicast-capable
routers or MOSPF routers (38).
Object An object is a model of an entity. An object is characterized by its behavior,
and an object is distinct from any other object. An object interacts with its envi-
ronment including other objects at its interaction points. An object is informally
said to perform functions and offer services (an object that performs a function
available to other entities and/or objects is said to offer a service). For modeling
purposes, these functions and services are speciﬁed in terms of the behavior of the
object and of its interfaces. An object can perform more than one function and a
function can be performed by the cooperation of several objects (42,43).
Object Storage An emerging storage approach similar to ﬁle-based storage except it
makes greater use of metadata. It trades the efﬁciency and performance of block-
based storage for easier management and more automation. Object metadata will
let content providers and enterprises manage the storage more effectively and apply
policies based on the data content, regulatory requirements, ownership of the data,
or based on other principles. The metadata can also be used to dynamically store
data at the most appropriate service levels (44).
Operating Environment In RFID environments, a region within which an inter-
rogator’s RF transmissions are attenuated by less than 90 dB. In free space, the
operating environment is a sphere whose radius is approximately 1000 m, with
the interrogator located at the center. In a building or other enclosure, the size and
shape of the operating environment depends on factors such as the material prop-
erties and shape of the building and may be less than 1000 m in certain directions
and greater than 1000 m in other direction (7).
Operating Procedure In RFID environments, collectively, the set of functions and
commands used by an interrogator to identify and modify tags (also known as the
tag-identiﬁcation layer (7).
Orbit (Satellite) The path described by the center of mass of a satellite in space,
subjected to natural forces, principally gravitational attraction, but occasional low-
energy corrective forces exerted by a propulsive device in order to achieve and
maintain the desired path.
Orbital Plane (Satellite) The plane containing the center of mass of the earth and
the velocity vector (direction of motion) of a satellite.
Outgoing Interface (oif) List In PIM-SM, each multicast route entry has an oif list
containing the outgoing interfaces to which multicast packets should be forwarded
(27).
Packet Protocol data unit (PDU) at network layer. In IPv6, a packet that consists of
an IPv6 header and an IPv6 payload.
Parameter Discovery Part of the ND process that allows nodes to learn conﬁguration
parameters, including link MTU, and the default hop limit for outgoing packets.

334
GLOSSARY
Passive Tag (or Passive Label) In RFID environments, a tag (or label) whose
transceiver is powered by the RF ﬁeld.
Path Determination Procedure to select the route from the routing table for use in
forwarding the datagram.
Path MTU Maximum IPv6 packet size that can be sent without using fragmentation
between a source and a destination over an IPv6 network route. The route MTU
equates with the smallest link MTU for all links in such route.
Path MTU Discovery Process relating to the use of ICMPv6 “Too Big” message to
discover the path MTU.
Path Vector A routing protocols approach that involves the exchange of hop infor-
mation sequences showing the path to follow in a route. For example, BGP-4
exchanges sequences of numbers of ASs.
Peaking Power Plants (also known as peaker plants or peakers) power plants that
typically operate only when there is a high peak demand for electric power.
Peer-Entity Authentication The corroboration that a peer entity in an association
is the one claimed.
Peer-to-Peer (P2P) Network A distributed system in which all nodes have identical
responsibilities and all communication is symmetric. P2P applications rely by
design on the interaction between end nodes. The nodes have signiﬁcant or total
independence of central servers. Every participating node acts as both a server and
a client. The idea behind P2P is to (1) bring communication to the edges of the
network to avoid overloading central servers and (2) harness the great number of
underutilized computers and Internet connections in people’s homes and ofﬁces.
This is accomplished by turning every user into a rebroadcaster. The content stream
is divided into small parts, and each part is distributed to one user’s computer. The
participating computers request missing parts from each other and exchange parts
to rebuild the whole content. Users can view the content, for example a movie, as
if it were sent directly from the content provider (45).
Personal Mobility Mobility for those scenarios where the end-user changes the
terminal device used for network access at different locations. The ability of a user
to access telecommunication services at any terminal on the basis of a personal
identiﬁer and the capability of the network to provide those services delineated in
the user’s service proﬁle (46).
Phishing Act of acquiring sensitive or personal information such as usernames, date
of birth, passwords or credit card details, by masquerading as a trustworthy entity.
Physical Layer In RFID environments, the data coding and modulation waveforms
used in interrogator-to-tag and tag-to-interrogator signaling.
PLC (Powerline Communications) PLC (also called powerline communication as
a singular term; also called powerline telecommunications [or PLT]) refers to
any technology that enables data transfer through powerlines by using advanced
modulation technology. Data communication can take place at narrowband or
broadband speeds. The technology has been around since the 1950s, but initially
only supported narrowband applications for relay management, for example for

GLOSSARY
335
public lighting. Broadband over PLC only began at the end of the 1990s. PLC is
thus a term used to identify technologies, equipments, applications, and services
aiming at providing users with communication means over existing “powerlines”
(cables transmitting electricity). The term broadband over powerline (BPL) is used
to underline the technology capability to address broadband services. As for the
term Access PLC, it is used to identify those PLC solutions aiming at providing
consumers with broadband services through the external electricity grid, while
in-home PLC is used to identify PLC solutions aiming at applications within the
home (47).
Point-To-Point Protocol (PPP) Point-to-point network encapsulation method that
provides frame delimiters, protocol identiﬁcation, and integrity services at the bit
level.
Point-to-Point Protocol over Ethernet (PPPoE) PPPoE is a network protocol for
encapsulating PPP frames in Ethernet frames. It is used mainly with ADSL ser-
vices. It offers standard PPP features such as authentication, encryption, and
compression.
Preﬁx The initial bits of an IP address. The number of bits is represented via the
preﬁx-length notation.
Preﬁx length The number of bits in a preﬁx.
Preﬁx List A collection of preﬁxes typically used when creating match conditions,
for example, for ﬁrewall ﬁlters.
Preﬁx-Length Notation Notation used to represent network preﬁx length. It uses
the “address/preﬁx length” form, where preﬁx length indicates the number of bits
in the preﬁx.
Presentation Time Stamp (PTS) Time stamps are inserted close to the material to
which they refer (normally in the PES packet header). They indicate the exact
moment where a video frame or an audio frame has to be decoded or presented to
the user respectively (12).
Privacy The right of individuals to control or inﬂuence what information related to
them may be collected and stored and by whom and to whom that information
may be disclosed.
Private Key Decryption key is often called private key in public-key systems. A
private key is also used for signing a message.
Private Security Sector Services and solutions such as but not limited to manned
guarding, alarm system integration and monitoring, and cash and valuables
handling.
Product Metadata Metadata related to a media ﬁle, including product id, category,
protecting services, access modes, usage rights, pricing info, scheduling info,
maturity rating, addressing, and so on (5).
Protocol Data Unit (PDU) A unit of information associated with a particular proto-
col. During transmission, the PDU of the N-layer in a protocol suite becomes the
payload of the PDU of the N-1 layer.

336
GLOSSARY
Proxy (in the CoAP Environment) A “proxy” is an endpoint selected by a client,
usually via local conﬁguration rules, to perform requests on behalf of the client,
doing any necessary translations. Some translations are minimal, such as for proxy
requests for “coap” URIs, whereas other requests might require translation to and
from entirely different application-layer protocols (28).
Pseudo-Header Provisional header that is built to calculate the needed checksum
for higher layer protocols. IPv6 uses a new pseudo-header format to calculate
UDP, TCP, and ICMPv6 checksums.
Pseudo-Periodic Event that is repeated at intervals of various lengths. For example,
the routes advertisement sent by an IPv6 router is made at intervals that are
calculated between a minimum and a maximum (16).
Pseudowire (PW) Emulation of a native service over a packet-switched network
(PSN). The native service may be ATM, frame relay, Ethernet, low-rate TDM, or
SONET/SDH, while the PSN may be MPLS, IP (either IPv4 or IPv6), or L2TPv3.
The ﬁrst PW speciﬁcations were the Martini draft for ATM PWs, and the TDMoIP
draft for transport of E1/T1 over IP. In 2001, the IETF set up the PWE3 Work-
ing Group, which was chartered to develop an architecture for service provider
edge-to-edge PWs, and service-speciﬁc documents detailing the encapsulation
techniques. Other standardization forums, including the ITU and the MFA Forum,
are also active in producing standards and implementation agreements for PWs
(11).
Public Key Encryption key is often called public key in public-key systems. A public
key can also be used for veriﬁcation of signatures (5).
Public-Key Algorithm An algorithm where the key used for encryption is different
from the key used for decryption. Furthermore, the private (decryption) key cannot
be calculated from the public (encryption) key (5).
Public-Key Infrastructure (PKI) System that provides public-key encryption and
digital signature services.
Public-Key Cryptography Standards (PKCS) Set of standards for public-key
cryptography from RSA Security Inc. See www.rsasecurity.com (5).
Q-in-Q An enhancement of IEEE 802.1q that allows service providers to create
carrier Ethernet VLANs that will preserve the IEEE 802.1q headers used in the
internal enterprise VLAN.
Quadrature Amplitude Modulation (QAM) Modulation technique that has been
used in Cable TV broadcasting (as well as in other applications).
Quaternary Phase Shift Keying (QPSK) Modulation technique for satellite broad-
casting.
Radio Frequency for Consumer Electronics (RF4CE) RF4CE is based on ZigBee
and was standardized in 2009 by four consumer electronics companies: Sony,
Philips, Panasonic, and Samsung. Two silicon vendors support RF4CE: Texas
Instruments and Freescale Semiconductor, Inc. RF4CE’s intended use is as a device
remote control system, for example for television set-top boxes. The intention is

GLOSSARY
337
that it overcomes the common problems associated with IR: interoperability, LOS,
and limited enhanced features (10).
Rate Adaptive DSL (RADSL) A non-standard version of ADSL. Note that standard
ADSL also permits the ADSL modem to adapt speeds of data transfer (15).
Real-Time Streaming Protocol (RTSP) An IETF protocol that is used for contin-
uous (streaming) of audio and video sessions. It provides the control for playing,
stopping, and media position control (e.g., fast forward) via bidirectional com-
munication sessions. An application-level protocol for control of the delivery of
data with real-time properties. It embodies an extensible framework to enable
controlled, on-demand delivery of real-time audio and video data; it uses TCP
or/or the user data protocol (UDP), depending on function.
Real-Time Transport Control Protocol (RTCP) (also known as RTP control pro-
tocol) An IETF protocol used for signaling, for example, identify and coordinate
the reporting of streaming ﬂow information (e.g., lost packets). Control protocol
that works in conjunction with RTP to control performance and for diagnostic
purposes. RTCP control packets are periodically transmitted by each participant
in an RTP session to all other participants.
Real-Time Transport Protocol (RTP) An IETF protocol (a set of commands and
processes) that is used to add timing and sequence information to each packet to
allow the reassembly of packets to reproduce real-time audio and video informa-
tion. A UDP-based packet format and set of conventions that provides end-to-end
network connectivity functions suitable for applications transmitting real-time
data, such as audio, video, and etcetera, over multicast or unicast network ser-
vices.
RTP provides end-to-end delivery services for data with real-time charac-
teristics, such as interactive audio and video. Those services include payload
type identiﬁcation, sequence numbering, time stamping, and delivery monitoring.
Applications typically run RTP on top of UDP to make use of its multiplexing
and checksum services; both protocols contribute parts of the transport protocol
functionality. However, RTP may be used with other suitable underlying network
or transport protocols. RTP supports data transfer to multiple destinations using
multicast distribution if provided by the underlying network (48).
Reassembly Procedure to rebuild the original message that had been subject to
fragmentation.
Receiver Equipment that processes the signal from a TS multiplex and performs
ﬁltering and forwarding of encapsulated PDUs to the network-layer service (or
bridging module when operating at the link layer) (32).
Recipient The destination endpoint of a message.
Redirect Procedure included in the ND mechanisms to inform a host about the IPv6
address of another neighbor that is more appropriate as a next hop destination.
Redundant Array of Inexpensive Disks (RAIDs) Also known as “redundant array
of independent disks.” It is a storage approach (system) that provides high reliabil-
ity through redundancy. It combines multiple disk drive components into a logical

338
GLOSSARY
unit, allowing the data to be distributed across the drives in one of a number of
ways called “RAID levels.”
Reference Time Stamp Time stamp providing the indication of the current time.
Reference time stamps are to be found in the PES syntax (ESCR), in the program
syntax (SCR), and in the transport packet adaption program clock reference (PCR)
ﬁeld (12).
Representational State Transfer (REST) REST is an architectural style of large-
scale networked software that takes advantage of the technologies and protocols
of the World Wide Web; it describes how distributed data objects, or resources,
can be deﬁned and addressed, stressing the easy exchange of information and
scalability (49).
Repudiation Denial by one of the entities involved in a communication of having
participated in all or part of the communication.
Request Headers Request headers are used in client requests to communicate infor-
mation about the client.
Reverse Path Forwarding (RPF) In PIM-SM, RPF is used to select the appropriate
incoming interface (iif) for a multicast route entry. RPF is a multicast forwarding
mode in which a data packet is accepted for forwarding only if it is received on an
interface used to reach the source in unicast (39). The RPF neighbor for an address
X is the next-hop router used to forward packets toward X. The RPF interface is
the interface to that RPF neighbor. In the common case, this is the next hop used
by the unicast routing protocol for sending unicast packets toward X. For example,
in cases where unicast and multicast routes are not congruent, it can be different
(27).
Reverse Proxy (in the CoAP Environment) A “reverse proxy” is an endpoint that
acts as a layer above some other server(s) and satisﬁes requests on behalf of these,
doing any necessary translations. Unlike a proxy, a reverse proxy receives requests
as if it was the origin server for the target resource; the requesting client will not
be aware that it is communicating with a reverse proxy (28).
Router Node that can forward datagrams not speciﬁcally addressed to it. In an IPv6
network, a router is also used to send advertisements related to its presence and
node conﬁguration information.
Router Advertisement ND message sent by a router in a pseudo-periodic way or as a
router solicitation message response. The advertisement includes, at a minimum,
a preﬁx that can be used by the host to calculate its own unicast IPv6 address
following the stateless address conﬁguration procedures.
Router Discovery ND process that allows a node to discover routers connected to a
particular link.
Router-Port Group Management Protocol (RGMP) A protocol that constrains IP
multicast on switches that have only routers attached.
Routing Loop Undesirable situation in a network where trafﬁc is relayed over a
closed loop and never reaches its destination. The TTL ﬁeld is used to detect such
trafﬁc and delete it.

GLOSSARY
339
Routing Over Low-Power and Lossy Networks (ROLL) IETF Working Group
that has deﬁned application-speciﬁc routing requirements for an LLN routing
protocol; it has also speciﬁed the IPv6 routing protocol for low-power and lossy
networks (RPL) (30).
RP-Set In PIM-SM, the RP-Set is a set of RP addresses constructed by the BSR based
on candidate-RP advertisements received. The RP-Set information is distributed
to all PIM routers in the BSR’s PIM domain (27).
Satellite Footprint The geographic area of the earth on which a satellite’s direct
transmissions can be received by a ground-based station or home dish.
Satellite Systems Satellite communication plays a key role in commercial,
TV/media, government, and military communications because of its intrinsic
multicast/broadcast capabilities, mobility aspects, global reach, reliability, and
ability to quickly support connectivity in open-space and/or hostile environments.
Satellite communications is a LOS one-way or two-way radio frequency (RF)
transmission system that is comprised of a transmitting station (uplink), a satellite
system that acts as a signal regeneration node, and one or more receiving stations
(downlink). Satellites can reside in a number of orbits. A geosynchronous (GEO)
satellite circles the earth at the earth’s rotational speed and with the same direction
of rotation, therefore appearing at the same position in the sky at a particular time
each day. When the satellite is in the equatorial plane, it appears to be permanently
stationary when observed at the earth’s surface, so that an antenna pointed to it
will not require tracking or (major) positional adjustments at periodic intervals of
time (this satellite arrangement is also known as “geostationary”). The GEO is at
35,786 km (22,236 mi) of altitude from the earth’s surface. Other orbits include
the following: LEOs, MEOs (aka intermediate circular orbits [ICOs]), polar orbits,
and highly elliptical orbits (HEOs). LEOs are either elliptical or (more commonly)
circular orbits that are at a height of 2000 km or less above the surface of the earth.
The advantage of LEOs is that they signiﬁcantly reduce the propagation delay of
the signal. The orbit period at these altitudes varies between 90 min and 2 h, and
the maximum time during which a satellite in LEO orbit is above the local horizon
for an observer on the earth is up to 20 min. With LEOs, there are long periods
during which a given satellite is out of view of a particular ground station; this may
be acceptable for some applications, for example, for earth monitoring. Coverage
can be extended by deploying more than one satellite and using multiple orbital
planes. A complete global coverage system using LEOs requires a large number
of satellites (>12+) in multiple orbital planes and in various orbits (50).
Scope For IPv6 addresses, the scope is the portion of the network to which the trafﬁc
will be propagated.
Scope ID The scope ID is an identiﬁer for a speciﬁc area or scope.
Scope Zone One multicast scope may have several instances, which are known as
scope zones or zones, for short. For instance, an organization may have multiple
sites. Each site might have its own site-local scope zone, each of which would
be an instance of the site-local scope. However, a given interface on a given host
would only ever be in at most one instance of a given scope. Messages sent by

340
GLOSSARY
a host in a site-local scope zones to an address in the site-local scope would be
limited to the site-local scope zone containing the host (34).
Scrambling Term used as a word for weaker encryption or controlled distortion
of an analog signal. The distortion can be removed by possessing and using the
descrambling equipment and proper keys (5).
Scrambling Algorithm An algorithm used in a scrambling (encryption) or descram-
bling (decryption) process.
Second-Generation VDSL (VDSL2) An ITU Recommendation G.993.2 speciﬁes
eight proﬁles that address a range of applications including up to 100 Mbps
symmetric transmission on loops about 100 m long (using a bandwidth of 30
MHz), symmetric bit rates in the 10–30 Mbps range on intermediate-length loops
(using a bandwidth of 12 MHz), and asymmetric operation with downstream rates
in the range of 10–40 Mbps on loops of lengths ranging from 3 km to 1 km (using
a bandwidth of 8.5 MHz). VDSL2 includes most of the advanced feature from
ADSL2. The rate/reach performance of VDSL2 is better than VDSL (15).
Security Label The marking bound to a resource (e.g., a data unit) that names or
designates the security attributes of that resource.
Security Policy The set of criteria for the provision of security services.
Sender The originating endpoint of a message.
Sensor Network A sensor network is an infrastructure comprised of sensing (mea-
suring), computing, and communication elements that gives the administrator the
ability to instrument, observe, and react to events and phenomena in a speciﬁed
environment. The administrator typically is some civil, government, commercial,
or industrial entity. Typically, the connectivity is by wireless means, hence the
term wireless sensor network (WSN). The environment can be the physical world,
a biological system, or an information technology (IT) framework. Network(ed)
sensors systems are seen by observers as an important technology that will experi-
ence major deployment in the next few years for a plethora of applications, not the
least being homeland security. Typical applications include, but are not limited to,
data collection, monitoring, surveillance, and medical telemetry. There are four
basic components in a sensor network: (i) an assembly of distributed or localized
sensors; (ii) an interconnecting network (usually but not always wireless based);
(iii) a central point of information clustering; and (iv) a set of computing resources
at the central point (or beyond) to handle data correlation, event-trending, querying,
and data mining. In this context, the sensing and computation nodes are considered
part of the sensor network; in fact, some of the computing may be done in the
network itself. Because of the potentially large quantity of data collected, algorith-
mic methods for data management play an important role in sensor networks. The
computation and communication infrastructure associated with sensor networks is
often speciﬁc to this environment and rooted in the device- and application-based
nature of these networks. For example, unlike most other settings, in-network pro-
cessing is desirable in sensor networks; furthermore, node power (and/or battery
life) is a key design consideration.

GLOSSARY
341
Sensors Active devices that measure some variable of the natural or man-made
environment (e.g., a building, an assembly line). The technology for sensing and
control includes electric and magnetic ﬁeld sensors; radio-wave frequency sen-
sors; optical-, electro-optic-, and IR-sensors; radars; lasers; location/navigation
sensors; seismic and pressure-wave sensors; environmental parameter sensors
(e.g., wind, humidity, heat); and biochemical homeland security-oriented sensors.
Sensors can be described as “smart” inexpensive devices equipped with multiple
on-board sensing elements: they are low-cost, low-power, untethered multifunc-
tional nodes that are logically homed to a central sink node. Sensors are typically
internetworked via a series of multihop short-distance low-power wireless links
(particularly within a deﬁned “sensor ﬁeld”); they typically utilize the Internet or
some other network for long-haul delivery of information to a point (or points) of
ﬁnal data aggregation and analysis. In general, within the “sensor ﬁeld,” WSNs
employ contention-oriented random access channel sharing/transmission tech-
niques that are now incorporated in the IEEE 802 family of standards; indeed,
these techniques were developed in the late 1960s and 1970s expressly for wire-
less (not cabled) environments, and for large sets of dispersed nodes with limited
channel-management intelligence. Sensors span several orders of magnitude in
physical size; they (or, at least some of their components) range from nanoscopic
scale devices to mesoscopic scale devices at one end and from microscopic scale
devices to macroscopic scale devices at the other end. Nanoscopic (also known
as nanoscale) refers to objects or devices in the order of 1–100 nm in diameter;
mesoscopic scale refers to objects between 100 and 10,000 nm in diameter; the
microscopic scale ranges from 10 to 1000 μm; and the macroscopic scale is at the
millimeter-to-meter range. At the low end of the scale, one ﬁnds, among others,
biological sensors, small passive microsensors (such as “smart dust”—The Smart
Dust mote is an autonomous sensing, computing, and communication system that
uses the optical visible spectrum for transmission; they are tiny and inexpensive
sensors developed by UC Berkeley engineers), and “lab-on-a-chip” assemblies. At
the other end of the scale, one ﬁnds platforms such as, but not limited to, identity
tags; toll collection devices; controllable weather data collection sensors; bio-
terrorism sensors; radars; and undersea submarine trafﬁc sensors based on sonars.
Some refer to the latest generation of sensors, especially the miniaturized ones
that are directly embedded in some physical infrastructure, as “microsensors.” A
sensor network supports any kind of generic sensor; more narrowly, networked
microsensors are a subset of the general family of sensor networks. Microsensors
with on-board processing and wireless interfaces can be utilized to study and
monitor a variety of phenomena and environments at close proximity.
Server The destination endpoint of a request; the originating endpoint of a response.
Service Protection Ensuring that an end-user can only acquire a service, and, by
extension, the content contained therein, which they are entitled to receive.
Session Description Protocol (SDP) A media description speciﬁcation used for
describing multimedia sessions for the purposes of session announcement, session
invitation, and session initiation.

342
GLOSSARY
Session Key A key (normally symmetric) used to encrypt each set of data on a
transaction basis. A different session key is used for each communication session.
The session key is normally transferred to the receiver using a key exchange
mechanism or by encrypting the key under the receiver’s public key (5).
Shared Tree A tree that uses a single common root placed at some chosen point
in the network. This shared root is called a RP (also called core or center). All
sources in the multicast group use the common shared tree. The notation (∗, G) is
used to represents the tree. In this case “∗” is a wildcard to mean all sources.
Shortest-Path Tree (SPT) In PIM-SM, it is the SPT that is based on the merged
shortest paths from all receivers to the multicast source. This is one of the features
that distinguishes PIM-SM from core-based trees (CBT). When appropriate, the
use of the SPT provides an optimal distribution network that helps to keep the
multicast trafﬁc closer to the minimum required to deliver the information to all
members. (51). In PIM-SM, the SPT is the multicast distribution tree created by
the merger of all of the shortest paths that connect receivers to the source (as
determined by unicast routing) (27).
Singulation Identifying an individual tag in a multiple-tag environment.
Site-Level Aggregation Identiﬁer (SLA ID) 16-bit ﬁeld in the global unicast
address that identiﬁes subnetworks. The SLA ID ﬁeld is used by an individual
organization to create its own local addressing hierarchy and to identify subnets.
Site-Local Address Address identiﬁed by the 1111 1110 11 (FEC0::/10) preﬁx. The
scope of these addresses is a local site (of an organization). Site-local addresses
are not accessible from other sites and routers should not direct site-local trafﬁc
out of a site.
Slotted Random Anticollision In RFID environments, an anticollision algorithm
where tags load a random (or pseudo-random) number into a slot counter, decre-
ment this slot counter based on interrogator commands, and reply to the interroga-
tor when their slot counter reaches zero (7).
Smart Energy The term “smart energy” refers to actions and technologies that are
used to improve the efﬁciency of energy consumption.
Smart Grid (SG) An electricity network that can intelligently integrate the actions
of all users connected to it—consumers, generators, and those that do both—in
order to efﬁciently deliver sustainable, economic, and secure electricity supplies
(as deﬁned by the European Technology Platform for Electricity Networks for the
Future).
Smart Ubiquitous Networks (SUNs) ITU-T SUNs are IP-based packet networks
that can provide transport and delivery to a wide range of existing and emerging
services to people and things. The services provided by the networks can cover
aspects such as control, processing, and storage. The networks are smart in the
sense that they are knowledgeable, context aware, adaptable, autonomous, and
programmable and can instigate services effectively and securely. The networks
are ubiquitous in the sense that they allow access anytime, anywhere, through

GLOSSARY
343
varied access technologies, access devices including end-user devices and human–
machine interfaces. Due to emerging trends in Information and Communications
Technology (ICT) concerning the extension of communication objects (including
not only humans but also machines and objects) and ways of communication,
the ITU-T Study Group 13 has proposed a name—SUNs—as a new vision that
incorporates current activities and emerging trends. In 2011, it was decided that
activities for SUN in the following areas would commence: content awareness,
context awareness, programmability, smart resources management, and autonomic
network management (52).
Solicited-Node Address IPv6 multicast address used by nodes during the address
resolution process. The solicited-node address facilitates efﬁcient querying of
network nodes during address resolution. IPv6 uses the neighbor solicitation mes-
sage to perform address resolution. In IPv4, the ARP request frame is sent to the
MAC-level broadcast, disturbing all nodes on the network segment regardless of
whether a node is running IPv4. For IPv6, instead of disturbing all IPv6 nodes
on the local link by using the local-link scope all-node address, the solicited-node
multicast address is used as the neighbor solicitation message destination. The
solicited-node multicast address consists of the preﬁx FF02::1:FF00:0/104 and
the last 24-bits of the IPv6 unicast address that is being resolved (16).
Source Tree A tree that has its root at the multicast source and has branches forming
a spanning tree over the network to the receivers. The tree uses the shortest path
through the network and hence a separate SPT exists for each individual source
sending to each group. The notation of (S,G) is used to describe an SPT where S
is the IP address of the source and G is the multicast group address.
Source-Speciﬁc Multicast (SSM) A form of multicast in which a receiver is required
to specify both the network-layer address of the source and the multicast destina-
tion address in order to receive the multicast transmission. The 232/8 IPv4 address
range is currently allocated for SSM by IANA. In IPv6, the FF3x::/32 range (where
“x” is a valid IPv6 multicast scope value) is reserved for SSM semantics, although
today SSM allocations are restricted to FF3x::/96 (37).
Sparse-Mode (SM) protocols SM is one mode of operation of a multicast protocol.
PIM-SM uses explicit join/prune messages and RPs in place of dense-mode PIM’s
and DVMRP’s broadcast and prune mechanism (27). Multicast routing protocols
are designed on the assumption that only few routers in the network will need to
distribute multicast trafﬁc for each multicast group. SM protocols start out with
an empty distribution tree and add drop-off branches only upon explicit requests
from receivers to join the distribution. SM protocols are generally used in WAN
environments, where bandwidth considerations are important.
SSM-Aware Host A host that knows the SSM address range and is capable of
applying SSM semantics to it (37).
Stateless IP/ICMP Translation (SIIT) An IPv6 transition technique that allows
IPv4-only hosts to talk to IPv6-only hosts.

344
GLOSSARY
Static Routing Utilization of routes conﬁgured manually into a router’s routing
table.
Static Tunneling Tunneling technique where addresses are manually conﬁgured for
the tunnel source and destination endpoints.
Storage Infrastructure (typically in the form of appliances) that is used for the
permanent or semipermanent online retention of structured (e.g., databases) and
unstructured (e.g., business/e-mail ﬁles) corporate information. Typically includes
(i) a controller that manages incoming and outgoing communications as well as
the data steering onto the physical storage medium (e.g., RAIDs, semiconductor
memory) and (ii) the physical storage medium itself. The communications mech-
anism could be a network interface (such as gigabit Ethernet), a channel interface
(such as SCSI), or an SAN interface (i.e., FC).
Storage Appliance A storage platform designed to perform a speciﬁc task, such as
NAS, routers, and virtualization.
Storage Virtualization Software (sub)systems (typically middleware) that abstract
the physical and logical storage assets from the host systems.
Stream A ﬂow of a single type of data.
Stream Cipher Algorithms that simply produce a keystream to be XORed with the
plaintext. The same keystream is reproduced at the receiver side for decryption
(5).
Streaming An approach where a large media ﬁle (audio, video, and so on) is parti-
tioned into smaller pieces so it can be viewed or heard immediately; this forgoes
having to wait for the whole ﬁle to be downloaded ﬁrst. The process of playing a
ﬁle while it is still downloading. Streaming technology, also known as streaming
media, lets a user view and hear digitized content—video, sound and animation—
as it is being downloaded. Using a World Wide Web browser plug-in, streamed
sounds and images can arrive within seconds of a user’s click (53).
Streaming Media Internet video and/or audio clips that can play directly over the
Internet, without needing to be downloaded ﬁrst onto a computer. Used to view
and hear broadcasts, and to interactively play and seek in stored clips (24).
Streaming Protocols Commands, processes, and procedures that can be used to
select, set up, start the playing, pausing, recording, and tear down of streaming
sessions.
STUB Multicast Routing A mechanism that allows IGMP messages to be forwarded
through a non-PIM-enabled router toward a PIM-enabled router.
Stub Network A network having only a single OSPF router attached. A network
belonging to an OSPF system is either a transit or a stub network, but never both
(38).
Subnet-Router Anycast Address Anycast address that is allocated to router inter-
faces. Packets sent to the subnet-router anycast address will be delivered to one
router on the subnet.
Subnetwork One or more links that use the same 64-bit preﬁx in IPv6.

GLOSSARY
345
Subnetwork Data Unit (SNDU) SNDU is an IPv4 or IPv6 datagram (or other
subnetwork packet, e.g., an arp message or bridged Ethernet frame) (18). An
encapsulated PDU sent as an MPEG-2 payload unit.
Subscriber A household or business that legally receives and pays for cable or Pay
TV services for its own use (not for retransmission).
Suite B security Suite B security is a National Security Agency (NSA) directive that
requires that key establishment and authentication algorithms be based on elliptic
curve cryptography, and that the encryption algorithm be AES. The United States
government has posted the Fact Sheet on NSA Suite B Cryptography that states in
part as follows: “To complement the existing policy for the use of the Advanced
Encryption Standard (AES) to protect national security systems and information as
speciﬁed in The National Policy on the use of the Advanced Encryption Standard
(AES) to Protect National Security Systems and National Security Information
(CNSSP-15), the NSA announced Suite B Cryptography at the 2005 RSA Con-
ference. In addition to the AES, Suite B includes cryptographic algorithms for
hashing, digital signatures, and key exchange. Suite B only speciﬁes the cryp-
tographic algorithms to be used . . . ” The Fact Sheet on Suite B Cryptography
requires that key establishment and authentication algorithms be based on elliptic
curve cryptography, and that the encryption algorithm be AES. Suite B deﬁnes
two security levels, of 128 and 192 bits. In particular, Suite B includes (54):
r Encryption: AES—FIPS 197 (with key sizes of 128 and 256 bits)
r Digital signature: Elliptic curve digital signature algorithm (ECDSA)—FIPS
186-2 (using the curves with 256- and 384-bit prime moduli)
r Key exchange: Elliptic curve Difﬁe–Hellman (ECDH)—NIST Special Publica-
tion 800-56A (using the curves with 256- and 384-bit prime moduli)
The 128-bit security level corresponds to an elliptic curve size of 256 bits and AES-
128; it also makes use of SHA-256. The 192-bit security level corresponds to an
elliptic curve size of 384 bits and AES-256; it also makes use of SHA-384. To
accommodate backward compatibility, a Suite B compliant client or server can be
conﬁgured to accept a cipher suite that is not part of Suite B. Note: Some refer to
the two security levels based on the AES key size that is employed instead of the
overall security provided by the combination of Suite B algorithms. At the 128-bit
security level, an AES key size of 128 bits is utilized; however, at the 192-bit
security level, an AES key size of 256 bits is used.
SUNs Smart ubiquitous networks.
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) A legacy, but widely
deployed system used to monitor and control a plant or equipment in indus-
tries such as but not limited to energy, oil and gas reﬁning, water and waste
control, transportation, and telecommunications. A SCADA system encompasses
the transfer of data between a SCADA central host computer and a number of
remote terminal units (RTUs) and/or programmable logic controllers (PLCs), and
the central host and the operator terminals.

346
GLOSSARY
Symmetric DSL (SDSL) A vendor-proprietary version of symmetric DSL that may
include bit rates to and from the customer ranging of 128 Kbps to 2.32 Mbps. SDSL
is an umbrella term for a number of supplier-speciﬁc implementations over a single
copper pair providing variable rates of symmetric service. SDSL uses 2B1Q HDSL
run on a single pair with an Ethernet interface to the customer. The industry is
expected to quickly move toward the higher-performing and standardized G.shdsl
technology developed by the ITU with support from T1E1.4 (USA) and ETSI
(European Telecommunications Standards Institute) (15).
Symmetric Encryption Type of encryption in which encryption and decryption keys
are the same key or can easily be derived from each other. In most cryptographic
systems, the decryption key and the encryption keys are identical (5).
Symmetric Flavors DSL Symmetrical variations of DSL that include SDSL,
SHDSL, HDSL, HDSL2, and IDSL. The equal speeds make symmetrical DSLs
useful for LAN access, video-conferencing, and for locations hosting their own
Web sites (15).
Symmetric High-Speed Digital Subscriber Line (SHDSL) A state-of-the-art,
industry standard based on ITU Recommendation G.991.2, also known as G.shdsl
(2001). SHDSL achieves 20% better loop-reach than older versions of symmetric
DSL, it causes much less crosstalk into other transmission systems in the same
cable, and multivendor interoperability is facilitated by the standardization of this
technology. SHDSL systems may operate at many bit rates, from 192 Kbps to
5.7 Mbps, thereby maximizing the bit rate for each customer. G.shdsl speciﬁes
operation via one pair of wires, or for operation on longer loops, two pairs of wire
may be used. For example, with two pairs of wire, 1.2 Mbps can be sent over
20,000 feet of 26 AWG wire. SHDSL is best suited to data-only applications that
need high upstream bit rates. SHDSL is being deployed primarily for business
customers (15).
Tag Air Interface As deﬁned in ISO 19762-3, a conductor-free medium, usually air,
between a transponder and a reader/interrogator through which data communica-
tion is achieved by means of a modulated inductive or propagated electromagnetic
ﬁeld.
Tag-Identiﬁcation Layer In RFID environments, collectively, the set of functions
and commands used by an interrogator to identify and modify tags (also known
as the operating procedur) (7).
Telco Traditional telephone company.
Teredo IPv6 transition technology for use when IPv6/IPv4 hosts are located behind
an IPv4 network address translator.
Teredo Client Software on an IPv6/IPv4 host allowing it to participate in the Teredo
transition technology.
Teredo Relay An IPv6 router that can receive trafﬁc from the IPv6 Internet and
forward to a Teredo client.
Teredo Server A node that assists in the provision of IPv6 connectivity to Teredo
clients.

GLOSSARY
347
Threat A potential violation of security.
Tiered Storage A process for the assignment of different categories of data to differ-
ent types of storage media. The purpose is to reduce total storage cost and optimize
accessibility. In practice, the assignment of data to particular media tends to be an
evolutionary and complex activity. Storage categories may be based on a variety of
design/architectural factors, including levels of protection required for the appli-
cation or organization, performance requirements, and frequency of use. Software
exists for automatically managing the process based on a company-deﬁned pol-
icy. Tiered storage generally introduces more vendors into the environment and
interoperability is important.
As an example of tiered storage is as follows: Tier 1 data (e.g., mission-critical
ﬁles) could be effectively stored on high-quality directly attached storage (DAS)
(but relatively expensive) media such as double-parity RAIDs. Tier 2 data (e.g.,
quarterly ﬁnancial records) could be stored on media afﬁliated with an SAN;
this media tends to be less expensive than DAS drives, but there may be network
latencies associated with the access. Tier 3 data (e.g., e-mail backup ﬁles) could be
stored on recordable compact discs (CD-Rs) or tapes. (Clearly, there could be more
than three tiers, but the management of the multiple tiers becomes fairly complex.)
Another example (in the medical ﬁeld) is as follows: Real-time medical imaging
information may be temporarily stored on DAS disks as a Tier 1, say for a couple
of weeks. Recent medical images and patient data may be kept on FC drives (tier
2) for about a year. After that, less frequently accessed images and patient records
are stored on AT attachment (ATA) drives (tier-3) for 18 months or more. Tier 4
consists of a tape library for archiving.
Transit Network A network having two or more OSPF routers attached. These
networks can forward data trafﬁc that is neither locally originated nor locally
destined. In OSPF, with the exception of point-to-point networks and virtual
links, the neighborhood of each transit network is described by a network links
advertisement (38).
Translation Translation refers to the direct conversion of protocols, for example,
between IPv4 and IPv6.
Transport Relay Translator (TRT) TRT partitions the IP layer into two terminated
IP legs, one IPv4 and one IPv6. Translation then occurs at the higher layers (16).
Tree Information Base (TIB) This is the collection of state maintained by a PIM
router and created by receiving PIM messages and IGMP information from local
hosts. The table essentially stores the state of all multicast distribution trees at that
router (39).
Tunnel In IPv6 transition context, an IPv6 over IPv4 tunnel.
Tunneling Techniques Tunneling techniques include the following (29):
r IPv6-over-IPv4 tunneling: The technique of encapsulating IPv6 packets within
IPv4 so that they can be carried across IPv4 routing infrastructures.
r Conﬁgured tunneling: IPv6-over-IPv4 tunneling where the IPv4 tunnel end-
point address is determined by conﬁguration information on the encapsulating

348
GLOSSARY
node. The tunnels can be either unidirectional or bidirectional. Bidirectional
conﬁgured tunnels behave as virtual point-to-point links.
r Automatic tunneling: Tunneling where the IPv4 tunnel endpoint address is auto-
matically determined, generally being embedded in the IPv6 address. Examples
include IPv6-compatible addresses and IPv6 6to4 addresses.
UICC (Universal Integrated Circuit Card) UICC, the smart card used in mobile
terminals in GSM and UMTS networks. A UICC typically contain several applica-
tions, and the same smart card provides access to both GSM and UMTS networks.
The UICC also provides storage (e.g., for a directory). In a GSM network, the
UICC contains a subscriber identiﬁcation module (SIM) application; in a UMTS
network it is the USIM (universal subscriber identity module) application. It is
a new-generation SIM included in cell phones or laptops using high-speed 3G
cellular networks. The UICC smart card typically has of a CPU, ROM, RAM,
EEPROM, and I/O circuits.
UMTS Terrestrial Radio Access Network (UTRAN) A collective term for the
NodeBs (base stations) and radio network controllers (RNC) that comprise the
UTRAN. NodeB is the equivalent to the base transceiver station (BTS) concept
used in GSM. The UTRAN allows connectivity between the UE and the core
network.
Unicast Address An address that identiﬁes an IPv6 interface and allows network-
layer point-to-point communication. It identiﬁes a single interface within the
scope of the unicast address type. An identiﬁer for a single interface. A packet
sent to a unicast address is delivered to the interface identiﬁed by that address.
The following list shows the types of IPv6 unicast addresses:
r Aggregatable global unicast addresses
r Link-local addresses
r Site-local addresses
r Special addresses, including unspeciﬁed and loopback addresses
r Compatibility addresses, including 6to4 addresses
Unicast Environment Environment where one system communicates directly to
another system.
Unidirectional Link (UDL) A one-way transmission IP over DVB link, for example,
a broadcast satellite link.
Universal Mobile Telecommunications System (UMTS) UMTS is a 3G mobile
cellular technology for networks supporting voice and data (IP) based on the GSM
standard developed by the 3GPP.
Unspeciﬁed Address 0:0:0:0:0:0:0:0 or ::—used to show the absence of any address,
equivalent to the IPv4 address 0.0.0.0.
Upstream Interface Interface toward the source of the datagram. Also known as
the RPF interface (39).

GLOSSARY
349
Upstream Interface (or Router) In CBT, an “upstream” interface (or router) is one
that is on the path toward the group’s core router with respect to this interface (or
router) [BAL199701].
USIM Universal subscriber identity module.
Very High Bit Rate DSL (VDSL) A standard for up to 26 Mbps, over distances up
to 50 m on short loops such as from ﬁber to the curb. In most cases, VDSL lines
will be served from neighborhood cabinets that link to a Central Ofﬁce via optical
ﬁber. VDSL has been introduced in some market to deliver video services over
existing phone lines. VDSL can also be conﬁgured in symmetric mode (15).
Very Small Aperture Terminal (VSAT) A complete end-user terminal (typically
with a small 4–5 ft antenna) that is designed to interact with other terminals in
a satellite-delivered data IP-based network, commonly in a “star” conﬁguration
through a hub. Contention and/or trafﬁc engineering are typical of these services.
Hub or network operator to control the system and present billing based on a data
throughput, or other form of usage basis. VSATs are utilized in a variety of remote
applications and are designed as low-cost units (say $1500–$3000 depending on
application and data rate).
Video Compression The process through which a video ﬁle is reduced in size for
storing and streaming either on traditional TV systems, IPTV, or IBTV. Performing
a digital compression process on a video signal. Compression techniques are used
to enable efﬁcient transmission of video signals.
Video Format The ﬁle type of a video ﬁle. Some of the most well-known formats
for digital video include .avi (Microsoft), .mov (Quicktime), .wmv (Windows),
and .ﬂv (Flash).
Virtual Infrastructure An infrastructure where there is a dynamic mapping of
physical resources to functional service requests, such that the entity requiring
service is oblivious to the speciﬁc nature of the actual hardware supporting the
underlying service.
Virtual Private LAN service (VPLS) VPLS is a way to provide Ethernet-based
multipoint-to-multipoint communication over IP/MPLS networks. VPLS allows
geographically dispersed sites to share an Ethernet broadcast domain by connect-
ing sites through pseudowires. The technologies that can be used as pseudo-wire
can be Ethernet over MPLS, L2TPv3, or even GRE. There are two IETF standards
describing VPLS establishment. VPLS requires a full mesh of LSPs which has
the n2 scaling problem. H-VPLS helps solve this problem by dividing the virtual
LAN into separate hierarchies (11).
Virtualization The abstraction of server, storage, and network resources in order
to make them available dynamically for sharing by IT services, both internal to
and external to an organization. In combination with other server, storage, and
networking capabilities, virtualization offers customers the opportunity to build
more efﬁcient IT infrastructures. Virtualization is seen by some as a step on the
road to utility computing. An approach that allows several operating systems to
run simultaneously on one (large) computer (e.g., IBM’s z/VM operating system

350
GLOSSARY
lets multiple instances of Linux coexist on the same mainframe computer). It is the
practice of making resources from diverse devices accessible to a user as if they
were a single, larger, homogenous, appear-to-be-locally available resource. Virtu-
alization depends on being able to dynamically shift resources across platforms to
match computing demands with available resources: the computing environment
can become dynamic, enabling autonomic shifting applications between servers
to match demand.
Web Cache A Web cache ﬁlls requests from the Web server, stores the requested
information locally, and sends the information to the client. The next time the
Web cache gets a request for the same information, it simply returns the locally
cached data instead of searching over the Internet, thus reducing Internet trafﬁc
and response time (23).
Web of Things Technology that aims for direct Web connectivity of things in the
IoT context by pushing Web capabilities (e.g., web server) down to devices.
Web Services (WSs) WSs provide standard infrastructure for data exchange between
two different distributed applications.
Widget A stand-alone application that can be embedded into a (third party) website
by a(ny) user on a page where they have rights of authorship (e.g., a proﬁle on
a social media site). A widget is a standardized on-screen representation of a
control that may be manipulated by the user. Scroll bars, buttons, and textboxes
are all examples of widgets. For example, a “search widget” could be added on a
personal website by copying and pasting the embed code into the home page (or
some similar action on a Facebook proﬁle). Widgets allow users to turn personal
content into dynamic web apps. Traditional web widgets provided functions such
as advertising banners and link counters.
Wi-Fi Wi-Fi is a brand originally licensed by the Wi-Fi Alliance to describe the
underlying technology of wireless local area networks (WLANs) based on the
IEEE 802.11 family of standards, including 802.11a, 802.11b, 802.11g, 802.11n,
and 802.11v (55). It was developed to be used for business mobile computing
devices, such as laptops, in LANs, but is now increasingly used for additional
services, including Internet and voice over IP (VoIP) phone access, gaming, and
basic connectivity of consumer electronics such as televisions and DVD players,
or digital cameras (11). (Wi-Fi is a trademark of the Wi-Fi Alliance, a commercial
organization that certiﬁes the interoperability of speciﬁc devices designed to the
respective IEEE standard.)
Wildcard (WC) Multicast Route Entry In PIM-SM, wildcard multicast route
entries are those entries that may be used to forward packets for any source
sending to the speciﬁed group. Wildcard bots in the join list of a join/prune mes-
sage represent either a (∗,G) or (∗,∗,RP) join; in the prune list they represent a
(∗,G) prune (27).
Wireless M-BUS The Wireless M-BUS standard (EN 13757-4:2005) speciﬁes com-
munications between water, gas, heat, and electric meters and is becoming widely
accepted in Europe for smart metering or AMI applications. Wireless M-BUS

GLOSSARY
351
is targeted to operate in the 868 MHz band (from 868 MHz to 870 MHz); this
band enjoys good trade-offs between RF range and antenna size. Typically, chip
manufacturers, for example Texas Instruments, have both single-chip (SoC) and
two-chip solutions for wireless M-BUS.
Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) A sensor network is an infrastructure comprised
of sensing (measuring), computing, and communication elements that gives the
administrator the ability to instrument, observe, and react to events and phenomena
in a speciﬁed environment. Typically, the connectivity is by wireless means, hence
the term WSN (56).
WirelessHART (aka IEC 62591) WirelessHART is a wireless sensor networking
technology based on the highway addressable remote transducer protocol (HART).
In 2010, WirelessHart was approved by the International Electrotechnical Com-
mission (IEC) as IEC 62591 as a wireless international standard. IEC 62591
entails operation in the 2.4 GHz ISM band using IEEE 802.15.4 standard radios
and makes use of a time-synchronized, self-organizing, and self-healing mesh
architecture. WirelessHART/IEC 62591 was deﬁned for the requirements of pro-
cess ﬁeld device networks. It is a global IEC-approved standard that speciﬁes an
interoperable self-organizing mesh technology in which ﬁeld devices form wire-
less networks that dynamically mitigate obstacles in the process environment. This
architecture creates a cost-effective automation alternative that does not require
wiring and other supporting infrastructure (57).
Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access (WiMAX) WiMAX is a
standards-based technology enabling the delivery of last mile wireless broad-
band access as an alternative to cable and DSL WiMAX is deﬁned by the WiMAX
Forum, formed in June 2001, to promote conformance and interoperability of the
IEEE 802.16 standard.
Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access (WiMAX) Forum The
WiMAX Forum was formed in June 2001 to promote conformance and interoper-
ability of the IEEE 802.16 standard. The WiMAX Forum describes WiMAX as “a
standards-based technology enabling the delivery of last mile wireless broadband
access as an alternative to cable and DSL.”
ZigBee IP (ZIP) The goal of this protocol stack is to extend the use of IP networking
into resource-constrained devices over a wide range of low-power link technolo-
gies. The effort related to ZIP development has resulted in signiﬁcant progress to
the goal of bringing IPv6 network protocols over 802.15.4 wireless mesh networks
to reality. ZIP is a protocol stack based on IETF- and IEEE-deﬁned standards such
as 6LoWPAN and IEEE 802.15.4 to be used for the SE 2.0 proﬁle.
ZigBee RF4CE Speciﬁcation The specialty-use driven ZigBee RF4CE is designed
for simple, two-way device-to-device control applications that do not require
the full-featured mesh networking capabilities offered by ZigBee 2007. ZigBee
RF4CE offers lower memory size requirements, thereby enabling lower cost imple-
mentations. The simple device-to-device topology provides easy development and
testing, resulting in faster time to market. ZigBee RF4CE provides a multivendor
interoperable solution for consumer electronics featuring a simple, robust, and

352
GLOSSARY
low-cost communication network for two-way wireless connectivity. Through the
ZigBee-certiﬁed program, the Alliance independently tests platforms implement-
ing this speciﬁcation and has a list of ZigBee-compliant platforms offering support
for ZigBee RF4CE (58).
ZigBee Smart Energy A leading standard for interoperable products that monitor,
control, inform, and automate the delivery and use of energy and water. It helps
create greener homes by giving consumers the information and automation needed
to easily reduce their consumption and save money. ZigBee SE version 1.1, the
newest version for product development, adds several important features including
dynamic pricing enhancements, tunneling of other protocols, prepayment features,
over-the-air updates, and guaranteed backward compatibility with certiﬁed ZigBee
SE products version 1.0. (58).
ZigBee Speciﬁcation The core ZigBee speciﬁcation deﬁnes ZigBee’s smart, cost-
effective, and energy-efﬁcient mesh network based on IEEE 802.15.4. It is a self-
conﬁguring, self-healing system of redundant, low-cost, very low-power nodes
that enable ZigBee’s unique ﬂexibility, mobility, and ease of use. ZigBee is avail-
able as two feature sets, ZigBee PRO and ZigBee. Both feature sets deﬁne how
the ZigBee mesh networks operate. ZigBee PRO, the most widely used speciﬁ-
cation, is optimized for low-power consumption and to support large networks
with thousands of devices (58). (ZigBee is a trademark of the ZigBee Alliance,
a commercial organization that certiﬁes the interoperability of speciﬁc devices
designed to the respective IEEE standard.)
Zone Name A human readable name for a scope zone. An ISO 10646 character
string with an RFC 1766 language tag. One zone may have several zone names,
each in a different language. For instance, a zone for use within IBM’s locations
in Switzerland might have the names “IBM Suisse,” “IBM Switzerland,” “IBM
Schweiz,” and “IBM Svizzera” with language tags “fr,” “en,” “de,” and “it” (34).
Z-Wave Z-Wave is a wireless ecosystem that aims at supporting connectivity of
home electronics, and the user, via remote control. It uses low-power radio waves
that easily travel through walls, ﬂoors, and cabinets. Z-Wave control can be added
to almost any electronic device in the home, even devices that one would not ordi-
narily think of as “intelligent,” such as appliances, window shades, thermostats,
smoke alarms, security sensors, and home lighting. Z-Wave operates around 900
MHz (the band used by some cordless telephones but avoids interference with Wi-
Fi devices). Z-Wave was developed by Zen-Sys, a Danish startup around 2005;
the company was later acquired by Sigma Designs. The Z-Wave Alliance was
established in 2005; it is comprised of about 200 industry leaders dedicated to the
development and extension of Z-Wave as the key enabling technology for “smart”
home and business applications.
REFERENCES
1. 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) Organization, www.3gpp.org.
2. Third Generation Partnership Project 2 Organization, http://www.3gpp2.org.

REFERENCES
353
3. Bormann C. Getting Started with IPv6 in Low-Power Wireless “Personal Area” Networks
(6LoWPAN), Universit¨at Bremen TZI, IETF 6lowpan WG and CoRE WG Co-Chair, IAB
Tutorial on Interconnecting Smart Objects with the Internet, Prague, Saturday, 2011-03-26,
http://www.iab.org/about/workshops/smartobjects/tutorial.html.
4. Microsoft
Corporation,
MSDN
Library,
Internet
Protocol,
2004,
http://MSDn.
microsoft.com.
5. Conax AS. Glossary of Terms, Fred Olsensgate 6, NO-0152 Oslo, Norway.
6. Drake J, Najewicz D, Watts W. Energy Efﬁciency Comparisons of Wireless Communica-
tion Technology Options for Smart Grid Enabled Devices. White Paper, General Electric
Company, GE Appliances & Lighting, December 9, 2010.
7. EPCglobal IncTM, EPCTM Radio-Frequency Identity Protocols, Class-1 Generation-2 UHF
RFID, Protocol for Communications at 860 MHz–960 MHz, Version 1.0.9, January 2005.
8. Practel, Inc., Role of Wireless ICT in Health Care and Wellness—Standards, Technologies
and Markets, May, 2012, Published by Global Information, Inc. (GII), 195 Farmington
Avenue, Suite 208 Farmington, CT 06032 USA.
9. Jung N-J, Yang I-K, Park S-W, Lee S-Y. A design of AMI protocols for two way commu-
nication in K-AMI. Control, Automation and Systems (ICCAS), Conference Proceedings
2011, 11th International Conference on, Date of Conference: 26–29 Oct. 2011, S/W Center,
KEPCO Res. Inst., Daejeon, South Korea, Page(s): 1011–1016.
10. Smith P. Comparing Low-Power Wireless Technologies. Tech Zone, Digikey Online Mag-
azine, Digi-Key Corporation, 701 Brooks Avenue, South Thief River Falls, MN 56701
USA.
11. Cisco. IP NGN Carrier Ethernet Design: Powering the Connected Life in the Zettabyte
Era. Cisco Whitepaper, 2007, Cisco Systems, Inc., 170 West Tasman Dr., San Jose, CA
95134, USA.
12. Fairhurst G. MPEG-2 Digital Video, Background to Digital Video, University of Aberdeen,
King’s College, Dept. of Engineering, Aberdeen, AB24 3FX, UK, January 2001,
http://www.erg.abdn.ac.uk/research/future-net/digital-video/mpeg2-trans.html.
13. Delay Tolerant Networking Research Group, http://www.dtnrg.org.
14. Gifford K. Disruption Tolerant Networking for Space Operations (DTN). Uni-
versity of Colorado, Boulder, CO, United States, NASA Research, March 2012,
http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/station/research/experiments/DTN.html.
15. DSL Forum, DSL Forum, 48377 Fremont Blvd, Suite 117, Fremont, CA 94538,
http://www.dslforum.org.
16. IPv6 Portal, http://www.ipv6tf.org/meet/faqs.php.
17. ETSI Documentation, ETSI, 650 Route des Lucioles F-06921 Sophia Antipolis Cedex—
FRANCE.
18. Clausen Horst D, Collini-Nocker Bernhard, et al. Simple Encapsulation for Transmission
of IP Datagrams over MPEG-2/DVB Networks, Internet Engineering Task Force, draft-
unisal-ipdvb-enc-00.txt, May 2003.
19. Machine-to-Machine Communications (M2M); M2M Service Requirements. ETSI TS
102 689 V1.1.1 (2010-08). ETSI, 650 Route des Lucioles F-06921 Sophia Antipolis
Cedex—FRANCE.
20. Machine-to-Machine Communications (M2M); Functional Architecture Technical Spec-
iﬁcation, ETSI TS 102 690 V1.1.1 (2011-10), ETSI, 650 Route des Lucioles F-06921
Sophia Antipolis Cedex—FRANCE.

354
GLOSSARY
21. Kindig S. TV and HDTV Glossary. December 02, 2009, Crutchﬁeld, 1 Crutchﬁeld Park,
Charlottesville, VA 22911.
22. 3GPP TS 22.368 V10.1.0 (2010-06), Technical Speciﬁcation, June 2010, 3rd Generation
Partnership Project; Technical Speciﬁcation Group Services and System Aspects; Service
requirements for Machine-Type Communications (MTC); Stage 1 (Release 10).
23. SunStar, Storage Glossary of Terms, 900 West Hyde Park Blvd. Inglewood, CA 90302.
24. ReelSEO.com, Online Video Dictionary—Glossary of Online Video Terms, The Online
Video Marketer’s Guide, 2010.
25. Gast M. Introduction to 802.11v, Trapeze Networks, Interop Presentation, 2008.
26. Krasinski R, Nikolich P, Heile RF. IEEE 802.15.4j Medical Body Area Networks
Task Group PAR, IEEE P802.15 Working Group for Wireless Personal Area Networks
(WPANs), January18, 2011.
27. Estrin D, Farinacci D, et al. Protocol Independent Multicast-Sparse Mode (PIM-SM):
Protocol Speciﬁcation. RFC2362, June 1998.
28. Shelby Z, Hartke K, Bormann C, Frank B. Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP).
CoRE Working Group, March 12, 2012, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-core-coap-09.
29. Gilligan R, Nordmark E. Transition Mechanisms for IPv6 Hosts and Routers, RFC2893,
August 2000.
30. Winter T, editor. ROLL/RPL: IPv6 Routing Protocol for Low power and Lossy Networks,
March 2011, draft-ietf-roll-rpl-19.
31. ISA, 67 Alexander Drive, P.O. Box 12277, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709,
info@isa.org.
32. Fairhurst G, Montpetit M-J. Address Resolution for IP Datagrams over MPEG-2 Networks,
Internet Draft draft-ietf-ipdvb-ar-00.txt, IETF ipdvb, June 2005.
33. ETSI TR 101 557 V1.1.1 (2012-02), Electromagnetic Compatibility and Radio Spectrum
Matters (ERM); System Reference Document (SRdoc); Medical Body Area Network
Systems (MBANSs) in the 1785 MHz to 2500 MHz range.
34. Hanna S, Patel B, Shah M. Multicast Address Dynamic Client Allocation Protocol (MAD-
CAP). RFC2730, December 1999.
35. Radoslavov P, Estrin D, et al. The Multicast Address-Set Claim (MASC) Protocol.
RFC2909, September 2000.
36. Vida R, Costa L, editors. Multicast Listener Discovery Version 2 (MLDv2) for IPv6, RFC
3810, June 2004.
37. Holbrook H, Cain B, Haberman B. Using Internet Group Management Protocol Version
3 (IGMPv3) and Multicast Listener Discovery Protocol Version 2 (MLDv2) for Source-
Speciﬁc Multicast. RFC4604, August 2006.
38. Moy J. Multicast Extensions to OSPF. RFC 1584, March 1994.
39. Adams A, Nicholas J, Siadak W. Protocol Independent Multicast—Dense Mode (PIM-
DM): Protocol Speciﬁcation (Revised). RFC 3973, January 2005.
40. Welcher PJ. The Protocols of IP Multicast, NetCraftsmen White Paper, Chesapeake
NetCraftsmen, LLC., 1290 Bay Dale Drive—Suite #312, Arnold, MD 21012.
41. NSF Future Internet Architecture Project, http://www.nets-ﬁa.net.
42. Lee GM, Choi JK, et al. Naming Architecture for Object to Object Communications. HIP
Working Group, Internet Draft, March 8, 2010, draft-lee-object-naming-02.txt.

REFERENCES
355
43. ITU-T Y.2002. Overview of Ubiquitous Networking and of its Support in NGN. November
2009.
44. Radding A. SAN of the Future. Essential Guide To Storage Networking, Storage Media
Group/SearchStorage.com Whitepaper, March 2010.
45. Sj¨oberg D. Content Delivery Networks: Ensuring Quality of Experience in Streaming
Media Applications. TeliaSonera International Carrier, CDN White Paper, August 14,
2008.
46. Johnson M. ITU-T IPTV Focus Group Proceedings, ITU-T, 2008.
47. PLCforum, http://www.plcforum.org/frame_plc.html.
48. Schulzrinne H, Casner S, et al. RTP: A Transport Protocol for Real-Time Applications,
IETF Request for Comments, July 2003.
49. Kay R. Quick Study: Representational State Transfer (REST). ComputerWorld, August 6,
2007.
50. Minoli D. Satellite Systems Engineering in an IPv6 Environment. Boca Raton, FL: Francis
and Taylor; 2009.
51. Rodbell M. Protocol Independent Multicast—Sparse Mode, CMP COMMs Design,
an
EE
Times
Community,
3
June
2007,
http://www.comMSDesign.com/main/
9811/9811standards.htm.
52. Service Architecture Lab (a leading French research group with a focus on ‘Future Ser-
vices’), http://servicearchitecture.wp.it-sudparis.eu/.
53. California Software Labs, Basic Streaming Technology and RTSP Protocol—A Technical
Report, 2002, California Software Labs, 6800 Koll Center Parkway, Suite 100 Pleasanton
CA 94566, USA.
54. Salter M, Rescorla E, Housley R. Suite B Proﬁle for Transport Layer Security (TLS). RFC
5430, March 2009.
55. Minoli D. Hotspot Networks: Wi-Fi for Public Access Locations. New York, NY: McGraw-
Hill; 2002.
56. Minoli D. Wireless Sensor Networks (co authored with K. Sohraby and T. Znati). Hoboken,
NJ: Wiley; 2007.
57. Emerson Process Management, IEC 62591 WirelessHART, System Engineering Guide,
Revision 2.3, Emerson Process Management, 2011.
58. ZigBee Alliance, http://www.zigbee.org/.
59. Cisco Systems, Internet Protocol (IP) Multicast Technology Overview, 2007, Cisco Sys-
tems, Inc., 170 West Tasman Dr., San Jose, CA 95134, USA.
60. Open IPTV Forum (OIPF), Services and Functions for Release 2 [V1.0]-[2008-10-20],
2008, Open IPTV Forum, 650 Route des Lucioles - Sophia Antipolis, Valbonne, France.

INDEX
AAAA (also known as Quad A) resource
records (RRs), 253
abbreviated form of IPv6 address, 228
abstract layering of CoAP, 128
actuators, 6, 30, 35
address autoconﬁguration, 6LoWPANs, 298
address comparison between IPv4 and IPv6,
226
address leases, IPv6, 236
ad hoc on-demand distance vector (AODV),
123
advanced metering infrastructure (AMI),
16, 53
aerial surveillance with drones/UAVs, 79
air interface, 115
air interface for E-UTRAN (evolved
UTRAN), 198
allocation and retention priority (ARP), 206
ambient and assisted living, 13
ambient intelligence, 16
ANT/ANT+, 144, 148, 192
anti-terrorism capabilities, 83
anycast transmission, 226
AODV (ad hoc on-demand distance vector),
123
appliance control, 68
applications, asset tracking, 49
applications, automotive, 49
applications, consumer, 14
applications, distribution, 15
applications, electrical grid management, 49
applications, energy, 14
applications, environmental, 50
applications, ﬁnance/point-of-sale (POS),
50
applications, geolocation/tracking, 80
applications, healthcare, 15
applications, homeland security
applications, 50
applications, in-building automation, 49
applications, industrial, 15
applications, industrial monitoring and
control, 50
applications, intelligent transportation
systems (ITSs), 49
applications, metropolitan operations, 49
Building the Internet of Things with IPv6 and MIPv6: The Evolving World of M2M Communications,
First Edition. Daniel Minoli.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
356

INDEX
357
applications, military sensors, 50
applications, parking metering, 49
applications, process control, 50
applications, public safety, 16
applications, public services, 49
applications, real estate (industrial), 14
applications, residential home, 15
applications, resource automation, 16
applications, retail, 16, 17
applications, RFID examples applicable to
IoT, 112
applications, security, 16
applications, smart cities, 49
applications, smart meters, 49, 50
applications, surveillance, 17
applications, telehealth (e-health), 50
applications, telemetry, 49
applications, track and trace, 17, 77
applications, transportation, 15
applications, wireless automated meter
reading (AMR)/load management (LM),
50
architectural reference model for MTC, 134
asset tracking for theft, 77
assistive technology (AT), 57
assured forwarding (AF), 246
ASTM (American Society for Testing and
Materials), 190
authentication, 238
authentication header (AH) (protocol 51),
IPv6, 238, 239
automatic meter reading (AMR), 5, 110
automatic tunneling of IPv6 over IPv4, 247
automotive and transportation applications,
64
baby monitors, 68
baseband layer, 172
basic operation, MIPv6, 267
battery considerations, 107
battery life, various wireless systems, 173
battery technology, 105
battery types, 105
bCall (breakdown call), 64
bearers in EPS, 200
beneﬁts of MBAN Technology, 58
BER (bit error rate), 178
bidirectional tunneling, MIPv6, 264, 268
binary phase shift keying (BPSK), 161
binding acknowledgement (BA), MIPv6,
258, 270
binding authorization, MIPv6, 259
binding cache, MIPv6, 259
binding error, MIPv6, 270
binding management key, MIPv6, 259
binding, MIPv6, 259
binding refresh request, MIPv6, 270
binding update list, MIPv6, 259
binding updates (BUs), MIPv6, 258, 270
biometrics, 70
bit error rate (BER), 178
BLE, 172, 173, 194, 195
BLE channel allocations, 174, 175
BLE packet, 174
BLE protocol stack, 174
blood pressure (BP), 55
Bluetooth, 36, 42, 144, 148, 170, 187
Bluetooth equipment, 57
Bluetooth HDP, 178, 179
Bluetooth health device proﬁle (HDP), 175,
178, 179
Bluetooth low energy (BLE), 57, 144, 171
Bluetooth MAC speciﬁcation v1.1
foundation MAC (L2CAP, LMP, and
baseband), 177
Bluetooth PHY (radio) Speciﬁcation, 177
Bluetooth piconet, 172
Bluetooth protocol, 179
Bluetooth transport interface, 179
Bluetooth v1.0 and v1.0b, 171
Bluetooth v1.1, 171
Bluetooth v1.2, 171
Bluetooth v2.0 + enhanced data rate
(EDR), 171
Bluetooth v2.1 + Enhanced Data Rate
(EDR), 171
Bluetooth v3.0 + High-Speed (HS), 171
Bluetooth v4.0, 171
Bluetooth versions, 171
body area network (BAN), 9, 145
broadband over powerline (BPL), 209
broadcast environment, 155
broadcast header, 6lowpans, 299
building automation and control (BA&C), 5
cache replacement policy, MIPv6, 285
care-of address (CoA), MIPv6, 258, 259
care-of init cookie, MIPv6, 259

358
INDEX
care-of keygen token, MIPv6, 259
care-of test init, MIPv6, 270
care-of test, MIPv6, 270
car-to-car applications, 191
car-to-infrastructure applications, 191
CCTV (Closed-Circuit TV), 88
cellular network technologies for
IoT/M2M, 195
cellular wireless networks battery, 146
cellular wireless networks
conﬁguration/maintenance, 146
cellular wireless networks design goals, 146
cellular wireless networks node, 146
cellular wireless networks standardization,
WBAN standardization, 146
cellular wireless networks topology, 146
cellular wireless networks trafﬁc, 146
CENELEC, 135, 212
CENELEC device addressability, 122
changes to sending router advertisements,
MIPv6, 278
chief technical ofﬁcers (CTOs), 12
cities using camera surveillance systems, 82
city sensors, 62
clear channel assessment (CCA), 160
closed-circuit TV (CCTV), 84
cloud computing, 22
cluster-tree networks, 165
CoAP (Constrained Application Protocol),
126
CoAP messaging model, 129
CoAP protocol layers, 128
CoAP request and response semantics, 129
COAP/UDP for IoT, 44
CoA registration, MIPv6, 266
coexistence scenarios for wireless
technologies, 174
coin cell, CR2032, 194
communication capabilities, IP support,
104
communication capabilities, IPv6 support,
104
communication constrains deﬁned by the
underlying personal area network
(PAN), 6LoWPANs, 296
communications IDs, 98
communities of interest (COI), 223
comparison between two generations of
cellular technologies, 199
comparison of IPv4 and IPv6 headers, 235
comparison of transmissions to IPv6 nodes,
227
comparison of WPAN Technologies, 192
compression of addresses, 294
computer-aided dispatch, 86
conﬁgured tunneling of IPv6 over IPv4, 247
connectivity to the EPC, 203
constrained application protocol (CoAP),
121, 126
constrained RESTful environments (CoRE),
22, 122, 126
contactless payments, 71
contactless SCs and RFID tags comparison,
113
contactless smart cards (SCs), 72, 111, 113
continuous patient monitoring, 59
controlling production machines, 86
controlling vending machines, 86
control plane stack for MTC architecture,
136
cookie, MIPv6, 259
CoRE, 22, 122, 126
core networks (CoNs), 42, 43, 200, 201
correspondent node (CN), MIPv6, 257, 259
correspondent registration, MIPv6, 259
cover-coding, 115
CR2032 coin cell, 194
crime-free zones, 82
CSMA/CA, 181, 191
cybersecurity, 70
DAG information object (DIO), 125
DAG information solicitation (DIS), 125
DASH7/ISO/IEC 18000-7, 22, 122, 149
data end points (DEPs), 10
datagram transport layer security (DTLS),
127
data integration point (DIP), 37
data throughput, various wireless systems,
173
dedicated short-range communications
(DSRC), 189
demand response (DR), 49, 52
DEP, 37
destination advertisement object (DAO),
125
destination option extension header, 263
destination option, MIPv6, 259

INDEX
359
destination options header (protocol 60),
IPv6, 238, 239
destination-oriented DAG (DODAG), 125
detection of IEDs, 85
detection/prevention of crimes, 83
device and gateway domain (framework), 39
device ID (DI) proﬁle, 179
device intelligence, 103
device mobility, 36
device power, 105
DHCPv6, 233, 235
diagnostic trouble code (DTC), 65
DIAMETER protocol (IETF RFC 3588), 43
differentiated services code point (DSCP),
246
DiffServ QoS, 246
digital rights management (DRM), 75
digital subscriber line (xDSL), 42
digital video surveillance (DVS), 79
DIPP “thing”, 11
direct communication, MIPv6, 265
direct connectivity, 39
directed acyclic graph (DAG), 125
direct routing (aka route optimization),
MIPv6, 264
direct sequence spread spectrum (DSSS),
161
discovery of node capabilities, 45
distributed network protocol version 3
(DNP3), 140, 141
DNP3, 140, 141
domain name system (DNS), 99
domain-speciﬁc solutions, 121
drones/UAVs aerial surveillance with, 79,
86
DSRC vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I), 189
DSRC Vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V), 189
DSR (dynamic source routing), 123
dual IP layer (also known as dual stack),
247
durable unique network address (NAdr),
18
DVS, 85
DYMO (dynamic MANET on-demand),
123
dynamic home agent address discovery
(DHAAD), 263
dynamic host conﬁguration protocol
(DHCP), 223
EDGE, 149
e-Health, 55, 102
electric vehicles (EVs), 213
electrocardiograph (ECG), 56, 145
electronic commerce (EC), 111
electronic data interchange (EDI), 111
electronic product code (EPC), 2, 31, 97,
99, 114, 115
embedded chips, 4
embedded wireless, 1
EN 13757-3 (application layer),
210
encapsulating a packet, IPv6, 241
encapsulating security payload (ESP)
header (protocol 50), IPv6, 238, 239
encryption, 238
end nodes, 2
end-point identiﬁer (EID), 101
energy/power limitations, 36
engine management System (EMS), 65
enhanced bCall, 65
enhanced data rates (EDRs), 145
enhanced performance architecture (EPA),
140
eNodeBs, 202, 205
EN 13757-2 (physical and link layer), 210
environment characteristics of IoT nodes,
101
e-parking, 189
ePassport, 70
EPC, 2, 31, 97, 99, 114, 115
EPCglobal Architecture Framework, 118
EPCglobal environment, 117
EPCglobal Inc., 114
EPCglobal standards, 114
episodic patient monitoring, 59
EPS and support of legacy environments,
208
EPS Bearers, 200
EPS network elements, 198
ETSI M2M, 22, 122
ETSI TISPAN CoN, 43
ETSI TR 101 557 Technical Report (TR),
184
ETSI TR 101 557 V1.1.1 (2012–02), 146
ETSI TS/TR 102 for M2M architecture,
services, 122
European Committee for Electrotechnical
Standardization (CENELEC), 135

360
INDEX
E-UTRAN (evolved UTRAN), 198, 200,
202
evolution paths to 4G/LTE, 208
evolution to LTE, 208
evolved packet core (EPC) network, 198
evolved UMTS terrestrial radio access
network (eUTRAN), 42
example of M2M domains, 41
expedited forwarding (EF), 246
extensions to IPv6 neighbor discovery for
low-power networks, 294
E-Z pass tags, 99
face recognition, 82
face recognition systems, 79
FCC’s MBAN spectrum proposal, 59
federal communications commission (FCC)
MBAN rules, 181
FeliCa, 187
fetal telemetry, 61
ﬁtness (health), 55
ﬁtness level, monitoring and tracking, 61
ﬂeet management, 66, 77, 78
foreign link, MIPv6, 259
foreign subnet preﬁx, mipv6, 259
format of mobility options, MIPv6, 276
forming an 128-bit IPv6 address, 236
forward-error-correction (FEC), 191
fragmentation and reassembly layer,
6LoWPANs, 298
fragmentation header, IPv6, 238
fragmentation header, 6LoWPANs, 299
fragment header (protocol 44), IPv6, 239
full function device (FFD), 35, 162
full ZigBee smart energy (SE) proﬁle, 166
gateway as a network proxy, 40
GBR, 206
3G cellular systems, 199
GDS, 85
general packet radio service (GPRS), 65,
145
generic access proﬁle (GAP), 179
geographic information system (GIS), 86
geosynchronous (GEO) satellite system,
152
3G/4G cellular networks, 10
3G/4G technologies, 146
global IoT (G-IoT), 35
globally unique identiﬁers, 97
global network infrastructure, 34
global positioning system (GPS), 4
GIS, 86
4G/LTE/SAE cellular systems, 199
glucose meter, 56
Google Wallet, 73
3GPP CoN, 43
3GPP2 CoN, 43
3GPP (3rd Generation Partnership Project),
147, 196
3GPP (3rd Generation Partnership Project)
service requirements for machine type
communications, 131
3GPP MTC, 122
3GPP speciﬁcations for MTC, 132
3GPP2 (Third-Generation Partnership
Project 2), 147
3GPP TS 22.368 Release 10 for MTC, 50
GPRS, 132, 149, 197
GPRS tunneling protocol (GTP), 203
GPS, 65, 77, 79
GPS bracelets, 36
GPS/general packet radio service (GPRS)
tracking devices, 64
grid management, 145
GSM, 149, 196
GSM EDGE Radio Access Network
(GERAN), 42, 150
GSM evolution (EDGE), 145
guaranteed time service (GTS), 162
gunshot detection systems (GDSs), 79, 85
HA node operation, MIPv6, 285
HA tunneling, 262
HBC PHY Layer Speciﬁcation for the IEEE
802.15.6 Standard, 183
HDP, Bluetooth, 179
header compression (HC), 203, 233
header compression (HC), IPv6, 242, 243,
244
header compression, 6LoWPANs, 298
health cards, 74
healthcare facilities, 55
health device proﬁle (HDP), 179
health IoT opportunities, 13
heating, ventilation, and air conditioning
(HVAC), 5, 110
higher-layer connections, 19

INDEX
361
high level M2M system architecture
(HLSA), 38
high resolution digital video surveillance
(DVS), 79, 85
HLSA (High level M2M system
architecture), 38
H2M communication, 4
H2M devices, 7
home address, MIPv6, 258, 259
home Address Option, MIPv6, 276
home Agent Address Discovery, MIPv6,
288
home agent (HA), MIPv6, 258, 260
home Agents List, MIPv6, 260
home area network (HAN), 53, 214
home automation, 67
home init cookie, MIPv6, 260
home keygen token, MIPv6, 260
Homeland Security, 108, 110
HomePlug Alliance, 215
HomePlug Broadband-Speed Technologies,
214, 215
HomePlug Green PHY (“GP”), 214
HomePlug Green PHY Speciﬁcation, 214
home registration, MIPv6, 260
home subnet preﬁx, MIPv6, 260
home subscriber server (HSS), 200, 201
home test (HoT), MIPv6, 270
home test init (HoTi), MIPv6, 270
hop-by-hop options header (protocol 0),
IPv6, 238, 239
host controller interface (HCI), 179
host identity protocol (HIP), 114
HTTP, 130
HTTP/TCP for IoT, 44
human body communications PHY (HBC),
183
human embedded chips, 4
human to human (H2H) communication, 36
human-to-machine (H2M), 2
human to machine (H2M) communications,
36
HVAC, 5, 110
hybrid ﬁber coax (HFC), 42
ICMPv6, 231
ICMPv6 messages, 125
IEC 60870-5 series, 140, 141
IEDs, Detection of, 85
IEEE 11073-104xx Device Speciﬁcation,
180
IEEE 11073-20601 Personal Health Device
Communication Application Proﬁle,
179, 180
IEEE 1901 BPL standard, 212
IEEE 1901 Powerline Networking
Standard, 214, 215
IEEE 802.11a, 191
IEEE 802.11b/g and Bluetooth frequency
interaction, 176
IEEE 802.11b/g frequency bands, 176
IEEE 802.11b/g typical topology, 176
IEEE 802.11g, 191
IEEE 802.11p-2010, 191
IEEE 802.11p PHY layer, 191
IEEE 802.15 Family of Wireless PANs, 159
IEEE 802.15.1 (Bluetooth), 42, 146
IEEE 802.15.4, 10, 36, 101, 122, 150, 170,
184
IEEE 802.15.4 frames, 163
IEEE 802.15.4 PHY layer, 162, 181
IEEE 802.15.4 PHY layer operating
frequency bands, 162
IEEE 802.15.4 PHY layer packet structure,
164
IEEE 802.15.4-2003 standard for lower
(physical and link) layers, 293
IEEE 802.15.4-based wireless standards, 22
IEEE 802.15.4j (TG4j) MBANs, 146, 150,
151
IEEE 802.15.6, 146, 184
IEEE 802.15.6 Beacon mode with beacon
period superframe boundaries, 183
IEEE 802.15.6 Non-beacon mode with
superframe boundaries, 183
IEEE 802.15.6 Non-beacon mode without
superframe boundaries, 183
IEEE 802.15.6 PHY, human body
communications (HBC) layer, 181
IEEE 802.15.6 PHY, narrowband (NB)
layer, 181
IEEE 802.15.6 PHY, ultra wideband
(UWB) layer, 181
IEEE 802.15.6 WBANs, 180
IEEE P1901.2, 213
IEEE P1901.2 LF NB PLC standard, 215
IEEE P1901.2 standard for OFDM-based
communication, 122

362
INDEX
IEEE P2030/SCC21, 122
image processing systems, 85
industrial, scientiﬁc and medical (ISM)
equipment, 57
information communications technology
(ITC), 29
information preﬁx information option
(PIO), 124
Infrared Data Association (IrDA), 150
infrared (IR) systems, 170
integrated open-air surveillance (IOS), 79
integration point or person (DIPP), 9
intelligent home, 13
intelligent meters, 52
intelligent tags, 13
intelligent transportation systems (ITS), 49,
189
interface identiﬁer, MIPv6, 260
Internet Assigned Numbers Authority
(IANA), 222
internet protocol header compression
(IPHC), 244
internet service providers (ISPs), 222
internetworking of IoT things, 121
interoperability, 103
interrogator, 115
interworking, LTE, 203
IntServ QoS, 246
IOS Systems Examples, 89
IoT, 3
IoT applications, 12, 48
IoT applications taxonomy, 49
IoT deﬁnition, Cisco, 34
IoT deﬁnition, conceptual aspects of
deﬁnition, 31
IoT deﬁnition, examples, 33, 34
IoT deﬁnition, infrastructure aspects of
deﬁnition, 31
IoT deﬁnition, ITU-T, 31
IoT deﬁnition, standardization, 32
IoT deﬁnition, Working Deﬁnition this text,
33
IoT devices, 2
IoT example, 6, 7, 9
IoT Framework, 38
IoT/M2M nodes design constraints, 293
IoT nodes, Environment Characteristics of,
101
IoT stakeholders, 12
IoT standardization, 20
IP address format, 222
IP connectivity, 42
IP In Smart Objects (IPSO), 138
IP multimedia subsystem (IMS), 202
IP Protocol considerations for LoWPAN,
6LoWPANs, 298
IPsec, 223, 258
IPsec in IPv6, 242
IPsec mechanisms, 196
IPsec network environment, 243
IPsec Processing, MIPv6, 289
IP Security (IPsec) security association,
MIPv6, 260
IPSO Alliance, 138
IP standards for higher layer functions,
IPv6, 293
IPTV, 225
IPv4 address, 221, 224
IPv4 Address comparison with IPv6, 226
IPv4 and IPv6 Comparison of headers, 235
IP Version 6 (IPv6), 10
IPv4 over IPv6 addresses automatic
representation, 229
IPv4-compatible addresses in IPv6, 230
IPv4 Run-Out, 222
IPv6, 17, 101, 122, 169, 191, 197, 220
IPv6 adaption layer, 137
IPv6 6to4 address, 230
IPv6 address, 18, 223, 228, 229, 231, 253
IPv6 address, abbreviated form, 228
IPv6 address comparison with IPv4, 226
IPv6 address deprecated state, 237
IPv6 address leases, 236
IPv6 address preferred state, 237
IPv6 address space, 225
IPv6 and IPv4 Comparison of headers, 235
IPv6 Anycast, 231
IPv6 Anycast transmission, 226
IPv6, Authentication Header (AH), 238
IPv6 Autoconﬁguration, 233
IPv6 Base Header, 234
IPv6 comparison of transmissions modes,
227
IPv6 decapsulation, 241
IPv6, Destination Options Header, 238
IPv6, Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP)
Header, 238
IPv6 encapsulation, 241

INDEX
363
IPv6 extension headers, 233
IPv6 ﬂow labels, 231
IPv6, Fragmentation Header, 238
IPv6 header, 232
IPv6, Hop-by-Hop Options Header, 238
IPv6 intermediate processing, 241
IPv6, IPv4-compatible addresses, 230
IPv6, key protocols, 231
IPv6 labeled ﬂows, 224
IPv6 loopback virtual address, 229
IPv6 migration strategies, 246, 248, 249,
250
IPv6 multicast address, 230
IPv6 multicast transmission, 226
IPv6 neighbor discovery (ND), 124
IPv6 Not speciﬁed address, 229
IPv6 over IPv4 dynamic/automatic tunnel
addresses, 229
IPv6-over-IPv4 tunneling, 247
IPv6 over low power WPAN (6LoWPAN),
22, 122, 293
IPv6 packet, 232
IPv6 plug-and-play, 18
IPv6 Protocol Extensions for MIPv6, 269
IPv6, routing header, 238
IPv6 Routing Protocol for LLNs (RPL), 123
IPv6 technologies, 23
IPv6 Teredo address, 230
IPv6 Transport mode IPsec, 242
IPv6 tunneling, 239, 240
IPv6 Tunnel mode IPsec, 242
IPv6 unicast transmission, 226
IPv6 use of IPsec, 242
ISA100.11a, 42, 151
ISM band, 172, 181, 185, 195
ISO 18000, 114
ISO/IEC 11073, 146
ISO/IEC 14443, 72, 112, 188
ISO/IEC 15693, 72, 112
ISO/IEC 18000-3, 188
ISO/IEC standards, 115, 116
ISP, 12, 237, 253
ITS, 49, 102
ITU-T Z.100 speciﬁcation and description
language (SDL), 177
JavaScript Object Notation (JSON), 130
JTC1 SC 6, 122
just in time (JIT), 111
Kevin Ashton, 2
Keygen token, MIPv6, 260
key IPv6 protocols, 231
“killer app” for IPv6, 10, 17, 220
KNX, 42, 210
labeled ﬂows, IPv6, 224
latency requirements, 102
layer 2 (L2) handover, MIPv6, 260
layer 3 (L3) handover, MIPv6, 260
layering of CoAP, 128
licensed band used for medical telemetry
system, 181
license plate recognition, 79, 85
LifeLine home care pendants, 61
lighting control, 68
Liion batteries, 106
limited code and RAM space, 101
limited computing capabilities, 36
line-of-sight (LOS), 170
link control protocol (LCP), 245
link-layer address, MIPv6, 260
link quality indicator (LQI), 160
load management (LM), 110
locator/ID separation protocol (LISP), 100
logical link control and adaptation protocol
(L2CAP), 172, 179
London’s Ring of Steel, 81
long-term evolution (LTE), 145
long-term evolution of the Internet (LTEI),
10
low bandwidth, 6LoWPANs, 296
low earth orbits (LEOs) satellite system,
152
low energy (LE) wireless technologies, 105
lower Manhattan security initiative, 81
low-frequency narrowband (LF NB)
standard, 212
6LoWPAN, 36, 122, 127, 137, 293
6LoWPAN architecture, 294
6LoWPAN bootstrapping, 294
6LoWPAN improved header compression,
294
6LoWPAN IPv6 ND optimizations, 294
6LoWPAN, IPv6 overlow-power area
networks (IEEE 802.15.4), 148
6LoWPANs, Address Autoconﬁguration,
298
6LoWPANs, broadcast header, 299

364
INDEX
6LoWPANs, communication constrains
deﬁned by the underlying Personal Area
Network (PAN), 296
6LoWPANs, fragmentation and reassembly
layer, 298
6LoWPANs, fragmentation header, 299
6LoWPANs, header compression, 298
6LoWPANs, IP Protocol considerations for
LoWPAN, 297
6LoWPANs, low bandwidth, 296
6LoWPANs, mesh addressing header,
299
6LoWPANs, mesh routing protocol, 298
6LoWPANs, small packet size, 296
6LoWPANs, transmission of IPv6 Packets
over IEEE 802.15.4, 297
6LoWPANs, typical header stacks that may
be used in a LoWPAN network, 300
low power, 101
low power and lossy networks (LLNs), 123
low-power consumption IEEE 802.11
Wi-Fi, 146
low-power wireless personal area networks
(LoWPANs), 144
low-rate wireless personal area networks
(LR-WPANs), 144
loyalty cards, 87
LR-WPANs, 160
LTE, 151, 197, 199
LTE, connectivity to the EPC, 203
LTE header compression, 203
LTE home subscriber server (HSS), 201
LTE interfaces, 207
LTE Interworking, 203
LTE interworking mechanisms, 204
LTE mobility management entity (MME),
201
LTE packet data network gateway (P-GW),
201
LTE policy control and charging rules
function (PCRF), 201
LTE, pre-LTE interworking mechanisms,
204
LTE protocol architecture, 203
LTE protocol stack at the E-UTRAN, 205
LTE QoS management, 205
LTE radio resource management (RRM),
203
LTE roaming, 203, 204
LTE security, 203
LTE serving gateway (S-GW), 201
machine in (or on) humans (MiH), 4
machine in (or on) human (MiH)
communications, 36
machine-to-machine (M2M), 2
machine-type communication (MTC), 2, 50
MAC Layer Modes for the IEEE 802.15.6
Standard, 183
man–machine interface (MMI), 75
mass surveillance, 80
material requirement planning (MRP), 111
maximum bit rate (MBR), 206
maximum transmission unit (MTU), 44
MBANS, 185
MBANS frequency band coexistence, 185
MBANS frequency bands, 185
MBAN Technology, Beneﬁts of, 58
M-BUS, 42, 210
mechanisms for movement support, MIPv6,
290
media access control (MAC), 205
medical body area network system
(MBANS), 55
medical implant communication service
(MICS), 181
medical monitoring probes, 4
medical pendant, 68
medical proﬁle, ZigBee, 166
medium earth orbits (MEOs) satellite
system, 77, 152
MEO (medium earth orbit), 77, 152
mesh addressing header, 6LoWPANs, 299
mesh environments, 155
mesh routing protocol, 6LoWPANs, 298
message data ﬁeld for BU messages,
MIPv6, 272
metering for high pressure pipelines, 54
metro-ethernet networks, 10
metropolitan area networks (MANs), 145
metropolitan IoT (M-IoT), 35
microwave bombardment using ultra wide
band (UWB), 85
migration strategies to IPv6, 246, 248, 249,
250
minimum guaranteed bit rate (GBR), 205
MIP (Mobile IPv4), 291
MIPv6, 238, 239

INDEX
365
MIPv6 base speciﬁcation, 257
MIPv6, BA, 270
MIPv6 basic operation, 267
MIPv6, bidirectional tunneling, 264, 268
MIPv6 binding, 259
MIPv6 binding authorization, 259
MIPv6 binding cache, 259
MIPv6, binding error, 270
MIPv6 binding management key, 259
MIPv6, binding refresh request, 270
MIPv6 binding update list, 259
MIPv6, BU, 270
MIPv6 cache replacement policy, 285
MIPv6, care-of address (CoA), 258, 259
MIPv6 care-of init cookie, 259
MIPv6 care-of keygen token, 259
MIPv6, care-of test, 270
MIPv6, care-of test init, 270
MIPv6 changes to sending router
advertisements, 278
MIPv6 CoA registration, 266
MIPv6 cookie, 259
MIPv6, correspondent node (CN), 257, 259
MIPv6 correspondent registration, 259
MIPv6 destination option, 259
MIPv6 direct communication, 265
MIPv6, direct routing (aka route
optimization), 264
MIPv6 foreign link, 259
MIPv6 foreign subnet preﬁx, 259
MIPv6 format of mobility options, 276
MIPv6 HA node operation, 285
MIPv6, home address, 258, 259
MIPv6, home address option, 276
MIPv6 home agent address discovery, 288
MIPv6, home agent (HA), 258, 260
MIPv6 home agents list, 260
MIPv6 home init cookie, 260
MIPv6 home keygen token, 260
MIPv6 home registration, 260
MIPv6 home subnet preﬁx, 260
MIPv6, home test (HoT), 270
MIPv6, home test init (HoTi), 270
MIPv6 interface identiﬁer, 260
MIPv6 IPsec Processing, 289
MIPv6 IP Security (IPsec) security
association, 260
MIPv6, IPv6 protocol extensions for, 269
MIPv6 Keygen token, 260
MIPv6 layer 2 (L2) handover, 260
MIPv6 layer 3 (L3) handover, 260
MIPv6 link-layer address, 260
MIPv6 mechanisms for movement support,
290
MIPv6, message data ﬁeld for BU
messages, 272
MIPv6, mobile node (MN), 257
MIPv6 mobile node operation, 286
MIPv6, mobility header, 271
MIPv6, mobility header messages, 270
MIPv6 mobility header processing, 278,
281, 282
MIPv6 mobility message, 260
MIPv6 mobility options, 274
MIPv6 modiﬁcations to IPv6 neighbor
discovery, 277
MIPv6 modiﬁed preﬁx information option,
277
MIPv6 modiﬁed router advertisement
message, 277
MIPv6 movement support, 290
MIPv6 new advertisement interval option,
277
MIPv6 new HA information option, 278
MIPv6, new IPv6 destination option for, 269
MIPv6, new IPv6 ICMP messages for, 269
MIPv6 nonce, 260
MIPv6 packet processing, 287
MIPv6 processing bindings, 284
MIPv6 receiving BUs, 284
MIPv6 registration, 260
MIPv6 relationship to mobile IPv4 (MIP),
291
MIPv6 requests to cache a binding, 284
MIPv6 requests to delete a binding, 285
MIPv6, requirements for various nodes,
279, 280, 281
MIPv6 return-routability procedure, 260,
284
MIPv6 reverse tunneling, 288
MIPv6 route optimization, 268, 287
MIPv6 routing header, 260
MIPv6 routing header type 2, 262
MIPv6 security, 270
MIPv6 sending BAs, 285
MIPv6, type 2 routing header, 276
MIPv6 unicast routable address, 260
M2M, 23, 29, 43

366
INDEX
M2M area network, 42
M2M area network (device domain), 131
M2M authentication server (MAS), 43
M2M communication, 4, 36
M2M communication networks (network
domain), 131
M2M device, 131
M2M device (framework), 39
M2M domains, 41
M2M gateway, 42, 131
M2M gateway control node, 70
M2M HLSA, 41
M2M in 3GPP, architecture, 133
M2M in 3GPP, service models, 133
M2M management functions, 43
M2M revenues, 7
M2M service bootstrap function (MSBF),
43
M2M services, 5
M2M standardization, 130
mobile ad hoc network (MANET), 10
mobile health, 58
mobile IPv4 (MIP), 291
mobile IPv4 (MIP) relationship to MIPv6,
291
mobile IPv6 (MIPv6), 19, 104, 224
mobile IPv6 (MIPv6) technologies, 24
mobile network technologies for IoT/M2M,
195
mobile node (MN), MIPv6, 257
mobile node operation, MIPv6, 286
mobile phones, 30
mobility, 19, 102
mobility handoff at the IP (e.g., routing)
layer, 21
mobility handoff at the physical (e.g.,
cellular) layer, 21
mobility header messages, MIPv6, 270,
278, 281, 282
mobility header, MIPv6, 271
mobility management entity (MME), 200,
201
mobility message, MIPv6, 260
mobility options, MIPv6, 274
mobility support, 104
modiﬁcations to IPv6 neighbor discovery,
MIPv6, 277
modiﬁed preﬁx information option, MIPv6,
277
modiﬁed router advertisement message,
MIPv6, 277
modulation phase jitter, 188
monitoring and tracking ﬁtness level, 61
moveable barrier technology, 85
movement support, MIPv6, 290
MTC applications deﬁned by 3GPP, 50
MTC architectural reference model, 134,
135
MTC features, 134
multicast transmission, 45, 226
multi-channel adaptation layer (MCAP),
178, 179
multimedia applications, 225
multimedia ﬁle management, 75
multiprotocol label switching (MPLS), 10
narrowband PHY (NB), 182
NAT, 238, 253
national IoT (N-IoT), 35
NB PHY layer speciﬁcation for the IEEE
802.15.6 standard, 182
near ﬁeld communication (NFC), 36, 144
neighbor discovery (ND), 231
neighbor discovery protocol (NDP), 231,
263
neighbor unreachability detection (NUD),
124
NEMO (network mobility), 261
network address translation (NAT), 54, 225
network control protocols (NCPs), 245
network coordinator, 164
network domain, 42
network mobility (NEMO), 261
network security, 70
new advertisement interval option, MIPv6,
277
new HA information option, MIPv6, 278
new IPv6 destination option for MIPv6, 269
new IPv6 ICMP messages for MIPv6, 269,
270
New York city operation sentinel, 81
next generation network (NGN), 2, 32
NFC, 72, 151, 187
NFC active device, 73
NFC contactless communication, 57
NFC Forum, 73, 187
NFC interrogator, 73
NFC reader, 73

INDEX
367
NFC tag, 187, 188
NFC technology speciﬁcations, 188
NIKE+, 152, 192
NITSC (China), 122
node (thing) protocol stack, 44, 45
nodeBs (base stations), 197
nonce, MIPv6, 260
nonpersistent CSMA, 161
non-wireless technologies used for IoT, 209
number plate recognition, 88
object classiﬁcation, 37
object ID (OID), 17
object name service (ONS), 99
object protection, 78
objects, 2
offset quadrature phase shift keying
(O-QPSK), 161
OID, 98
OLSRv2 (optimized link state routing
protocol version 2), 123
on-board unit (OBU), 191
open-air surveillance, 79
open architecture, 103
open systems interconnection (OSI) basic
reference model, 213
operation sentinel, 81
orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing
(OFDM), 191
OSPF/IS-IS (open shortest path
ﬁrst/intermediate system to intermediate
system), 123
outdoor cameras, 85
P1609.1, 191
P1609.2, 191
P1609.3, 191
P1609.4, 191
packet data convergence protocol (PDCP),
205
packet data network gateway (P-GW), 201
packet processing, MIPv6, 287
PAN, 3, 42, 144, 145
PAN wireless technologies, topologies
supported, 156
parking space occupancy, 63
passenger information system for public
transportation, 63
passive surveillance, 62
passive tag, 115
patient alarm monitoring, 60
pavement/roadway pressure, 63
PDN gateway (P-GW), 200
peaking power plants, 53
peak power consumption, 194
personal area network (PAN), 3, 42, 144,
145
personal, home and hospital care (PHHC)
Proﬁle, 146
personalized ﬁtness schedule, 61
pervasive computing environments, 33
PHHC Proﬁle, 166
PHY Layer Speciﬁcation for the IEEE
802.15.6 Standard, 182
PHY service data unit (PSDU), 162
physical markup language (PML), 31
Piconet, Bluetooth, 172
PLCforum, 213
PLC (Power Line Communications), 42, 54,
145, 210, 211
plug-in electric vehicles (PEVs), 214
pointer records (PTRs) RRs, 253
point of sale (POS), 72
point-to-point environment, 155
point-to-point protocol (PPP), 245
policy control and charging rules function
(PCRF), 200, 201
polling of nodes, 45
power and lossy networks (RPL)/routing
over low power and lossy networks
(ROLL), 121
power consumption, various wireless
systems, 173
power efﬁciency, 194
power efﬁciency requirements, 102
power line communication (PLC), 42, 54,
145, 210, 211
predictive and early warning systems, 61
private space open-air surveillance, 83
processing bindings, MIPv6, 284
production machines, 86
programmable logic controllers (PLCs), 139
protocol comparison, wireless technologies,
173
protocol efﬁciency, 193
protocol ID, 98
protocol implementation conformance
statement (PICS) proforma, 177

368
INDEX
protocol stack in CoAP’s environment, 128
proxy mobile IPv6 (PMIPv6)-based
mobility, 132
public land mobile network (PLMN), 203
public space open-air surveillance, 83
pulse oximeter, 56
QCI values, 206
QoS, 146, 170, 172, 179, 199, 200, 201,
202, 205, 206, 207, 215, 220
QoS class identiﬁer (QCI), 206
QoS support in IPv6, 246
quality of sevice (QoS), 146, 170, 172, 179,
199, 200, 201, 202, 205, 206, 207, 215,
220
radio access network (RAN), 196
radio frequency for consumer electronics
(RF4CE), 170
radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID), 2, 5,
6, 17, 21, 23, 24, 30, 31, 33, 34, 48, 64,
71, 72, 77, 97, 98, 99, 105, 111–118,
151, 187, 188
radio link control (RLC), 205
radio network controllers (RNC), 197
radio resource management (RRM), 203
random access mechanisms, 181
range, various wireless systems, 173
rate of violent crimes, 83
real-time control protocol (RTCP), 225
real-time position reporting systems, 85
real-time streaming protocol (RTSP), 264
real-time transport protocol (RTP), 225,
264
receiver energy detection (RED), 160
receiving BUs, MIPv6, 284
reduced function device (RFD), 35, 162
regional internet registry (RIR), 222
regional IoT (R-IoT), 35
registration, MIPv6, 260
relationship of WAVE and DSRC, 190
relationship to Mobile IPv4 (MIP), 291
remote DEP “thing”, 11
remote diagnostics, 65
remote monitoring of trafﬁc infractions, 83
representational state transfer (REST), 100,
130
requests to cache a binding, MIPv6, 284
requests to delete a binding, MIPv6, 285
requirements for various IPv6 nodes, 279,
280, 281
residential broadband services in an IPv6
environment, 250
retail point of sale (POS), 5
return-routability procedure, MIPv6, 260,
284
reverse tunneling, MIPv6, 288
RF4CE, 152, 195
RFID, 2, 5, 6, 17, 21, 23, 24, 30, 31, 33, 34,
48, 64, 71, 72, 77, 97, 98, 99, 105,
111–118, 151, 187, 188
RFID tags, 6, 71, 113
RF layer, 172
Ring of Steel, 81, 84
RIP (routing information protocol), 123
road side unit (RSU), 191
roaming, 42
roaming architecture for 3GPP accesses
with P-GW in home network, 204
roaming, LTE, 203
robust header compression (ROHC), 245
ROLL, 22, 42, 122
route information option (RIO), 124
route optimization, MIPv6, 268, 287
routing header (protocol 43), IPv6, 238, 239
routing header type 2, MIPv6, 260, 262
routing header type for MIPv6, new header,
263
routing over low power and lossy networks
(ROLL), 22
routing protocols, 123
routing state memory space, 123
safety monitoring, 60
satellite systems, 152
satellite technology, 42, 118
SCADA protocol stack, 140
SCADA remote terminal units (RTUs), 139
SCADA (Supervisory Control And Data
Acquisition), 21, 29, 44, 93, 138–141,
145, 196, 209, 211
scalability, 102
scanning environment, 155
security bindings, 127
security, MIPv6, 270
sending BAs, MIPv6, 285
senior activity monitoring, 60
sensor ﬁeld, 109

INDEX
369
sensor networks, 107
sensors, 6, 30, 35, 108, 109
SE Proﬁle 2, 214
service access points (SAPs), 177
service discovery protocol (SDP), 179
serving gateway (S-GW), 200, 201
Shim6 (RFCs 5533-5535), 101
short-range device (SRD), 57, 145
signaling, 207
simple object access protocol (SOAP), 100
SLAAC (stateless address
autoconﬁguration), 236
slotted Aloha, 181
small packet size, 6LoWPANs, 296
smart appliances, 13
smart cards (SCs), 3, 70
Smart Energy 2.0 (SE 2.0) proﬁle, 137
Smart Energy Initiative, 215
smart grid (SG), 3, 52
smart grid (SG) interoperability, 122
smart meters, 102
smart transportation, 13
smart ubiquitous network (SUN), 32
social alarm devices, 56
social media, 1
speciﬁcation and description language
(SDL), 177
speciﬁcations for NFC technology, 188
speed-of-vehicle readers, 71
SRD (Short-range device), 57, 145, 184
SS7-MAP protocol, 207
standards for IoT, 121
star environment, 155
stateless address autoconﬁguration
(SLAAC), 236
stolen vehicle tracking (SVT), 65
street light control, 62, 63
suite B ciphers, 46
supervisory control and data acquisition
(SCADA), 21, 29, 44, 93, 138–141, 145,
196, 209, 211
surveilance drones, 79
surveillance, 17, 79, 102
surveillance examples, 89
system architecture evolution (SAE), 197
tag identiﬁcation layer, 115
tags, 30
taxonomy of “Things” in IoT, 11
taxonomy of IoT applications, 49
TBRPF (topology-based reverse path
forwarding), 123
TCP, 169
telehealth (also see e-health), 12
telematics control unit (TCU), 65
thermostat/HVAC, 68
things (in IoT), 1
things (objects) characteristics, 36
things on the move, 13
TIA TR-50 smart device communications,
122
TLS/SSL, 146
toll payment, 189
toll tags, 71
topologies supported by PAN wireless
technologies, 156
traditional covert alarms, 86
trafﬁc characteristics of IoT nodes, 102
trafﬁc ﬂow management, 62, 63
trafﬁc light cameras, 79
transmission control protocol (TCP), 126,
264
transmission of IPv6 packets over IEEE
802.15.4, 6LoWPANs, 297
Type 2 routing header, MIPv6, 276
type of sensors, 35
typical header stacks that may be used in a
LoWPAN network, 6LoWPANs, 300
UAVs (unmanned aerial vehicles), 79
ubiquitous intelligent devices, 13
ubiquitous networking, 33
UDP (User datagram protocol), 126, 169,
225, 264
UE (user equipment), 203
UICC (Universal Integrated Circuit Card),
73, 74, 75, 76
ultra wideband PHY (UWB), 182
UMTS, 153
UMTS terrestrial radio access network
(UTRAN), 42
unicast routable address, MIPv6, 260
unicast transmission, 226
uniform resource identiﬁer (URI)/uniform
resource locator (URL), 98
U-NII band, 172
unique identiﬁcation (UID), 2
universal integrated circuit card (UICC), 73

370
INDEX
universal mobile telecommunications
system (UMTS), 145, 196
universal terrestrial radio access network
(UTRAN), 197
universities using camera surveillance
systems, 81
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV), 79
unslotted carrier sense multiple
access/collision detect (CSMA/CA), 162
U.S. Department of Defense (U.S. DoD),
221
U.S. Department of Transportation (U.S.
DoT), 189
user datagram protocol (UDP), 126, 169,
225, 264
user equipment (UE) used for MTC, 135
user plane stack for MTC architecture, 136
UTRAN, 153
UWB PHY layer speciﬁcation for the IEEE
802.15.6 standard, 182
vehicle and pedestrian detection, 63
vehicle-to-infrastructure communications,
66, 68
vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I), DSRC, 189
vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V), DSRC, 189
vehicular asset tracking, 67
vending machines, 86
versions of Bluetooth, 171
very small aperture terminal (VSAT), 153
videoconferencing, 225
video-ondemand, 225
virtual private network (VPN), 10, 196
VITAnumber, 74
VoIP, 225
WAVE protocol stack, 192
WAVE short message protocol (WSMP),
191
WAVE (wireless access in vehicular
environments), 190
WBAN Battery, 146
WBAN conﬁguration/maintenance, 146
WBAN design goals, 146
WBAN node, 146
WBAN standardization, 146
WBAN topology, 146
WBAN trafﬁc, 146
web of things (WoT), 17
web services description language (WSDL),
100
Wi-Fi, 145, 153, 194, 195
WiFi channel allocations, 175
WiFi equipment, 57
Wi-Fi, low-power consumption IEEE
802.11, 146
WiMAX, 145, 153
wireless access in vehicular environments
(WAVE), 190
wireless body area networks (WBANs), 55
WirelessHART (aka IEC 62591), 154
wireless local area networks (WLANs), 5,
10, 42, 145
wireless M-BUS, 42
wireless medical body area networks
(WMBANs), 145
wireless medical telemetry services
(WMTS), 181
wireless meter-bus (M-Bus), 153
wireless PANs, IEEE 802.15 family of
standards, 159
wireless protocol comparison, 173
wireless sensor network (WSN), 3, 10, 108,
145, 154
wireless sensors, 86
wireless technologies, coexistence, 174
wireless technology and concepts
supporting IoT/M2M, 147
World IPv6 Day, 252
worldwide interoperability for microwave
access (WiMAX), 42
WSN, 3, 10, 108, 145, 154
WSN battery, 146
WSN conﬁguration/maintenance, 146
WSN design goals, 146
WSN node, 146
WSNs, 110
WSN topology, 146
WSN trafﬁc, 146
xDSL, 210
ZDO, 166
ZigBee, 36, 42, 57, 144, 160, 195, 214
ZigBee Alliance, 158, 160
ZigBee building automation, 167
ZigBee channels, 174, 175
ZigBee device object (ZDO), 161, 166

INDEX
371
ZigBee health care, 146, 166, 167
ZigBee home automation, 167
ZigBee/IEEE 802.15.4, 146, 155
ZigBee input device, 167
ZigBee IP (ZIP), 122, 137, 157
ZigBee light link, 167
ZigBee MAC, 157
ZigBee network devices, 168
ZigBee PHY, 157
ZigBee PRO, 158
ZigBee protocol stack, 157, 158
ZigBee remote control, 168
ZigBee retail services, 168
ZigBee RF4CE speciﬁcation, 154
ZigBee Smart Energy (SE) 2.0, 22, 122, 168
ZigBee speciﬁcation, 154
ZigBee standards, 167
ZigBee telecom services, 169
ZigBee WPAN topologies, 165
Z-wave, 155

