
BUILD A 
REMOTE-
CONTROLLED 
ROBOT

Other TAB Electronics Robotics Titles
The Robot Builder’s Bonanza, Second Edition, by Gordon McComb
Robots, Androids, and Animatrons, Second Edition, by John Iovine
TAB Electronics Build Your Own Robot Kit by Myke Predko and Ben Wirz

McGraw-Hill
New York • Chicago • San Francisco • Lisbon • London • Madrid 
Mexico City • Milan • New Delhi • San Juan • Seoul
Singapore • Sydney • Toronto
BUILD A 
REMOTE-
CONTROLLED 
ROBOT
DAVID R. SHIRCLIFF

Copyright © 2002 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. All rights reserved. Manufactured in the
United States of America. Except as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part
of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a data-
base or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the publisher. 
0-07-140964-5
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: 0-07-138543-6 
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after
every occurrence of a trademarked name, we use names in an editorial fashion only, and to the benefit
of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such designations
appear in this book, they have been printed with initial caps. 
McGraw-Hill eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales pro-
motions, or for use in corporate training programs. For more information, please contact George
Hoare, Special Sales, at george_hoare@mcgraw-hill.com or (212) 904-4069. 
TERMS OF USE
This is a copyrighted work and The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. (“McGraw-Hill”) and its licensors
reserve all rights in and to the work. Use of this work is subject to these terms. Except as permitted
under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not
decompile, disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works based upon,
transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the work or any part of it without
McGraw-Hill’s prior consent. You may use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use;
any other use of the work is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work may be terminated if you
fail to comply with these terms. 
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS”. McGRAW-HILLAND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUAR-
ANTEES OR WARRANTIES AS TO THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF
OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMA-
TION THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE,
AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT
NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill and its licensors do not warrant or guarantee that the func-
tions contained in the work will meet your requirements or that its operation will be uninterrupted or
error free. Neither McGraw-Hill nor its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for any inac-
curacy, error or omission, regardless of cause, in the work or for any damages resulting therefrom.
McGraw-Hill has no responsibility for the content of any information accessed through the work.
Under no circumstances shall McGraw-Hill and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental,
special, punitive, consequential or similar damages that result from the use of or inability to use the
work, even if any of them has been advised of the possibility of such damages. This limitation of lia-
bility shall apply to any claim or cause whatsoever whether such claim or cause arises in contract, tort
or otherwise.
DOI: 10.1036/0071409645
 
abc
McGraw-Hill 

To my wife, Raye, and my children, Daniel, Haley,
Ian, Margaret, and Raymond, for their support
and encouragement.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
David Shircliff is a teacher at Seneca Ridge Middle School
in Loudon County, Virginia, where he teaches classes in
technology education. A dedicated electronics enthusiast,
Mr. Shircliff has been researching and building robots for
over 20 years.
Copyright 2002 The McGraw Hill Companies, Inc.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

vii
CONTENTS
Preface
ix
Introduction
xi
CHAPTER ONE. THE MOTORIZED PLATFORM
1
Preparing Motorized Wheels
1
The Platform
4
Mounting Wheels
6
Third Castor Wheel
9
Finishing Touches
11
CHAPTER TWO. BODY FRAMEWORK
13
Cutting Aluminum
13
Drilling and Cutting the Sections
15
Assembling Framework
30
Mounting Framework on the Platform
34
Mounting the Vacuum Outlet
35
CHAPTER THREE. POWER SUPPLY AND 
TEMPORARY CONTROL BOX
39
Mounting Batteries and Barrier Strips
39
Wiring Platform
43
Temporary Control Box
45
Control Box Construction
48
Wiring the Temporary Control Box
48
Using the Control Box
51
Copyright 2002 The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.   Click Here for Terms of Use.
For more informatiom regarding this title, click here

CHAPTER FOUR. REMOTE CONTROL SYSTEM
53
Motherboard
57
Wiring the Motherboard
60
Completing the Motherboard
62
Installing and Wiring the Motherboard
63
Using the Remote Control System
66
CHAPTER FIVE. ARMS AND SUBSYSTEMS
67
Arms
69
Drink Dispenser
75
The Head
80
Wiring the Vacuum System
81
CHAPTER SIX. SKIN AND FINISHING TOUCHES
85
Skin
85
Mounting Tray
91
Mounting Controls
92
Body Lights and Horn
96
12-Volt Power Outlet
98
Bow Tie
98
Painting and Trimming the Body
100
Trim
100
Sources
107
Index
111
viii
CONTENTS

PREFACE
I
n recent years robots have captured the interest of more and
more people. Thanks to movies and TV, the notion of the
robot as a mechanical companion and servant has become a
common concept. As interest in robots grew, a number of
books showing how to build robots at home began to appear.
These books, however, were very technical, showing how to
build computer-controlled mobile platforms that are consid-
ered by most to be true robots.
My interest in robots leaned more toward the popular con-
cept of robots as humanlike friends and servants. I did not
have the technical skill or funds to build a computer-controlled
robot, so I decided to develop a robot that would fit the popu-
lar image of robots and not be too difficult to complete or
expensive to build. The result was Questor.
While working on Questor, I tried to develop a project that
I, as a beginner, could complete with little technical skill,
using tools I had in my workshop. Also, I wanted Questor to
look and function like a robot butler, a form I felt best fit the
friend/servant theme. For this reason I needed a people-sized
robot that would have great presence. I concentrated more on
form than sophistication to develop an impressive looking, but
relatively simple-to-build, project—a beginner’s project.
Later, when I decided to write a book about the project, I
wanted to avoid weaknesses I found in other how-to robot
books. This book is heavily illustrated, helping to take the
guesswork out of Questor’s construction. Next, the book deals
only with the construction of the robot, and not the theories
on which it is based. This type of information is best derived
from specialty electronics and robotics books. I have included
ix
Copyright 2002 The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

a list of books and magazines that supply information, as well
as other possible sources for robot kits and parts.
It is my hope that you will use this book not only to build
your own version of Questor, but to guide you in creating your
own unique robot. This way your robot will reflect your knowl-
edge and skill as a builder. Also, I hope that your robot will be
used as a test bed for other robotics projects. If you are like
me, once you build your own robot, you’ll always be trying to
improve it.
David R. Shircliff
x
PREFACE

INTRODUCTION
O
ne of the first questions you will have to answer when you
say you have your own robot is, “What does it do?” If your
answer (as mine) is, “It rolls around by remote control and
serves drinks” disappoints the questioner, don’t be offended. It
simply means that the person asking the question knows little
about the real world of robotics, the science of robots.
Before you can attempt to explain your answer to the unin-
formed asker, you must know a little about the subject of
robots. Ask yourself, “What is a robot?” The word robot comes
from the Czech word Robota, which means obligatory work or
servitude. The word robot was first used in a Czech play called
R.U.R. (Rossum’s Universal Robots) by Karl Capek. Written in
1921, the play depicts a race of humanoid robots that turn on
their masters and destroy them, a theme that seems always to be
associated with robots. Figure I-1 shows a scene from the play.
The exact meaning of the term robot, even in today’s techno-
logical age, is a matter of debate. Man’s technical prowess makes
the exact meaning elusive: manlike mechanical device; person
working mechanically, without original thought; machine or
device that works automatically. These definitions seem rather
broad and could encompass any number of modern devices from
a dishwasher to a timer-controlled video cassette recorder, with-
out conjuring up the popular Star Wars notion of robots.
A second, more-precise definition is stated by the Robot
Institute of America. It reads: “A robot is a programmable mul-
tifunctional manipulator designed to move material, parts, tools
or specialized devices through variable programmed motions for
the performance of a variety of tasks.”
While more precise, it tends to be narrow and also does not
parallel the popular notion of the mechanical friend everyone
xi
Copyright 2002 The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

would like to have. It applies more specifically to those types of
robots at work in factories all over the world, shown here in
Figs. I-2 through I-4. These assembly line type robots can do
everything from welding a car (then painting it) to assembling
delicate electronics components, all automatically, 24 hours a
day if needed, and without a break. They don’t get sick
(although when they do break down, they can be easily
repaired or even replaced), ask for pay raises, or any pay for
that matter, and can be retrained to do another job in a matter
of minutes by simply changing the job program in their control
computers. If you look again at Figs. I-2 through I-4, you will
see that while the device most certainly looks mechanical, it
does not look like a human. Instead it takes the shape of the
most useful part of the human anatomy, from a robot stand-
point, the arm.
Both these definitions seem to be correct in their specific
case, but there is a middle family between the simple auto-
mated device and the sophisticated computer-controlled
xii
INTRODUCTION
FIGURE I-1.
The robots of the play R.U.R. (Rossum’s Universal
Robots) attack their human masters. (Courtesy of New York Public
Library at Lincoln Center.)

manipulator. This middle family is that of the show robot or
showbot. Questor, the robot outlined in this book, is a mem-
ber of the showbot family. Figures I-5 through I-8 picture
examples of commercial show robots.
A showbot in most cases has no computer brain. Instead it
is controlled via a remote control system operated by a person
somewhere out of sight. You might have seen or heard of a
INTRODUCTION
xiii
FIGURE I-2.
An industrial robot. (Courtesy of Cincinnati Milacron.)

xiv
INTRODUCTION
FIGURE I-3.
Robots are best used for repetitive tasks like stacking. (Courtesy of
Unimation Inc.)
FIGURE I-4.
Robots can do light work such as grinding. (Courtesy of Cincinnati
Milacron.)

showbot entertaining groups of fascinated people in shopping
malls or on TV as characters in movies. I even read about a
showbot delivering a speech at a college graduation. Showbots,
however, can be adapted for use in the home.
This book lays the groundwork to construct one such home
showbot, Questor. (See Figs. I-9 and I-10.) Questor was
designed to look like and function like a butler. There is a drink
dispenser built into his arm and a vacuum port in his mobile
platform. I felt these two functions are what most people
expect a robot servant to do. The arms, which help promote
Questor’s humanoid shape, are nonfunctional; they serve only
to hold the serving tray. The hands are made of two auto drink
holders. A button located on the wrist (the area above where
the hands are bolted on) controls the drink dispenser.
His head is a lamp, and there are two headlights on the front
of the mobile platform. These lights not only help the operator
guide the showbot at night, but they are very useful during
power blackouts. There is also a 12-volt direct current (dc) ciga-
rette lighter plug on the side of the base. This is used to run bat-
tery-powered appliances such as portable radios or TVs off the
robot’s batteries.
INTRODUCTION
xv
FIGURE I-5.
Showbots come in many shapes and sizes. (Courtesy of Ken Zaken,
Robots 4 Fun.)

A horn located on the lower part of the front body panel
announces Questor’s presence. I plan to add a tape recorder for
prerecorded messages. This is something you could consider
designing into your showbot. Finally, his body panels and arms
were painted to look as though Questor is wearing a tuxedo
jacket, and a light-up bow tie completes the look.
I also designed Questor so he could be built using tools
found in a home workshop and parts available in local hard-
ware and electronics stores. However, there are a few parts
you will have to order. The following list of what I’ve deter-
mined are “must buy parts” shows items you will need to pur-
chase before starting construction. The address for a parts
supplier, Herbach & Rademan Company, is listed in Sources
in the back of the book.
xvi
INTRODUCTION
FIGURE I-6.
The Six-T showbot can blow up
balloons! (Courtesy of The Robot Factory.)

Must Buy Parts
2 12-volt dc motorized wheels
2 6-volt, 8-amp solid gel batteries, with charge kit
2 10-ohm, 25-watt potentiometers
Note: The drink dispenser motor and vacuum system kit can
also be ordered from Herbach & Rademan. The rest of the
parts needed for each phase of Questor’s construction will be
listed in the beginning of each chapter.
All of Questor’s various components, except for the remote
control system, are powered by a 12-volt dc battery system.
Questor can be controlled by either a control box connected to
the base by a cable or a wireless remote control system. The
INTRODUCTION
xvii
FIGURE I-7.
Showbots can also be soft and fuzzy.
(Courtesy of The Robot Factory.)

remote control system, as are the rest of the parts, is a standard
off-the-shelf item.
At this point, you should read through the book to famil-
iarize yourself with the diagrams, photographs, parts lists, and
overall format. Once you plan your showbot, you can order
the “must buy” items. You are now ready to enter the fascinat-
ing world of robotics.
ROBOT BASICS
But first, a review of the basics.
The construction of a remote-controlled robot, while not
easy, need not be difficult. My motto when designing and
building Questor was “keep it simple, stupid” (KISS)! The
xviii
INTRODUCTION
FIGURE I-8.
Quadracon and friend Peeper. (Courtesy
of Pelican Beach LLC, successor to ShowAmerica Inc.)

INTRODUCTION
xix
FIGURE I-9.
Questor the
robot servant (front view).
FIGURE I-10.
Side view.

best strategy is to use as many off-the-shelf items as possible.
As your confidence and skill level grow, you can design and
build your own components. In addition, as you work with
different materials, such as wood, plastic, and metal, you will
learn the properties of each and how you can use them in
your own robot designs.
When I first started to design and build remote-controlled
robots I used a very simple motorized wheel assembly taken
out of a toy car and made bodies out of poster board and con-
struction paper. Figure I-11 shows the plans for one such
robot. I tried to make these robots life size, 3 to 4 feet tall.
They were fun to design and build and taught me a lot about
what would work without being expensive to construct. If you
are a first-time robot builder, I suggest that you try one of these
paper robots. Whether made of paper or wood and metal, all
my robot designs have four basic subsystems: a motorized base,
a remote control system, a power supply, and a body.
MOTORIZED BASE
The motorized base for your robot can be the most difficult
subsystem to design and build. You can save yourself a lot of
trouble if you design “around” this part of the robot. Instead
of designing the robot first and fitting the motorized base to
your design, design and build the base first and then fit your
robot body to it. The base generally holds all of the internal
parts or “guts” that make your robot work. In Questor, for
example, the base has the wheels mounted on it as well as the
batteries (which can be quite heavy) and the control system.
That is why he looks the way he does. The old saying “form
follows function” is true in robot design, too.
The most important part of the base is the motor-driven
wheels. This is where many (myself included) robot builders
have the most problems. Do yourself a favor and buy motor-
ized wheel units. A supplier is listed in the back of the book.
These units already have a motor mounted to a drive wheel
and usually the assembly is in a frame you can modify to
attach to your base. With Questor’s motorized wheels all I had
to do was design a way to mount them to the base. Figure I-12
xx
INTRODUCTION

shows the wheels I used for Questor. Another good source for
motorized wheels is children’s ride-on toys. They already have
the motors and wheels mounted to a frame (as well as the bat-
teries) and can be used as is, or removed and mounted on your
robot base. The main drawback of using ride-on toys is they
lack a steering system. This is a critical area that you must
design into your base.
INTRODUCTION
xxi
3 cardboard supports
Base
Arm
3/4" dowel
Cup
C.
B.
Motorized base
18"
A.
Body
Head
FIGURE I-11.
Complete plans for a “paperbot.”

There are several ways to set up a steering system for your
robot. A robot must have a minimum of three wheels in order
to work, and how you power and mount the wheels will affect
your control of the robot. Figure I-13 shows the combinations
available. All the combinations require two motorized wheels
and at least one swiveling wheel for balance. This was the sys-
tem I used in Questor. By making one motorized wheel go for-
ward or in reverse, while the other is off or going forward, you
can very effectively steer a robot. Table I-1 charts the combi-
nations for steering with this system. All this “control” is pro-
vided by the next subsystem, the remote control system.
REMOTE CONTROL SYSTEM
The ability to remotely control your robot is a big part of its
appeal. The two types of remote control are wired and wireless.
Basically, what you are doing with either system is tripping
switches to control robot functions. Figure I-14 shows the two
systems, as used for Questor.
xxii
INTRODUCTION
FIGURE I-12.
Motorized wheel.

With a wired remote control system the operator uses a
control box connected to the robot via a long wire or cable.
The advantages of this system are that it is simple to build and
costs little to construct. The main disadvantages are limited
range and the cable itself can get in the way. For the beginning
robot builder, however, this is the best system to start out with.
It will allow you to build and test systems for your robot with-
out the complexity and expense of a wireless system.
Wireless remote control is what most people think of when
you say “remote control.” A wireless system allows a much
greater range for the operator, and there is no control cable to
get in the way. A wireless system has three main parts. The
INTRODUCTION
xxiii
Front drive
Center drive
Drive wheel
Castor
Rear drive
FIGURE I-13.
Drive wheel layouts.
TABLE I-1. Control Combinations
MOTORIZED
MOTORIZED
ROBOT
WHEEL ONE
WHEEL TWO
DIRECTION
On
On
Forward
Off
Off
Stop
On
Off
Right turn
Off
On
Left turn
On
Reverse
Spin right
Reverse
On
Spin left

first is a transmitter. This is what you will use to control your
robot. The transmitter sends signals to a receiver. The receiver
is the second part of the system; it uses the signals to control
servos, the third part of the system. A servo takes decoded sig-
nals from the receiver and uses them to turn a motor. Figure
I-15 shows a complete wireless system. Systems like this one
are readily available from your local hobby shop. The motor in
a servo is very powerful for its size and can be used to trip
switches within your robot and control it. Figure I-16 shows
the servo/switch control system.
POWER SUPPLY
How to power a robot is another area where the beginning
robot builder can experience difficulty. Here my KISS philoso-
phy can again help. You will find, as I did, that different systems
have different power needs. The use of rechargeable batteries to
power each of these systems is the simplest solution.
Question uses four rechargeable batteries. Two are 6-volt
batteries wired together to supply the 12 volts needed to
power the drive wheels, main lights, and vacuum cleaner. The
xxiv
INTRODUCTION
FIGURE I-14.
Wireless and wired controls.

other two batteries are both 9 volts. One powers the receiver
used in the remote control system, while the other is used to
power the robot’s blinking-light bow tie.
The 6-volt batteries came from a motorized children’s ride-on
toy. They have the advantages of being readily available and
being designed to be safe, because they are sealed. Another
advantage is that the battery charger and plug needed come with
the batteries (Fig. I-17). Currently you can find these batteries
in both 6- and 12-volt sizes. The first of the 9-volt batteries came
with the remote control system along with a charger for both 
the receiver and the transmitter. The second 9-volt battery, for the
blinking bow tie, is simply a standard rechargeable. Figure I-18
shows the two 9-volt batteries. You will notice that while they are
both 9 volts they are different sizes.
By using separate batteries for each system you can avoid
having to build the complex circuits needed to raise or lower
INTRODUCTION
xxv
FIGURE I-15.
Basic wireless remote control system.

xxvi
INTRODUCTION
FIGURE I-17.
Battery from children’s ride-on toy.
FIGURE I-16.
Questor’s servo/switch control board.

battery power. However, if you have many systems on your
robot (for example, two or three blinking lights) you will have
to recharge a lot of batteries. You can, though, combine sys-
tems with the same power needs to feed off the same battery.
Regardless of how many batteries you use, you will have to
be able to access them, as well as the other subsystems of your
robot. This brings us to the next and, for a showbot, the most
important subsystem: the body.
BODY
A robot’s body tells the world who the robot is and what it can
do. For a show robot the body is its reason for existence,
because showbots are used for entertainment and to help
advertise products. Questor was designed to be a robot butler.
He has a waiter’s jacket painted on his body panels, and his
arms, while nonfunctional, do hold a serving tray. A blinking
bow tie helps complete his servant look. I built his body from
scratch, after completing his motorized base, with this specific
look in mind.
I am sure that you already have many ideas on how you
would like your robot to look. I hope the examples given here
will help spark your imagination. You should keep sketches of
your robot ideas in a notebook, so as your skill level grows you
can attempt your more advanced notions.
INTRODUCTION
xxvii
FIGURE I-18.
9-volt batteries used in Questor.

One of the key points to keep in mind while designing is,
what will you build your robot out of? For the beginning robot
builder this can be particularly vital. What materials are you
familiar with? Do you have the tools to work with a certain type
of material? How much does a material cost? How much will
the body weigh when complete? All these are questions that
you will have to ask yourself. You can answer most of these
questions if you use a body that is already built. Where can you
get a prebuilt robot body? At your local variety store they are
called trashcans! Before you shudder at the idea that your robot
be made out of a trashcan, let us examine the advantages.
The main advantage of using a trashcan is that it is a
ready-made container that can be built on. Take for an exam-
ple a small metal garbage can, like that in Fig. I-19. Being
metal (galvanized steel), it is very sturdy and has the added
benefit of looking “robotic.” Even though it is made of metal it
can be easily cut and drilled. (Care should be taken when
xxviii
INTRODUCTION
FIGURE I-19.
Yes, with a little imagination
this can be a robot!

working with metal because cutting and drilling will produce
sharp edges.) The trashcan’s size is also of benefit because it
helps your design have a “life-sized” look that is important to
showbots. Figure I-20 pictures a showbot with a body the
shape of a trashcan. If you feel that metal is too difficult to
work with, simply buy a plastic trashcan. Be sure that the
plastic is hard and nonflexible. Flexible plastic is weak and
therefore makes a poor body.
Small metal cans, wash tubs, and even salad bowls can be
used for robot bodies. Once your base is done you can experi-
ment with different containers until a final design is reached.
Figures I-21 and I-22 on pp. xxx and xxxi show sketches of two
robot bodies. Notice how by stacking different containers, two
very familiar (and famous) robots come to life.
I hope that this section on robot basics has prepared you
for the fun you will encounter in the rest of the book.
INTRODUCTION
xxix
FIGURE I-20.
Trashcan-
inspired showbot. (Courtesy of
Pelican Beach LLC, successor
to ShowAmerica Inc.)

xxx
FIGURE I-21.
Can you name this robot? (Courtesy of American Robots.)

xxxi
FIGURE I-22.
Does this alternate head design look familiar? (Courtesy of American Robots.)

This page intentionally left blank.

THE MOTORIZED
PLATFORM
T
he motorized platform is a most important part of
Questor’s construction. It not only supplies the robot with
mobility, but contributes to its personality and appeal.
Although simple in construction, the platform outlined in this
chapter is capable of carrying 50 pounds of robot. To start its
construction, the first job to perform is to prepare the motor-
ized wheels that propel the platform.
PREPARING MOTORIZED WHEELS
Once you have obtained the motorized wheels, study them
and learn how they operate and how they are assembled. This
is important because you must disassemble the wheels in
order to prepare them for attachment to the platform. Be
careful not to lose any of the smaller parts and work on only
one wheel at a time. Figures 1-1 and 1-2 show an assembled
and disassembled wheel.
To disassemble the wheel, first remove the motor and gear-
box assembly held to the side of the wheel’s frame by three
small screws. On the opposite side of the frame is a cotter pin
that holds the wheel’s axle and frame together. Remove this
pin (this is done easily with a pair of needle nose pliers) and
pull the axle out from the other side slowly. As you pull the
axle out, four small spacing washers, two red plastic and two
metal, will fall from the frame along with the wheel itself and
the wheel’s large white driver gear.
1
C H A P T E R
O N E
Copyright 2002 The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

Next remove the swivel ring from the top of the now bare
frame. The ring is held in place by a cotter pin that passes
through the large post on the top of the frame. Remove this
pin and slide the swivel ring up the post and off the frame.
There will be some grease and a small ball bearing left on the
top of the frame. Wipe away the grease and remove the ball
bearing. The swivel ring, cotter pin, and ball bearing are no
longer needed for this robot, but add them to your parts sup-
ply for later projects.
Now you are ready to prepare the empty frame for attach-
ment to the platform. After considering many different meth-
ods of attaching the wheels to the platform, I came to the
conclusion that the most direct and simple way is to drill
holes in the frame and holes in the platform, then bolt them
together. Figure 1-3 shows the location of four 3-inch  1/4-
inch-diameter holes that are to be drilled on the top of the
frame. If you have never worked with metal before or do not
2
CHAPTER ONE
FIGURE 1-1.
Assembled motorized wheel.

have a strong vise, don’t attempt to drill the holes yourself. 
A local metal shop or school industrial arts class could do it
for you.
Using Fig. 1-3, mark the locations of the holes on the top
of the frame and start the holes with a center punch. This
device makes a small dent in the metal for the drill bit to sit
in. If you don’t have a center punch, a nail will do. I found
the easiest way to drill the holes was using a strong vise,
clamp one leg of the frame lengthwise between two pieces of
wood. You will have to bend the legs apart slightly to accom-
plish this. Now drill the hole marked on the top of the frame
on the side of the leg that you clamped. After drilling,
THE MOTORIZED PLATFORM
3
FIGURE 1-2.
Disassembled motorized wheel.

unclamp the leg, flip the frame over, clamp the other leg,
and drill the hole on that side. Figure 1-4 shows how to
clamp and drill the holes in this way. You could have clamped
the frame posts in the vise, but round objects tend to slip
when you drill them.
Now reassemble the first motorized wheel and disassemble
and drill the second. Figure 1-5 shows the top view of one
completed wheel. With both wheels drilled and assembled, it
is time to cut and drill the platform.
THE PLATFORM
The platform itself is simply a 20-  20-  1/4-inch piece of
plywood, cut from a larger 24-  24-  1/4-inch piece. While
simple in design and construction, it is the key element on
which all of Questor is mounted. Great care should be taken
to try to keep all of the various holes and cuts as precise and
as straight as possible. The easiest way to assure straight cuts
is to measure 4 inches in from the bottom edge of one side of
the board and 4 inches in from the top edge of the same side,
then connect the two points with a line. Figure 1-6 shows how
4
CHAPTER ONE
FIGURE 1-3.
Location of mounting holes.

THE MOTORIZED PLATFORM
5
FIGURE 1-4.
Suggested clamping method.
FIGURE 1-5.
Completed motorized wheel.

to mark the plywood for cutting. After you cut the platform
from the stock plywood, sand the cut edges to remove any
splinters. Save the leftover plywood; it will be used later.
To mount the motorized wheels on the platform you must
first drill two 3/4-inch-diameter holes to accommodate the
posts of the wheel frame. Figure 1-7 shows where on the plat-
form to drill the holes. If you don’t have access to a 3/4-inch-
diameter drill bit, you can make the holes by drilling smaller
holes around the inside of the 3/4-inch circle, then removing
the wood with a coping saw. This rough circle is then filled
and sanded to shape.
MOUNTING WHEELS
After the holes are drilled, it is time to mount the motorized
wheels. To do this take one of the predrilled motorized
6
CHAPTER ONE
FIGURE 1-6.
Guide for cutting platform; remove and save excess wood.

wheels and insert its frame post into one of the 3/4-inch
holes in the platform. Then turn the wheel so that the motor
and gearbox face the center of the platform. Figure 1-8
shows the correct position of the wheels. You must make
sure that the wheels point as straight as possible during the
mounting process.
Each of the motorized wheels is held to the platform by
four 2-inch  1/4-inch-diameter bolts. With the wheel point-
ing as straight as possible, take a pencil and carefully mark the
location of one of the four mounting holes in the wheel’s
frame on the platform. Remove the motorized wheel and drill
a 1/4-inch-diameter hole where marked. Now replace the
wheel and realign the hole in the frame with the hole now in
the platform. Take one of the eight bolts and insert it through
the wheel’s frame and out the top of the platform. If the bolt
does not go through the hole in the platform easily or after it’s
inserted the motorized wheel is no longer straight, remove the
wheel and redrill the hole in the platform slightly larger. The
play in the hole will allow you to shift the wheel’s position.
THE MOTORIZED PLATFORM
7
FIGURE 1-7.
Location of post holes.

This, however, only works for small adjustments. With the bolt
inserted you can now mark and drill the other holes starting
with the hole in the opposite corner from the bolt. (If you
started with the bottom left hole, drill the upper right next.)
This method and order of marking and drilling helps ensure
the wheels will be straight.
The motorized wheels’ final attachment to the platform is
illustrated in Fig. 1-9. Notice the use of lockwashers. These
washers are very important because they keep the nuts from
coming loose due to vibration caused when the robot travels
over rough surfaces. You should use lockwashers throughout
your robot. Also Fig. 1-9 shows the use of a large bore washer.
This washer should be approximately 2 inches in diameter
with a 3/4-inch bore to allow it to slip over the post of the
motorized wheel. The washer keeps a ridge on the top of the
wheels’ frame from digging into the wooden platform when
the bolts are tightened. Also, the washer helps keep the wheel
sitting level. After the wheels are attached, make a final check
to see that they are straight. Once the two motorized wheels
are mounted, it is necessary to mount a third castor wheel on
the front of the platform.
8
CHAPTER ONE
FIGURE 1-8.
Motorized wheels in mounted position.

THIRD CASTOR WHEEL
The castor wheel makes the platform level and gives it stability.
The wheel should be about 3 inches in diameter and designed
for heavy-duty use. Depending on the wheel you obtain, you’ll
probably have to stack pieces of plywood between the platform
and the mounting plate of the castor wheel so that the plat-
form sits level. Figure 1-10 shows where on the platform the
wheel is mounted. Remember to make sure that the castor is
centered along the front edge of the platform. A guideline
shown in Fig. 1-10 shows how to do this.
After you find the center point, place the castor wheel on
the platform so that if turned in a circle, the wheel will not pro-
trude past the front edge of the platform. Next mark and drill
the hole for the wheel’s mounting plate. (The diameter of the
THE MOTORIZED PLATFORM
9
FIGURE 1-9.
Motorized wheel attachment.

10
CHAPTER ONE
TABLE 1-1. Parts List
AMOUNT
ITEM
2
Motorized wheel
1
Sheet of 24-  24-  1/4-inch plywood
1
4-inch-diameter castor wheel
8
2-inch  1/4-inch-diameter bolt, nut, and lockwasher set
4
3-inch  1/4-inch-diameter bolt, nut, and lockwasher set
2
2-inch  3/4-inch-diameter bore washer
1
Auto fiberglass repair kit, including cloth and resin
1
Can spray paint (color of your choice)
FIGURE 1-10.
Location of castor wheel.

holes depends on the wheel you have obtained.) As I noted
before, you will probably have to stack some plywood spacers
(use the wood left over from when you made the platform)
between the wheel and the platform. These spacers are made by
tracing around the castor’s mounting plate and then marking
and drilling the mounting holes as you did for the platform.
When you stack the spacers, all the holes should line up.
Bolt the castor wheel and spacers to the platform as shown
in Fig. 1-11. Then using a small level, check to see that the
platform sits correctly. If the level of the platform is slightly off,
this can be corrected by placing washers between the stacked
plywood and the mounting plate of the castor until level.
FINISHING TOUCHES
After you have mounted all three wheels, remove them and
paint the platform. This not only makes the platform look bet-
THE MOTORIZED PLATFORM
11
FIGURE 1-11.
Castor wheel attachment.

ter, but makes it water resistant. You may opt as I have to
fiberglass the platform. Fiberglass also provides water protec-
tion and adds strength to the platform. Fiberglass is very easy
to work with (especially on a flat surface) so if you follow the
directions on the package, you should have no problems. If
you do use fiberglass, use a kit with a clear resin so you can
locate and redrill all the mounting holes in the platform. Once
you have fiberglassed and painted, you can reattach the three
wheels. Figure 1-12 shows the completed platform.
12
CHAPTER ONE
FIGURE 1-12.
Completed platform (bottom view).

BODY FRAMEWORK
Q
uestor’s body is made from five 8-foot  1-inch  1-inch 
1/8-inch strips of aluminum angle. I chose this material
over wood or plastic because while slightly more expensive, it
is stronger and more lightweight. Also, if care is taken, alu-
minum is relatively easy to work with. The aluminum angle is
used to form two boxes. These boxes are called the upper
framework and the lower framework. Once joined, they make
up Questor’s body.
Before the boxes are constructed each section of alu-
minum angle used to make up that portion of the body is
marked and drilled with holes to be used later in the robot’s
construction. These predrilled holes are best made when the
framework is in pieces rather than when assembled. A chart
will list how to assemble each box so all the predrilled holes
are in their proper locations when the framework is complete.
Remember to take your time and not to cut or drill the alu-
minum angle until you have checked your measurements or
hole locations against the book.
CUTTING ALUMINUM
Figure 2-1 shows how to cut each of the five aluminum strips
into the pieces that make up Questor’s framework. Cut the
strips with a hack saw and use a miter box to achieve straight
cuts. Be careful not to cut the aluminum before you have
checked your measurements.
13
C H A P T E R
T W O
Copyright 2002 The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

FIGURE 2-1.
Aluminum angle cutting guide.
14

Once you have cut the strips into pieces, separate them
so that you have four 36-inch, four 6-inch, six 10-inch, and
ten 20-inch pieces. Keep all the extra aluminum for use
later.
Now that you have the various pieces grouped together,
check to see if they are all the same length. If the pieces are
slightly unequal, simply choose the shortest piece of that
group and cut or file the others down to match it. After all the
pieces have been grouped and trimmed, they must be
predrilled and some pieces precut before assembly. This
preparation will save you a lot of time and trouble later.
DRILLING AND CUTTING THE SECTIONS
Many of the holes to be drilled now are not utilized until later
in the robot’s construction. It is much easier to drill them now
while the framework is in pieces than later when it is assem-
bled. All the cuts to be made consist of 45-degree angles.
These cuts are at the ends of one side of some of the pieces
and allow them to be joined into squares with no overlap.
Figure 2-2 shows an example of this.
Figures 2-3 through 2-26 illustrate how each piece of alu-
minum is drilled or cut. Each figure consists of two rectan-
gles; one rectangle represents each of the outer surfaces of
BODY FRAMEWORK
15
TABLE 2-1. Parts List
AMOUNT
ITEM
5
8-foot  1-inch  1-inch  1/8-inch angle aluminum
50
1/8-inch pop rivet (and rivet gun)
8
1-inch  5/32-inch-diameter bolt, nut, and 
lockwasher set
6
1-inch  1/4-inch-diameter bolt, nut, and 
lockwasher set
1
Vacuum cleaner kit

FIGURE 2-2.
Angles cut so pieces can be joined at corners.
FIGURE 2-3.
Drilling and cutting guide.

FIGURE 2-4.
Drilling and cutting guide.
FIGURE 2-5.
Drilling and cutting guide.

FIGURE 2-6.
Drilling and cutting guide.
FIGURE 2-7.
Drilling and cutting guide.

BODY FRAMEWORK
19
that piece. The figures depict each piece as if it were laid
lengthwise with its two edges on a workbench then flattened
so both sides could be seen. All the figures show the locations
and diameter of the holes to be drilled. The locations of the
45-degree angle cuts to be made at the ends of many of the
aluminum pieces are shown as shaded areas where the alu-
minum is to be removed.
Most of the figures are duplicates of each other. The dif-
ference between the figures are numbers and sometimes let-
ters that appear on the sides of each aluminum piece. The
numbers are used when the framework is assembled to the
two main sections that make up Questor’s body. The letters
are used when these sections are joined together by two con-
necting pieces to form the completed framework. In both
cases the symbols ensure that all the predrilled holes are 
in their correct locations when the framework is completed.
To mark the numbers and letters on the outsides of each 
FIGURE 2-8.
Drilling and cutting guide.

20
CHAPTER TWO
FIGURE 2-9.
Drilling and cutting guide.

BODY FRAMEWORK
21
FIGURE 2-10.
Drilling and cutting guide.

22
CHAPTER TWO
FIGURE 2-11.
Drilling and cutting guide.

BODY FRAMEWORK
23
FIGURE 2-12.
Drilling and cutting guide.

24
CHAPTER TWO
FIGURE 2-13.
Drilling and cutting guide.
FIGURE 2-14.
Drilling and cutting guide.

BODY FRAMEWORK
25
FIGURE 2-15.
Drilling and cutting guide.
FIGURE 2-16.
Drilling and cutting guide.

26
CHAPTER TWO
FIGURE 2-17.
Drilling and cutting guide.
FIGURE 2-18.
Drilling and cutting guide.

BODY FRAMEWORK
27
FIGURE 2-19.
Drilling and cutting guide.
FIGURE 2-20.
Drilling and cutting guide.

28
CHAPTER TWO
FIGURE 2-21.
Drilling and cutting guide.
FIGURE 2-22.
Drilling and cutting guide.

BODY FRAMEWORK
29
aluminum section, first write the correct number or letter on a
piece of masking tape and then apply the tape to its proper
location according to the figure of that piece.
After all the pieces have been prepared they must again be
separated into two groups—one group of pieces for each of
the two sections of Questor’s framework. The first group,
when assembled, forms the robot’s upper framework. The
pieces needed are as follows: four 36-inch- and six 10-inch-
long pieces.
The second group forms the lower section of the frame-
work and the pieces needed are: ten 20-inch and four 6-inch
pieces. Of the ten 20-inch pieces for the lower section of the
robot, only eight are needed. The remaining two are used as
connecting pieces between the lower and upper framework.
These two pieces can be identified by the letters A and B
which you should have marked on them.
FIGURE 2-23.
Drilling and cutting guide.

Now that you have the pieces regrouped, study them and
familiarize yourself with these markings. How each section is
assembled will become obvious as you study the pieces. The
key to the assembly is the markings that allow all the
predrilled holes to line up correctly.
ASSEMBLING FRAMEWORK
Assembling the framework now becomes a simple matter of
matching the ends of the pieces according to the numbers on
their ends; and then riveting the matched ends together. Tables
2-2 and 2-3 list the numbered ends used in the matching
sequence for each of the two sections of the robot’s framework.
Table 2-2 is for the upper section and Table 2-3 is for the lower
section.
FIGURE 2-24.
Drilling and cutting guide.

BODY FRAMEWORK
31
After you have matched the pieces, line up the predrilled
1/8-inch holes at the ends of each piece. If the holes on the
pieces do not line up (which happened to me three-quarters of
the time), clamp them together and redrill the 1/8-inch-diameter
hole in both pieces at the same time. Next insert a 1/8-inch rivet
into the hole and using a rivet gun “pop” the rivet to secure the
pieces. The rivet gun you use should come with directions.
Once you have completed both the upper and lower sec-
tions of the framework, they must be joined together with two
20-inch connection pieces marked A and B. To begin take the
lower section and place it so the two Fs (which stand for
front) on the front of this section face you. Then place the upper
section within the lower, with its Fs facing you. Figure 2-27
shows where the two connecting pieces are placed; the piece
marked A is placed at the front and the piece marked B in the
rear. The pieces are held in place by four 1-inch  1/4-inch-
FIGURE 2-25.
Drilling and cutting guide.

32
CHAPTER TWO
FIGURE 2-26.
Drilling and cutting guide.
TABLE 2-2. Matching List for Upper Framework
CORNERS
UPPER FRAMEWORK MATCH AND RIVET ENDS NUMBERED
1
1-9-8-16
2
2-10-3-11
3
4-12-5-13
4
6-14-7-15
5
24-26
6
23-25
7
19-27
8
20-28
NOTE: Ends numbered 17, 18, 21, 22 are not riveted.

BODY FRAMEWORK
33
TABLE 2-3. Matching List for Lower Framework
CORNERS
LOWER FRAMEWORK MATCH AND RIVET ENDS NUMBERED
1
1-17-8-31
2
2-19-3-21
3
4-23-5-25
4
6-27-7-29
5
9-18-16-32
6
10-20-11-22
7
12-24-13-26
8
14-28-15-30
FIGURE 2-27.
Location of connecting pieces.

34
CHAPTER TWO
diameter bolt, nut, and lockwasher sets. The upper and lower
body are now joined to complete Questor’s framework.
MOUNTING FRAMEWORK ON THE
PLATFORM
The next step in completing Questor’s body is mounting the
framework on the mobile platform. If you have chosen to
include the vacuum cleaner option in your version of Questor,
now is the time when it is installed.
Begin by placing the mobile platform on the floor so that the
castor wheel faces you, this is the front of the platform. Next
assemble the vacuum cleaner according to the instructions
included in the kit. Place the vacuum lengthwise on the plat-
form so that the vacuum’s motor faces the rear of the platform
and the hose outlet faces front. Make sure that the vacuum’s
mounting bracket sits flush with the platform. Once you have
the vacuum cleaner positioned correctly on the platform, lower
the framework onto the platform so that the Fs on the frame-
work face the front of the platform. The vacuum cleaner should
fit into the lower section of the framework as it is lowered onto
the platform. You will have to move the vacuum about with the
lower framework to accomplish this. Figure 2-28 shows how to
position the vacuum inside the framework.
Now that you have the vacuum and framework positioned
correctly on the platform, the mounting holes for each must
be marked and drilled. Begin by carefully marking the two
1/4-inch-diameter holes needed to secure the vacuum cleaner
unit. The bolts for this should be included in the vacuum
cleaner kit. Next mark the eight 5/32-inch-diameter holes
along the lower edge of the framework used to secure the
framework to the platform. You will use eight 1-inch  5/32-
inch-diameter bolt, nut, and lockwasher sets to secure the
framework in place. Now remove the vacuum and framework
and drill the holes. Replace the framework with the vacuum
cleaner inside, and bolt both in place. Press the bolts with
washers in place through the bottom of the platform, then

BODY FRAMEWORK
35
FIGURE 2-28.
Vacuum position in lower framework.
bolt the parts in place. Be sure to place lockwashers on the
bolt before the nut is tightened. Figure 2-29 shows how the
framework is bolted to the platform.
MOUNTING THE VACUUM OUTLET
The final step for completing the mounting procedure is to
attach the vacuum cleaner outlet to the framework; this outlet
consists of a hinged door and switch assembly. When the door
is opened, the vacuum activates. To use the vacuum you open
the door and attach a white vacuum hose to the outlet.
The outlet is held to the framework by a bracket, shown in
Fig. 2-30, made from leftover aluminum angle. The outlet is

36
CHAPTER TWO
FIGURE 2-29.
Bolt attaching framework to platform.
FIGURE 2-30.
Vacuum outlet bracket.

BODY FRAMEWORK
37
then screwed to the bracket and the whole assembly bolted to
the lower front section of Questor’s framework utilizing two
1/4-inch predrilled holes at that location. Figure 2-31 shows
where and how the outlet assembly is mounted. Now that
both the vacuum and outlet are mounted, they must be joined
by a short section of black hose included in your vacuum kit.
Cut a piece of hose approximately 3 inches long. To connect
the vacuum to the outlet, unscrew the outlet from the bracket,
then connect the hose to the vacuum. Next connect the outlet
to the other end of the hose and screw it back to the bracket.
The mounting procedure just described is also used to change
the vacuum cleaner’s bags, so it is important that you under-
stand this assembly. Questor’s framework is not yet complete.
FIGURE 2-31.
Mounted outlet.

This page intentionally left blank.

POWER SUPPLY AND
TEMPORARY
CONTROL BOX
Q
uestor’s systems get their power from a 12-volt battery
system. This system is comprised of two 6-volt batteries.
You will find as I did that most of the motors, lights, and some
electronics for robots require a 12-volt system; the temporary
control box is just that. Controls in the box switch the two
motorized wheels on Questor’s platform to on/off and reverse
thus controlling his direction. There are also two speed con-
trols mounted in the box, one for each wheel. The control box
is connected to the robot’s platform by a cable of wire; the
length is up to you. When wiring these systems make sure you
pay close attention to the wiring diagrams.
MOUNTING BATTERIES AND 
BARRIER STRIPS
Questor gets his power from two 6-volt, gel-type batteries
mounted within his lower framework. The batteries are
mounted on the right and left sides of the upper framework
where it sits within the lower framework. Figure 3-1 shows
where one of these batteries is located.
Each of the two batteries is held in place by three 2-inch-
long pieces of aluminum angle. (Use the aluminum angle left
over from the building of the framework.) Two of these pieces
39
C H A P T E R
T H R E E
Copyright 2002 The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

40
CHAPTER THREE
FIGURE 3-1.
Location of one of the two 6-volt batteries.
FIGURE 3-2.
Battery mounting bracket.

POWER SUPPLY AND TEMPORARY CONTROL BOX
41
are bolted to the mobile platform, while the third is bolted to
the framework itself using a predrilled hole on the framework.
Figure 3-2 shows where to drill holes in each of the 2-inch
aluminum pieces.
To begin installing the batteries, first take two of the 2-inch
pieces of aluminum angle and bolt one to each side of frame-
work connecting piece B using two 5/32-inch bolt, nut, and
lockwasher sets for each. There are two predrilled holes on
each side of the upper framework. Next slide one of the batter-
ies under each of the pieces making sure that the battery ter-
minals face the front of the platform and that they are sitting
in their correct mounting positions. Then place two more alu-
minum pieces, with their mounting holes flush with the robot’s
platform, snug against the battery. Place one piece against the
front of the battery and one against the side; do this to both
batteries.
Mark the mounting holes on the platform where each of
the four aluminum pieces sit. Remove the pieces and battery
and drill the four 5/32-inch-diameter holes in the platform
TABLE 3-1. Parts List
AMOUNT
ITEM
2
6-volt, solid-gel battery, with charger kit
2
DPDT switch
1
SPST switch
1
Project box
1 or more
Roll red 18-gauge wire
1 or more
Roll black 18-gauge wire
2
2-post barrier strip and mounting screws
1
8-post barrier strip and mounting screws
2
25-watt, 10-ohm potentiometer
6
2-inch piece of leftover aluminum angle
6
1-inch  5/32-inch-diameter bolt, nut, and lockwasher set
1
Crimp kit
4
Small electrical twist caps

where marked. Once the holes are drilled, replace the batter-
ies with terminals facing the rear, and bolt the four 2-inch alu-
minum pieces in place, using four 1-inch  5/32-inch-diame-
ter bolt, nut, and lockwasher sets. Figure 3-3 shows the
mounting brackets in place. Now you could turn the robot
upside down and the batteries will remain in place.
The next step in providing Questor with power is to mount
multipost barrier strips at various points on the robot’s plat-
form. Figure 3-4 shows what one of these strips looks like.
These barrier strips are very important because they allow the
42
CHAPTER THREE
FIGURE 3-3.
Mounting brackets in place.

robot to be wired together with great ease; they also allow you
to remove individual components from the robot without 
disturbing others. Most of Questor’s electrical components
use barrier strips.
For now you need only three barrier strips: two 2-post and
one 8-post. These two 2-post terminals are permanently
mounted on the platform near where the motorized wheel
post protrudes through the platform; the exact location is of
little importance. The third 8-post strip will be temporarily
mounted at the center of the rear edge of the robot’s platform.
It will be removed later for use in the remote control system.
WIRING PLATFORM
Now that the power supply and barrier strips are mounted they
must be wired together using 18-gauge wire. This wire will be
used now and throughout the robot. Figure 3-5 shows a graphic
representation of how the platform is wired. When you look at
Fig. 3-5, you will notice that all the wires used are either red or
black. The red wire represents all the wires that will eventually
be connected to the positive pole of the power supply, and the
black to the negative pole. While Fig. 3-5 is rather straightfor-
ward, a few things must be noted before wiring can begin.
First, the red and blue wires coming from each of the
motorized wheels must be connected to their barrier strips. The
wires from each wheel are too short and must be extended
POWER SUPPLY AND TEMPORARY CONTROL BOX
43
FIGURE 3-4.
Multipost barrier strip.

using one 6-inch red and one 6-inch black wire for each
wheel. Use twist caps or solder the red extender wire to the
red wire of the motorized wheel and the black to the blue
wire. To connect the extended wire to the barrier strips, twist
both wires loosely together and push them up and out of the
post of the motorized wheel. This post leads to the inside of
the lower framework where the barrier strips are placed.
Connect the wire to two of the screw posts on the same side
of the strip. Refer to Fig. 3-5 for the exact connections.
Wiring the two 6-volt batteries together is made somewhat
difficult because of the small size of the battery post. Instead
44
CHAPTER THREE
FIGURE 3-5.
Platform wiring diagram.

of trying to solder the connecting wire to the battery post, I
elected to use what is called a crimp kit. A crimp kit enables
you to attach special ends to the wires that allow them to be
wired together easily. Figure 3-6 shows the different ends
available and the crimping tool.
As illustrated in Fig. 3-7, the batteries are not only wired
together but to other components. Two of these are charging
plugs that come with the batteries. Also wired between the
two batteries is an SPST (single-pole, single-throw) switch.
This switch serves two functions: First, it is the main on/off
switch for Questor; and two, it separates the batteries when
they are being charged (the switch is in the off position at this
time). Make sure that you use lengths of wire long enough to
allow the charging plugs and switch to reach the rear of the
platform where they will be mounted later; for now you can
tape the components securely to the platform.
Once you have wired the platform, use the charging plugs
and charge the batteries. While the batteries are charging, it
takes about 36 hours, you can construct the temporary control
box used to control Questor.
TEMPORARY CONTROL BOX
Before you begin to assemble the temporary control box, a
brief explanation of how it functions is in order. To begin, the
two 6-volt batteries have been wired together to give Questor a
12-volt power source. This power source is then wired to two
potentiometers, one for each motorized wheel, within the con-
trol box. These pots as they are commonly called, are a type of
variable resistor that lowers or raises the voltage coming from
the batteries. The pots are used to control the speed of each
motorized wheel.
The lowered or raised voltage passes into two double-
pole, double-throw (DPDT) switches, again one switch for
each motorized wheel. The DPDT switches are actually two
switches in one, hence the term double in their description.
To reverse the direction of a dc electric motor, you must
POWER SUPPLY AND TEMPORARY CONTROL BOX
45

46
CHAPTER THREE
FIGURE 3-6.
Crimp kit.

change the polarity of the wires leading to the motor. For
example, if the right terminal of the motor is connected to
the positive terminal of the power source, and the left to the
negative, the motor will run clockwise. Exchange the leads
so the right lead is negative and the left positive and the
motor will run counterclockwise, or in reverse. The DPDT
switch does all this internally so all you do is flip the switch
up or down to change the direction of the motor. Also
included in these switches is a center on/off position where
no power goes to the motor.
After passing through the DPDT switch the voltage reaches
one of the two motorized wheels on the robot’s platform, and
depending on the position of the switch the motor will run 
POWER SUPPLY AND TEMPORARY CONTROL BOX
47
FIGURE 3-7.
Battery wiring diagram.

forward, reverse, or not at all. How this system is used to control
Questor will be described later in the chapter.
CONTROL BOX CONSTRUCTION
The temporary control box will house all of Questor’s control
electronics in this stage of his construction. The box itself
should be approximately 4  4 inches square to allow room for
the various parts. The parts contained in the control box are two
heavy duty DPDT switches and two potentiometers like those
shown in Fig. 3-8. These components are wired together in the
control box then connected to the robot’s batteries and motor-
ized wheels via a group of wires taped together in a cable. How
the parts are mounted in the control box is up to you; however,
Fig. 3-9 shows a recommended layout. To mount the parts you
will have to remove the box’s overplate on the control box and
drill mounting holes in that plate.
WIRING THE TEMPORARY CONTROL BOX
The wire used in the temporary control box and throughout
the robot is an 18-gauge-type colored either black or red. Again,
red is for all wires connected to the positive pole of the batteries
and black is for all to the negative. This makes it easier to trace
48
CHAPTER THREE
FIGURE 3-8.
DPDT and “pots” switch.

the various circuits in Questor. The robot’s electronics are not
so complicated that you would confuse these wires with others
leading to Questor’s various systems.
Figure 3-10 shows how to wire the components in the con-
trol box together. The color of each wire has been noted. Try
as I might, I was unable to make Questor a completely solder-
less project. You will have to solder some of the robot’s compo-
nents. Two of these components are the pots in the control
box. If you have never soldered before, you could simply twist
the wires around the post of the components, but this makes
for loose and many times poor electrical contacts. What you
can do is twist the wires now and solder them later when you
have picked up the skill.
POWER SUPPLY AND TEMPORARY CONTROL BOX
49
FIGURE 3-9.
Suggested control box layout.

50
CHAPTER THREE
FIGURE 3-10.
Temporary control box wiring diagram.

When you look at Fig. 3-10, you will notice eight num-
bered wires coming out of the control box to the barrier strip
on the platform. The numbers on each wire correspond with
numbers on the posts of the 8-post barrier strips located at the
rear of the robot’s platform. Match the numbers on the tem-
porary control box to the platform to complete this phase of
Questor’s construction.
USING THE CONTROL BOX
The temporary control box is very simple to use. The first thing
to do is to activate Questor by flipping the main power switch to
the on position. Turn both pots on the control box all the way to
the right and then turn the pots slightly to the left. This reduces
the speed of both wheels so the robot will travel slow enough
for you to get familiar with using the control box. Next flip the
two DPDT switches on the control box up and Questor will
begin to move slowly forward. If you flip them down he will
move backwards. Allow the robot to travel for about 20 feet. You
may notice that Questor is veering either left or right. You can
correct this using the two pots on the control box. If the robot is
veering left, increase the speed of the left wheel slightly, and if
he is veering right, increase the speed of the right wheel. This
should straighten out Questor while keeping his speed up. You
could also straighten the robot’s path by decreasing the speed of
the wheel opposite the direction he’s veering. This, however,
also slows the robot down and if you are already operating
Questor at a slow speed, this could slow him down too much.
Later you can use the pots to increase Questor’s speed and then
recalibrate his direction.
Turning the robot can be accomplished in one of three
ways. The first is to run one motorized wheel forward and the
other in reverse; this allows Questor to turn about his center.
This method comes in very handy when operating the robot in
close quarters. The second way to turn Questor is to turn one
wheel off and run the other either forward or reverse, depend-
ing on the direction in which you want to go. By steering the
POWER SUPPLY AND TEMPORARY CONTROL BOX
51

robot in this way, you can make his turns wider and smoother
looking. The final method of directing Questor only works
with the temporary control box. The pots on the control box
are used to vary the speed of the motorized wheels allowing
one to overpower the other and veer the robot in the desired
direction. This of course is the opposite of what you did to
straighten Questor’s path. The remote control system does not
have a speed control function built into it, so this method of
control cannot be used with this system; but that is not to say
you could not design this capability in your robot.
At this point you have completed most of the major work
in Questor’s construction. Now is the time to experiment with
the robot’s control and refamiliarize yourself with the rest of the
book. The next chapter details Questor’s remote control system.
If you do not plan to include a remote control system or may
plan to include one later, you may skip that chapter. I would,
however, recommend you do read it to give you an understand-
ing of remote control systems.
52
CHAPTER THREE

REMOTE CONTROL
SYSTEM
W
ireless control has always seemed to fascinate people,
and Questor’s remote control system is the heart of his
appeal. While the technical aspects of remote control may be
a little hard for the novice to grasp, Questor’s remote control
system is rather simple in construction. Before I go into detail
on how the system is comprised, a brief explanation of remote
control is in order.
A remote control system consists of three basic components.
The first is the transmitter or “encoder.” Moving controls on the
transmitter causes it to send or encode signals to the second
part of the remote control system, the receiver, or decoder. The
receiver gets the signals from the transmitter and then decodes
them. Depending on what signal the receiver decoded, it will
activate a servo, the third part of the system. Servos are the
mechanical part of a remote control system. A wheel or some-
times bar on the servo will turn in proportion with the move-
ment of the transmitter’s control. This movement can then be
used to directly control the function of a robot, or in Questor’s
case to trip switches that control his movements.
Questor’s remote control system is a standard off-the-shelf
type like that pictured in Fig. 4-1. Notice the three main parts
of the system. The robot requires a system with a minimum of
two channels. A two-channel system has two servos; each of
the servos is used to control one of the robot’s motorized
wheels. The system used in my version of Questor has three
channels; the third channel is used to trip two switches that
can turn other items on the robot on or off.
53
C H A P T E R
F O U R
Copyright 2002 The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

54
CHAPTER FOUR
FIGURE 4-1.
Three-channel remote control system.
FIGURE 4-2.
Leaf switch.

REMOTE CONTROL SYSTEM
55
The switches that the servos trip are called leaf switches
(Fig. 4-2). A leaf switch is a very small on/off switch that is
triggered by depressing a small metal strip or “leaf” on the
switch. By using four leaf switches, it is possible to recreate
the function of the DPDT switches used in the temporary
control box.
A total of eight switches is needed to duplicate the func-
tion of the DPDT switches used to control the robot’s motor-
ized wheels. One servo is then used to trip four switches in
such a way to drive the wheel either forward or reverse. You
use the control sticks on the remote control transmitter in the
same way as you flipped the DPDT switches on the temporary
control box; up is forward, center is off, and down is reverse.
If you chose a remote control system with more than two
channels, you can use the other servos to trip leaf switches for
turning other devices on or off, or control motors (forward,
stop, and reverse) within the robot. The third servo of my
remote control system is used to turn a horn on and off.
TABLE 4-1. Parts List
AMOUNT
ITEM
1
2-to-3-channel remote control system
10
Leaf switch and mounting screws
1
10-  10-  1/8-inch plywood square
4
1-  10-  1/8-inch wood strip
4
8-post barrier strip
4
Screw hook
2
Rubber band
1
Small strip of foam rubber
#
Spools of 18-gauge black-and-red wire
4
2-  2-inch aluminum corner brace
4
2-inch  1/8-inch-diameter bolt, nut, and lockwasher set
1
4-slot fuse holder
4
SFE 20-amp fuse

You need only one leaf switch per function if that function
is to be turned only on or off. Figure 4-3 shows how the leaf
switches are positioned and triggered for either on/off or for-
ward/reverse control. By now you’re probably wondering
where all this fits inside of Questor. The remote control 
system (servos and receiver), leaf switches, and other compo-
nents are mounted on a motherboard that is then installed
inside Questor’s framework.
56
CHAPTER FOUR
FIGURE 4-3.
Control options using leaf switches.

MOTHERBOARD
The motherboard is simply a 10-  10-  1/8-inch piece of ply-
wood on which all of the components for the remote control
system are mounted. The various components consist of the
remote control system’s servos, receiver, and battery pack, along
with ten leaf switches, four barrier strips, and a four-slot fuse
holder. Figure 4-4 shows where each item is placed on the
board. The first items to be mounted are the servos.
Cutouts will have to be made in the board to allow the ser-
vos to sit flush with the board. To do this, first place the servos
evenly spaced on the motherboard and trace around their
bases. Cut out the wood where traced and slip the servos in
place. The servos’ body should have tabs sticking out along its
top edge; these tabs prevent the servo from going all the way
through the board and this is where the servos are screwed to
the board. Most remote control systems come with either plas-
tic wheels and/or star levers that are screwed on the servo’s
REMOTE CONTROL SYSTEM
57
FIGURE 4-4.
Parts layout of motherboard.

motor. Figure 4-5 shows how a star lever looks. For this appli-
cation you will need star levers that must be modified by
removing four of the star’s legs. What you end up with is a
straight bar like that in Fig. 4-6. The bar will trip a bank of
leaf switches on either side of the servo.
58
CHAPTER FOUR
FIGURE 4-6.
Modified star lever.
FIGURE 4-5.
Star lever.

In order to be tripped, the leaf switches must line up with
the trip bar on the servo. This is accomplished by stacking 
10-  1-  1/8-inch strips of wood along each side of the ser-
vos, then mounting the leaf switches on the strip. Figure 4-7
shows where to mount the leaf switches on the wooden strip
in relation to the servos. Once the leaf switches are mounted,
connect the servos to the remote control system’s receiver and
by using the transmitter, check to see if the trip bar is activating
the switches properly. The order in which the servos are
wired to the receiver is not important at this time; however,
when the receiver is mounted, the sequence will be detailed
so that the control stick on the transmitter activates the
proper servo.
Once the servos and leaf switches are operating properly,
the barrier strips and fuse box for the remote control system
can be mounted to the motherboard. Figure 4-4 shows where
to mount these components. With all components mounted,
the next step is to wire them together.
REMOTE CONTROL SYSTEM
59
FIGURE 4-7.
Leaf switch mounting.

WIRING THE MOTHERBOARD
Before you wire the motherboard, cut two notches on each
side of the motherboard so the wires will not go past its edge.
Figure 4-8 shows how to wire together the components on the
motherboard. There are two main rows of barrier strips on the
motherboard; the first row is numbered. These numbers cor-
respond with numbers on the tabs of the leaf switches; simply
wire the matching numbers together. In some cases more than
one wire will go to one post on the barrier strip. Use the half
of the barrier strip closest to the leaf switches. The color wire
used is indicated on the leaf switch: R  red, B  black. The
other row is where the motorized wheel and horn will be con-
nected; they too use the matching number system.
The second row is divided into two parts called power
grids. The first 8 post (which is one complete barrier strip) is
called the positive grid and is where the positive lead of the
battery is connected and where all the positive or red wires
from Questor’s electronics will be connected. The second 8
post is for the negative or black wires and is called the nega-
tive power grid. All the posts on the same side of each grid
must be wired together by one wire run from post to post. Be
sure not to run a wire between the positive and negative grids;
this will cause a short circuit. Figure 4-8 shows where the
wire runs. Later when other functions are wired, the instruc-
tions will say “wire to positive power grid and negative power
grid.” You can then connect those wires to any open post on
the grids. Figure 4-8 also shows four wires coming from the
positive grid to the fuse holder. These wires are all positive
and you should use red wires. Two more red wires run from
the opposite ends of two of the fuses directly to the post on
the leaf switch barrier strips. This is where the switch gets the
power to control two on/off functions in the robot. (The nega-
tive or black wire forms the function being controlled; in my
robot a horn is wired directly to the positive power grid.)
There are also two black wires running from the negative
power grid to the leaf switch barrier strips at post 8 and 2.
These are also shown in Fig. 4-8.
60
CHAPTER FOUR

Wires to the leaf switches and fuse holder will have to be
soldered. The wires that lead to the barrier strips should
have hooks bent at their ends so they can wrap around the
screws on the strip. After the board is wired, check it against
Fig. 4-8 because errors here can affect the function of the
rest of the robot. Also at this time, install four 20-amp fuses
in the fuse holder. These fuses help protect the robot’s com-
ponents from short circuits and overloads. Once the board
is wired and checked, the remote control receiver can 
be mounted and the motherboard mounted in Questor’s
framework.
REMOTE CONTROL SYSTEM
61
FIGURE 4-8.
Motherboard wiring diagram.

COMPLETING THE MOTHERBOARD
The remote control’s receiver and battery are mounted on the
underside of the motherboard. Using four screw-on hooks,
rubber bands and foam rubber, the receiver is held securely in
place. Figure 4-9 shows how to mount the receiver. The figure
is self-explanatory. The only thing to keep in mind is that the
servos must be wired to the receiver, so don’t mount the
receiver out of reach of the servo wires.
The order in which the servos are connected to the
receiver is very important to the control of the robot. When
both control sticks on the transmitter are pushed up, the
robot should move forward. If both sticks are pulled down,
the robot should run in reverse. The center or neutral posi-
tion is off and of course causes no movement of the robot. 
If you have a third channel (and servo) in your remote con-
trol system, it should react to the sideways movement of one
of the control sticks on the transmitter. Table 4-2 lists 
all of the control combinations used to operate Questor’s
functions.
It is not necessary to wire the motorized wheels to the
motherboard. To check this simply make sure that when the
sticks are pushed forward, the two servos controlling the
motorized wheels turn as shown in Fig. 4-10. If you have a
third servo a sideways movement of either stick should cause
the servo to activate it.
62
CHAPTER FOUR
FIGURE 4-9.
Receiver and battery mounting.

INSTALLING AND WIRING THE
MOTHERBOARD
After the servos have been checked, the motherboard can be
installed in Questor’s framework and wired in place. To mount
the board you will need four 2-  2-inch aluminum corner
braces available at any hardware store. These are bolted in
place at the lower part of the robot’s upper framework where
the four bolts holding the two connecting pieces of the frame-
work are located. Figure 4-11 shows one angle in place. The
motherboard is then attached to these angles.
REMOTE CONTROL SYSTEM
63
TABLE 4-2. Control Combinations Using Transmitter Control Sticks
STICK POSITION
ROBOT MOVEMENT
Right
Left
Up
Up
Forward
Down
Down
Reverse
Center
Center
Stop
Up
Down
Circle right
Down
Up
Circle left
Up
Center
Turn right
Center
Up
Turn left
FIGURE 4-10.
Proper servo activation to trip leaf switches.

Mark the holes for the aluminum angles on the mother-
board from underneath. Then remove the motherboard and
drill four 1/8-inch-diameter holes where marked, being careful
not to damage the parts already mounted on the motherboard.
Attach the motherboard to the angles using four 2-inch  1/8-
inch-diameter bolt, nut, and lockwasher sets.
Wiring the motherboard to the rest of the robot now
becomes a simple matter of matching number wires from
the motorized wheels and battery system to numbered posts
on the barrier strips. The two pots used to control the
robot’s speed are wired in at this time. One wire to each pot
comes directly from the fuse holder. Figure 4-12 shows the
connection to be made for the entire system. Since Questor
has yet to get his metal skin, the pots have no place to be
64
CHAPTER FOUR
FIGURE 4-11.
Mounting angles for motherboard.

mounted on the robot, so for now simply tape them on the
platform at the rear of the robot where they will later be
mounted. Many of the spaces on the power grid barrier
strips will remain empty until later in the robot’s construc-
tion. As each new function is added to the robot, the empty
spaces will be used.
REMOTE CONTROL SYSTEM
65
FIGURE 4-12.
Platform-to-motherboard wiring guide.

USING THE REMOTE CONTROL SYSTEM
The remote control system operates much in the same way as
the temporary control box did. In the control box the position
of the switches, up for forward, center for off, and down for
reverse, along with their combinations, dictated the direction
of the robot. With the remote control system, the control
sticks on the transmitter take the place of the switches of the
temporary control box. Unlike the temporary control box,
however, the transmitter cannot control the speed of the robot
because the pots are no longer at the controls but on the robot
itself. This means that you will have to calibrate Questor’s
motorized wheels and preset the robot’s speed before you use
the remote control system, a small price to pay for wireless
control. As I noted before, if your remote control system has a
third channel and thus a third servo, you could remotely con-
trol other robot functions. This extra servo is controlled by the
sideways movement of one of the control sticks.
Congratulations! You have just completed the last major
component of Questor’s construction! The rest of the book
covers various subsystems within Questor as well as the cos-
metic aspects of the robot’s construction. If you plan on build-
ing a duplicate of Questor, the following chapters detail the
rest of his construction. However, it is my hope that you will
use them as a guide to create your own individual robot 
servant.
66
CHAPTER FOUR

ARMS AND
SUBSYSTEMS
I
n this chapter you will fabricate and assemble Questor’s
arms, drink dispenser, and head as shown in Fig. 5-1. Also
you will wire the vacuum cleaner completing that system.
Questor’s arms and drink dispenser will be built first because
they are interrelated to one another. The pump and tank for
the drink dispenser are housed inside the robot’s body while
the fluid outlet and control button are mounted on Questor’s
arm—more specifically, his left wrist. The drink dispenser
operates in a rather straightforward manner; pushing the con-
trol button on Questor’s wrist activates a small (and slightly
noisy) 12-volt pump. This pump draws fluid out of a 1-gallon
67
C H A P T E R
F I V E
FIGURE 5-1.
Arm, drink dispenser, and head.
Copyright 2002 The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

container (a former milk container) and passes it via a tube
(fish tank air tubing) to an outlet on the underside of the
robot’s wrist below the control button. This way the person
getting the drink can control the amount dispensed.
Questor’s head consists of a 12-volt automobile dome light
and a cube shaped cover made of opaque ceiling light panels.
The head’s cover is the most delicate part of Questor and
should be fabricated, fitted, and then removed until the
68
CHAPTER FIVE
TABLE 5-1. Parts List
AMOUNT
ITEM
1
Pushbutton SPST switch
1
12-volt dc pump
1
1-gallon milk container and cap
1
8-foot  2-inch PVC piping
4
2-inch-diameter PVC end-cap
2
2-inch-diameter PVC elbow
1
9 1/2-  9 1/2-  1/8-inch sheet of hardboard
4
1-inch  1/4-inch-diameter nut, bolt, and 
lockwasher set
1
1-  2-foot section of sheet metal
6
1/4-inch-diameter washer
1
4-foot-length fish tank air tubing
2
Auto drink holder
1
Tube of silicone glue
1
1-slot fuse holder
1
12-volt auto dome light with switch
1
2-  4-foot sheet of ceiling light panel
6
1/8-inch  1/8-inch-diameter sheet-metal screw
#
Miscellaneous wood screws
1
2-post barrier strip
#
Rolls of 18-gauge wire, red and black
4
2-  2-inch corner brace
4
1-inch  1/8-inch-diamter bolt, nut, and 
lockwasher set

robot’s final assembly to protect it from damage. The head
lights when a button (that should come with the auto dome
light kit) mounted on the robot is pushed. Questor’s head
serves two functions: One, as an attention getter, being that
the light is quite bright and, two, to illuminate the objects
being carried on his serving tray, The serving tray will be
mounted at the same time as Questor’s head, during final
assembly. The following sections will detail the construction
and installation of the robot’s arms, drink dispenser, and head.
ARMS
Questor’s arms are very simple to make and install; however,
care should be taken when fabricating them because errors in
the parts may affect the way the arms are mounted and how
level the serving tray sits on the arms. After viewing pictures
of Questor earlier in this book, the way the arms look and
their position should be rather obvious.
The arms are made from 2-inch-diameter PVC piping used
for plumbing (or robot arms). You will need two 8-inch and two
21-inch lengths of PVC. When you buy the PVC, also purchase
two 90-degree turn elbows and four end-caps. Figure 5-2 shows
what these parts look like.
When you cut the PVC piping, be sure to make your cuts as
straight as possible; I suggest you use a miter box to ensure
straight cuts. Cut the lengths of PVC according to Fig. 5-3 and
assemble them, as well as the elbows and end-caps, together
according to the figure. Be sure that the elbows and end-caps
fit snugly on the tubing because you will not be gluing or fas-
tening the parts together.
Once assembled, check to see that the arms are the same
height and length. Do this by standing them next to each other.
If the arms are not correct, all that may be needed is some tap-
ping or pulling of the end-caps so that they fit more snugly or
closer to the PVC pipe, or stick out farther from it. If the devi-
ation is large, you should disassemble the arm and recut a new
section of PVC piping. The piping is usually sold in eight-foot
ARMS AND SUBSYSTEMS
69

lengths, so you should have plenty if this occurs. After you
have the arms assembled, take a marker and draw a ring
around the pipes tracing the ends of the elbows and end-caps.
These lines will act as a guide, so if you disassemble the arms
for cutting and drilling, they can be reassembled correctly.
Now take one of the arms and hold it up against the side
of Questor’s upper framework so that the top edge and lower
arm lines up with the two 1/4-inch-diameter predrilled holes
on the framework as shown in Fig. 5-4. Mark where the holes
meet the elbow and arm and drill two 1/4-inch-diameter holes
where marked. Do the same with the other arm. Before the
arms can be bolted to the framework, a 3/8-inch hole must be
drilled on the outside of the lower part of the arm. Figure 5-5
70
CHAPTER FIVE
FIGURE 5-2.
Elbow and end-cap.

ARMS AND SUBSYSTEMS
71
FIGURE 5-3.
Arm assembly.
FIGURE 5-4.
Mounting holes for the arm.

shows the location of this hole. The hole which lines up to the
1/4-inch-diameter hole drilled previously is used to access the
head of the bolt so you can turn it with a screwdriver when
attaching the arm to the framework.
Three more holes must now be drilled in Questor’s left
arm to accommodate parts used in the drink dispenser. One of
the two 1/4-inch-diameter holes is drilled along the inside of
the lower section of the arm and allows a tube from the drink
dispenser to pass into the arm. The second 1/4-inch-diameter
hole is drilled on the underside of the arm just behind the
front end-cap. This hole is where the outlet spout of the dis-
penser is located. The final hole drilled in the arm is located
directly above the hole for the outlet spout on the top of the
arm behind the end-cap; it allows wires for the control button
that switches the drink dispenser on and off to reach the switch
that will be mounted in the end-cap. The hole’s diameter
depends on the type of switch you have obtained. Figure 5-6
shows where the three holes are drilled on the left arm.
After all the holes have been drilled, there is one final
preparation to be made. Two small squares must be cut from
the ends of the two upper pipes of the arms. These cutouts
allow for the pipes to be refitted to the elbows once the bolts
are in place. Make sure these cutouts are bigger than the head
of the bolts you use. Refer to Fig. 5-7 for the location.
The arms can now be reassembled and bolted to the
framework. Starting with the lower portion of the arm, reat-
tach it to the elbow, then aligning the hole on the elbow once
72
CHAPTER FIVE
FIGURE 5-5.
A 3/8-inch-diameter access hole.

ARMS AND SUBSYSTEMS
73
FIGURE 5-6.
Holes in the left arm for the drink dispenser.
FIGURE 5-7.
Bolt head clearance cutouts.

again with that on the frame, bolt it in place using a 1-inch 
1/4-inch-diameter bolt, nut, and lockwasher set. Do the same
with the mounting hole on the lower arm, only stack three
washers between the arm and the framework so the arm sits
straight along the framework. You can access the head of the
screw through the 3/8-inch holes drilled on the sides of the
arm. Now you can replace the upper section of the arm being
sure to align the small cutout section on the piece with the
head of the bolt holding the elbow to the framework. Figure 5-8
shows how the arms are mounted to the framework.
The last component that completes Questor’s arms are his
hands. The hands are simply two auto drink holders mounted
to the end-caps on the front of Questor’s arms. The top of the
drink holder is removed and the rest is screwed to the end-cap
with a 1/8-inch screw. Figure 5-9 shows a completed hand.
After you have made the hands, set them aside; they will be
attached to the robot’s arms later during the robot’s final
assembly. You are now ready to build Questor’s drink dispenser
and install it in the robot’s left hand.
74
CHAPTER FIVE
FIGURE 5-8.
Arm mounting.

DRINK DISPENSER
Figure 5-10 shows the parts layout for Questor’s drink dis-
penser. The dispenser’s base, on which all of the components
are mounted, consists of a 9 1/2-  9 1/2-inch piece of 1/8-
inch plywood. The unit, when completed, is mounted in
Questor’s upper framework, hence the 9 1/2-  9 1/2-inch
base. As you can see by the previous figure, many parts for the
dispenser must be modified or fabricated before they are
mounted; the first of these is the 12-volt pump itself.
The pump (listed in parts list; your pump could be different)
has two large input/output spouts that have to be removed so
that the remaining parts of the spout can accept the narrower
tubing used to pass fluids through the system. Figure 5-11
shows what portion of the spout to remove. Next, two sheet
metal brackets need to be cut; these brackets hold the drink dis-
penser’s tank, a 1-gallon milk container, in place and prevent it
ARMS AND SUBSYSTEMS
75
FIGURE 5-9.
Completed hand.

from shifting when the robot moves. The template for those
brackets is shown in Fig. 5-12. Lastly, the cap to the 1-gallon
milk container must have two holes made in it. The first hole,
located in the center of the cap, is for the input tube going to
the pump that draws fluid out of the container. A second small-
er hole is made next to that one so air can get into the container
when fluid is being drawn out. Otherwise, a vacuum would
form inside the container, causing it to collapse.
After the parts are prepared, they can be mounted on the
base as shown in Fig. 5-10. Start with the brackets that hold
76
CHAPTER FIVE
FIGURE 5-10.
Drink dispenser layout.

the 1-gallon milk container in position. Place the container on the
base and press the metal brackets around it; the metal will bend
to the shape of the container. Now mark the location of the
brackets mounting tabs, remove the container, and screw 
the brackets in place using four 1/8-inch wood screws.
Next is the pump which is mounted in the right rear corner
of the base. It too is held in place by 1/8-inch wood screws.
Near the pump on the back edge of the base, mount the barrier
strip and fuse holder; make sure to allow about an inch
ARMS AND SUBSYSTEMS
77
FIGURE 5-11.
Remove these sections from spout.
FIGURE 5-12.
Template for drink tank brackets.

between each component. The last thing to do at this stage is
to connect the pump to the container using a 2-foot piece of
fish tank air hose tubing; the tube should go from the pump
through the cap of the container and rest on the bottom of the
container. Smear some silicone glue around the connection at
the pump to ensure a waterproof fit. The dispenser is now
ready for mounting and wiring.
The drink dispenser is held in place using four 1-inch
angles like those used in the remote control system. There
are four predrilled holes in the framework to accept the
angles that are held in place by four 1-inch  1/4-inch-diam-
eter bolt, nut, and lockwasher sets. Bolt the angles in place,
then position the drink dispenser on them. Take a pencil or
pen and mark via the underside of the base where the unit
sits on the angles. Remove the drink dispenser’s container
and drill four 1/8-inch-diameter holes where marked; be
careful not to damage the parts already mounted on the
board. Now bolt the unit in place using four 1-inch  1/8-
inch-diameter bolt, nut, and lockwasher sets. Replace the
container on the base and reconnect the tube from the pump
to the container. Once the drink dispenser is in place, a sec-
ond length of tubing must be run from the output spout of
the pump into the robot’s left arm and out of a predrilled
hole at the bottom of the arm. The tubing should be approxi-
mately 20 inches in length. Also smear some silicone glue
where the tubing connects to the pump. Figure 5-13 shows
how to run the tubing through the arm and how to form the
spout at the robot’s wrist where people fill their cups. The
last step in installing the drink dispenser is to wire the pump,
control switch, and power together. Figure 5-14 shows how
to wire the dispenser in place. Note the use of a 20-amp
fuse; this fuse is short circuit protection for the pump, and
the wire leading to its holder must be soldered in place. The
control button mounted on the robot’s wrist will also have to
be soldered with two wires running the length of the arm,
one that runs down the framework to the barrier strips on
the remote control board.
After the dispenser is wired in place, it must be tested.
Place a small amount of water in the container, then turn on
78
CHAPTER FIVE

the robot’s main power switch and press the switch on the
robot’s wrist. The pump will begin to hum and once it primes
itself, water will flow out the spout at the underside of the
robot’s wrist; this completes the drink dispenser. Next you’ll
install Questor’s head.
ARMS AND SUBSYSTEMS
79
FIGURE 5-13.
Tank-to-arm tubing.
FIGURE 5-14.
Drink dispenser wiring diagram.

THE HEAD
Questor’s head is basically an automobile dome light with a
white cover made of ceiling light panels. The dome light is
attached to a 9 1/2-inch-square piece of 1/8-inch pressboard
(or plywood; hardboard is easier to cut circles in) which is in
turn mounted at the top of Questor’s upper framework using
three predrilled holes located on the framework. Three metal
tabs located where the light’s base is screwed to the frame-
work act as mounting points for the light’s cover. Figure 5-15
shows the dome light and cover mounting tabs attached to the
robot’s frame.
The mounting tabs for the cover are made from the same
type of sheet metal used to make the container brackets for
the drink dispenser. The tabs should be 2 inches long folded
in the middle with a 1/8-inch hole drilled at both ends. Note
that the holes drilled in the ends of the tabs should be slightly
smaller in size than the diameter of the 1/8-inch sheet metal
screws used to hold the dome light assembly to the robot’s
frame.
The dome light cover, which is actually considered
Questor’s head, is made from a sheet of plastic ceiling light
80
CHAPTER FIVE
FIGURE 5-15.
Mounting tabs for the head. Note the auto dome light in place.

panels and eight lengths of plastic angle. The ceiling light
panels are available at most hardware stores and the plastic
angle you need can be purchased at a hobby shop. Figure 5-16
shows the size, shape, and amount of the panels to be cut
from the sheet of plastic ceiling light cover. When cutting the
plastic panels, use a plastic cutting knife that should be avail-
able where you obtain the panels.
Assemble the panels as shown in Fig. 5-17 using the
lengths of plastic angle where the panels meet, and modeling
glue to cement the parts together. After the glue has dried,
place the cover over the dome light so that the tabs on the
framework are inside the cover. The cover is clear enough so
that you will be able to see and mark the hole in the tabs on
the cover. Carefully drill the mounting holes in the cover mak-
ing sure not to crack the plastic. Now attach the cover with
three 1/8-inch sheet metal screws; you can now wire the dome
light.
Figure 5-18 shows how to wire the dome light. The switch
(which should come with the dome light) for the light will
later be mounted on the robot’s skin; for now, simply tape it to
the robot’s frame. Test the light being sure to flip Questor’s
main power switch on before trying the light. Now that the
head has been wired and tested, remove the cover so it will
not be damaged while you complete Questor’s construction.
WIRING THE VACUUM SYSTEM
The final major system to be wired is Questor’s vacuum sys-
tem, the body and motor of which you installed earlier. The
wiring guide that comes with the kit is for installation of the
vacuum in a car, while basically the same type of installation
as here, a few things should be noted. First, the kit comes
with all black wires, not black and red, and the motor itself
has two white leads. The motor was designed to run in the
right direction no matter what lead is connected to positive or
negative terminals of a battery. Just be careful not to connect
both leads to the same terminal or in this case, the power grid.
Also, on the switch you will see three tabs where the wires are
ARMS AND SUBSYSTEMS
81

82
CHAPTER FIVE
FIGURE 5-16.
Head panels to be cut from ceiling light panel.

ARMS AND SUBSYSTEMS
83
FIGURE 5-17.
Inside view of assembled head panels.
FIGURE 5-18.
Head wiring diagram.

connected. Use the bottom tab and the one marked “open” on
the side of the switch. This allows the motor to run only when
the door of the vacuum outlet is open. Finally, the fuse for the
system is built into the wire itself; be sure the fuse is in place
before attempting to use the vacuum. Once wired, all that is
needed to activate the system is to open the door to the vacu-
um outlet and attach the vacuum cleaner hose. This com-
pletes all of Questor’s major systems.
84
CHAPTER FIVE

SKIN AND FINISHING
TOUCHES
N
ow that Questor’s major systems have been completed and
installed, it is time to improve his appearance. In this chap-
ter you will attach Questor’s metal skin, mount the controls, and
install other options from previously installed systems that make
the robot function and appear as a butler, true to his robot ser-
vant theme. Also in this section you’ll paint the metal skin and
add the robot’s serving tray. Before the skin can be attached,
Questor’s remote control (RC) system, drink dispenser, and
arms must be removed. Be sure that you remove the aluminum
angles used to mount the RC system and drink dispenser.
SKIN
Questor’s skin consists of metal flashing. This material is a
very thin sheet metal that can be easily cut with a pair of scis-
sors; the flashing comes in various lengths and widths. You’ll
need approximately two 8-foot rolls that are 10 inches wide;
from this will be cut three 3-foot panels and two 2-foot pan-
els. The two 2-foot panels will be cut in half lengthwise to give
you four 5-inch-wide sections. Out of these seven sections will
be cut the final skin panels.
Beginning with the three 3-foot panels, trim them so that
you have three panels that are 2 1/2 feet long and 9 inches
wide. Next cut the four 5-inch-wide panels so that they are 19
inches long. Once all the skin panels have been cut, they are
attached to the framework from the inside. You can cut and
85
C H A P T E R
S I X
Copyright 2002 The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

tuck the skin around obstructions along the framework; just
be sure it looks good from the outside. The panels are held
in place by strips of double-sided tape running the length of
the inside of the framework. Also, sheet metal screws along
the outside of the framework secure the panels in place. The
screws are placed at all the 1/8-inch-diameter predrilled
holes on the sides of the framework. Figure 6-1 illustrates
where and how the panels are attached. You will need to cut
a hole in the center of the lower rear panel to accommodate
the vacuum cleaner motor that protrudes there, and a square
on the lower front panel to accommodate the vacuum outlet.
86
CHAPTER SIX
TABLE 6-1. Parts List
AMOUNT
ITEM
2
Roll of aluminum flashing
#
Rolls of double-sided tape, 1/2 inch wide
2
Roll of aluminum tape, 6 inches wide
1
2-  4-foot sheet of hardboard
2
2-inch section of aluminum angle
5
1-inch section of aluminum angle
#
1/8-inch sheet-metal screws
2
Auto courtesy lights
2
SPST switch
1
12-volt horn
1
Rubber gasket (big enough to fit around the vacuum system’s 
motor)
1
4-foot length of rubber floor matting
12
1/8-inch-diameter washer
1
Light-up bow tie
1
9-volt battery
1
Can black spray paint
1
Can white spray paint
1
TV snack tray
1
Roll black foam insulation tape
1
1-  2-foot sheet of felt

The metal skin panels cover all of the robot’s body except
for the rear of the upper framework and the top of the lower
framework. These openings will be covered with utility panels
which, when removed, allows access to Questor’s innerwork-
ings. The utility access panels are made of 1/8-inch-thick
hardboard. The panels are then covered with aluminum tape
to give them a metallic look that matches the rest of the body.
The panel for the rear of the upper framework measures 9
 29 inches; it is held to the framework by five 1-inch-long
mounting tabs made from leftover aluminum angle used to
make the framework. These tabs are riveted to the rear frame-
work and the panel in turn is screwed to the tabs with 1/8-inch
sheet metal screws, like those used to secure the metal skin to
the framework. Figure 6-2 shows how each tab is to be drilled
to accept both the rivet and the screw. Rivet the five tabs along
the rear framework where 1/8-inch holes have been drilled pre-
viously. Match the 1/8-inch holes on the tab with that on the
framework and rivet it in place, as shown in Fig. 6-3.
To locate where on the panel to drill the holes for the
screws used to attach it, place the panel on the inside of the
SKIN AND FINISHING TOUCHES
87
FIGURE 6-1.
Skin attachment to framework.

robot’s framework so the five tabs sit on top of the panel. Mark
the panel where the holes on the tabs rest, then remove it and
drill 1/8-inch-diameter holes where marked. Now when you
place the panel on top of the tabs, the holes should line up and
the panel can be screwed in place. To complete the panel,
cover it with aluminum tape. Two 6-inch wide strips running
the length of the panel will be enough to cover its front surface
and edges. Figure 6-4 shows the completed panel installed.
88
CHAPTER SIX
FIGURE 6-2.
Mounting tab for rear access panel.
FIGURE 6-3.
Tab in place on framework.

The access panels that cover the top of Questor’s lower
framework are made and mounted in the same way as the rear
panel. These two U-shaped panels when pieced together form a
ring around the upper framework and cover the openings of the
lower. The measurements for the panels are shown in 
Fig. 6-5. The panels are held in place by the same type of metal
tab system used for the rear panel. In this case, however, you
SKIN AND FINISHING TOUCHES
89
FIGURE 6-4.
Completed rear access panel.

will need two 2-inch- and two 1-inch-long tabs. The tabs are
screwed to the lower framework using 1/8-inch sheet metal
screws rather than rivets; I made this decision because I felt it
looked better. You, however, could rivet them if you wish. There
are predrilled holes along the top of the lower framework where
the tabs should be attached. The two 2-inch tabs go on the
sides of the frame, while the 1-inch tabs go on the front and
rear. Figure 6-6 shows where the tabs are located.
Drilling the mounting holes in both panels and tabs so that
they line up, is handled differently from the rear panels. Place
the two panels so that they sit flush on the mounting tabs. If
the panels go past the inside of the top of the lower frame-
work, trim the edges of the panels until they both fit inside
the framework and sit flush on the mounting tabs; now mark
on the panels where they sit on the tabs. The two 1-inch tabs
will have one hole a piece, while the two 2-inch tabs will have
two holes at either end of the two panels where they both sit
on the one tab. Figure 6-7 illustrates where 1/8-inch mount-
ing holes will be drilled at the same time in both panels and
90
CHAPTER SIX
FIGURE 6-5.
U-shaped access panel for lower framework.

the tabs. Cover the panels with aluminum tape and fasten
them to the tabs with 1/8-inch sheet metal screws.
Now that all the openings on Questor’s body are covered,
it is time to mount the robot’s serving tray, lower body lights,
and controls previously wired to the robot.
MOUNTING TRAY
The next item to be mounted to Questor is his serving tray. If
you haven’t already, reattach Questor’s arm and reinstall his
drink dispenser system. The tray itself is a 17 1/2-  12 3/4-
inch snack tray like that pictured in Fig. 6-8. Place the tray
across the arms and mark on the tray where the corners sit on
the arms. Drill four 1/4-inch-diameter holes in the tray and sit
it back on the arms. Align the tray so it sits straight and mark
the holes in the tray on the arms. Drill four 1/4-inch-diameter
holes in the arms and screw the tray in place with four 1/4-
inch-diameter metal screws. Also at this time you’ll be attach-
ing Questor’s hands that you made previously.
SKIN AND FINISHING TOUCHES
91
FIGURE 6-6.
Tabs for lower access panels.

MOUNTING CONTROLS
Eight previously installed components are now mounted on
Questor’s body panels. The first three are the two speed con-
trollings pots and the main power switch of the robot’s motor-
ized platform. These components are mounted on the rear
panel of the lower framework on either side of the motor for the
vacuum system. Figure 6-9 shows where the components are
located. The second switch seen on the rear panel is for the two
headlights that will be mounted on the front of the lower panel
92
CHAPTER SIX
FIGURE 6-7.
Hole in both access panel and mounting tab.

SKIN AND FINISHING TOUCHES
93
FIGURE 6-8.
Serving tray and hands in place.
FIGURE 6-9.
Location of components mounted earlier (pots, on/off switch, and
charging plugs).

later in this chapter. Also note the rubber gasket around the
vacuum cleaner motor that you can attach at this time.
To mount the pots and switches, poke a hole through
the front of the panel folding the excess sheet metal against
the inside of the panel. It is then a simple matter to mount
the components in place by attaching them to the panels
using the nuts that come with both the switches and pots.
You can, if you wish, buy knobs for the pots, but it is not
necessary.
Also mounted on the rear panel of the lower framework
are the two charging plugs for Questor’s batteries. These
plugs needed a firmer base than the metal flashing can pro-
vide. For this reason two 6-inch strips of aluminum angle are
riveted vertically at either side of the framework behind the
body panel. The plugs are then fitted between the side of the
framework and the support strip utilizing a ridge that goes
around the plug. A small square must be cut in the lower
corner on either side of the panel to accommodate the plug
as seen in Fig. 6-10.
The next two items are the on/off switch and recharge
plugs for the remote control system. The on/off switch is
mounted at the lower edge of the right side panel of the upper
framework. Follow the mounting directions that come with
the RC system and use the hardware that comes with the
switch. The RC charging plug is taped to the lower edge of the
back framework itself; I used duct tape because it had a
metallic look that matched the framework. Both mountings
are shown in Figs. 6-11 and 6-12.
The last item to be mounted is the on/off switch for the
auto dome light in Questor’s head. Mount it on the same side
as the on/off switch for the RC system, but at the top edge of
the framework, as shown in Fig. 6-13.
Once these eight components have been mounted,
Questor is basically complete. The rest of this chapter is
devoted to adding items to spruce up the robot’s appearance.
Also, if you have purchased an RC system with a third channel,
you will be adding a horn that is controlled by the system’s
third servo.
94
CHAPTER SIX

95
FIGURE 6-10.
Charging plug in place.
FIGURE 6-11.
RC on/off switch mounting.

BODY LIGHTS AND HORN
Questor’s headlights are two 12-volt auto courtesy lights
mounted on the front of the lower framework positioned at
either side of the vacuum cleaner port. You mount the lights
96
CHAPTER SIX
FIGURE 6-12.
RC charging plug.
FIGURE 6-13.
On/off button for dome light.

the same way as the switches mounted earlier, but cut out the
extra metal instead of folding it in. Follow the mounting direc-
tions for the lights you have obtained. Figure 6-14 shows how
to wire the lights. The control switch for the lights (an SPST
switch you must supply) is mounted on the rear of the lower
framework on the opposite side of the vacuum cleaner motor
from the main power switch.
Questor’s 12-volt horn is mounted on the bottom of the
upper framework’s front panel; it is then wired to the RC
motherboard that, if you opted, should already have the con-
trol leaf switch wired in place. Mount the horn on the front of
the robot somewhere and connect the red wire of the horn to
terminal number 14 on the RC motherboard, and the black
lead to the negative power grid. To control the horn, move one
of the control sticks on the RC transmitter sideways. This will
cause the third servo on the motherboard to turn, activating
the leaf switch controlling the horn. A second leaf switch
mounted on the opposite side of the servo is used to control
any other on/off function you wish. Both the horn and lights
are shown in Fig. 6-15 mounted in place.
SKIN AND FINISHING TOUCHES
97
FIGURE 6-14.
Courtesy light wiring diagram.

12-VOLT POWER OUTLET
Questor’s 12-volt power outlet allows you to draw power
directly from his batteries for use with other 12-volt devices,
e.g., radios and mini televisions. The outlet itself is a cigarette
lighter mount available at most electronics stores. Since most
radios and TVs come with auto lighter plugs, this was the logi-
cal choice. Mount the outlet on the left side of Questor’s lower
framework. Figure 6-16 shows how to wire the outlet to the
power grid on Questor’s remote control board.
BOW TIE
Another light up option you can add to your robot is a bow tie
with flashing LEDs (light emitting diodes) like that pictured in
Fig. 6-17. The bow tie is available at most novelty shops or
from the supplier listed in the back of this book. The bow tie
98
CHAPTER SIX
FIGURE 6-15.
Lights and horn in place.

operates off a 9-volt battery taped to the inside of Questor’s
front body panel. The battery will last for a long time with
intermittent use. Also, the tie has no on/off switch, so you’ll
have to wire and mount one yourself. Figure 6-18 shows how
to do this. The tie is held to the robot with a strip of double
sided tape like that used to mount the body panels.
SKIN AND FINISHING TOUCHES
99
FIGURE 6-16.
12-volt outlet wiring guide.
FIGURE 6-17.
Light-up bow tie.

PAINTING AND TRIMMING THE BODY
You can paint your version of Questor any way you wish, but if
you are making a duplicate model of my version, the following
photos, Figs. 6-19 to 6-22, will better show how he is painted. I
only painted the upper portion of the robot so the robot would
look as if he were wearing a tuxedo jacket. The two colors used
are black and white. To paint the arms it is best to remove them
from the body; the upper arm is covered with lengths of leftover
black hosing from the vacuum system. Simply cut the hose to
length and slide it over the upper arm; the end-cap at the top
will hold it in place. Make sure you also paint Questor’s serving
tray, if needed, to match the rest of his body.
TRIM
There are still a few gaps on Questor’s body that need to be
covered to enhance his appearance; four of these gaps appear
where the panels of the upper framework meet the two access
panels at the top of the framework. Cover these gaps using
100
CHAPTER SIX
FIGURE 6-18.
Bow tie wiring diagram.

FIGURE 6-19.
Painting guide.
FIGURE 6-20.
Painting guide.

black foam weather stripping, as shown in Fig. 6-23. Place the
strips so they stick to the upper body panels just touching the
lower access panels. When you later remove and replace the
access panels, be sure to slide them under the foam strips.
The last item to be mounted to Questor is a skirt to hide
his wheels. The skirt is made of black rubber floor matting
available at any hardware store. You will need approximately a
2-  2-foot piece of matting; from this cut four 6-  20-inch
strips, one for each side of the robot’s lower body. Cut slits up
the matting to allow it to pass over obstacles. Then screw the
mat strip directly to the edge of the wooden platform using
large washers to help support the strip. Figure 6-24 shows
how the installed strips look.
102
CHAPTER SIX
FIGURE 6-21.
Painting guide.

SKIN AND FINISHING TOUCHES
103
FIGURE 6-22.
Painting guide.
FIGURE 6-23.
Foam strip used to cover body gaps.

104
CHAPTER SIX
FIGURE 6-24.
Platform skirt in place.
Two smaller gaps that need to be covered are found where
the two lower access panels on the top of Questor’s lower
framework meet. These small gaps are covered with T-shaped
metal covers made from leftover metal flashing used to make
the robot’s skin. The strips are held in place by the screws that
hold the access panels to its mounting tabs. Figure 6-25
shows what the covers look like and how they are held in
place.
The last detail to take care of is to cover the surface of
Questor’s serving tray with black felt. The felt helps keep items
on the tray from shifting when the robot moves. The felt is avail-
able with a sticky backing so all you need to do is cut it to fit and
stick it in place. Make sure that you obtain felt that is waterproof
so the color will not run when it gets wet from drinks carried on
the tray. This last little detail completes Questor’s construction.

SKIN AND FINISHING TOUCHES
105
FIGURE 6-25.
T-shaped gap cover for lower access panels.

This page intentionally left blank.

SOURCES
PARTS SUPPLIERS 
Herbach & Rademan Company
353 Crider Avenue
Moorestown, NJ 08057
(800) 848-8001
www.herbach.com
American Science & Surplus
3605 Howard Street
Skokie, IL 60076
(847) 982-0870
www.sciplus.com
The Robot Store 
4286 Redwood Highway PMB-N
San Rafael, CA 94903
(800) 374-5764
www.robotstore.com
Radio Shack
300 West Third Street
Suite 1400
Fort Worth, TX 76102
www.radioshack.com
107
Copyright 2002 The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

BOOKS
The Robot Builder’s Bonanza, 2d ed., by Gordon McComb
(McGraw-Hill, 2001)
Robots, Androids, and Animatrons, 2d ed., by John Iovine
(McGraw-Hill, 2002)
Personal Robotics: Real Robots to Construct, Program, and
Explore the World by Richard Raucci (A.K. Peters, 1999)
Build Your Own Robot! by Karl Lunt (A.K. Peters, 2000)
Robot Riots: The Guide to Bad Bots by Alison Bring and Erin
Conley (Dorset Press)
(The following informative but older books are, unfortu-
nately, out of print. However, you should be able to locate them
in a library, in a used book store, or on a used book web site.)
The Complete Handbook of Robotics by Edward L. Safford 
(TAB Books)
How to Build Your Own Self-Programming Robot by David L. 
Heiserman (TAB Books)
How to Build Your Own Working Robot Pet by Frank DaCosta 
(TAB Books) 
Robot Intelligence...with Experiments by David L. Heiserman
(TAB Books)
Robots (Fact, Fiction and Prediction) by Jasia Reichardt (Viking)
Robots Reel to Real by Barbara Krasnoff (Arco Publishing)
The State of the Art Robot Catalog by Phil Berger (Dodd, Mead
and Company)
The Robots Are Here by Alvin Silverstein and Virginia B.
Silverstein (Prentice-Hall)
108
SOURCES

MAGAZINE
Robot Science & Technology 
3875 Taylor Road, Suite B
Loomis, CA 95650
(888) 510-7728
www.RobotMag.com
SHOWBOT COMPANIES FEATURED
Robots 4 Fun
14807 N. Forestdale Drive
Rathdrum, ID 83858
(208) 687-2923
www.robots4fun.com
The Robot Factory
3740 Interpark Drive
Colorado Springs, CO 80907-5058
(719) 447-0331
www.robotfactory.com
Pelican Beach LLC (successor to ShowAmerica Inc.)
217 Wood Glen Lane
Oak Brook, IL 60523
(630) 530-5673
SOURCES
109

This page intentionally left blank.

111
INDEX
Access panels, 87
illustration of, 89
Aluminum, cutting the, 13
Angle guides, cutting the, 14
Arm assembly, illustration of, 71
Arm mounting, illustration of, 74
Arms, 67
Barrier strips:
mounting the, 39
multipost, illustration of, 43
Batteries:
charging plugs for, 95
location for, 40
mounting bracket, illustration of, 40
mounting the, 39, 62
wiring diagram for, 47
wiring the, 47
Body framework, 13
Bow tie, 98
wiring diagram for, 100
Castor wheel, 9
illustration of, 11
location of, 10
Channels, 53
Charging plug, illustration of, 95
Control box, temporary, 39, 45
adjusting the, 51
construction of, 48
suggested layout for, 49
using the, 51
wiring the, 50
Control options, illustration of, 56
Controls, mounting the, 92
Crimp kit, 45
Decoder, 53
Drink dispenser, 75
hole placement for, 73
layout, illustration of, 76
tank-to-arm tubing, 79
wiring diagram for, 79
Drink tank, template for, 77
Encoder, 53
Fiberglass, 12
Finishing touches, parts list for, 
86
Framework:
assembling the, 30
body, 13
cutting, 13, 14
drilling, 15
drilling and cutting guide, 16–32
lower, parts list for, 33
mounting the platform, 34
mounting the vacuum outlet to, 
35
parts list for, 15
upper, parts list for, 32
Gearbox, wheel, 1
Hands, 74
Head, 80
mounting tabs for, 80
wiring diagram for, 83
Head panels, illustration of, 82
Herbach and Rademan Company, 
107
Horn, 96
Copyright 2002 The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

LEDs, 98
Lights, 96
Motherboard, 57
completing the, 62
installing the, 63
layout, illustration of, 57
mounting angles for, 64
wiring diagram for, 61
wiring the, 60, 65
Painting the body, 100
Platform:
building the, 4
motorized, 1
wiring diagram for, 44
wiring the, 43
Platform skirt, attaching the, 
102
Platform-to-motherboard wiring
guide, 65
Post holes, location of, 7
Potentiometers (pots), 45
Power outlet:
12-volt, 98
wiring guide for, 99
Power supply, 39
Pump, 77
PVC piping, 69
Receiver, 53
mounting the, 62
Remote control switch, illustration
of, 95
Remote control system, 53
parts list for, 55
using the, 66
Radio Shack, 107 
Servos, 53
Skin:
attachment to framework, 
illustration of, 87
materials for, 85
Soldering, 49
Star lever, 58
Subsystems, 67
parts list for, 68
Switches:
DPDT, 45
leaf, 54
mounting the, 59
selecting the, 55
SPST, 45
Transmitter, 53
Transmitter control sticks, using
the, 63
Tray, mounting the, 91
Trim, 100
Utility panels, 87
Vacuum cleaner kit, 34
Vacuum outlet:
bracket for, 36
mounting the, 35
Vacuum system, wiring the, 
81
Weather stripping, 102
Wheels, motorized:
attachment of, 9
finishing the, 11
illustration of, 2
mounting the, 6
parts list for, 10
preparing the, 1
third castor, 9
wiring, parts list for, 41
112
INDEX

