Building Classroom Discipline
C. M. Charles
Eleventh Edition

 
 
 
Pearson New International Edition
  Building Classroom Discipline
      C. M. Charles
      Eleventh Edition

Pearson Education Limited
Edinburgh Gate
Harlow
Essex CM20 2JE
England and Associated Companies throughout the world
Visit us on the World Wide Web at: www.pearsoned.co.uk
© Pearson Education Limited 2014 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted 
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without either the 
prior written permission of the publisher or a licence permitting restricted copying in the United Kingdom 
issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd, Saffron House, 6–10 Kirby Street, London EC1N 8TS.
All trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners. The use of any trademark 
in this text does not vest in the author or publisher any trademark ownership rights in such 
trademarks, nor does the use of such trademarks imply any afﬁ liation with or endorsement of this 
book by such owners. 
ISBN 10: 1-269-37450-8
ISBN 13: 978-1-269-37450-7
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
 Printed in the United States of America
ISBN 10: 1-292-04192-7
ISBN 13: 978-1-292-04192-6

Table of Contents
P
E
A
R
S
O
N
 
C
U
S
T
O
M
 
L
I
B
R
A
R
Y
 
I
1. Classroom Discipline: The Problems and the Promise
1
C. M. Charles
2. Recognizing Your Obligations and Charting the Course Ahead
25
C. M. Charles
3. The Development of Modern Discipline
51
C. M. Charles
4. Ron Morrish on Organizing and Presenting a Basic Discipline Plan
77
C. M. Charles
5. Craig Seganti on Taking Charge in the Classroom
101
C. M. Charles
6. Harry and Rosemary Wong on the First Things You Should Teach
125
C. M. Charles
7. Fred Jones on Keeping Students Willingly Engaged in Learning
149
C. M. Charles
8. Marvin Marshall on Fostering Responsible Behavior
173
C. M. Charles
9. William Glasser on Releasing the Power of Positive Choice
199
C. M. Charles
10. Spencer Kagan on Working on the Same Side with Students
223
C. M. Charles
11. Paula Cook on Helping Students Who Exhibit Neurological-Based Behavior
245
C. M. Charles
269
Index

II

Classroom Discipline:  
The Problems and the Promise
From Chapter 1 of Building Classroom Discipline, Eleventh Edition. C. M. Charles. Copyright © 2014 by  Pearson 
Education, Inc. All rights reserved.
1

What, You ask, Is thIs text GettInG Me Into?
The answer is, this text is getting you into the most important thing you can learn 
about teaching, which is how to establish and maintain a pleasant learning envi-
ronment in which students behave civilly and responsibly and you are able to teach 
without disruption. Such environments are essential to high-quality teaching and 
learning. Unfortunately, in many of today’s classrooms, civil and responsible be-
havior is not much in evidence. Numbers of students show little respect for teach-
ers. Some make almost no effort to learn, and a few wantonly disrupt learning for 
everyone in the class. Such behavior harms both teaching and learning. Teachers 
in disruptive classrooms find little pleasure in their chosen profession, and often 
burn out early and either leave teaching or struggle on miserably. As for students, 
persistent misbehavior keeps them distracted and sometimes fearful, both of which 
are destructive to learning.
But there’s bright promise of better things to come. In these pages, you will 
learn how to minimize misbehavior so you can work enjoyably with well-behaved 
students. Many students behave civilly most of the time, but altogether too many 
do not. Given that fact, your first step is to acknowledge five realities of misbehavior 
and discipline and learn to address all of them. Here are the five realities:
 1. Students are inclined to misbehave. Many are going to behave nicely most of the 
time, but a few are going to misbehave so severely that they cheat and damage 
themselves, their classmates, their teachers, their parents, and the society that 
depends on (and pays for) their education as citizens.
 2. To be successful in teaching, you must learn how to promote responsible behavior in 
the classroom. You must learn how to influence students in a positive manner 
to behave civilly and considerately even when they don’t want to. Unless you 
learn to do that, you will never be able to teach well, and even students who 
want to learn in your classes will have difficulty doing so.
 3. Fostering responsible behavior is the greatest challenge you will face in teach-
ing. Bluntly speaking, your success and the well-being of your students de-
pend on it. Unless you have exceptional natural talents, you must work to 
Classroom Discipline:  
The Problems and the Promise
Classroom Discipline:  
The Problems and the Promise
Would You Like to Understand Discipline, 
Wrinkles and All, and Become Really Good at It?
2

Classroom Discipline: The Problems and the Promise
develop the skills that promote good classroom behavior. 
 4. Students who develop responsible behavior have a great advantage in life. Most peo-
ple cannot come close to realizing their potential unless they conduct them-
selves responsibly. Many students receive the help they need only in school, 
with little support from home or community.
 5. You have to teach many students how to behave responsibly. You actually have to 
teach your students how to behave, how to be successful, and even how to be 
likeable, all of which are very important if they are to enjoy quality lives. This 
is one of your great challenges. It is of paramount importance. 
Can I antICIpate hoW MY students WIll Behave?
Yes. With effort, you can gain quite a good understanding of how students at vari-
ous age levels in various segments of society tend to behave individually and in 
groups. Virtually all conscious behavior, proper or improper, has a motive behind 
it. Some of those motives are genetically determined and reside within us, some 
occur and change as part of the maturation process, some are learned, some are 
triggered by environmental and social situations, some are set off by emotion, and 
many occur because we become able to make better choices as we develop intellec-
tually. A bit later, we will examine 26 conditions that underlie student misbehavior, 
but first let’s review what is considered typical or “natural” behavior at different 
levels of development. Keep in mind that these depictions are general and do not 
always apply.
Behavior in the primary Grades (ages 5 to 8)
Have a look at primary-grade children on the playground. They are full of life 
and very eager to learn. Most of them have loving dispositions. They particularly 
enjoy stories, music, and rhythmic activities. They have an enormous facility in 
learning language, which often makes them appear intelligent beyond their years. 
Children at this age don’t like to sit still for long—in fact you can hardly make 
them do so.
And yet these students, precocious though they seem, have limited capabili-
ties in some regards, which has important implications for teachers. Before the 
approximate age of 7, most function intellectually at what Swiss psychologist 
Jean Piaget (shown here) called the preoperational stage, where they reason not 
on the basis of logic but rather on impressions obtained from their surroundings 
(see Charles, 1974; Piaget, 1951). Piaget found that during the preoperational 
phase, students are poor at remembering the order of events, understanding 
rules, explaining cause–effect relationships, comprehending number relation-
ships, and understanding other speakers accurately, including the teacher. 
Socially, they get along reasonably well with each other, although they often 
squabble. They tire easily, get fussy, and require frequent rest. They make little 
distinction between work and play.
3

Classroom Discipline: The Problems and the Promise
An important change occurs in children at around age 7, give or take a year 
or so. They move into an intellectual stage Piaget called concrete operations, where 
brain development enables them to begin understanding concepts that they inter-
preted differently only weeks earlier. Importantly, they become able to consider the 
relationship of parts to whole and to reason in terms of cause and effect. Where 
previously they reasoned and explained on the basis of appearances or intuition 
(e.g., “The sun moves because the wind blows it along”), they can now understand 
number relationships and many concepts in science, such as the cause of day and 
night.
Socially, they are learning to play well together. By second grade, they are en-
joying games such as tag and hide and seek. They like puzzles, riddles, and guessing 
games. Although able to learn rules for games, they are not so good at following 
them. They accept adult authority with little question. They tell fabrications rou-
tinely but seldom in a malicious way. They are highly imitative of each other. For 
them, misbehavior is whatever adults don’t like, and guilt is understood in terms 
of getting caught.
By the time they complete the primary grades, students are usually well social-
ized to understand that raising hands, standing in lines, taking turns, and waiting 
patiently are expected behaviors. They continue to respond well to affection and 
personal attention. All through this stage, students enjoy music, art, rhythms, stories, 
and activities that have to do with plants and animals.
Behavior in the Intermediate Grades (ages 9 to 11)
As students move into grade 4, they become increasingly able to function inde-
pendently, although they still want attention and affection from teachers. Holding 
hands with the teacher replaces hugging. Their interest in animals and the natural 
world continues strongly.
Intellectually, they continue to use concrete language and images for thinking 
(as indeed do most of us adults). Teachers need to realize that students cannot yet 
think by using pure abstractions. For example, they do not conceptualize “minus” 
numbers per se, such as –4, but can think of four real items being removed from 
a group.
Socially, these students increasingly want to share each others’ company. 
They like group names and begin to form cliques and clubs. Their individual 
behavior begins to reflect peer norms. They recognize the need for rules and rule 
enforcement, both in games and class behavior. They like to play group games. 
And they are beginning to enjoy competition, provided they win. Losing is a dif-
ferent matter, which they find difficult to accept; it causes many to cry and lose 
their tempers.
Verbally, these students tend to be highly argumentative. Many are loud and 
vocally aggressive, yet increasingly they rely on reason and efforts to persuade oth-
ers. No longer is teacher authority blindly accepted. Students may argue with the 
teacher, talk back, and be uncooperative.
Ethically, they show a growing awareness of honesty and its importance in 
relationships. Although most stretch the truth frequently, they see that the more a 
lie intends to deceive, the worse it is. Conscience is developing along with respect 
for others. A growing sense of right and wrong is evident.
4

Classroom Discipline: The Problems and the Promise
Behavior in the Middle school Grades (ages 12 to 14)
At this level, student behavior becomes somewhat more erratic, and teachers require 
great skill in order to teach well and build supportive relationships. Bodily changes 
worry, perplex, excite, and dismay these students. New realities associated with sex stir 
and baffle. Psychological weaning from parents leaves them feeling lost and cut off. 
They crave adult support, yet the emerging need for independence leads to conflict 
with adults. These realities often act as serious distractions to school learning.
At the same time, students are becoming increasingly rebellious and disposed 
to probing the boundaries of rules and customs. Their awe of the teacher has 
waned, but has been replaced with respect and affection for teachers who show 
understanding and helpfulness. Intellectually, most of these students have acquired 
a great new power—the ability to think abstractly. Their minds work as quickly as 
do those of adults, although they lack adult perspective and wisdom. Students can 
make use of concepts such as love, hate, honesty, loyalty, negative numbers, force, 
speed, time, and atomic particles. They have become able to think about thought.
Behavior in the high school Grades (ages 15 to 18)
Before entering high school, students have developed the capacity for deeper thinking. 
They now show a proclivity for theorizing. They try to find a cause, a purpose, and a 
place for everything. They think about the possible as much as the actual and have ac-
quired a strong concern for right and wrong. Their rational power produces the ideal-
ism characteristic of adolescence. Propositional thinking emerges: “If I do so and so, 
then so and so will result.” Interest in people and society in general is growing rapidly.
Lies are now seen as anything intentionally false. Punishment must take into ac-
count factors such as intent to break a rule, age of the violator, and previous record of 
behavior. Many rules and laws are seen as unfair or irrelevant, so breaking them is no 
longer considered absolutely wrong. Socially, these students can see various groups’ 
points of view, which they like to weigh, clarify, and evaluate against each other. They 
can’t see why everything is not ideal—politics, institutions, human relations, and so 
forth—which makes them overly critical of the way institutions and people actually 
function. Students may scathingly reject existing social arrangements and values, but 
for the most part their personal behavior complies reasonably well with social norms.
As they near the end of high school, students begin to settle down emotion-
ally. They understand themselves better and have reached a truce with their bodies 
and feelings. They have begun to think about what they hope to do in the future. 
Some, lamentably, become further alienated from the educational mainstream.
A new relationship with adults also emerges. The love–hate attitude of earlier 
years fades, while respect for adults grows as students recognize their own interde-
pendence with the community. Teachers can interact with these students as fellow 
adults, and students see teachers as mentors and role models.
hoW do students’ needs and haBIts affeCt theIr BehavIor?
All students have needs that prompt them to behave in certain ways. A need is a 
vague condition within us that strongly and persistently urges us to seek out certain 
satisfactions. We cannot directly observe a need—that is why psychologists refer to 
5

Classroom Discipline: The Problems and the Promise
needs as mental constructs, meaning imaginary “somethings” that help us explain 
motivation and behavior. A desire that is long-lasting, recurrent, and seemingly part 
of the human psychological makeup is deemed to reflect a “need.” A need is a bit 
different from a “want,” which is more societally influenced and transient. When 
we are unable to satisfy a need, we feel more than disappointed—we feel uneasy, 
distraught, or incomplete over longer periods of time.
Psychologists generally agree we have inborn basic needs for safety, comfort, 
and positive relations with others. Abraham Maslow (1954) provided the first 
widely acknowledged model of needs, which he depicted hierarchically. For teach-
ers, the following list of needs is more useful than Maslow’s hierarchy because it 
identifies what students require in order to benefit fully from their educational 
program. This list is drawn from ideas set forth by Rudolf Dreikurs (1995), William 
Glasser (1998b), and C. M. Charles (2008), among others:
■ Security. To feel safe without worry.
■ Association. To be with and interact with others.
■ Belonging. To feel a part of things, be valued, have a place in the class.
■ Dignity. To feel respected and worthwhile.
■ Hope. To believe that experiences in school and elsewhere are worthwhile and 
success is possible.
■ Power. To have some control over and input into events in which one participates.
■ Enjoyment. To experience pleasurable emotions of anticipation, intrigue, fun, 
and interest.
■ Competence. The capability to do many things well, including the expected 
schoolwork.
Educators can help students meet these basic needs by removing threat from learn-
ing activities and social interactions, permitting students to work together, insisting 
on courteous treatment of others, involving students in planning and making deci-
sions, ensuring that learning activities and personal interactions are satisfying, and 
making sure students learn important information. When teachers do these things 
well, student behavior is seldom a serious problem.
Habits also play strong roles in student behavior, but they are different from 
needs and wants. Habits are patterns of willful behavior, ingrained through practice 
to the point that we repeat them without having to think. They are quite useful 
when they help us behave considerately and productively, but harmful when they 
interfere with our progress or offend others. Thus we hear the expressions “good 
habits” and “bad habits.”
In teaching, we try to help our students establish productive habits, such as auto-
matically sitting down and getting to work, following directions, treating others with 
consideration, and striving for high quality. Classrooms become efficient and rela-
tively free from disruption when students learn to follow class routines automatically.
What do students need and Want in their school experience?
Now let’s turn more specifically to what students need and want in their teachers and 
schools. When students receive these things, they behave better. Although preferences 
6

Classroom Discipline: The Problems and the Promise
vary somewhat from group to group and change steadily with maturation, virtually 
all students want the following:
■ A sense of safety and importance as a class member.
■ A teacher who is friendly, interesting, helpful, and supportive.
■ Interesting learning activities in topics of obvious value.
■ Camaraderie or enjoyable association with classmates.
■ Opportunity for and likelihood of success and accomplishment.
■ Acknowledgment for what they do right and help with what they do wrong.
Provide those things and it is quite likely you will be a successful teacher. On the 
other hand, most students (but not all) dislike the following, which they will avoid 
if they can:
■ Sitting still for long periods of time.
■ Keeping quiet for long periods of time.
■ Working alone.
■ Memorizing facts for tests.
■ Completing lengthy reading and writing assignments.
■ Doing repetitive work.
■ Engaging in competition when they have no chance of winning.
It is suggested that you discuss these matters with your students and explain how 
you will, as often as possible, provide conditions and activities they appreciate, 
while you will keep to a minimum those they dislike. Remember, however, that 
students vary somewhat in preferences. Some students like activities such as work-
ing alone and memorizing information. They will tell you if you ask.
hoW do soCIoCultural realItIes InfluenCe BehavIor?
Today’s rapidly changing demographics bring together students from many different 
economic and cultural groups. Each group displays certain values, outlooks, habits, 
customs, aspirations, and ways of interacting. Teachers are often criticized for being 
insensitive to the differences among various groups.
Despite the mistakes teachers might inadvertently make, virtually all genuinely 
want to serve their students well and equitably. To do so, they need information 
that helps them understand the traits and mannerisms of students from various 
backgrounds, especially backgrounds different from their own. Let’s take a moment 
to examine a few of the general differences they encounter.
values and associated Behaviors: What do schools emphasize?
The majority of schools and teachers in the Western world reflect values, beliefs, 
and behaviors that stem from the Judeo-Christian ethic, influenced by a capitalistic 
outlook, future orientation, and interpersonal equality. Following are examples of 
such beliefs and behaviors:
■ Time orientation. Promptness is valued; orientation is toward the future.
■ Planning ahead. Plans are made ahead of time to serve as guides for action.
7

Classroom Discipline: The Problems and the Promise
■ Relations with others. A general sense of equality prevails; other people are to 
be treated with consideration and respect.
■ Personal achievement and competition. Individuals are urged to aspire to per-
sonal achievement; it is considered good to compete and try to rise above the 
norm.
■ Child-to-adult relations. Adults are shown respect but are not seen as infallible.
■ Adult-to-child relations. Children require guidance but are not to be treated 
subserviently.
■ Opportunity. Potential advancement in life is available to everyone; one has 
only to seize the opportunity and follow through.
■ Verbal learning. Much learning in school is expected to occur verbally through 
listening, reading, and discussing.
■ Success. Success in life is seen as performing well, getting a good job, providing 
a good home, and acquiring a degree of wealth.
■ Personal behavior. We are all responsible for our own behavior; most people 
behave ethically; laws and regulations are to be obeyed.
areas of Conflict: how do Group values differ?
Human behavior and values across all groups are far more similar than different; 
yet, students from various cultural and economic groups may display certain values 
and behaviors that are somewhat inconsistent with expectations in school. Some-
times those differences are misunderstood by teachers, and sometimes teacher 
 behavior is misunderstood by students.
For example, some cultural groups do not prize individual achievement and 
recognition; although they want the group as a whole to do well, they consider it 
improper for individuals to stand out. Some groups place strong emphasis on tradi-
tions from the past. Some see little purpose in working at school activities that do 
not appear useful or are not inherently interesting. Students in some cultures adopt 
a subservient manner when interacting with teachers and are made uncomfortable 
by eye contact. Many do not think it proper to voice opinions that disagree with 
the teacher. Failure to recognize and adjust to such differences can lead to misun-
derstandings between teachers and students, making teaching and learning more 
difficult than anticipated.
economic realities: do they affect student Behavior?
Today, large numbers of our students come from economically disadvantaged 
backgrounds. Economic disadvantage is a term used synonymously with living in 
poverty. Students are considered to be living in poverty if they are members of 
households that must spend more than one-third of their disposable income for 
food adequate to meet the family’s nutritional needs. About one-fourth of all 
students in the United States are judged to fall in that category (Payne, 2001). 
Karen Pellegrino (2005) has identified poverty as a major factor that limits stu-
dent success in school. Ruby Payne (2001, 2003) maintains that poor children 
are much more likely than nonpoor children to suffer developmental delay and 
to drop out of school early.
8

Classroom Discipline: The Problems and the Promise
What does ruby payne say about  
the “hidden rules” of students in poverty?
Ruby Payne’s investigations have led her to conclude that each economic class has 
its own set of hidden rules that help it survive. The hidden rules for schools, teach-
ers, and about half of the school population are concordant with the predominant 
school values listed previously. But the hidden rules for students from generational 
poverty (meaning long-term poverty) are different. Payne urges teachers to learn 
those rules because they provide keys to understanding, communicating, and working 
productively with students.
Payne (2001) says that for people in poverty, the major driving life forces seem 
to be survival, personal relationships, and entertainment. Students in poverty tend 
to value relationships more than achievement. It can be disquieting for an indi-
vidual to acquire too much education because the educated person might leave the 
community. Conflict is often resolved by fighting, and respect is accorded to those 
who can defend themselves. School discipline is more about penance and forgive-
ness than behavior change, and students often save face by laughing when they are 
disciplined. One’s sense of personal value is tied up with the ability to entertain 
others. Money is to be used and spent, not saved. Destiny and fate are believed 
to determine most matters; individuals feel they have relatively little control over 
their lives.
Payne adds that students in poverty often use a casual, informal style of speech 
that contrasts with the more formal style emphasized in school and business. 
Teachers should clarify the difference between formal and informal speech and 
help students learn to use language that is appropriate for given situations. Noise 
level among people of poverty may tend to be high, with frequent displays of emo-
tion. At home, the television may mix with participatory conversation, in which 
two or more people talk at the same time. The classroom, in contrast, is expected 
to be quieter, with speakers taking turns.
how Can I Work More effectively with students 
of various societal and economic Groups?
That’s a question most teachers ask. The following is a composite of suggestions 
from various authorities on working more effectively with students from various 
backgrounds:
■ Learn as much as you can about the value systems of students from back-
grounds different from your own. Pinpoint what those students consider im-
portant, how they relate to each other and to adults, and how they relate to 
teachers and school in general.
■ Become knowledgeable about the hidden rules that affect group and personal 
behavior.
■ Show acceptance of your students, their families, and their lifestyles.
■ Show solidarity with students and be eager to help them learn and find success.
■ Emphasize the knowledge, skills, and values needed for school success and for 
a strong personal and cultural identity.
9

Classroom Discipline: The Problems and the Promise
■ Communicate your genuine conviction that all students can succeed in school 
and indicate how you will help them do so.
■ Link curriculum content to students’ out-of-school experiences.
■ Attempt to mentor students, an especially effective tactic for improving moti-
vation and building personal relations.
■ Establish standards of class behavior that are sensitive to all cultures while 
emphasizing responsibility and respect.
■ Demonstrate for students the behavior that helps them succeed in school and 
have them practice that behavior.
■ Teach students how to speak and write in a formal manner.
■ Keep family members informed about their child’s performance and behavior 
and ask them to work with you for the child’s benefit.
Commentary from anonymous teacher 1
I teach in a Title 1 school that receives federal assistance for students in 
low-income families. Several of my students are in generational poverty as 
described by Ruby Payne. I encounter a number of conditions among my 
students that Dr. Payne alluded to. There is a good deal of fighting. They do 
not engage well in class work. They do not structure their sentences as we 
try to teach in Standard English. Some of them wear tattered clothing, and 
other students pick on them and make comments about their appearance.
The majority of my students qualify for free or reduced-price lunches. 
Food is a big issue for them. They often come to school without breakfast. 
I know that some of them eat bags of chips while walking to school. At 
recess, it is common to see and hear students asking for snack handouts 
from their classmates.
In the area where I teach, the proportion of students living in poverty 
has steadily increased over the past two decades. The faculty at my school 
discusses this matter often. We are very concerned about it, but see little 
promise of anything in the near future that will make that condition better 
for our students.
let’s exaMIne Misbehavior: What exaCtlY Is It?
Misbehavior in school is behavior that violates class rules, demeans others, or is 
otherwise incompatible with the legal or social norms of the society. Most class-
room misbehavior falls into two categories—student unwillingness to work as di-
rected and students’ causing unwarranted distractions. Within those two categories 
we can identify 13 specific kinds of misbehavior that require teacher attention. You 
will encounter many of them on a daily basis. Some are far more serious than oth-
ers, yet even the benign ones require attention because they hinder learning. The 
13 types, listed generally from less serious to more serious, are:
 1. Inattention. Daydreaming, doodling, looking out the window, thinking about 
things irrelevant to the lesson.
10

Classroom Discipline: The Problems and the Promise
 2. Apathy. A disinclination to participate, sulking, not caring, fearful of trying, 
not concerned about doing well.
 3. Needless talk. Chatting during instructional time about things unrelated to the 
lesson.
 4. Moving about the room. Getting up and wandering around without permission 
or congregating in parts of the room.
 5. Annoying others. Provoking, teasing, picking on others, calling names.
 6. Disrupting. Shouting out during instruction, talking and laughing inappropri-
ately, using vulgar language, causing “accidents.”
 7. Lying. Falsifying to avoid accepting responsibility or admitting wrongdoing, 
or to get others in trouble.
 8. Stealing. Taking things that belong to others.
 9. Cheating. Making false representations for personal benefit or wrongly taking 
advantage of others.
 10. Sexual harassment. Making others uncomfortable through touching,  sex-related 
language, or sexual innuendo.
 11. Aggression and fighting. Showing hostility toward others, threatening, shoving, 
pinching, wrestling, hitting, bullying.
 12. Malicious mischief. Doing intentional damage to school property or the be-
longings of others.
 13. Defiance of authority. Talking back to the teacher, ignoring the teacher, or refus-
ing to do as requested.
All of these types of misbehavior have a dampening effect on teaching, learning, 
personal feelings, and motivation to learn. Many of them occur regularly. Psy-
chologist Fred Jones (1987) reported the frequency of misbehavior in hundreds 
of classrooms he studied. In the better-behaved classes, one or more of the above 
misbehaviors occurred every 2 to 3 minutes. In less well-behaved classes, the 
frequency was more in the order of three or more misbehaviors per minute. You 
can imagine the amount of time teachers must spend dealing with that amount 
of misbehavior. More recently, psychiatrist William Glasser (2001) concluded 
that fewer than half of America’s high school students were making any real ef-
fort to learn. He found the majority did not take education seriously, rarely paid 
attention or did the assigned work, and were often disruptive. Many students 
told him they made little effort in school not because school was too hard, but 
because school was too boring.
What Causes students to MIsBehave?
Many conditions promote or “cause” students to misbehave. By addressing those 
causes, you can significantly reduce inappropriate behavior in your classes. At this 
point, we will note 26 specific conditions that tend to promote misbehavior in 
school. You will see that you can take steps proactively to limit, or even eliminate, 
most of these conditions. For our review, the conditions are grouped in  accordance 
with the locations in which they seem to reside, or from which they seem to 
emanate.
11

Classroom Discipline: The Problems and the Promise
Causal Conditions that reside in Individual students
Ten conditions that often promote misbehavior reside within individual students. 
Those conditions are: unmet needs, thwarted desires, expediency, urge to transgress, 
temptation, inappropriate habits, poor behavior choices, avoidance, egocentric per-
sonality, and neurological-based behavior. Here we note each of the 10 conditions 
and indicate how you can address them.
 1. Unmet needs. Both in and out of the classroom, students continually try to 
meet strongly felt needs for security, association, belonging, hope, dignity, 
power, enjoyment, and competence. Everyone, almost without exception, 
strives to meet these needs. When unsuccessful in doing so, students become 
unsettled, distracted, and more likely to behave inappropriately.
Suggestions: Keep these needs in mind, and plan in advance how you will 
address them. Write them on an index card you keep on your desk to remind 
yourself they are in play all the time. By observing students and talking with 
them, you can usually identify needs that are prompting misbehavior and can 
usually help with them.
 2. Thwarted desires. When students fail to get something they badly want, they 
may complain, become destructive, sulk, pout, or act out.
Suggestions: When appropriate, discuss with students the fact that all of 
us occasionally get to have things the way we want them, but very often we do 
not. When students show keen disappointment, compliment them for work-
ing hard. Ask them if there is anything you can do to help. Be sympathetic, 
but don’t dwell on the problem. Promote an attitude of “Let’s move ahead and 
keep trying.” Do something to draw them back to productive work, such as 
posing a challenge or creating a mystery for them to solve.
 3. Expediency. Anticipate that all students will, on occasion, look for shortcuts 
to make their lives easier or more enjoyable. In doing so, they will break rules 
and sometimes behave dishonestly.
Suggestions: Discuss that fact openly, while stressing that the best proce-
dure for all of us is to do things correctly, even when it is inconvenient. That 
is how we make genuine progress and get others to trust us. Ask students why 
they sometimes take the easy way, such as reading book summaries or reviews 
rather than the assigned book, rushing through a writing assignment, or copy-
ing the work of others. If they are comfortable enough to answer honestly, they 
will probably say they do so because they don’t like the work, don’t see the 
point in it, or don’t want to spend the time it requires. Ask them what would 
encourage them to give their best effort. Listen to their suggestions and make 
use of them if you can.
By the way, expedient behavior is not so evident in classes that students 
find interesting, but it appears often in classes they find difficult or boring.
 4. Urge to transgress. Many of us have a natural aversion to rules imposed by 
others, and we seem to find it a challenge to break them, despite knowing 
there is a chance we’ll get caught or even harm ourselves or others. Students 
succumb to this urge frequently, especially when class activities are not ap-
pealing, and they cheat, take shortcuts, tell lies, break class rules, and annoy 
others.
12

Classroom Discipline: The Problems and the Promise
Suggestions: Anticipate this urge and plan ways to counter it. When talking 
with your students about expected behavior, discuss the urge, its effects, and 
how it can be controlled sensibly. Tie this in with the reasons for rules and 
their value in keeping us comfortable, equalizing opportunity, and helping us 
live together harmoniously. If students are old enough, ask if they understand 
what ethics, ethical conduct, and personal character mean. Ask why they think 
ethical people are so widely admired.
 5. Temptation. Students regularly encounter objects, people, situations, and be-
haviors they find powerfully attractive. This phenomenon is evident in  students’ 
taste in music and lyrics, ways of speaking, clothing fashions, lifestyles, and in 
cutting corners on assignments. Although students know they are sometimes 
misbehaving when succumbing to these temptations, they  nevertheless find 
them so attractive they often adopt, mimic, acquire, or tolerate them, even 
when the acts are not condoned by adult society.
Suggestions: Conduct discussions with your students to analyze tempta-
tion and seek to understand why certain objects, styles, and opportunities are 
so seductive. Help students foresee the undesirable consequences of following 
disapproved styles and manners. Help them clarify the lines that separate ap-
propriate behavior from inappropriate and urge them to resist involvement in 
activities likely to do them harm.
 6. Inappropriate habits. Inappropriate habits are ingrained ways of behaving 
that transgress established standards and expectations. Jason uses profan-
ity at school. Maria is discourteous and calls others names. Larry shirks his 
assignments. Some of these habits are learned in school, but most become 
 established outside of school.
Suggestions: When first discussing desirable behavior in school, raise this 
topic. Tell your students there are certain requirements for behavior at school, 
even though those requirements might not prevail outside of school—that there 
are certain ways we must conduct ourselves and treat and speak with others in 
school. Be careful not to single out individuals as examples. Identify unaccept-
able behaviors such as cursing, calling names, and showing disregard for others. 
If necessary, show students how you expect them to act. When they fail to com-
ply, call it to their attention and ask them if they remember how that particular 
thing is done in school. Ask them courteously to show you they know.
 7. Poor behavior choices. The behaviors students use in attempting to meet their 
needs are sometimes acceptable, sometimes not. In most cases, students choose 
to behave as they do. For example, Alicia, when seeking attention, pesters oth-
ers so much they avoid her. Alan, seeking to augment his sense of power, re-
fuses to do what his teacher requests. Assuming those behaviors are under their 
control, we say that Alicia and Alan are making poor behavior choices.
Suggestions: Help your class recognize that when they choose to misbe-
have, they are hindering the likelihood of being successful in school. To help 
such students, you might address the class as a whole and pose the following 
questions:
■ What are some of the things you have seen students do to [get attention, be 
acknowledged, get better grades than they deserve, get out of work, become 
members of certain groups]?
13

Classroom Discipline: The Problems and the Promise
■ Does their behavior usually get them what they want?
■ What could those students do that would probably bring better and more 
satisfying results?
 8. Avoidance. No one likes to face failure, intimidation, ridicule, or other un-
pleasant situations. One way to escape those things is to avoid activities or 
places where they might occur, or if that is not possible, simply refuse to partic-
ipate. But in school, students’ reasons for avoidance are not always evident to 
teachers. Norona, when refusing to participate in a group assignment, seems 
to show disrespect for the teacher, but her real reason is that she doesn’t want 
to appear inept in front of her peers.
Suggestions: To help students such as Norona, show your class how to face 
unpleasant situations and work through them. You might ask them to work 
in pairs or small groups and together answer questions such as the following:
■ Are there things you try to avoid in school, such as people, events, or activi-
ties you find frightening or embarrassing?
■ Which of those things could best be dealt with through avoidance (e.g., 
staying away from a clique that is maligning other students)?
■ Which of those things cannot be dealt with through avoidance (e.g., giving 
an oral report in front of the class)?
■ What is the worst thing that can happen in class if we make a mistake? Are 
mistakes valuable? Can they help us learn?
■ What could we do as a class to keep others from feeling embarrassed when 
they make mistakes?
■ What might a person do to reduce his or her fear of mistakes or being in-
volved in unpleasant situations?
 9. Egocentric personality. Students with egocentric personalities focus primarily on 
themselves, believe they are superior to others, and usually think they do little 
wrong. Most classes contain one or more students with such personalities.
Suggestions: To help these students behave more appropriately, ask ques-
tions of your entire class such as the following:
■ Are the needs and interests of all students important, or do only certain 
students deserve attention?
■ Is one person often entirely right and everyone else entirely wrong?
■ Is everyone entitled to an equal opportunity in the class? How should you 
and I react to a person who always wants to dominate, be first, be right, and 
quarrel with those who don’t agree? (Make sure the proffered suggestions 
are positive in nature, not negative.)
 10. Neurological-based behavior (NBB). A few students behave undesirably not 
through intent or thoughtlessness but because their brains call forth behavior 
they cannot fully control. Certain behavior diagnoses referred to as “neurological-
based behaviors,” which include learning disabilities, attention-deficit hyperac-
tivity disorder (ADHD), and a number of other issues. Frequently, students with 
these diagnoses do not respond reliably to normal discipline tactics. 
14

Classroom Discipline: The Problems and the Promise
Suggestions: Teachers who have students with NBB need help from 
 specialists. That help will usually be provided by the school. But regular class-
room teachers can do many things on their own. Mel Levine (2003) urges 
teachers to explain to the class that some people function in such a way that 
they lose control at times (are “wired up,” if you prefer), more often than 
others do. Other authorities ask teachers to (1) always model the calm, sooth-
ing behavior we want students to display and make sure students feel loved 
and respected as human beings; (2) be careful about making eye contact, 
which stimulates upper-cortex activity and is often interpreted as a challenge 
or threat; (3) react to situations calmly (a raised voice tends to make students 
with NBB raise their voices in return); and (4) provide considerable structure 
to activities (meaning directions and procedures) because a lack of structure 
often makes learning difficult for students with NBB.
Conditions that seem to reside in peers and Groups
Two significant causes of misbehavior—provocation and contagious group behavior—
seem to reside in class peers and groups. Here are suggestions for dealing with 
them.
 1. Provocation. A great amount of misbehavior results from students’ provoking 
each other through teasing, petty annoyance, put-downs, sarcastic remarks, 
and aggression or bullying. Heather is trying to study, but Art is bent on teas-
ing her incessantly until she reaches the bursting point. Marty calls Jerry a 
name and Jerry responds hotly.
Suggestions: Provocation often produces strong emotions that overwhelm 
self-control and increase combativeness. Discuss this phenomenon with your 
class. Ask:
■ Is provoking others or bullying them consistent with the class character we 
are trying to build or with the kind of person you truly want to be?
■ Can you name some things people say or do that upset you so much you 
want to retaliate?
■ If you retaliate, what do you think will happen? Will that put an end to the 
conflict?
■ What are some positive things we can do to stop provocation in the class?
 2. Contagious group behavior. Students sometimes succumb to peer pressure or 
get caught up in group emotion and as a result may misbehave in ways they 
would not consider if by themselves. It is difficult for students to disregard 
peer pressure, easy to get swept up in group energy and emotion, and easy to 
justify one’s misbehavior as “only what others were doing.” Because Kerry and 
Lee want to look cool to their peers, Kerry defaces school property, and Lee 
bullies a weaker member of the class. Neither of the boys does those things 
when alone.
Suggestions: Discuss this phenomenon with your class. For example, tell 
the class about some event in which a friend of yours, let’s say Sarah, behaved 
15

Classroom Discipline: The Problems and the Promise
badly just because others were doing so. Indicate that Sarah is now very embar-
rassed about her behavior and wishes no one knew about it. Ask your students 
if they know any stories like Sarah’s they would be willing to share, without 
mentioning names the class might recognize. (Tell them they must not men-
tion family matters or members—doing so is a sure way to get parents upset at 
you.) If they share stories, guide the class in analyzing one or two of them. If 
they don’t contribute a story, have a fictional one ready for their consideration. 
After hearing or recounting the story, ask questions such as:
■ Is the behavior something the person will be proud of later?
■ Why do you suppose the person behaved that way (e.g., for fun, comrade-
ship, testing limits, being seen as clever or cool)?
■ What do you think the long-term results will be for that person (e.g., an 
unpleasant story to remember, regret, guilt, getting caught, being found 
out, worry, disappointing one’s family, possible punishment, living with 
knowing you did the wrong thing)?
■ How do you believe the possible benefits compare with the probable 
dangers?
■ If you are caught doing something you are truly ashamed of, is there any 
way to make amends and save your reputation?
■ How can you stay away from, or keep out of, group activities that are unlawful, 
hurtful to others, or against the rules?
Conditions that seem to reside in Instructional environments
Four conditions that promote misbehavior are associated with instructional envi-
ronments. They are physical discomfort, tedium, meaninglessness, and lack of stimulation. 
All are easily avoided.
 1. Physical discomfort. Students often become restless when made uncomfort-
able by inappropriate temperature, poor lighting, or unsuitable seating or 
workspaces.
Suggestions: Attend to comfort factors in advance and ask students about 
them. Make modifications as necessary.
 2. Tedium. Students begin to fidget after a time when an instructional activity 
requires continued close attention, especially if the topic is not appealing.
Suggestions: For such activities, break the work into shorter segments or 
add something that increases the level of interest.
 3. Meaninglessness. Students grow restless when required to work at topics they 
do not comprehend or for which they see no purpose.
Suggestions: Make sure the topic is meaningful to students—that they 
 understand it and see its relevance and importance in their lives.
 4. Lack of stimulation. The topic and learning environment provide little that is 
attractive or otherwise stimulating. Students take no interest in the lesson.
Suggestions: Select topics and activities in which students have natural 
interest. When that is not possible, introduce elements students are known to 
enjoy, such as novelty, mystery, movement, group work, group competition, 
and role-playing.
16

Classroom Discipline: The Problems and the Promise
Conditions that seem to reside in teachers 
and other school personnel
You won’t hear it discussed often, but teachers and other school personnel some-
times misbehave in school and in so doing influence students to misbehave. Here 
are 10 examples of teacher misbehavior (and school personnel behavior) that 
sometimes promote student misbehavior:
 1. Poor habits. Personnel in the schools sometimes use inappropriate ways of 
dealing with students or each other, such as using unseemly language and 
speaking in a sarcastic or bossy manner.
Suggestions: Reflect regularly on how you interact with and speak to your 
students. Self-monitor your behavior and make sure it is as you want it to be. If 
you see or hear colleagues treating students in an unprofessional manner, and 
if you believe it is having a harmful effect on the students, consider speaking 
about the matter in private with your school administrator. Don’t identify the 
colleague or cast blame. Simply describe the situation. The administrator may, 
or may not, wish to follow up.
 2. Unfamiliarity with better techniques. Some educators have not had occasion to 
learn some of the newer, more effective ways of teaching and relating with 
today’s students.
Suggestions: It is important that you keep yourself informed about topics 
and activities that are well received by students. Don’t be reluctant to approach 
popular teachers at your school and ask them what seems to work best for them. 
You can also find innumerable outstanding ideas and suggestions on the Internet 
and in professional books and journals that might be available at your school.
 3. Presenting poor models of behavior. At times, all of us behave inconsistently and 
irresponsibly, especially on days when for whatever reason we are short on 
self-control. On those occasions, we sometimes treat students discourteously. 
We can’t expect to be perfect, but we must realize that when we treat students 
poorly—which is to say, in ways we would not want to be treated—we leave 
a lasting impression that not only damages relationships but also encourages 
students to imitate our bad behavior.
Suggestions: Always be the best model you can for your students, who 
watch you very closely and often pattern their behavior after yours (especially 
when you misbehave). If you do something that is inappropriate, call attention 
to it, explain why it was wrong, and apologize if necessary.
 4. Showing little interest in or appreciation for students. We sometimes fail to show 
interest in students or appreciation for them as individuals, despite knowing 
they want our attention. If we disregard them repeatedly, students become 
hesitant to approach us or may seek our attention in disruptive ways.
Suggestions: Give each student as much personal attention as possible. 
Greet them by name, exchange a friendly word, and show you are open to 
discussing any challenges they might be facing in school. Acknowledge their 
accomplishments and try to help them feel at ease.
 5. Succumbing to personal frustration. Some educators get beaten down from con-
tinually having to deal with misbehavior, inconsiderate parents, or a surfeit of 
17

Classroom Discipline: The Problems and the Promise
meetings and paperwork. The stress may at times make it difficult for them to 
work with students in a kind, helpful manner.
Suggestions: Educators often try unsuccessfully to force students to comply 
with expectations. If you use encouragement and enticement rather than force, 
you will see students become more cooperative, considerate, and willing to 
make an effort. Also, go out of your way to communicate with caregivers and 
show appreciation for their children.
 6. Reacting badly to provocation. Students may do and say things intentionally to 
get under your skin. You know you should keep your composure, but find your-
self becoming upset and saying or doing something that is not professional.
Suggestions: When students try to provoke you, disregard their comments 
and actions and proceed as if nothing has happened. If you feel the need to 
respond, only say, “Something is causing violations of our agreement about 
being considerate of others. I don’t like that in our class. I’m wondering what 
we can do so that won’t happen.”
 7. Providing ineffective guidance and feedback. In the absence of guidance and feed-
back, students sometimes do not understand what is expected of them, how 
much progress they have made, or how they can improve.
Suggestions: Make sure students understand clearly what they are sup-
posed to do and how they should go about it. During and after assigned activi-
ties, tell students what they have done well and what they can do to improve. 
Emphasize that making mistakes is almost always a part of learning. Ask them 
for their appraisals of the activity and the efforts they have made.
 8. Using ineffective personal communication. Some educators are not adept at com-
municating with students on a personal level. This may result in students’ 
becoming uneasy and reticent about approaching their teachers.
Suggestions: Speak regularly with students in a friendly way. Students want 
you to know their names and exchange pleasantries with them. Often they 
want to tell you their views on various matters and would like to know yours. 
Speaking with students as social equals (i.e., as a friend) validates them per-
sonally. You just need to make sure to avoid comments that hurt feelings or 
dampen enthusiasm. Without overdoing it, say things honestly that increase 
students’ optimism and bolster their confidence.
 9. Failure to plan proactively. Many educators do not adequately plan their in-
structional program in advance or anticipate problems that might arise. Then, 
when unexpected things happen, they are not prepared to respond effectively.
Suggestions: Think carefully about your curriculum and instructional 
 activities and how your students are likely to respond to them. By anticipating 
difficulties, you can avoid most problems and prepare yourself to deal with 
whatever might happen. Think through what you will do when people are 
injured or become suddenly ill, grow defiant, or get into fights. Decide what 
you will do and say if an unauthorized visitor approaches you, if a parent be-
rates you, if the class groans when you announce an assignment, and so forth. 
Determine how you can respond decisively to such eventualities, yet maintain 
your composure and ability to relate positively with others.
 10. Using coercion, threat, and punishment. Students don’t like to be threatened or 
forced to do anything. If you treat them abrasively, they keep a watchful eye on 
18

Classroom Discipline: The Problems and the Promise
you, fearful of being scolded, embarrassed, or demeaned, and will very likely 
develop negative attitudes toward you and school.
Suggestions: Give up coercion and threat and replace them with consid-
erate helpfulness, personal attention, and good communication. Explain to 
students how they should behave, demonstrate those behaviors, and have stu-
dents practice the behaviors. When you see students behave responsibly, thank 
them for doing so. For older students, express your appreciation privately or 
to the class as a whole.
and noW at last, What Is ClassrooM dIsCIplIne?
Through most of the history of education, discipline was thought of as what teachers 
do to make students behave themselves in school. The tactics teachers used in previ-
ous times were essentially two in number: (1) Teachers would tell students what to do 
and what not to do, such as complete work on time and don’t bother others; and (2) 
teachers would punish students who failed to comply with those directives, usually 
through scolding or detention after school, and sometimes through extra homework 
or even corporal punishment. In that approach, misbehavior and discipline were 
treated as crime and punishment. We now call that approach “coercive discipline.”
Authorities no longer support coercive discipline, even though, except for cor-
poral punishment, it is still seen in a great many classrooms. You are urged to take 
a different and more modern approach—one in which you use organization, com-
munication, and personal influence to foster and support proper behavior. In this 
newer approach based on positive influence, misbehavior is thought of as student 
mistakes, and discipline is thought of as teacher help. This newer approach to dis-
cipline employs three major strategies, each of which involves a number of specific 
tactics. The three strategies are:
 1. First, remove or limit the conditions that tend to promote misbehavior.
 2. Second, teach students how to behave appropriately and support their efforts 
to do so.
 3. Third, intervene helpfully when students misbehave by directing them back to 
proper behavior.
These newer tactics also help students move toward “self-discipline” in which they 
voluntarily conduct themselves in ways that bring success in school. Again, the 
process abandons teacher exhortation and replaces it with positive influence and 
persuasion. Teachers speak with students in a kind and helpful manner, teach them 
how to follow procedures, have them practice kindness and civility, and provide 
feedback that is helpful, not punitive. Virtually all of today’s discipline authorities 
advocate this approach.
What are the three Main objectives of discipline today?
Here are the outcomes we now expect from discipline:
■ First and foremost, discipline maintains a safe and civil environment in which 
high-quality teaching and learning can occur.
19

Classroom Discipline: The Problems and the Promise
■ Second, discipline promotes civility and responsible behavior as major char-
acter traits in the young.
■ Third, discipline helps students develop and use inner motivation and ongo-
ing self-control.
Because you are expected to use discipline for these three purposes, you would 
probably like to know how to prepare yourself to do so. As luck would have it, a 
plan for you lies just ahead. It is revealed in the outline that follows. Please read 
the outline carefully. It shows the three great objectives of discipline and provides a 
picture of what fine teachers do, as you will come to appreciate. Let your mind play 
over each of the bulleted headings. 
 1. First objective: To provide a high-quality learning environment for students 
through:
■ Teacher exercising class leadership by being in charge democratically.
■ Adjusting instruction in accordance with students’ traits and needs, which 
vary with genetics, maturation, and experience.
■ Teaching students to abide by class expectations and procedures.
■ Establishing effective communication with and among students.
■ Providing engaging instruction and interacting helpfully with students.
■ Monitoring student work effectively.
■ Ensuring that you and your students recognize and discharge your specific 
duties in class.
■ Recognizing and addressing the identifiable causes of misbehavior.
■ Providing ongoing support for proper behavior in class.
■ Redirecting misbehavior humanely and effectively, while preserving per-
sonal dignity.
 2. Second objective: To pursue and achieve civil, respectful, cooperative behavior by:
■ Practicing and expecting civil and considerate behavior by all members of 
the class and school community.
■ Eliminating bullying, verbal put-downs, and ethnic and social stereotyping.
■ Fostering a sense of community in the classroom, emphasizing interaction 
and cooperation.
■ Continually modeling the behavior you expect students to display.
 3. Third objective: To promote a sense of personal responsibility among students 
for learning and behaving acceptably by:
■ Exploring with students the relationships and requirements of freedom, 
choice, and responsibility.
■ Helping students reflect on how to become the persons they really want 
to be.
■ Giving students experience, when they are sufficiently mature, with choices, 
decision making, restitution, and foreseeing and dealing with consequences.
20

Classroom Discipline: The Problems and the Promise
eight fundamental Questions in discipline: 
how Will they Be answered?
The eight fundamental questions in discipline follow. Look them over now, just so 
you know what they are. We have already briefly touched on some of them. You are 
not expected to answer them yet, but the questions are:
 1. What kind of behavior can we expect of students, and what is classroom 
misbehavior?
 2. How does misbehavior damage teaching and learning?
 3. What are the purpose and nature of classroom discipline?
 4. What does discipline require of me legally, professionally, and ethically?
 5. What attitude toward discipline will serve me best?
 6. What are the most effective things I can do, in advance, to prevent or reduce 
misbehavior in my classes?
 7. What are the most effective things I can do to support proper behavior in my classes?
 8. What are the most effective things I can do to redirect misbehavior humanely 
and effectively?
21

Classroom Discipline: The Problems and the Promise
ac tiv i ti e s
Self-Test: True/False
 1. Professional educators agree fairly closely on what 
constitutes student misbehavior.
 2. Any given student will behave somewhat differently 
over time, as he or she passes through different 
stages of development.
 3. “Needs” and “wants” are synonymous terms that 
can be used interchangeably when referring to 
 motives that drive student behavior.
 4. It was suggested in the chapter that it is fairly 
 useless to discuss needs, wants, interests, and 
habits when talking with students about their 
behavior.
 5. The status known as “in poverty” is defined in 
terms of the portion of a family’s income needed 
for food to satisfy its nutritional requirements.
 6. It was suggested in the chapter that you should 
make yourself knowledgeable about the hidden 
rules that might influence group and personal be-
havior among your students.
 7. “Basic needs” that affect student behavior were de-
picted as residing in physical conditions that exist 
in the classroom.
 8. One recommended way to make students feel 
 appreciated is for teachers to chat with them 
 individually fairly frequently.
 9. According to the author, the first objective of disci-
pline is to use tactics that make it virtually impos-
sible for students to misbehave.
 10. It was stressed that the fundamental questions in 
discipline are five in number.
Self-Test: Multiple Choice
 1. Of the following, which type of student misbehav-
ior is considered the most serious?
(a) inattention
(b) apathy
(c) disruption
(d) aggression
 2. Students become able to use cause–effect thinking 
at the approximate age of
(a) 5.
(b) 7.
(c) 10.
(d) 12.
 3. Behavior seems to be most erratic for students at 
which age level?
(a) preschool
(b) primary grades
(c) middle school
(d) secondary school
 4. Which of the following usually remains strongest 
over long periods of time?
(a) particular need
(b) particular want
(c) particular interest
(d) particular preference
 5. What is the approximate percentage of students in 
the United States said to be “living in poverty”?
(a) 13%
(b) 20%
(c) 25%
(d) 31%
22

Classroom Discipline: The Problems and the Promise
 6. Inappropriate habits are said to reside within
(a) the learning environment.
(b) the family structure.
(c) students.
(d) poverty.
 7. Which of the following is a cause of misbehavior 
that might stem from the physical environment?
(a) student need
(b) physical discomfort
(c) fear of rejection
(d) neurological-based behavior
 8. Expedient behavior is seldom a problem in classes 
that are
(a) demanding.
(b) interesting.
(c) teacher-dominated.
(d) student-dominated.
 9. The contention that teachers sometimes “misbe-
have” in class is
(a) unfounded.
(b) a logical nonsequitur.
(c) an injustice to teachers.
(d) reasonable and useful.
Self-Test: Explain This
 1. What is meant by a “psychological need,” and how 
does it differ from an interest or want?
 2. What does it mean to say that a condition “causes” 
misbehavior?
 3. If you pinpoint a condition that “causes” misbe-
havior, what can you do about that condition?
 4. What are the major changes in students’ intellec-
tual capability between the ages of 5 and 15?
 5. Give two examples of how cultural values and eco-
nomic realities affect behavior.
Additional Suggested Activities
 1. Name three ideas in this chapter that you’ll give 
attention to when planning your discipline 
approach.
 2. In pairs or with small groups of colleagues, re-
fer to the values that are typically emphasized in 
school. Indicate to what extent your own values 
correspond to those typical of schools. Refer to 
the general suggestions for working with students 
from all ethnic and economic groups, then select 
three of those suggestions that you feel would be 
most important to your students’ success.
 3. In pairs or small groups, review the 26 conditions 
that often promote misbehavior in school. Select 
five of them you believe are most in need of atten-
tion in typical classrooms.
 4. Review the section on “conditions that reside in 
teachers and other school personnel.” As a teacher 
or paraprofessional, have you experienced school 
personnel who misbehaved in any of those ways? 
What do you think they could have done to im-
prove their behavior? Share your conclusions with 
your classmates.
23

Classroom Discipline: The Problems and the Promise
Basic needs: Psychological requirements for normal 
functioning.
Habits: Patterns of willful behavior ingrained to the point 
that we repeat them without having to think.
Hidden rules (Payne): Seldom-recognized values and 
guidelines that strongly affect behavior in various 
 ethnic and socio-economic groups.
Living in poverty: Any member of a family that has to 
spend more than one-third of its disposable income for 
food adequate to meet the family’s nutritional needs is 
said to be living in poverty.
Misbehavior: Behavior that is considered inappropriate for 
the setting or situation in which it occurs. Any behavior 
that, through intent or thoughtlessness, interferes with 
teaching or learning, threatens or intimidates others, or 
oversteps society’s standards of moral, ethical, or legal 
behavior.
Need: A mental construct (an imaginary “something”) we 
use to explain motivation and behavior; a desire that is 
long-lasting and recurrent.
Teacher misbehavior (Charles): Anything teachers do in 
the classroom that adversely affects learning or human 
relations, or that is unprofessional in any way.
Value systems: Overall, what members of particular 
cultures and segments of society believe to be right, 
proper, and worthwhile, and, conversely, what they be-
lieve to be wrong, improper, and of no worth.
G l ossary
refere n c e s
Charles, C. (1974). Teachers’ petit Piaget. San Francisco: 
Fearon.
Charles, C. (2008). Today’s best classroom management 
strategies: Paths to positive discipline. Boston: Allyn & 
Bacon.
Glasser, W. (1998b). The quality school: Managing students 
without coercion. New York: HarperCollins.
Glasser, W. (2001). Every student can succeed. Chatsworth, 
CA: William Glasser Incorporated.
Maslow, A. (1954). Motivation and personality. New York: 
Harper.
Payne, R. (2001). A framework for understanding poverty. 
Highlands, TX: Aha! Process, Inc.
Payne, R. (2003). [Quoted in] Claitor, D. (2003). Break-
ing through: Interview of Ruby Payne. Retrieved from 
http://www.hopemag.com/issues/2003/septOct/ 
breakingThrough.pdf
Pellegrino, K. (2005). The effects of poverty on teaching 
and learning. Retrieved from http://www.teach-nology 
.com/tutorials/teaching/poverty/
Piaget, J. (1951). Judgment and reasoning in the child. 
 London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
24

Recognizing Your Obligations  
and Charting the Course Ahead
From Chapter 2 of Building Classroom Discipline, Eleventh Edition. C. M. Charles. Copyright © 2014 by  Pearson 
Education, Inc. All rights reserved.
25

What are the SchoolS’ obligationS to StudentS?
In the United States and many other countries, schools by law and common 
 agreement have the obligation to provide the following for students:
■ Opportunity for a free or low-cost well-rounded education;
■ Curriculum, instruction, and materials that enable students to acquire the 
knowledge and skills necessary for success in today’s world;
■ A safe and supportive environment for learning; and
■ A corps of well-trained teachers, administrators, and other professional and 
support staff to assist students in becoming educated.
Almost all schools meet these obligations. Any that do not are usually referred to 
as poor schools or ineffective schools.
What are My obligationS to StudentS?
You have the following obligations to students:
■ Display a professional demeanor at all times.
■ Maintain a safe, secure, and supportive environment for learning.
■ Show sensitivity to and understanding of students’ personalities, backgrounds, 
and needs.
■ Help students acquire important knowledge, skills, and attitudes.
■ Provide interesting, worthwhile instructional activities.
■ Help students learn to behave responsibly and strive for excellence.
Teachers who fail to meet these obligations may be referred to as poor or ineffec-
tive teachers. Even when they are ineffective or derelict in their duties, teachers are 
rarely said to be “misbehaving,” but we will use that term when referring to their 
unprofessional behavior.
Recognizing Your Obligations 
and Charting the Course Ahead
Recognizing Your Obligations 
and Charting the Course Ahead
What Are Your Legal and Professional Obligations, 
How Do Fine Teachers Communicate with Students, 
and How Should You Plan for the Future?
26

Recognizing Your Obligations and Charting the Course Ahead
What are StudentS’ obligationS to teacherS, 
FelloW StudentS, the coMMunity, and taxpayerS?
Students who attend school incur many important obligations, yet they rarely think 
of them as such. They usually look upon education as something expected of them 
or forced on them—something to be endured, rather than enjoyed as one of the 
greatest opportunities of their lives. Not much is demanded of students—for the 
most part, they are only asked to make a modest effort to learn and behave prop-
erly. When you speak with students about the roles they are expected to fill in class, 
consider stressing these points:
■ Students have the obligation to make a reasonable effort to learn. They fulfill 
this obligation by attending classes, paying attention, cooperating with the 
teacher, participating considerately in class activities, and doing the assigned 
work.
■ Students are obliged to refrain from interfering with class work or the progress 
of others. They must not unnecessarily disrupt the teacher or instructional 
activities, or interfere with other students’ efforts to learn.
■ Students are obliged to display acceptable behavior, which includes abiding 
by class rules, behaving civilly, and showing consideration for others.
When students meet these obligations, their behavior is considered appropriate, 
and they are almost always successful in school. When students do not meet these 
obligations, their behavior is considered to be misbehavior or improper behav-
ior, and a great many of those students do poorly in school. You might wish to 
 emphasize this point in your classes.
What doeS diScipline require oF Me legally?
Certain teacher behavior is required by law, and certain teacher behavior is pro-
hibited by law. For example, you are legally required to exercise due diligence in 
overseeing students under your care. And you are prohibited by law from dating 
students below the age of consent. Further, you must not engage in illegal activ-
ities or immoral activities that might impinge on your teaching. (The meaning 
of “immoral activities” is not entirely clear in the law. Check your school district 
 handbook and follow its guidelines.*)
The basic legal requirements you must be sure to observe relate to due dili-
gence, negligence, breach of duty, and expectations associated with in loco parentis, 
a term that will be explained momentarily:
You Must Exercise Due Diligence. Due diligence refers to paying close and rea-
sonable attention to students who are under your supervision. You and other 
school personnel must oversee students at school and take reasonable care to 
protect them from harm (Goorian & Brown, 2002). Many teachers are unaware 
*Note: The author of this text is not a lawyer, and what you read in these pages is not to be 
considered legal advice. It is the author’s interpretation of the general sense of the law.
27

Recognizing Your Obligations and Charting the Course Ahead
they are required by law to keep a diligent eye on students. Please remember 
that your mere presence around students is not sufficient. You must watch over 
them carefully. You must follow established school policies and conduct your-
self as would a reasonable and prudent professional in similar circumstances.
You Must Avoid Negligence and Breach of Duty. Negligence is the failure to main-
tain careful watch over students under your supervision. It is considered to be 
a serious breach of duty, meaning a serious failure to comply with one of your 
legal obligations at school. If a student is injured emotionally or physically at 
school and the teacher on supervisory duty did not exercise due diligence, the 
teacher and school may be sued for negligence (Drye, 2000). You can protect 
yourself against charges of negligence and breach of duty by adhering to the 
following guidelines:
■ Perform your assigned duties ethically and conscientiously as directed by 
school policy, even when those duties might seem boring or unnecessary.
■ Carefully oversee your students. Be attentive in monitoring their behavior. 
Do not leave them unattended in your classroom, shop, or instructional 
area.
■ For activities that involve physical risk, provide thorough precautions and 
safety instructions before you have students undertake the activities.
■ Be vigilant for signs that students might be inclined to harm themselves. Pay 
attention to what they do, say, and write. Be alert to changes in behavior. If 
you have concerns, speak with your administrator or school counselor.
■ Be alert to any signs that a student is being bullied or otherwise abused. 
Follow your school guidelines to familiarize yourself with signs of abuse 
and how you should respond.
■ Exercise special caution regarding physical contact with students. Don’t al-
low yourself to be alone in the classroom with a student unless you are in 
plain sight of others. Refrain from touching students, other than on the 
hands or arms or with pats to the shoulders or head (Note: Pats to the head 
are considered offensive in some cultures). If students frustrate or anger 
you, never strike them or grab any part of their bodies, as it is very difficult 
to justify physical contact motivated by anger. Also make sure you never 
throw pencils, pens, erasers, books, desks, or chairs, no matter how strongly 
you are provoked.
You Must Act In Loco Parentis. In loco parentis is not an allusion to crazy par-
ents. It is a legal term that means “in place of parents.” It requires you to ex-
ercise the same duty at school as do parents at home in overseeing children’s 
safety and security. In actual practice, you should watch over students even 
more carefully than their caregivers sometimes do.
The doctrine of in loco parentis is not limited to watching over students. It also 
gives you and other school officials authority over students in matters of academics 
and discipline. It permits you to take many actions that a reasonable parent would 
take under similar circumstances. (Physical or verbal abuse is not allowed, even 
though parents might use it on their children.)
28

Recognizing Your Obligations and Charting the Course Ahead
What are My proFeSSional obligationS?
For teachers, the term professionalism refers to displaying the fairest, most con-
siderate, and most ethical ways of fulfilling the duties of the teaching position. 
Where discipline is concerned, your primary professional obligation is to establish 
and maintain a safe and productive learning environment for your students. That 
means keeping the environment physically and emotionally safe, keeping students 
on task, fostering positive relationships among members of the class, and minimiz-
ing behavior that interferes with your teaching or your students’ learning. Take the 
following suggestions seriously, and make absolutely sure you abide by them:
Regarding Professional and Ethical Behavior. You must always conduct yourself 
ethically. You must treat students and colleagues fairly, honestly, kindly, and 
supportively. You must be honest with them, but at the same time avoid, when 
possible, saying or doing things that hurt their feelings or stifle their desire to 
learn or cooperate.
Regarding Effort. You must give your genuine best effort to the profession. Your 
obligation is to do all you reasonably can to help students profit from their 
educational experience and find satisfaction in doing so. You should give 
that same effort to relations with administrators, colleagues, and students’ 
caregivers.
Regarding Teaching. You must teach in a manner that is conducive to success 
for every one of your students. You must give careful attention to selecting 
appropriate subject matter, providing interesting and worthwhile learning ac-
tivities, relating effectively and helpfully with students, adjusting instruction 
to students’ abilities and personalities, and insisting on considerate, humane 
treatment by and for everyone in the class.
Regarding Helpfulness. Always do what you can to help students, collectively 
and individually. Help them succeed academically. Help them relate well with 
others. Help them find satisfaction in school and learning. As Haim Ginott 
(1971) said so many years ago, always ask yourself what you can do, at a 
given moment, to be most helpful to your students. He referred to continual 
 helpfulness as “teachers’ hidden asset.”
Regarding Respect. Show genuine respect for your students. Treat all of them 
as your social equals, worthy of your time and attention. Speak with each of 
them in a kindly manner as often as you can. Learn their names quickly and 
remember significant things about them. Show genuine approbation for effort 
and work done well (but skip the insincere or undeserved praise). Spread your 
attention around evenly. Do not attack students’ dignity or disparage them in 
any way. As best you can, always treat them as you would like to be treated in 
similar circumstances.
Regarding Cooperation. Help your students understand that you and they must 
accept each other and work together in order to achieve expectations in a sat-
isfying manner. Emphasize that you have a plan that will help them learn and 
enjoy themselves. Reassure them you will be considerate of their desires and 
feelings. Sincerely invite them to cooperate with you and each other, and give 
29

Recognizing Your Obligations and Charting the Course Ahead
them some responsibility in making the class enjoyable and productive. Make 
sure they feel part of the process.
Regarding Communication. Students need to know clearly what is expected of 
them. Be helpful and encouraging but don’t preach or moralize. Don’t grill 
students about improper behavior or otherwise put them on the defensive. 
When they speak, listen attentively and try to understand their points of view. 
When you reply to them, do not criticize their points of view. If necessary, 
simply say your comments are intended to help them be more successful in 
school.
Regarding Your Charisma. Charisma is a quality of attractiveness that draws at-
tention and makes others want to be in your presence and interact with you. 
You acquire charisma by making yourself personally interesting and by being 
upbeat and pleasant, with a touch of wit (don’t try to be overly witty—just a 
little works best). Occasionally share tidbits about your interests, experiences, 
and talents. Don’t act silly. Don’t use sarcasm, even when you think it is very 
funny. It is too easily misinterpreted. In short, smile, be helpful, and treat stu-
dents considerately.
Who eStabliSheS proFeSSional and ethical expectationS?
Professional expectations reflect agreements that have been established over 
time within various professions. They are made specific by groups that wish 
to promote and maintain high standards of conduct. Over the years, various 
 individuals, groups, and agencies have worked to codify the professional conduct 
expected of educators. The most widely acknowledged of those efforts was set 
forth in 1975 by the National Education Association (NEA). Those standards are 
still in place.  Summarized here, they, in part, stipulate that the educator: Should 
honestly  represent his or her professional qualifications, should use discretion 
when making statements about fellow educators, should take care in accepting 
gifts, should transparently report students’ progress, and should help students 
maintain dignity. See www.nea.org for a complete listing of the educators’ Code 
of Ethics. 
In addition to the NEA stipulations, it is generally agreed that, as a teaching 
professional, you should abide by the following:
■ Dress professionally, as an adult in a professional situation.
■ Use appropriate language for the educational setting, with correct speech 
 patterns and complete avoidance of obscenities.
■ Be attentive to others and treat them with respect and courtesy.
Today, much attention is also given to professional teacher competencies 
as articulated by the Interstate New Teacher Assessment and Support Con-
sortium, called  InTASC (2011), which has formalized 10 standards that per-
tain to  teaching in general. The standards are grouped into four categories: 
(1) The Learner and Learning; (2) Content; (3) Instructional Practice, and  
30

Recognizing Your Obligations and Charting the Course Ahead
(4) Professional Responsibility. Here are the InTASC standards, presented with 
permission. 
The Learner and Learning
Standard #1: Learner Development. The teacher understands how learners grow 
and develop, recognizing that patterns of learning and development vary in-
dividually within and across the cognitive, linguistic, social, emotional, and 
physical areas, and designs and implements developmentally appropriate and 
challenging learning experiences. 
Standard #2: Learning Differences. The teacher uses understanding of individual 
differences and diverse cultures and communities to ensure inclusive learning 
environments that enable each learner to meet high standards. 
Standard #3: Learning Environments. The teacher works with others to create envi-
ronments that support individual and collaborative learning, and that encourage 
positive social interaction, active engagement in learning, and self motivation.
Content
Standard #4: Content Knowledge. The teacher understands the central concepts, 
tools of inquiry, and structures of the discipline(s) he or she teaches and cre-
ates learning experiences that make the discipline accessible and meaningful 
for learners to assure mastery of the content. 
Standard #5: Application of Content. The teacher understands how to connect con-
cepts and use differing perspectives to engage learners in critical thinking, creativ-
ity, and collaborative problem solving related to authentic local and global issues.
Instructional Practice
Standard #6: Assessment. The teacher understands and uses multiple methods 
of assessment to engage learners in their own growth, to monitor learner prog-
ress, and to guide the teacher’s and learner’s decision making.
Standard #7: Planning for Instruction. The teacher plans instruction that 
supports every student in meeting rigorous learning goals by drawing upon 
knowledge of content areas, curriculum, cross-disciplinary skills, and peda-
gogy, as well as knowledge of learners and the community context. 
Standard #8: Instructional Strategies. The teacher understands and uses a va-
riety of instructional strategies to encourage learners to develop deep under-
standing of content areas and their connections, and to build skills to apply 
knowledge in meaningful ways.
Professional Responsibility
Standard #9: Professional Learning and Ethical Practice. The teacher engages 
in ongoing professional learning and uses evidence to continually evaluate 
his/her practice, particularly the effects of his/her choices and actions on oth-
ers (learners, families, other professionals, and the community), and adapts 
practice to meet the needs of each learner. 
31

Recognizing Your Obligations and Charting the Course Ahead
Standard #10: Leadership and Collaboration. The teacher seeks appropriate lead-
ership roles and opportunities to take responsibility for student learning, to 
collaborate with learners, families, colleagues, other school professionals, and 
community members to ensure learner growth, and to advance the profession. 
For each of the standards presented above, InTASC provides recommendations 
concerning the essential knowledge teachers should possess and the related per-
formances that characterize highly effective teaching. To see a full presentation of 
the InTASC recommendations complete with many examples, consult http://www 
.ccsso.org/Resources/Publications/InTASC_Model_Core_Teaching_Standards_A_
Resource_for_State_Dialogue_(April_2011).html.
the interesting case of Miss gusperson
Miss Gusperson was one of the most popular teachers, if not the most pop-
ular teacher, on the faculty of Clines Middle School. Her elective classes 
were always filled to overflowing and students gravitated to her wherever 
she went on campus. They called her “Miss Gus,” and she could often be 
seen “high-fiving” students and pretending to dance with them. On most 
days, she invited at least five of her favorite students to have lunch with her 
in her classroom.
Her usual attire was a dark sweatshirt, knee-length pants, and tennis 
shoes. She was conversant with students’ slang expressions and used them 
liberally when interacting with students. She usually made time to talk with 
students about their personal and social concerns, and often used class 
time for doing so.
Despite her popularity with students—or perhaps because of it—she 
was often the object of criticism. A few fellow teachers considered her to 
be too chummy with students. More than a few parents commented about 
her somewhat slovenly attire and grooming, and her principal, Mr. Clarke, 
was uneasy about her open reluctance to participate in groups working to 
update the school curriculum.
In view of what you have read so far about professionalism, what is 
your overall appraisal of Miss Gusperson’s conduct at school? What do 
you consider laudatory? Might you have any concerns about her conduct? 
What changes in behavior, if any, do you think she should make?
are you ready to capture thiS change in the Wind?
A change is occurring in discipline. Educators are now accepting that it is very dif-
ficult to promote desirable behavior in today’s students by using criticism, admon-
ishment, or punishment. They are realizing they have a better chance of getting the 
results they want by using “influence tactics” that are positive and helpful. Such 
tactics attract students, encourage cooperation, and make learning more enjoyable. 
Some of the tactics activate students’ internal inclination to do what they know is 
right. 
32

Recognizing Your Obligations and Charting the Course Ahead
Learning about these newer approaches is of no value unless you understand 
and master their application. You must make an effort to grasp the ideas, understand 
their purpose, and become comfortable with them. When possible, discuss the ap-
proaches with others and practice applying them in realistic situations. You will find 
guidance for doing these things in the activities at the end of this chapter.
The tactics you will be learning also help students move toward “self- 
discipline,” in which they voluntarily conduct themselves in ways that bring success 
in school. Teachers exert positive influence by demonstrating the behavior they ex-
pect, speaking with students in a kindly and helpful manner, teaching students how 
to follow procedures, having students practice kindness and civility, and  providing 
feedback that is helpful, not punitive.
introducing SoMe neW terMS: What do they Mean?
As we proceed, you will encounter a number of concepts and terms that are used 
in the conversation about discipline, including: classroom discipline, behavior, 
misbehavior, appropriate behavior, limits, and positive influence. Whenever you 
see a new term in bold type, that means it is listed and defined.
Classroom discipline refers to teachers’ efforts to establish and maintain four 
conditions of fundamental importance in all classrooms:
 1. Teachers are allowed to teach in a professional manner without being disrupted.
 2. Students are allowed to learn as intended without being hindered by others.
 3. Students learn how to cooperate, work together, and get along with each other.
 4. Teachers and students experience satisfaction and pleasure in their school 
experiences.
Discuss these four conditions with your students. They help students see the difference 
between appropriate behavior (which helps them succeed) and inappropriate behav-
ior (which hinders their progress). It is your duty to make those things clear to students.
How do you do so? In former times, teachers told students they were to “act 
like civilized human beings” or “behave like ladies and gentlemen.” Laudable as 
those suggestions sound, you must be more specific about your expectations. Stu-
dents need to see, understand, and practice various behaviors that will help them 
be successful, such as:
Raise your hand before speaking.
Begin work immediately when you enter the classroom.
Treat others as you would like them to treat you.
Don’t interrupt or disrupt.
Anticipate that you will have to teach students how to comply with such expecta-
tions, through explanation, demonstration, and practice.
In addition to clarifying expectations, you need to have in mind several helpful 
comments or questions to use when students fail to display acceptable behavior. 
Those comments and questions do not scold or criticize, but instead call on students 
33

Recognizing Your Obligations and Charting the Course Ahead
to reflect and make choices. Here are examples of questions you might ask, using a 
pleasant facial expression and neutral tone of voice:
That is against our rules. Would you do it again, please, correctly this time?
Is that what you intended to do (or say)?
Let’s remember to give everyone a chance to speak.
Which of our class expectations does that violate?
Is that in keeping with the kind of person you truly want to be?
How would your parents or caregiver want you to conduct yourself in this 
situation?
As we move ahead, we will examine many such ways of responding to misbehavior. 
None of them scolds the student.
Behavior is the totality of one’s physical and mental activities. Although it in-
cludes everything we do, in classroom discipline, we are only concerned about actions 
over which students and teachers have voluntary control. We will be working toward 
influencing students to choose to behave in ways that benefit themselves and the class.
Misbehavior (also called disruptive behavior and inappropriate behavior) 
refers to actions that disrupt teaching, interfere with learning, demean others, or 
otherwise violate the moral codes of society. Make sure students understand the 
meaning of misbehavior by using examples to which they can relate. (And let’s 
recognize that students are not the only ones who misbehave in school.)
Appropriate behavior (also called acceptable behavior or responsible behav-
ior) refers to student behavior that is consistent with class expectations and does 
not interfere with learning, demean others, or violate the moral codes of society.
Limits are the imaginary boundaries that separate acceptable behavior from mis-
behavior. Those boundaries are generally established by cultural traditions and are 
made explicit by teachers. In actual classrooms they vary somewhat from teacher to 
teacher. To be fair to your students, you should make very clear just where your limits 
are set—that is, where the lines are that separate acceptable behavior from misbehavior.
Positive influence is what we do, noncoercively, to invite or entice students to 
conduct themselves in accordance with class expectations. It is exerted through vari-
ous acts and comments, positive in nature, that open up possibilities and provide 
helpful assistance rather than negative criticism. Positivity is important because 
it minimizes student resistance while supporting appropriate actions. Better yet, it 
often activates students’ inner motivation to do what is proper.
What proFeSSional coMMunication SkillS 
Should teacherS diSplay?
In discipline—indeed in all of teaching—the ability to communicate effectively 
is paramount. It always comes into play when we want students or others to feel 
welcome, be receptive to us, take in new information and make sense of it, follow 
directions, or stop behaving in a counterproductive manner. Both verbal commu-
nication and nonverbal communication play key roles. Our effectiveness depends 
on what we say or do, how we say or do it, how we look when saying or doing it, and 
34

Recognizing Your Obligations and Charting the Course Ahead
how we respond to what the other person says or does. Let’s see what some of the 
great authorities have said about these aspects of teacher communication.
What did haim ginott Say about congruent communication?
Haim Ginott (1972) was the first authority to focus heavily on improving the effec-
tiveness of communication between teachers and students. He identified congruency 
as the most important aspect of communication. He used the term congruent com-
munication to mean communication that is harmonious with students’ feelings 
about situations and themselves. For example, when third-grade Johnny disrupts 
your lesson by riding the classroom broom as his pony, Ginott would have you say,
■ “Johnny, the broom belongs in the closet, please.”
Ginott also urged teachers to use sane messages when speaking with students. By 
sane messages he meant messages that address situations rather than students’ char-
acter or past behavior. Thus, with Johnny and the broom horse, he would not want 
teachers to say, “This is the fourth time today you’ve disobeyed our rule.”
Ginott emphasized that teachers at their best, using congruent communication, 
do not preach, moralize, impose guilt, or demand promises. Instead, they confer 
dignity on their students by respectfully treating them as capable of making good 
decisions. For example:
■ “Johnny, could I ask you to help by getting the broom back into the closet, please?”
In contrast, teachers at their worst label students, belittle them, and denigrate their 
character:
■ “Johnny, you are disturbing the class again. I’ve had about enough of your 
poor manners.”
Ginott added that effective teachers invite cooperation from their students. They do 
so, when a problem occurs, by describing the situation and what needs to be done. 
Further, they use laconic language—short and to the point—when responding 
to or redirecting student misbehavior. “Johnny, the broom belongs in the closet. 
Thanks.” They do not dictate to students or boss them around—acts that some-
times demean students and provoke resistance. Ginott also said teachers should feel 
free to express their concerns, even anger, but when doing so should use I-messages 
rather than you-messages.
■ Using an I-message, the teacher might say “I’m troubled about the disruption.”
■ Using a you-message, the teacher might say “Johnny, you are being very rude.”
You can see that the I-message is less offensive to the student, leaving him or her 
more open to suggestions you might make.
How would Ginott have us correct a student’s misbehavior? He says we should 
simply teach the student how to behave appropriately. That might require reteach-
ing the student two or three times. Even though the process might take time, it is 
much better than causing the student to react negatively or hostilely.
One more thing: Ginott especially urged teachers to refrain from asking why 
questions when discussing behavior—for example, “Why did you get that broom 
35

Recognizing Your Obligations and Charting the Course Ahead
out again?” He said such questions almost always make students feel guilty and put 
them on the defensive. Instead of asking why questions, simply ask the student to 
take the appropriate action.
What did Stephen covey Say about Frames of reference?
Stephen Covey (2004) says one of the most important things he ever learned about 
communication was that in order to communicate well, you have to understand 
your listener’s frame of reference as well as your own. The listener’s frame of refer-
ence, he says, is often different from yours.
For teachers, that means being perceptive of students’ deeper hopes, fears, 
realities, and difficulties. When you understand those things, you adjust what you 
wish to communicate so it aligns with the student’s child or adolescent frame of 
reference, rather than your adult or teacher frame of reference. What the student 
sees as reality often differs substantially from your perception of reality, and mat-
ters you consider important may be trivial in students’ view. Covey suggests that to 
work well with students, you need to know not just their thoughts but what those 
thoughts mean in their personal existence.
Earlier, Covey wrote that highly successful people attempt to understand their lis-
teners before they try to make listeners understand them. As he put it: “If I were to sum-
marize in one sentence the single most important principle I have learned in the field of 
interpersonal relations, it would be this: Seek first to understand, then to be understood. This 
principle is the key to effective interpersonal communication” (Covey, 1989, p. 237).
Covey uses the term empathic listening to refer to attempting to read and un-
derstand the emotions of others. He acknowledges that empathic listening takes 
time, but not nearly as much time as does having to back up and correct misunder-
standings and unexpressed and unresolved problems. Students want to be under-
stood, and you influence them much more strongly when you understand them.
What did William glasser Say about  
Seven connecting habits?
Renowned psychiatrist and educational authority William Glasser (2001) put great 
emphasis on communication between teachers and students. He identified seven 
deadly habits that inhibit teachers’ ability to establish optimal relationships with 
students. The deadly habits are criticizing, blaming, complaining, nagging, threaten-
ing, punishing, and rewarding students to control them. He said that if teachers are to 
establish and maintain good relationships with students and gain their willing 
cooperation, they must eliminate these deadly habits.
Glasser contends that as teachers stop using the seven deadly habits, their 
relations with students will begin to improve. The improvement continues fur-
ther when teachers replace the deadly habits with seven connecting habits, which 
Glasser identifies as caring, listening, supporting, contributing, encouraging, trusting, 
and befriending. Glasser believes—and the success of his quality schools supports 
his conviction—that all students who come to school can do competent work. In 
order to ensure acceptable competence, teachers must connect strongly with their 
36

Recognizing Your Obligations and Charting the Course Ahead
students. This means you use the seven connecting habits and give up trying to use 
external controls to make students behave.
Glasser makes his point by describing how we relate to friends (and he does 
indeed urge teachers to befriend their students). He notes that we do not criticize, 
blame, or speak harshly to our friends. Rather, we use connecting habits when 
 relating with them.
Please take a moment at this point to do the following, preferably with a partner:
For each of the following, think of a specific example in a realistic situation. 
Then indicate what you might say instead, using a connecting habit.
Give an example of criticizing . . . what might you say instead?
Give an example of blaming . . . what might you say instead?
Give an example of complaining . . . what might you say instead?
Give an example of nagging . . . what might you say instead?
Give an example of threatening . . . what might you say instead?
Give an example of punishing . . . what might you say instead?
Give an example of rewarding students to control them . . . what might you do 
instead?
?
What did Fred Jones Say about nonverbal communication?
Fred Jones (2007), a widely followed psychologist and expert in teaching and disci-
pline, believes nonverbal communication—which he refers to as body  language—
is even more effective than verbal statements in promoting good behavior in the 
classroom. He puts special emphasis on eye contact, physical proximity, body 
 carriage, and facial expressions, as follows:
Eye Contact. Suppose Miss Remy is explaining the process of multiplying frac-
tions. She sees Jacobo has stopped paying attention. She pauses. The sudden 
quiet causes Jacobo to look at Miss Remy and discover that she is looking 
directly at his eyes. He straightens up and waits attentively. Jones says few phys-
ical acts are more effective than eye contact for conveying the impression of be-
ing in control. He adds that turning and pointing the eyes and the feet toward 
students who disengage or disrupt shows teacher commitment to discipline.
Physical Proximity. Miss Remy has finished her demonstration and has directed 
students to complete some exercises on their own. After a time, she sees from 
the back of the room that Jacobo has stopped working and has begun talk-
ing to Jerry. She moves toward him. When Jacobo senses her presence, he 
immediately gets back to work, without Miss Remy having to say anything. 
Jones emphasizes that teachers who use physical proximity rarely need to say 
anything to the offending students to get them to behave.
Body Carriage. Jones also concluded that posture and body carriage are effec-
tive in communicating authority. Good posture and confident carriage sug-
gest strong leadership, whereas a drooping posture and lethargic movements 
37

Recognizing Your Obligations and Charting the Course Ahead
suggest resignation or fearfulness. Students read body language and are able 
to tell whether the teacher is feeling in charge or is tired, disinterested, or in-
timidated. Effective teachers, even when tired or troubled, know to stand tall 
and move assertively.
Facial Expressions. Teachers’ facial expressions communicate a great deal. They 
can show enthusiasm, seriousness, enjoyment, and appreciation, all of which 
encourage good behavior; or they can reveal boredom, annoyance, and resig-
nation, which may prompt lethargy or misbehavior among students.  Facial 
expressions such as winks and smiles demonstrate a sense of humor and 
 personal connection, traits students appreciate in teachers.
commentary from anonymous teacher 1
I am an elementary teacher with 18 years of experience in grades 2, 3, 
and 5. I prepared for teaching at a large reputable university and later 
earned a master’s degree there.
I was asked if, during my training and graduate studies, I had heard 
of, or had experience with, any of the teachings of Ginott, Covey, Glasser, 
or Jones. I’m not absolutely certain, but I don’t remember ever hearing 
or reading about Ginott, Covey, or Glasser, although I realize now they 
are widely recognized. A few years ago, I attended an inservice workshop 
directed by Dr. Jones. He influenced me a great deal and I now regularly 
use his suggestions on eye contact, physical proximity, and facial expres-
sions to help my students stay on task and conduct themselves properly. 
For me, Jones’s nonverbal tactics work about 90% of the time.
One thing struck me as I read Dr. Ginott’s views on using why ques-
tions to correct misbehavior. I realized that throughout my career I have 
been doing just what he says not to do. I had a boy, Jason, who always 
turned in sloppy papers and another, Ahmed, who talked all the time with-
out permission during seat work. I must have asked Jason a dozen times 
why he couldn’t turn in neater work, and Ahmed dozens of times why 
he was talking. Jason always looked away and answered with a shoulder 
shrug. As for Ahmed, he would answer by saying he didn’t know why he 
was talking. Neither my why questions nor my mild reprimands seemed to 
improve things at all. Yet I kept on nagging. I actually believed that by ask-
ing “why?” I could cause them to think about their behavior and decide to 
improve it. It never did work, so I’ll have to say I fell short in those cases.
What additional thingS Might i do to exert  
poSitive inFluence?
There are many suggestions for exerting positive influence on students in a systematic 
way. For now, please open your mind to maintaining a positive attitude, attending to 
the “neglected 50%” in teaching, avoiding the pitfall of arguing with students, and us-
ing positive influence to replace criticism. Here we briefly examine those four topics.
38

Recognizing Your Obligations and Charting the Course Ahead
establish and Maintain a positive attitude
You will probably love dealing with students who are nice to you, but you may 
find it distasteful and troubling to deal with those who misbehave. But doing so is 
necessary, and you need to do it well. Following are some suggestions.
First, look at your misbehaving students. Allow your mind to sweep across 
them and see them as individual human beings, many of them striving for recogni-
tion from you and from their classmates, perhaps showing off or pestering others 
or just carrying on in preference to being involved in the lesson.
Second, think this thought and do your best to truly mean it (paraphrased 
from an unknown source): I am grateful to each and every one of my students for 
being here, for trusting themselves to my care, and for enabling me to have this im-
portant job. I appreciate the challenge of helping them. I appreciate the opportunity to 
assist them in becoming better persons. I appreciate their testing and strengthening my 
capabilities. Because I am truly grateful for this opportunity, I will do the very best for 
them I can.
Third, if you feel like it, you might tell your students what has just gone 
through your mind. It can’t hurt, and it will probably help if you only do it once in 
a great while. You might add that you will support them in school and would like 
for them to support you in return.
attend to the “neglected 50%” in teaching
You should always give your best effort on behalf of your students, but today many 
beginning (and experienced) teachers do not understand fully how to do so. Let’s 
look at this matter for a moment. Suppose you take the most brilliant scholar in a 
given field and put her in charge of teaching your students who have virtually no 
interest in the subject she is to teach. What does that scholar need to do in order 
to teach the students well? Which of these three things do you think should be at 
the top of her list?
 1. Emphasize her strong knowledge of the subject matter.
 2. Organize a structure that will help students understand the subject matter, see 
how its main points are interconnected, and understand what it is good for.
 3. Influence students by using personal charisma, intriguing questions,  interesting 
demonstrations, and personal attention.
All three of those aspects—knowledge, structure, and influence—are essential for 
successful teaching. But of the three aspects, the one for which teachers usually 
receive the least preparation is the last of the three. Occasionally a teacher knows 
intuitively how to approach and work with students—teachers with that ability are 
often called “natural teachers.” But most beginning teachers have focused mostly 
on learning their subject matter and learning how to organize it for student learn-
ing. Unfortunately, they have not been taught very much about how to interact with 
students and influence them in a positive manner.
That aspect of teaching is what is here called the neglected 50% in teaching. At 
this point in your career you are knowledgeable in subject matter. You know how to 
organize material so students can access it easily. But you may not have had much 
instruction in how to influence students to cooperate and make an effort—hence 
39

Recognizing Your Obligations and Charting the Course Ahead
the term the neglected 50%. To be a highly effective teacher, you must be able to 
engage your students, rally them to your side, and get them to work in tandem with 
you. That’s what makes school satisfying for everyone.
avoid the pitfall of arguing with Students
It is self-defeating to argue with students, or anyone else for that matter. It is worse 
than a waste of time, because telling them (or anyone) they are wrong doesn’t 
change their minds. It often makes them even more resistant to your point of view. 
They will usually clam up or get defensive or angry, and after a time so will you. 
Remember this adage:
People convinced against their will
Are of the same opinion still.
Dale Carnegie included that saying in his marvelous book How to Win Friends and 
Influence People (1981 revision), in which he pointed to the pitfalls of arguing. 
He said he had listened to, participated in, and analyzed thousands of arguments 
and had concluded that arguing was invariably detrimental to your cause. You 
should avoid it, he said, as you would avoid rattlesnakes. Why? Because you can’t 
win an argument. It is impossible. If you make the weaker case, you lose. If you 
make the stronger case, you also lose, because you have made the other person 
feel inferior and have wounded his or her pride. Wounded pride does not seek 
to cooperate.
Carnegie says that when you disagree with another person but need to discuss 
a situation, here’s what to do: Control your temper, listen, look for areas of agree-
ment, and promise to think carefully about what the other person has said. He 
further advises that when you express your view, try saying, “I may be wrong. I often 
am. Let’s see if we can examine the facts together.” Never tell the other person he or 
she is wrong. If it turns out you are wrong, admit it quickly and sincerely.
replace criticism with positive influence
Let’s suppose you are teaching a lesson and come face to face with the moment of 
truth in discipline: A student, or group of students, has misbehaved—perhaps of-
fended you personally. You feel you can’t overlook this behavior; you feel you must 
respond. What do you do?
Here is a suggestion: At that point in time, hesitate (with a thoughtful expres-
sion on your face) just long enough to hold in check your natural reaction to find 
fault, criticize, admonish, or lash back. Those reactions won’t accomplish anything 
positive, nor will they ever convince the student he or she was wrong. They may 
well make the student shut up or answer back, but that student will never thank 
you for the correction. She will not consider that she might be wrong. Or he will 
think you are browbeating him. Students who become embarrassed or resentful or 
angry are far more inclined to withdraw or subvert your efforts than to cooperate.
Instead of scolding or criticizing, select a response that does not threaten 
or demean the student’s sense of self. Your actions or comments should lead the 
40

Recognizing Your Obligations and Charting the Course Ahead
offender back to positive behavior, with no damage to the fragile ego. How, exactly, 
do you do so? Following are two suggestions.
First, if the misbehavior is relatively benign, just pause a moment and look 
at the offenders, making eye contact if you can. If the misbehavior seems to stop, 
continue on with your lesson in a smooth flow.
Second, if the misbehavior continues or is repeated, follow the suggestion 
of either Marvin Marshall or Diane Gossen. Marshall (2001/2007) might ask the 
misbehaving student,
■ “At what level is that behavior?” He would have taught students the character-
istics of four different levels of behavior. Merely asking the student to identify 
the level of his or her behavior is not very threatening. By honestly categoriz-
ing the level of behavior, the student is influenced to return to an acceptable 
level.
Or Gossen (2004), an authority on restitution theory, might ask the offending 
student,
■ “Is that behavior in keeping with the kind of person you want to be?” If the 
student answers “yes,” ask him or her to stay for a moment after class to speak 
with you (at which time you might say, “If that is truly how you want to be, we 
need to do some thinking. It is simply not acceptable for anyone in the class 
to interfere with the lesson and other students’ learning”). If the student says 
it is not how he or she wants to be, Gossen would ask, “Then, what could you 
do that would be?”
Such questions do not criticize the student or ask students to criticize themselves. 
Remember: criticism almost never works. Who among us seeks it? Or appreciates 
it? Although we may enjoy criticizing others, we hate being on the receiving end.
Then what do we like to receive from others? How do we like to be made to 
feel? In five minutes, you could make a list that would fill the next two pages, but 
one thing stands out above all the others. It is this:
We want to feel appreciated and important.  ■
Simple as that. If you want to draw students to you, if you want them to co-
operate with you and support you, just say and do things that make them feel 
appreciated.
One way to make students feel appreciated is to ask them privately if they will 
help you with something. Another way is to offer them support and encourage-
ment. Another is to give them individual help. Another is simply to listen to them 
when they confide in you. Another is to learn and remember something of impor-
tance to each student—their siblings, pets, or favorite activities outside school. And 
a surprisingly powerful one is simply to find a minute or two each day to chat with 
them individually about anything at all except their misbehavior. But what you 
say to them must be genuine. Insincere flattery doesn’t do the job. Not for long. 
 Students see through it.
41

Recognizing Your Obligations and Charting the Course Ahead
commentary from anonymous teacher 2
I have learned that just as we encourage our students to develop scholarly 
habits to make learning easier, we can develop “teacherly” habits that 
make teaching and learning easier and more enjoyable. Three of my fa-
vorites are:
1. Greet students as they enter the classroom. I stand at the door, smile, 
use first names, and offer a quick comment or question to each student. 
This is quick, easy, and fun. It helps students feel “seen” and valued, and 
I can model friendliness and caring. I see less misbehavior arising from 
students who otherwise feel unnoticed.
2. Use lesson planning as a key tool in behavior management. Variety is 
the name of the game to keep students interested, engaged, and just a 
little off-balance. I like to use different groupings of learners, offer choices 
in activities and tasks, and feature assignments using all learning modali-
ties. Planning carefully for variety makes the class more fun and cuts down 
on misbehavior stemming from boredom.
3. Keep students and caregivers informed of expectations, assessments, 
and evaluations. In my experience, parents don’t like surprises at report card 
time and students are poor at guessing how they are doing in a class. For 
all projects, reports, oral presentations, and the like, I use grading rubrics. 
I design the rubric to reflect my expectations, then spend time teaching it 
to the students before they begin the assignment. I have students practice 
peer evaluations using the rubric. They soon understand what is expected 
and how to go about meeting the requirements. My district, and all others 
that I know of, uses a Web-based computer grading program that offers 
parent access. I make it a priority to keep up with my grading and to post 
grades at least once weekly. In addition, I print out monthly progress reports 
for all students. This habit ensures students receive guidance in successfully 
 completing assignments and that they receive accurate and timely feedback.
I’d also like to tell you about my struggles with a student I’ll call 
 Brendan. Our ongoing battle started the first day of school. He and all 
other students in our French class were asked to choose French names 
from lengthy lists. They would be called by those names in class. Brendan 
insisted on “Mozambique” for his name. I asked him to consider a normal 
name such as “Philippe” or “Guillaume” or “Jacques.” He refused and 
began chanting, “Mozambique! Mozambique! Mozambique!” I relented, 
smiling, in order to avoid an unpleasant standoff on the first day.
That was the beginning of my unending difficulties with Brendan. 
I soon saw him not as a quirky kid but as an absolute contrarian. You’d 
have thought his mission in life was to plague me by doing the opposite of 
what I asked or expected. Hardly a threat to the eye, he was cute with dark 
brown curls, bright eyes, and a cheerful smile, liked by his peers, especially 
girls. But his actions and attitudes flustered me and put me off my game. 
Worse, the two of us produced a negativity that affected the entire class. 
42

Recognizing Your Obligations and Charting the Course Ahead
There was nothing explosive or violent from him, but before long his cease-
less resistance wore me down.
To illustrate with but one example, we began each class with 5 to 7 
minutes of bell work. Once the procedure was established, all the students 
except Brendan complied without grumbling. Brendan didn’t grumble, but 
he stalled. “I don’t have a pencil/study guide/piece of paper.” I would 
supply him with what he needed, accompanied by a frown or look of ex-
asperation. Those exchanges sometimes lasted through bell work. If any 
time was left, he would say, “I don’t understand this.” If the assignment was 
to practice French greetings and good-byes with table partners, Brendan 
was certain to remark: “I don’t speak French.” And “I don’t know these 
people.”
If the assignment was to respond with correct answers about days and 
months, Brendan would call out, “Paris! Notre Dame! Haiti! New Orleans!” 
We had a rule to keep chair legs flat on the floor with no leaning back: 
Brendan would lean back as far as he could, balancing precariously. If I said, 
“Please don’t lean back in your chair,” he would say, “My bad.” In less than 
3 minutes he’d be leaning back again.
I didn’t know how to handle that or relate to him. I nagged, com-
plained, criticized, reasoned, counseled, muttered, and shook my head in 
disgust and resignation. None of that changed Brendan. But it changed 
me. I retreated behind clenched jaws and grinding teeth. I suspended bell 
work for that class. I used fewer and fewer groupings for oral practice. I 
started to pretend I didn’t see when he leaned back in his chair. I came to 
dread that class and rejoice when he was absent.
I soon learned Brendan was not motivated by grades, good or bad, or 
by parent phone calls, good or bad. He didn’t care about privileges or the 
loss of same. He was not intimidated by threats, by referrals, by chats with 
the assistant principal. He was always smiling. He kept me frowning and 
itchy. He won. I finally asked to have him removed from my class.
I think now I could do better. But back then, I took his behavior per-
sonally. His defiance offended me and kept me on the defensive. I wish I 
would have just smiled and chatted with him about his pets and his music, 
the two most important things in his life. I got that information from him the 
first day on “inventory” sheets I use for students to introduce themselves 
to me. I wonder, too, if we might have chatted about geography or French 
history or anything he liked in school. But I didn’t think of it. I was stubborn. 
My pride was on the line. I gave it priority over taking the time to get to 
know a bright and challenging student in my care.
Shall We exaMine a planning rubric For building 
a perSonalized SySteM oF diScipline?
Like all teachers, you need a system of discipline that works well for you and your 
students. Nothing else is more important to your success. You may be able to find a 
ready-made approach provided by one of the various great authorities in discipline. 
43

Recognizing Your Obligations and Charting the Course Ahead
But it is unlikely you will find one that fully meets your particular needs and also 
those of all your students.
If you don’t find an existing system that suits you well, you can construct one 
for yourself. It will actually further your competence if you do. The rubric presented 
here will help you select, modify, and reorganize tactics to bring everything in line 
with your students’ needs and your beliefs and situations.
This rubric calls on you to answer certain questions for yourself, and for  others 
if necessary. Now as you move ahead, just keep this summary point in mind:
Today, discipline is not about “making” students behave. It is about teaching 
them how to behave properly and “influencing” them to do so in a kind and 
positive manner. ■
the rubric and its contents
Here are the topics you should address when formulating a personalized approach 
to discipline. Please refer to this rubric and make notes in your journal (another 
item to be suggested presently) as you consider these elements.
Topic 1. My philosophy of discipline.
My definition of discipline.
The purposes for which I will use discipline.
My main duties in discipline.
My students’ main duties in discipline.
Topic 2. My theory of discipline.
What I consider to be the necessary components of an effective system of 
discipline.
What I consider to be the purpose of each component.
Topic 3. The professional and ethical demeanor I will display.
How I will comply with the legal, professional, and ethical obligations associ-
ated with discipline.
What I will do to establish positive relations and develop trust with students, 
colleagues, and my students’ caregivers.
44

Recognizing Your Obligations and Charting the Course Ahead
Topic 4. The kind of behavior I will endeavor to promote and the rules that 
support it.
Generally speaking, the behaviors I will promote in my classes.
The specific rules, if any, I will use to support the desired behaviors.
Topic 5. What I will do proactively to prevent or reduce misbehavior.
Specific steps I will take to prevent or limit the known causes of misbehavior 
that might otherwise influence my classes.
Topic 6. How I will support my students’ efforts to participate  
and persevere.
How I will speak with and relate to my students.
How I will make sure students know what they are expected to do.
The types of activities I will emphasize in teaching.
How I will engage students actively when I am providing instruction.
How I will monitor and help students when they are doing independent work.
How I will use my personal charisma.
How I will use body language to influence behavior.
How I will influence students to do high-quality work.
Topic 7. How I will redirect students when they misbehave.
How I will influence students, using positive tactics that preserve personal dignity.
How I will stop misbehavior and help students return willingly to appropriate 
behavior.
How I will deal with minor misbehavior such as talking or distracting others.
How I will deal with more disruptive behavior such as disrespect and abusiveness.
How I will deal with students’ refusal to comply with directions or do accept-
able work.
Topic 8. How and when I will communicate my discipline approach  
to students, administrators, and students’ caregivers.
How and when I will explain my discipline plan to students.
How and when I will communicate my discipline plan to my administrator 
and seek support.
How and when I will communicate my plan to students’ caregivers and re-
quest support.
a SuggeSted Journal to accoMpany the planning rubric
It is strongly advised that you keep a journal as you develop your rubric. A note-
book serves well. Make journal headings that correspond to the topics in the rubric. 
Allow space for notes between rubric headings. When you encounter appealing 
information related to the various topics, jot notes underneath the appropriate 
45

Recognizing Your Obligations and Charting the Course Ahead
heading. When you have completed your studies, your journal will contain the 
information you need for articulating a personalized system of discipline. Then, 
you only have to organize that information as guided by the questions in the rubric.
What you have learned in thiS chapter
You have reviewed your important legal and professional obligations to students 
and have noted students’ obligations to you. You have examined some of the major 
communication tactics that are effective with students today, and you have learned 
additional ways of exerting positive influence. You have learned the meanings of sev-
eral important terms—discipline, behavior, misbehavior, appropriate behavior, lim-
its, influence tactics, due diligence, negligence, breach of duty, professionalism, sane 
messages, congruent communication, laconic language, why questions, I-messages, 
you-messages, frames of reference, seven deadly habits, seven connecting habits, 
and the neglected 50%. You have examined the three main categories of tactics that 
are used in effective discipline—prevention of misbehavior, support of appropriate 
behavior, and redirection of improper behavior—and you have at hand a planning 
rubric to guide your progress in articulating your personal views on discipline.
ac tiv i ti e s
Self-Test: True/False
 1. “Modern discipline” is characterized as relying on 
teacher persuasion rather than stern enforcement 
to help students conduct themselves properly in 
school.
 2. “Coercion” refers to trying to make students do 
what they don’t want to do, whereas “influence” 
refers to persuading students to want to do what 
we want them to do.
 3. “Limits” in discipline refer to how far teachers are 
willing to go in order to enforce their rules of be-
havior in the classroom.
 4. Stipulations concerning teachers’ exercising due 
diligence are considered to be professional obliga-
tions, not legal obligations.
 5. The InTASC stipulations lay out the 10 areas of 
legal requirements with which teachers must 
comply.
 6. The term communication skills has the same mean-
ing as verbal skills.
 7. “Sane messages” as described and advocated by 
Haim Ginott are legally required of teachers.
 8. The “neglected 50%” of teaching refers mainly to 
actions teachers use to exert positive influence on 
students.
 9. Argumentation is not an effective activity for causing 
people to change their minds when they are wrong.
10. William Glasser’s “connecting habits” are things 
a teacher can do and say that increase students’ 
inclination to cooperate with the teacher.
Self-Test: Multiple Choice
 1. Classroom discipline is most accurately thought of as
(a) raucous misbehavior.
(b) rules, rewards, and punishments.
(c) teacher efforts to maintain good behavior.
(d) a joint effort by teacher, parent, and 
 administrator.
 2. Which was not listed among the main objectives of 
discipline?
(a) self-improvement
(b) security and safety
(c) civil behavior
(d) personal responsibility
 3. The boundaries that separate appropriate behavior 
from misbehavior are referred to as
(a) parameters.
(b) rubrics.
(c) limits.
(d) rules.
46

Recognizing Your Obligations and Charting the Course Ahead
 4. For teachers, “in loco parentis” is what kind of 
requirement?
(a) ethical
(b) legal
(c) professional
(d) ubiquitous
 5. Professional and ethical standards for teachers 
have been articulated by the
(a) GOP.
(b) CEO.
(c) CLU.
(d) NEA.
 6. “Congruent communication” was popularized by
(a) Stephen Covey.
(b) Haim Ginott.
(c) William Glasser.
(d) Fred Jones.
 7. Nonverbal communication received greatest atten-
tion from
(a) Stephen Covey.
(b) Haim Ginott.
(c) William Glasser.
(d) Fred Jones.
 8. The “neglected 50%” in teaching refers to
(a) good communication.
(b) frames of reference.
(c) exerting positive influence.
(d) teacher–parent cooperation.
 9. Who is noted for insisting that you cannot win an 
argument?
(a) Dale Carnegie
(b) Bill Clinton
(c) Mohandas Gandhi
(d) Oprah Winfrey
 10. What did Haim Ginott call ever-ready teacher 
help?
(a) professional imperative
(b) sane message
(c) hidden asset
(d) velvet-covered hammer
Self-Test: Explain This
 1. How would you define “classroom discipline,” 
and why is it so important in school?
 2. Explain the terms professionalism, ethics, and le-
galities. Give an example of each in relation to 
teaching.
 3. What does it mean to “exert positive influence” on 
students, and why is that approach deemed better 
than using criticism and coercion?
 4. What did Ginott mean by the term congruent com-
munication; what did Glasser mean by connecting 
habits; what did Covey mean by frames of reference; 
and why did Jones put so much emphasis on non-
verbal communication?
Additional Suggested Activities
 1. In your journal, enter ideas from this chapter you 
might wish to incorporate in your personal ap-
proach to discipline.
 2. Provide and discuss examples of teacher behaviors 
that (a) comply with, and (b) violate:
■ two things expected of teachers professionally
■ two legal obligations of teachers
 3. With regard to teachers’ personality traits:
■ Identify two personality traits that seem to pro-
mote better student behavior.
■ Identify two personality traits that often seem 
to make student behavior worse.
■ Explain how you will emphasize your effective 
traits and downplay the less effective.
 4. Think back to one of the best teachers you ever had 
and one of the poorest teachers you ever had. Now 
respond to these questions:
■ What did the good one do that pleased you?
■ What did the poor one do that displeased 
you?
■ Rank the following qualities of your favorite 
teacher beginning with what you liked best:
a) Knowledge of subject matter
b) Personal charisma
c) Ability to organize and present the material 
to be learned
d) Personal interest directed to you and your 
progress
■ To what extent is your ranking (in the item 
above) similar to the chapter commentary on 
the “neglected 50%” of teaching?
47

Recognizing Your Obligations and Charting the Course Ahead
Acceptable behavior: Student conduct that is consistent 
with class expectations. It does not interfere with learn-
ing, demean others, or violate moral codes of society.
Appropriate behavior: Student conduct that is consistent 
with class expectations. It does not interfere with learn-
ing, demean others, or violate moral codes of society.
Behavior: The totality of one’s physical and mental 
activities.
Body language (Jones): Nonverbal communication trans-
mitted through posture, eye contact, gestures, and 
 facial expressions.
Breach of duty: A teacher’s failure to comply with one or 
more legal obligations at school.
Classroom discipline: Everything teachers do to estab-
lish and maintain conditions wherein teachers can 
teach, students can learn, students cooperate with 
one another, and teacher and students experience 
satisfaction.
Congruent communication (Ginott): A style of commu-
nication in which teachers acknowledge and accept stu-
dents’ feelings about situations and themselves.
Disruptive behavior: Actions that disrupt teaching or learn-
ing. Often used interchangeably with “misbehavior.”
Due diligence: A responsibility of all school personnel to 
pay close and reasonable attention to students under 
supervision; reasonable care must be taken to protect 
students from harm.
Frame of reference (Covey): Point of view. To communi-
cate effectively, it is important to understand the other’s 
perception of reality.
I-messages (Ginott): Teachers’ expressing their personal 
feelings and reactions to situations without addressing 
student behavior or character: Example, “I have trouble 
teaching when there is so much noise in the room.”
Inappropriate behavior: Any behavior that through intent 
or thoughtlessness interferes with teaching or learning, 
threatens or intimidates others, or oversteps society’s 
standards of moral, ethical, or legal behavior.
In loco parentis: Teachers’ exercising care over students as 
if they were the students’ parents—in place of parents.
Laconic language (Ginott): Brevity of teacher’s comments 
about misbehavior. Example: “This is work time.”
Limits: The imaginary boundaries that separate acceptable/
appropriate behavior from misbehavior/inappropriate 
behavior.
Misbehavior, causes of (Charles): Factors that reside in 
students, the class environment, school personnel, and 
elsewhere, that tend to promote student misbehavior. 
(Charles identifies 26 such factors).
Neglected 50% (Charles): The aspect of teaching that ex-
erts positive influence on students to cooperate and 
make an effort in class. Tactics involve persuasion, 
personal charisma, skilful communication, intriguing 
questions, personal attention, helpfulness.
Negligence: A teacher’s failure to maintain a careful watch 
over students under supervision.
Responsible behavior: Student behavior consistent with 
class expectations—does not interfere with learning, 
demean others, or violate the moral codes of society. 
Synonymous with proper behavior.
Sane messages (Ginott): Teacher messages that address 
situations rather than students’ character.
Seven connecting habits vs. seven deadly habits 
(Glasser): Seven habits that help teachers connect 
with students are caring, listening, supporting, contribut-
ing,  encouraging, trusting, and befriending. They should 
replace the seven deadly habits of criticizing, blaming, 
complaining, nagging, threatening, punishing, and reward-
ing students to control them.
Why questions (Ginott): Counterproductive questions 
that teachers put to students, asking them to explain or 
justify their behavior, e.g., “Why did you . . . ?”
You-messages (Ginott): Teacher messages that attack stu-
dents’ character, such as “You are acting like barbarians.” 
These messages are put-downs that can convey heavy 
blame and guilt.
glo ssary
48

Recognizing Your Obligations and Charting the Course Ahead
Covey, R. (1989). The 7 habits of highly effective people.  
New York: Simon and Schuster.
Covey, R. (2004). The 7 habits of highly effective peo-
ple: Restoring the character ethic. New York: Free  
Press.
Drye, J. (2000). Tort liability 101: When are teachers liable? 
Atlanta, GA: Educator Resources. Retrieved from http://
www.Educator-Resources.com
Ginott, H. (1971). Teacher and child. New York: Macmillan.
Ginott, H. (1972). I am angry! I am appalled! I am  furious! 
Today’s Education, 61, 23–24.
Goorian, B., & Brown, K. (2002). Trends and issues: School 
Law. ERIC Clearinghouse on Educational Management. 
Retrieved from http://eric.uoregon.edu/trends_issues/
law/index.html
Gossen, D. (2004). It’s all about we: Rethinking discipline 
using restitution. Saskatoon, SK, Canada: Chelsom 
Consultants Limited.
ref e re n c e s
49

50

The Development  
of Modern Discipline
From Chapter 3 of Building Classroom Discipline, Eleventh Edition. C. M. Charles. Copyright © 2014 by  Pearson 
Education, Inc. All rights reserved.
51

The Development  
of Modern Discipline
Prior to the 1950s, discipline was thought of as an ongoing struggle between 
demanding teachers and disobedient students. The teachers' job was to make 
students learn, and although many students complied with that expectation, many 
others resisted work and caused disruptions. Altogether, discipline was a mélange 
of demands, rules, misbehavior, insubordination, punishments, detention, suspen-
sion, and paddles at the ready. Yet, no one really objected. Those conditions were 
accepted by students, parents, and teachers, often smilingly, as natural and neces-
sary in schooling.
That picture began to change around the middle of the 20th century. With the 
end of World War II, newer attitudes toward behavior and discipline were becom-
ing evident. Society was growing more tolerant of behavior a bit outside the norm, 
and with that tolerance came an inclination to treat students more considerately 
and humanely. Bit by bit, threat, corporal punishment, and other forceful means of 
controlling misbehavior began to fall from favor.
At the same time, society began asking schools to assume a stronger role in 
teaching students to be civil, responsible, and self-controlled, traits that were tradi-
tionally taught in the family and sometimes in the churches. The schools accepted 
the challenge, more or less by default, and by the end of the 20th century, the sternly 
coercive teacher had almost disappeared, replaced by teachers of gentler demeanor 
who relied on “friendly persuasion” to get students to behave themselves. In this 
chapter, we review the nature of those changes and see how they came about.
Chapter preview
Following this paragraph, you will see a timeline of major developments in dis-
cipline, beginning with the first systematic discipline approach set forth in 1951 
and running up through the year 2010, which gives a picture of the 60-year trans-
formation in discipline. Incorporated into the timeline are commentaries about 
contributions from great educators, psychologists, and psychiatrists between 1951 
and 2001, showing how discipline evolved in the last half of the 20th century. 
The Development  
of Modern Discipline
Which 20th-Century Authorities Set the Foundations 
for Today's Discipline, and What Did They Advocate?
52

The Development of Modern Discipline
Those powerful ideas, which opened new lines of thought about discipline, are 
then reviewed succinctly in this chapter. 
a timeline of Developments in moDern DisCipline
1951 
Understanding Group Dynamics—Fritz Redl (psychiatrist) and William 
Wattenberg (educational psychologist) presented the first systematically 
organized approach to discipline. It was based on their identification 
and analyses of forces they called “group dynamics” that affect people's 
behavior when in groups.
1954 
The Role of Reinforcement in Shaping Behavior—B. F. Skinner (psycholo-
gist) expanded on the discoveries of Russian physiologist Ivan Pavlov 
and for many years studied how reinforcement affects both animal and 
human learning. His conclusions led to tactics for shaping behavior 
through a process now popularly called “behavior modification.”
1969 
Understanding Behavior as Student Choice—William Glasser (psychiatrist) 
turned his attention to educational theory and practice after becoming 
convinced that personal choice—as distinct from reinforcement—was 
pivotal in human learning and general behavior. The teacher's role was 
to help students make choices that served them better in school.
1971 
Managing Students and Lessons—Jacob Kounin (educational psycholo-
gist) discovered that classroom behavior is very strongly affected by how 
teachers present and manage lessons, which opened yet another line of 
thought about discipline.
1971 
Using Congruent Communication—Haim Ginott (teacher and psycholo-
gist) set forth a number of new conclusions about how communication 
and teacher actions affect student behavior. His contentions still feature 
prominently in most of today's approaches to discipline.
1972 
Emphasizing Democracy and the Need for Belonging—Rudolf Dreikurs 
(psychiatrist) became convinced that students are continually motivated 
to pursue a primary goal in school, which is to gain a strong sense of 
belonging. Misbehavior is often manifested in their unsuccessful at-
tempts to do so.
1976 
Assertively Taking Charge—Lee Canter and Marlene Canter (educators) 
provided a tactic that teachers of the day sorely needed—a means of eas-
ily and effectively taking charge in their classrooms and dealing with 
misbehavior. Their approach, called “assertive discipline,” dominated 
discipline practice for 20 years thereafter.
53

The Development of Modern Discipline
1986 
Applying the Principles of Choice Theory—William Glasser (psychiatrist) 
returned to prominence with new thoughts on helping students make 
better behavior choices.
1987 
Keeping Students Actively Involved—Fred Jones (psychologist) discovered 
that the major problem in classroom discipline was “massive time- 
wasting.” He developed several tactics for conserving time and keeping 
students involved, which remain highly popular today.
1988 
Maintaining Student Dignity—Richard Curwin (educator) and Allen 
Mendler (psychologist) introduced the concept of discipline with dignity 
(Brian Mendler, educator, now participates in the work). They insist that 
for discipline to be effective, it must allow students to maintain a per-
sonal sense of dignity (self-respect), a concept now emphasized in virtu-
ally all modern approaches to discipline.
1989 
Cooperation for Classroom Discipline—Linda Albert (educator) presented a 
number of strategies for improving class behavior through structures 
that help students relate positively with each other and with the teacher.
1992 
Self-Restitution Theory—Diane Gossen (educator) developed and empha-
sized the concept of self-restitution, in which she asked students who 
misbehaved to reflect on their behavior, identify the need that prompted 
it, and then create new ways of behaving that are consistent with the re-
sponsible persons they want to be.
1993 
Emphasizing Positivity and Humaneness—Jane Nelsen (educator) and 
Lynn Lott (educator) provided additional positive classroom tactics that 
promote cooperation and enhance personal relations.
1994 
Building Inner Discipline—Barbara Coloroso (educator) promoted the 
growth of “inner discipline” in students, meaning they are helped to re-
alize, within themselves, that proper behavior leads to a better existence 
than does improper behavior.
1998 
On Classroom Roles and Procedures—Harry Wong and Rosemary Wong 
(educators) insisted that proper class behavior is much more likely 
when students know exactly what is expected of them—hence they ad-
vocate establishing and teaching clear procedures for all class activities. 
1999 
Learning to Meet Needs Without Harming Others—Ed Ford (director of 
Responsible Thinking Process, Inc.) developed a noncontrolling 
 approach in which students learn to meet their needs without infringing 
54

The Development of Modern Discipline
on the rights or comforts of others, thereby reducing conflict in the 
 classroom.
2000 
Promoting Synergy in the Classroom—C. M. Charles (teacher educator) ad-
vocates reducing misbehavior by energizing classes through use of 
teacher charisma, topics and activities of high interest, group competi-
tion, cooperative work, and recognition of genuine accomplishment.
2001 
Building Moral Intelligence—Michele Borba (educator) provides sugges-
tions to help students differentiate between right and wrong, establish 
ethical convictions, and act on those convictions in an honorable way.
2001 
Classrooms as Communities of Learners—Alfie Kohn (educator) laments 
the failure of schools to promote in-depth learning. His remedy is to 
convert classes into “communities of learners,” with give and take and 
in-depth exploration of meaningful topics.
The works noted up to this point have been pivotal in the development of mod-
ern thought on discipline. Those that now follow depict today's strongest influ-
ences in discipline. 
1998  
to  
present
How to Be an Effective Teacher—Harry Wong and Rosemary Wong's ideas 
grow in popularity. Their book The First Days of School: How to Be an Effective 
Teacher (revised edition, 2009) is the best-selling education book of all time. 
2001  
to  
present
Every Student Can Succeed—William Glasser (psychiatrist and education 
consultant) established yet another major approach to discipline, which 
promotes high levels of student learning and positive behavior. 
2001  
to  
present
Raising the Level of Student Responsibility—Marvin Marshall (educator) de-
veloped and disseminated a highly popular approach to humane disci-
pline that he calls Discipline Without Stress. Marshall’s approach makes 
strong use of a four-level “Hierarchy of Social Development,” with teach-
ers helping students learn to function at the highest level.
2002  
to  
present
Promoting Civility in the Classroom—P. M. Forni (director of the Civility 
Initiative at Johns Hopkins University) launched and continues a push 
to popularize civil behavior in schools and society. 
55

The Development of Modern Discipline
Now, we proceed to review in a bit more detail the earlier-20th-century contribu-
tions in discipline (1951–2001) and note the specific influences they have had on 
today's discipline.
Group DynamiCs: what DiD fritz reDl  
anD william wattenberG explain about Group behavior?
In 1951, psychiatrist Fritz Redl (left) and educational psychologist William 
 Wattenberg (top, next page) developed and disseminated the first theory-
based approach to humane classroom discipline. Their conclusions, described 
in their book Mental Hygiene in Teaching (1951), helped teachers understand 
group behavior and how it affects individual behavior. Redl and Wattenberg 
contended that much student misbehavior is caused by forces detectible only 
in larger groups. They called those forces group dynamics and said if teachers 
are to understand student behavior, they must first understand group dynam-
ics. Their ideas marked the beginning of what we now think of as “modern 
discipline.”
2002  
to  
present
Teacher-Student Same-Side Approach to Discipline—Spencer Kagan (psy-
chologist and educator), in collaboration with Patricia Kyle (educator) 
and Sally Scott (educator), explains the strategy and tactics of Win-Win 
Discipline, which calls on teachers and students to work together on the 
same side, learn to identify states of emotion in students who misbe-
have, and employ appropriate “structures” that help students conduct 
themselves appropriately. 
2003  
to  
present
Fred Jones's Tools for Teachers— Fred Jones enjoys growing popularity for 
his tactics in keeping students meaningfully involved in lessons and 
managing classrooms more efficiently. 
2005  
to  
present
What Is Real Discipline?—Ronald Morrish (behavior specialist and con-
sultant) answers this question in a website article (see references) and 
two popular books. He describes basic tactics for promoting responsible 
behavior that ring true to all teachers. 
2008  
to  
present
Discipline Through Clear Expectations, Leverage, and Student  Accountability— 
Craig Seganti (teacher) worked for 20 years in inner-city Los Angeles 
schools, where he developed tactics for getting the best from students 
who are often considered to be difficult to manage. 
56

The Development of Modern Discipline
the redl and wattenberg model. To control misbehavior, (1) identify and 
soften typical causes of misbehavior; (2) clarify and discuss student roles and 
teacher roles; (3) involve students in deciding how misbehavior should be han-
dled; and (4) maintain responsible student behavior by using “influence tech-
niques” such as encouragement and support of self-control rather than demands 
and reprimands. ■
Redl and Wattenberg explained that group dynamics account for phenom-
ena such as group spirit, group norms and expectations, imitative behavior, desire 
to excel, scapegoating of certain students, and providing hiding places for non-
achievers. They said students take on student roles such as leader, follower, clown 
(who shows off), instigator (who provokes misbehavior), and scapegoat (on whom 
blame is placed even when not deserved). They urged teachers to be watchful for 
these roles, bring them to the class's attention, and be prepared to encourage or 
discourage them as appropriate.
They also pointed out that students expect teachers to fill certain teacher roles, 
such as role models, sources of knowledge, referees, judges, and surrogate parents. 
Teachers must be aware that students hold these expectations and should discuss 
the implications with students.
Redl and Wattenberg urged teachers to behave toward students in a helpful 
manner, remain as objective as possible, show tolerance, keep a sense of humor, 
and help students maintain positive attitudes toward school and the class. All these 
things, they said, should be thought of as influence techniques, to be used instead 
of threat and punishment to promote desirable behavior. They also advised teach-
ers to involve students in setting class standards and deciding how misbehavior 
should be handled, both of which are now widely used practices.
shapinG behavior: what DiD b. f. skinner DisCover  
about helpinG stuDents learn  
anD ConDuCt themselves properly?
In the 1940s and early 1950s, Harvard behavioral psychologist Burrhus Frederic 
Skinner (1904–1990) was investigating how our voluntary actions are influenced 
by what happens to us immediately after we perform an act.
Skinner reported his conclusions in a number of publications, two of which 
were his book Science and Human Behavior (1953) and his article “The Science of 
Learning and the Art of Teaching” (1954). His findings convinced him that much 
if not most of our voluntary behavior is shaped by reinforcement (or lack thereof), 
which we receive immediately after performing an act. Simply put, when we per-
form an act and are reinforced immediately afterward, we become more likely to 
repeat that act or a similar one and even to try harder in the future.
For purposes here, reinforcement can be thought of as reward, although re-
ward is a term Skinner never used. The term he used was reinforcing stimulus. He 
learned that a stimulus (something the individual receives) can strengthen a par-
ticular behavior, but only if it is received very soon after that behavior occurs. In the 
57

The Development of Modern Discipline
1960s, teachers frequently used reinforcers such as candy, popcorn, and tangible 
objects, but that practice died out once teachers learned that students often worked 
mainly to get the reward, leaving unsatisfactory residual learning once the rewards 
were removed. Reinforcing stimuli now commonly used in classrooms include 
knowledge of results, peer approval, awards, free time, and teacher smiles, nods, 
and praise.
Constant reinforcement, given every time a student behaves as desired, helps 
new learning become established quickly. Intermittent reinforcement, given occasion-
ally, is sufficient to maintain desired behavior once it is established, whereas behav-
ior that is not reinforced tends to disappear over time.
Shaping behavior is accomplished through successive approximation, in 
which behavior is reinforced as it comes closer and closer to a pre-set goal. This 
process is helpful in building skills incrementally.
Although Skinner did not concern himself with classroom discipline per se, 
his discoveries affected it strongly. In the early 1960s, his followers organized his 
principles into the procedure called behavior modification, which became very 
popular in discipline and teaching. By the mid-1960s, many primary-grade teach-
ers were using behavior modification as their entire discipline system, rewarding 
students who behaved properly and ignoring those who misbehaved. (Skinner did 
not use punishment in shaping behavior. He considered its effects unreliable.)
But before many years passed, teachers abandoned behavior modification as a 
main approach to discipline, considering it akin to bribing students to get them to 
behave acceptably. Moreover, teachers found the process cumbersome to use and 
inefficient in teaching students what not to do. Teachers quickly realized it was far 
easier just to teach students how they should and should not behave.
That said, it is nevertheless true that teachers still use reinforcement tactics 
dozens of times every day, principally through praise and approval to motivate and 
support students.
the skinner model. When students conduct themselves acceptably, provide 
immediate reinforcement to increase repetition of good behavior and shape 
 behavior in desired directions. ■
ChoiCe theory: what DiD william Glasser say  
about ChoiCes anD failure?
William Glasser is unique among the authorities featured here, in that he was both 
a pioneer in the earlier movement toward modern discipline and, later, the con-
tributor of an exemplary approach in modern discipline. 
Glasser gained instant fame in educational circles with the publication of his 
blockbuster Schools Without Failure (1969). That was his second major book in four 
years and was later acclaimed as one of the most influential education books of the 
20th century.
58

The Development of Modern Discipline
Glasser was already widely known for his prior book, Reality Therapy: A New 
Approach to Psychiatry (1965). In that book, he urged psychotherapists to move their 
main focus away from probing into what had happened to troubled individuals 
in the past (the classical approach) and toward helping individuals resolve their 
 problems within the context of present reality.
Glasser, when counseling delinquent adolescents, found that they responded 
especially well to reality therapy. That experience led to a long career of writing 
about education, working with educators, and striving to apply his ideas in schools. 
Glasser believed a great many of our personal problems are due to unsatisfactory 
or nonexistent connections with people upon whom we depend. Reality therapy 
provides a means for troubled people to connect or reconnect with others impor-
tant in their lives, such as teachers. Glasser's suggestions for working effectively with 
students include:
■ Focus on the present. Don't waste time dwelling on the past, complaining, or 
discussing symptoms. Instead, focus on the here and now and seek ways to 
resolve problems.
■ Avoid criticizing and blaming. These are harmful external control behaviors that 
destroy relationships.
■ Remain nonjudgmental and noncoercive. Appraise everything in terms of the re-
sults. If actions are not providing the desired results, the old behaviors are not 
working. New ones are needed.
■ Don't get bogged down in excuses. Whether legitimate or not, excuses prevent 
one from making needed connections with others.
■ Put together specific workable plans for connecting with people important to you. Im-
plement the plans and evaluate your efforts and the results. Be ready to revise 
or reject plans if they do not work (The William Glasser Institute, 2009).
In addition to the principles of reality therapy, Glasser introduced three new ideas 
that gained educators' immediate attention:
 1. The Problem with Failure. Sense of failure is one of the most disheartening 
things that can happen to students. School should be organized to promote 
genuine success for all.
 2. The Power of Choice. Students choose to behave as they do. Nothing forces 
them to misbehave and no one can force them to learn. Teachers must recog-
nize that all they can do is influence students to make better choices in how 
they behave, which leads to greater success in school.
 3. The Value of Classroom Meetings. Classroom meetings are a superb vehicle for 
interacting with students and involving them in meaningful discussions.
Glasser also proposed an approach to discipline that emphasized rules of behavior 
linked to consequences for breaking them. Students, themselves, were to assume 
responsibility for proper behavior. When students misbehaved, they were asked 
in a friendly tone to state what they had done and to evaluate the effect their ac-
tions had on themselves, their classmates, and teacher. They were further asked 
to identify and commit themselves to subsequent behavior that would be more 
appropriate.
59

The Development of Modern Discipline
Glasser acknowledged that this process was a bit tedious. But he insisted that 
students who saw themselves as failures were not likely to improve unless they had 
ongoing supportive involvement with successful people, such as teachers, who pro-
vided positive influence and accepted no excuses for improper behavior.
the early Glasser model. (1) Involve students in reflecting on difficulties they 
encounter in school. (2) Have students suggest how they might help resolve the 
problems they face. (3) Ask them to take positive action by consciously choosing 
how they will behave in various circumstances. (4) Remove the notion of failure; 
judge students in terms of their positive efforts. ■
Commentary from anonymous teacher 1
From what I have seen in the past several years, I'd say most of the teach-
ers at my school pretty much follow Glasser's principles when interacting 
with students. However, I doubt that many of us, if any, credit those skills 
to Dr. Glasser. We have picked up on them somehow or another. Maybe 
they have become part of the climate of teaching. Anyhow, most of us have 
good rapport with our students, and best I can tell most of the students 
seem to have a feeling of connectedness with teachers.
Personally, I think Glasser's ideas are right on the mark. I, for one, find 
that using them makes my teaching days go more smoothly and leaves me 
with fewer behavior problems to deal with.
On the other hand, I don't see much evidence that teachers I know 
follow Glasser's suggestions in their personal lives. When we interact in-
formally among ourselves, mostly what we do is criticize, make excuses, 
and blame other people and other conditions for the difficulties we face. 
I'm guessing, too, that we teachers do not use the principles as we should 
when dealing with our family members. I wonder about that. I'm as guilty 
as anyone. What's going on here, when we certainly know better? I think 
our personal existence could be much improved if we would only make a 
conscious effort to employ the principles of reality therapy in our personal 
lives. That's my opinion, without anything scientific to back it up.
lesson manaGement: what DiD JaCob kounin DisCover 
about teaChinG style anD stuDent behavior?
In the late 1960s, Jacob Kounin, an educational psychologist at Wayne State Univer-
sity, conducted an extensive investigation into how highly effective teachers dealt 
with classroom misbehavior. But as reported in his 1971 book Discipline and Group 
Management in Classrooms, he didn't find much at first, as his research failed to un-
cover the information he was seeking.
And yet it remained evident that some teachers seemed to promote excel-
lent class behavior while others did not. Kounin analyzed his data again and this 
time made a surprising finding—that good discipline was not so much dependent 
on what teachers did when misbehavior occurred, but on how teachers presented 
60

The Development of Modern Discipline
lessons and dealt with various groups in the class. Their success came from what 
they did before misbehavior occurred, rather than from what they did to correct it 
after it occurred.
Specifically, Kounin noted that the more effective teachers managed their les-
sons so that students were kept alert, on task, and involved. He found that those 
teachers used identifiable procedures for gaining student attention and clarifying 
expectations. Of particular interest was what he called group alerting, where teach-
ers obtained students' full attention before giving directions or making explana-
tions. Then, during lessons, the teachers maintained student accountability by 
calling on students from time to time to respond, demonstrate, or explain.
Kounin also found that teachers of well-behaved classes displayed a constant 
awareness of what all students were doing in the classroom at all times. He used 
the term withitness to refer to such awareness. Teachers with higher levels of withit-
ness were able to monitor and interact with students doing independent work even 
while those teachers were presenting lessons to smaller groups. Kounin used the 
term overlapping to refer to teachers attending to two or more classroom events si-
multaneously. He concluded it was one of the most important of all teaching skills.
Other important qualities Kounin discovered included lesson momentum—
referring to a forward movement of the lesson, with no confusion or dead spots; 
smoothness, meaning a steady progression in the lesson without abrupt stops and 
starts; and satiation, meaning students getting their fill of a particular topic or activ-
ity and becoming bored or frustrated, causing them to disengage from the lesson.
The connection Kounin identified between teaching and student behavior led 
to a new line of thought concerning how teaching style affects student behavior. 
Most systems of discipline now place heavy emphasis on that connection.
the kounin model. Know what is going on in all parts of the classroom at all 
times. Learn to attend to multiple issues simultaneously. Carefully organize and 
conduct interesting lessons that (1) move forward smoothly without dead spots 
or abrupt changes, (2) hold students accountable for attention and participation, 
and (3) stop before reaching students' point of satiation. ■
ConGruent CommuniCation: what DiD haim Ginott teaCh 
us about CommuniCatinG with stuDents?
In the same year that Kounin published his work, another small book appeared 
that had immediate and lasting influence on teaching. The book was Haim Ginott's 
Teacher and Child (1971), in which Ginott explained the critical role of commu-
nication in teaching and discipline. One of Ginott's main contentions was that 
learning and behavior are greatly influenced by the way teachers talk with students. 
His teachings had enormous effect in establishing the personal, caring tone that 
prevails in discipline today. 
Ginott, a classroom teacher early in his career, later held professorships in 
psychology at Adelphi University and New York University Graduate School. He 
61

The Development of Modern Discipline
also served as UNESCO consultant in Israel, was resident psychologist on NBC's 
Today, and wrote a weekly syndicated column entitled “Between Us” that dealt with 
interpersonal communication.
In Teacher and Child, Ginott reminds us that learning always takes place in the 
“present tense” and is intensely personal to students. He said teachers must not pre-
judge students and must remember that each learner is an individual who requires 
much personal attention.
Ginott coined several terms to help convey his messages about communica-
tion. Those terms included congruent communication, meaning communication 
that is harmonious with students' feelings about situations and themselves; sane 
messages, which address situations rather than the students' character or past behav-
ior; teachers at their best, as when they use congruent communication and do not 
preach, moralize, impose guilt, or demand promises, but instead confer dignity 
on their students by treating them as social equals; and teachers at their worst, as 
when they label students, belittle them, and denigrate their character.
Effective teachers also invite cooperation from their students by describing 
the situation when a problem occurs and indicating what needs to be done. They 
do not dictate to students or boss them around—acts that demean students and 
provoke resistance. Above all, teachers have a hidden asset on which they can al-
ways rely, which is to ask themselves, “How can I be most helpful to my students 
right now?”
Ginott had a great deal to say about praise as well, and his contentions came 
as a surprise to most teachers. He insisted that evaluative praise is worse than no 
praise at all and should never be used. An example of evaluative praise is “Good 
boy for raising your hand.” Instead of evaluative praise, which comments on stu-
dent character, teachers should use appreciative praise, which comments on effort 
or improvement (e.g., “Thank you for remembering to raise your hand.”)
With regard to correcting inappropriate behavior, Ginott advised simply teach-
ing students how to behave properly, instead of reprimanding them when they 
misbehave. He urged teachers to avoid asking why questions when discussing be-
havior, such as, “Why did you do that to Thomas?” Why questions make students 
feel guilty and defensive.
Ginott acknowledged that his suggestions do not produce instantaneous re-
sults. They have to be used repeatedly over time for their power to take effect. 
Ginott said that misbehavior can be squelched, but genuine discipline (meaning 
self-discipline) rarely occurs instantaneously. Rather, it develops as a series of small 
steps that lead to genuine changes in student attitude. He placed great emphasis on 
the teacher's role in the overall process:
As a teacher I have come to the frightening conclusion that I am the decisive ele-
ment in the classroom. It is my personal approach that creates the climate. It is my 
daily mood that makes the weather. As a teacher I possess tremendous power to 
make a child's life miserable or joyous. I can be a tool of torture or an instrument 
of inspiration. I can humiliate or humor, hurt or heal. In all situations it is my 
response that decides whether a crisis will be escalated or de-escalated, and a child 
humanized or dehumanized. (1971, p. 13)
62

The Development of Modern Discipline
the Ginott model. Use congruent communication and sane messages when 
helping students with their behavior. Sincerely confer dignity on students and 
invite them to cooperate with you. Use appreciative praise and avoid tactics 
students might see as punishment. ■
neeDs anD DemoCratiC teaChinG: what were  
ruDolf Dreikurs's Contentions about stuDent neeDs  
anD the best way to teaCh?
In 1972 (the year he died), psychiatrist Rudolf Dreikurs put forth two ideas that 
were new to discipline. The first was that students—indeed all humans—have a 
powerful inborn need for belonging. He believed that when students in school 
are unable to satisfy this prime need (the genuine goal of their behavior) they 
turn by default to certain mistaken goals such as attention-seeking, power-seeking, 
revenge-seeking, and withdrawal.
Dreikurs's second major idea was that learning occurs best in democratic 
classrooms that emphasize active student involvement, promote a sense of be-
longing, and foster self-discipline. He characterized democratic classrooms as those 
where students participate in class decision making and are treated as social equals 
by their teachers.
Dreikurs (1897–1972) was born in Vienna, Austria, and died in Chicago, 
 Illinois. After receiving his medical degree, he entered into a long association with 
renowned Austrian psychiatrist Alfred Adler. Dreikurs immigrated to the United 
States in 1937 and became director of the Alfred Adler Institute in Chicago and 
professor of psychiatry at the Chicago Medical School. His involvement in child 
and family counseling prompted his interest in discipline practices in families and 
schools.
Dreikurs said the best way for teachers to deal with misbehavior is to identify 
and address the mistaken goal it reflects and discuss with students, in a friendly 
and nonthreatening manner, the faulty logic in that goal. Dreikurs suggested calmly 
asking, “Do you need me to pay more attention to you?” or “Could it be that you 
want to show that I can't make you do the assignment?”
Dreikurs also has much to say about the nature and importance of demo-
cratic classrooms. In such classrooms, teachers help students develop self-control 
based on social interest, which includes showing responsibility to oneself as 
well as to and for members of the group in matters of work, friendship, and 
self-significance. Students gain self-control as they become able to show initia-
tive, make reasonable decisions, and assume responsibility in ways that benefit 
themselves and others.
Dreikurs contrasted democratic classrooms with autocratic classrooms and 
permissive classrooms as follows: In autocratic classrooms, the teacher makes all 
decisions and imposes them on students, which does nothing to help students 
show personal initiative and accept responsibility. In permissive classrooms, the 
teacher overlooks students' failure to comply with rules or conduct themselves 
63

The Development of Modern Discipline
humanely, which suggests the teacher accepts those behaviors. In democratic class-
rooms, teachers are seen to do the following:
■ Always speak in positive terms, never negative.
■ Encourage students to strive for improvement, not perfection.
■ Emphasize students' strengths while minimizing their weaknesses.
■ Help students learn from mistakes, which are valuable elements in the learn-
ing process.
■ Encourage independence and responsibility.
■ Show faith in students; offer them help in overcoming obstacles.
■ Encourage students to help each other.
■ Show pride in student work; display and share it with others.
■ Be optimistic and enthusiastic—a positive outlook is contagious.
■ Use encouraging remarks such as, “You have improved.” “Can I help you?” 
“What did you learn from that mistake?” (Dreikurs & Cassel, 1995 [originally 
published in 1972], pp. 51–54)
the Dreikurs model. Help all students meet their need for belonging in the 
class. When they misbehave by pursuing mistaken goals, discuss the fallacy in a 
nonthreatening manner. Strive to maintain a democratic classroom that empha-
sizes group well-being. Such classrooms provide the best venue for promoting 
sense of belonging and helping students make positive choices and exercise 
responsibility. ■
takinG CharGe: how DiD lee anD marlene Canter aDvise 
teaChers to establish Control in their Classrooms?
In 1976, Lee and Marlene Canter, both classroom teachers, published a book en-
titled Assertive Discipline: A Take-Charge Approach for Today's Educator. In that book, 
they introduced a discipline approach called assertive discipline, which took 
 education by storm and for the next 20 years was far and away the most popular 
 discipline system in American schools.
As the title of their book suggests, the Canter approach urged teachers to “take 
charge” in the classroom and showed them how to do so—just what teachers were 
looking for at a time when permissiveness throughout society was fostering student 
behavior that made teaching ever more difficult. The Canters provided a simple 
but well-structured plan that enabled teachers to interact with students in a calm, 
insistent, and consistent manner. In the rationale for their plan, the Canters insisted 
that students had a right to learn in a calm, orderly classroom, and teachers had a 
right to teach without being interrupted by misbehavior.
Assertive discipline prompts students to make positive behavior choices. Its 
approach requires the following:
 1. A clear set of rules for class behavior.
 2. Positive consequences such as recognition and praise applied intermittently 
when students comply with the rules.
64

The Development of Modern Discipline
the Canter model. Establish five or six rules for class behavior. Make a list of 
positive consequences you will apply when students comply with rules. Make a 
list of negative consequences you will apply when students break the rules. Or-
ganize the negative consequences from less severe to more severe. As students 
continue to break rules, apply more severe consequences until the misbehavior 
ceases. ■
 3. Negative consequences applied consistently when students break the rules. 
The negative consequences are organized into a hierarchy that becomes pro-
gressively more unpleasant if students continued to break rules. Misbehav-
ior ends when teachers apply a consequence that is distasteful enough that 
students would choose to comply with class rules rather than endure the 
consequence.
The Canters wanted all teachers to function as assertive teachers, who clearly, con-
fidently, and consistently model and express class expectations, build trust, and 
teach students how to behave appropriately.
Assertive discipline was enthusiastically accepted at first, but gradually over 
time it began receiving criticism for being overly controlling. To address that 
complaint, the Canters added provisions for talking helpfully with students and 
working to establish mutual trust and respect. After some 20 years of dominance, 
assertive discipline as a major discipline strategy faded away, but vestiges of it are 
still seen in classrooms everywhere.
the Cooperative approaCh: how Does linDa albert  
aDvise teaChers to work with stuDents?
Linda Albert, author and disseminator of Cooperative Discipline (1989/1996), is a 
counselor, syndicated columnist, university professor, and former classroom teacher 
who works nationally and internationally with educators and parents. She has au-
thored regular columns in Working Mother and Family magazines and has made 
featured appearances on NBC's Today, CBS's This Morning, and CNN's Cable News.
Albert's main focus is on helping teachers and students cooperate with each other 
in a manner that removes most of the adversarial relationship that so often exists be-
tween teacher and student. Albert believes cooperation occurs more easily when stu-
dents truly feel they have an important place in the class. To make sure students gain 
that feeling, she gives heavy attention to what she calls the Three C’s—helping all stu-
dents feel capable, connect with others, and make contributions to the class and others.
To increase student sense of capability, Albert advises teachers to consider the 
following:
 1. Make mistakes okay. The fear of making mistakes undermines students' sense 
of capability, and when they are fearful, many stop trying. To minimize this 
fear, Albert asks teachers to talk with students about what mistakes are, help 
them understand that everyone makes mistakes, and show students that mis-
takes are a natural part of learning.
65

The Development of Modern Discipline
 2. Build confidence. In order to feel capable, students must have confidence that 
success is possible. To help students gain this confidence, teachers should con-
vey that learning is a process of improvement, not an end product.
 3. Make progress tangible. Teachers should provide tangible evidence of student 
progress. Grades are ineffective because they tell little about specific accom-
plishments. Albert suggests using devices such as accomplishment albums and 
portfolios along with talks about specific progress students have made and 
improvements they will make in the future.
 4. Recognize achievement. Albert believes that sense of capability increases when 
students receive attention for what they've accomplished. She suggests that 
teachers have class members acknowledge each other's accomplishments, rec-
ognize students at awards assemblies, set up exhibits, and make presentations 
for other classes and parents.
Albert also feels it is essential that all students connect, meaning they establish 
and maintain positive relationships with peers and teachers. As students make these 
connections, they become more cooperative and helpful with each other and more re-
ceptive to teachers. Albert would have teachers facilitate making connections by prac-
ticing the Five A’s—acceptance, attention, appreciation, affirmation, and affection.
The third “C” refers to contributing. Students who do not feel accepted or 
needed often see school as purposeless. Albert suggests that one of the best ways 
to help students feel they are needed is to make it possible for them to contribute. 
Some of her suggestions are:
 1. Encourage student contributions in the class. Ask students to state their opinions 
and preferences about class requirements, routines, and other matters. Stu-
dents can also furnish ideas about improving the classroom environment.
 2. Encourage student contributions to the school. Albert suggests creating Three C 
Committees whose purpose is to think of ways to help all students feel more 
capable, connected, and contributing. Teachers and administrators can assign 
school service time, in which students perform such tasks as dusting shelves, 
beautifying classrooms, and cleaning the grounds, all of which help build a 
sense of pride in the school.
 3. Encourage student contributions to the community. Albert suggests:
■ Adopting a health care center and providing services such as reading, sing-
ing, and running errands for residents of the center.
■ Contributing to community drives such Meals on Wheels, Toys for Tots, 
and disaster relief funds.
■ Encouraging random acts of kindness, such as opening doors for people 
and providing help with their packages.
the albert model. The key to good classroom behavior lies in close coopera-
tion between teacher and students. Help students grow in the Three C's: per-
sonal capability, connections with others, and contributions to school and society. 
Continually show students—and ask them to show each other—the Five A's of 
acceptance, attention, appreciation, affirmation, and affection. ■
66

The Development of Modern Discipline
positivity anD humaneness: how Do Jane nelsen  
anD lynn lott help teaChers brinG those Qualities  
into the Classroom?
Jane Nelsen (top) and Lynn Lott are educators who disseminate their views on 
discipline through lectures, workshops, printed material, and video material. Their 
goal is to help adults and children learn to respect themselves and others, behave 
responsibly, and contribute to the betterment of the groups of which they are mem-
bers. Their book Positive Discipline in the Classroom (2000 [originally published in 
1993]) explains how to establish classroom climates that foster responsibility, 
mutual respect, and cooperation. They believe such climates do away with most 
discipline problems because they teach students to value respect and helpfulness. 
Nelsen and Lott have authored a number of books and teaching materials that can 
be previewed on the Positive Discipline website at www.positivediscipline.com and 
on the Empowering People website at www.empoweringpeople.com.
Nelsen and Lott assert that teachers foster positive discipline when they establish 
classroom climates of acceptance, encouragement, respectfulness, and support. Such 
classrooms enable students to behave with dignity, self-control, and concern for others. 
Nelsen and Lott contend that virtually all students can learn to behave in that manner.
The key lies in helping students see themselves as capable, significant, and able 
to control their own lives. These qualities are best promoted in classrooms where 
students are treated respectfully and taught the skills needed for working with oth-
ers. In such classrooms, students (1) never experience humiliation when they fail, 
but instead learn how to turn mistakes into successes; (2) learn how to cooperate 
with teachers and fellow students to find joint solutions to problems; and (3) are 
provided an environment of firmness, kindness, and excitement for life and learn-
ing. Such environments reflect dignity and mutual respect, thereby replacing fear, 
discouragement, and feelings of inadequacy.
Nelsen and Lott especially emphasize the value of classroom meetings as ven-
ues for developing social skills of listening, taking turns, hearing different points 
of view, negotiating, communicating, helping one another, and taking responsibil-
ity for one's own behavior. When teachers involve themselves as partners in class 
meetings, a climate of mutual respect develops. Teachers and students listen to one 
another, take each other seriously, and work together to solve problems for the 
benefit of all. Antagonisms often seen in most classrooms tend to fade away.
nelsen and lott's significant seven
Nelsen and Lott identified three perceptions and four skills that contribute to the 
special benefits of Positive Discipline in the Classroom. They call these perceptions and 
skills the Significant Seven, which they describe as follows.
The Three Empowering Perceptions
Within a positive environment, students develop three perceptions about them-
selves that lead to success in life. Those three perceptions are:
 1. Perception of personal capability. (I have ability; I can do this.)
 2. Perception of significance in primary relationships. (I am needed; I belong.)
67

The Development of Modern Discipline
 3. Perception of personal power to influence one's own life. (I have control over 
how I respond to what happens to me.)
The Four Essential Skills
In their approach, Nelsen and Lott strive to help students develop four essential 
skills that contribute significantly to success in life:
 1. Intrapersonal skill. (I understand my emotions and can control myself.)
 2. Interpersonal skill. (I can communicate, cooperate, and work well with others.)
 3. Strategic skill. (I am flexible, adaptable, and responsible.)
 4. Judgmental skill. (I can use my wisdom to evaluate situations.)
the nelsen and lott model of Discipline. Make sure the tone of your classroom 
is accepting, encouraging, respectful, and supportive. Discuss the  Significant 
Seven with students and incorporate them into daily practice. ■
inner DisCipline: what Does barbara Coloroso say  
about helpinG stuDents aCCept responsibility  
anD maintain self-Control?
Barbara Coloroso believes that a major goal of education is to teach students to 
conduct themselves in a socially acceptable manner. She wants students to develop 
an inner sense of responsibility and self-control, and she thinks the school must 
help them do so. Responsibility and self-control enable students to take positive 
charge of their lives while respecting the rights of those around them. This process 
can be made to occur when students are given responsibility for making decisions 
and for managing the outcomes of those decisions.
Classrooms are ideal places to learn this process, and teachers are in an 
ideal position to help. The paragraphs that follow present Coloroso's suggestions 
for helping students in this manner. Most of the material presented here comes 
from her book, Kids Are Worth It: Giving Your Child the Gift of Inner Discipline 
(1994/2002). To see more of Coloroso's contributions, consult her website at 
www.kidsareworthit.com.
Teachers help students learn self-control by taking the following steps when 
students misbehave:
 1. Show students what they have done wrong.
 2. Give students ownership of the problems involved.
 3. When necessary, guide them to strategies that might solve the problems.
 4. Make sure students' dignity remains intact.
These steps help students acquire integrity, wisdom, compassion, and mercy, all of 
which contribute to inner discipline.
Teachers must make sure they never speak hurtfully to students or provoke anger, 
resentment, or additional conflict. When misbehavior is sufficiently serious, Coloroso 
would have teachers quickly guide students through a process of restitution, resolution, 
68

The Development of Modern Discipline
and reconciliation. Restitution means doing what is necessary to repair whatever dam-
age was done. Resolution means identifying and correcting whatever caused the mis-
behavior so it won't happen again. Reconciliation establishes healing relationships 
with people who were hurt or offended by the misbehavior. The offending student is 
asked to make decisions concerning future behavior, follow up accordingly, and then 
learn from the results of those decisions, even if they bring discomfort.
The teacher intervenes in student decisions only when they are physically dan-
gerous, morally threatening, or unhealthy. Otherwise, students deal with matters 
on their own.
You give students ownership of discipline problems when you ask them, “What 
do you intend to do about the situation?” That causes them to realize it is up to 
them to make matters better. Teachers are there to offer advice and support, but not 
to provide solutions. Inner discipline is acquired through learning how to think, not 
just what to think. The following are additional points that Coloroso emphasizes:
■ Students have the right to be in school, but they also have the responsibility 
to respect the rights of those around them. Rights and responsibility go hand 
in hand.
■ Teachers should never treat students in ways they, the teachers, would not want 
to be treated.
■ Rather than rescuing students or lecturing them when they misbehave, give 
students opportunities to solve their problems in ways that everyone finds 
acceptable.
■ Students who consistently experience realistic consequences for misbehavior 
learn that they themselves have positive control over their lives. In contrast, 
students who are bribed, rewarded, and punished become dependent on oth-
ers for approval. They work to please the teacher and try to figure out how to 
avoid getting caught when they misbehave.
the Coloroso model. Place heavy emphasis on helping students develop re-
sponsibility and self-control. When students misbehave, you should (1) have them 
state clearly what they have done wrong; (2) give them ownership of the problem 
by asking, “How will you fix the problem?”; (3) suggest options for resolution if 
the student needs them; (4) hold the student responsible for following through. ■
Commentary from anonymous teacher 2
Here is something I recently learned about making assumptions. I decide 
on students' seating assignments through the year, but promise that when 
June arrives I will allow them to sit with special friends to work on projects 
we have planned. I enjoy their happy reactions when I unveil my carefully 
considered final seating chart.
A while back, Monica, upon learning where she was to sit, slammed 
her backpack down on the table and vulgarly exclaimed, “I am not sit-
ting here with that (bleep)!” She was referring to Chloe, who stood with a 
69

The Development of Modern Discipline
stricken look on her face. It caught me off guard because I knew Monica 
and Chloe often referred to themselves as “BFFs” (best friends forever).
Celina quickly whispered to me, “Chloe stole Monica's boyfriend.” I 
then took a new tack and said to the class, “Let's sit down calmly for a mo-
ment and I'll pass out half-sheets of paper. Will you please list classmates 
you would like to sit next to, and also any you might have a conflict with? By 
tomorrow I will have a seating chart ready that should work better for us.”
Just a comment, too, on a different matter: Cleaning up after art proj-
ects used to be unpleasant for all of us. I was prone to say, “Oh, what a 
mess! We only have 2 minutes to get it cleaned up! We've got to leave 
this place spotless, right now!” It was not a good way to end a pleasant 
experience.
Somehow I learned it was much better to say, “Your projects look 
great! I love seeing what you come up with. Now it's cleanup time! Let's see 
how fast we can get the room back to normal. Anybody want to vacuum up 
the glitter? Can somebody help me gather the glue sticks and scissors?” 
I invariably have a couple of students who grew up watching Barney start 
singing, “Cleanup, cleanup, Everybody, everywhere...” I guess this is an 
example of a “builder” approach that shows respect for students. It works 
far better than my admonitions ever did.
learninG Communities: how Does alfie kohn suGGest we 
involve stuDents more Closely in Genuine learninG?
Alfie Kohn has been deeply troubled by teaching that tries to force students to be-
have compliantly. He often begins his workshops for teachers by asking, “What are 
your long-term goals for the students you work with? What would you like them to 
be—to be like—long after they've left you?” (Kohn, 1996/2001, p. 60).
When you ask most teachers, they say they want their students to be caring, 
happy, responsible, curious, and creative. Unfortunately, says Kohn, there is a yawn-
ing chasm between what we teachers want and what we are doing to get it. We say 
we want children to continue reading and thinking after school has ended, yet we 
focus on testing and grading, which does little to make students want to learn. 
We want students to be critical thinkers, yet we feed them predigested facts and 
conclusions—partly because of pressure from various constituencies to pump up 
standardized test scores. We act as though our goal is short-term retention of right 
answers rather than genuine understanding (Kohn, 1996/2001).
Kohn, a former teacher, is now a full-time writer and lecturer with a number 
of influential books to his credit. He is critical of many of today's educational 
practices and is the foremost proponent of converting ordinary classrooms into 
caring, supportive communities of learners, where students work together as they 
delve into topics that capture their attention. He stresses these views in his ad-
dresses, workshops, appearances on radio and television programs, and books 
such as Punished by Rewards: The Trouble with Gold Stars, Incentive Plans, A's, Praise, 
70

The Development of Modern Discipline
and Other Bribes (1993/1999) and Beyond Discipline: From Compliance to Community 
(1996/2001). He speaks at major conferences and has appeared on well over 200 
radio and television programs, including Oprah and Today. His website is www.
alfiekohn.org.
Kohn thinks traditional instruction—the type in which the teacher selects the 
curriculum; does the planning; delivers the lessons through lecture, demonstration, 
guided discussion, reading assignments, worksheets, and homework; and then uses 
tests to evaluate progress—is falling disastrously short of the expectations we hold 
for education.
That kind of instruction is aimed at getting students to demonstrate behav-
iorally certain specific objectives, usually on tests. But it gives little attention to 
exploring ideas, seeking new solutions, looking for meaning or connections, or 
attempting to gain deeper understanding of the phenomena involved.
In the style of instruction most commonly used today, students remain rela-
tively passive most of the time. They listen, read assignments, answer questions 
when called on, and complete worksheets, all with little give and take. Instruction 
and learning are deemed successful in the extent to which students show on tests 
they have reached the stated objectives. But this approach, says Kohn (1999), makes 
students focus on outcomes that are shallow, relatively insignificant, and of little 
interest or relevance to them. Students come to think of correct answers and good 
grades as the major goals of learning. They rarely experience the satisfaction of ex-
ploring interesting topics in depth and exchanging views and insights with others.
Kohn goes on to say that students taught in this way often develop poor at-
titudes toward learning. To them, learning is not an exciting exploration, but just a 
way of getting the work done. Once they have done the “stuff,” they quickly forget 
much of it as they move on to learn more new stuff. They strive to get the right 
answers, and when they do not, or if they don't make top scores on the test, they 
experience a sense of failure that is out of place in genuine learning, where making 
mistakes is the rule. And even when students seem to be learning well, they may 
actually be doing poorly because they are not thinking widely and exploring ideas 
thoughtfully.
Kohn argues for instruction that is different from the traditional. He says, first, 
that students must be taken seriously, meaning teachers must honor them as in-
dividuals and seek to determine what they need and enjoy. Further, teachers must 
recognize that students construct their knowledge and skills from a basis of experi-
ence. When students explore, grapple with ideas, and try to make sense of them, 
they make many mistakes, but mistakes are always part of learning. Teachers in that 
approach facilitate learning by seeking out students' interests and finding what lies 
behind their questions and mistakes.
Kohn (1996/2001) says the kind of schooling he would like to see is best pro-
moted by transforming schools and classrooms into learning communities, mean-
ing places in which students feel cared about and are encouraged to care about each 
other. There they experience a sense of being valued and respected; they matter to 
one another and to the teacher. They come to think in the plural. They feel con-
nected to each other; they are part of an “us.” And, as a result of all this, they feel 
safe in their classes, not only physically but emotionally.
71

The Development of Modern Discipline
Kohn suggests the following as ways to develop a greater sense of community 
in schools and classrooms:
■ Show respect for students. Students behave more respectfully when important 
adults in their lives behave respectfully toward them. They are more likely to 
care about others if they know they are cared about.
■ Help students connect with each other. Connections among students are estab-
lished and enhanced through activities that involve interdependence. Familiar 
activities for enhancing connections include cooperative learning, getting-to-
know-you activities such as interviewing fellow students and introducing them 
to the class, and finding a partner to check opinions with on whatever is being 
discussed at the moment. Kohn also suggests using activities that promote per-
spective taking, in which students try to see situations from another person's 
point of view.
■ Use classroom meetings. Kohn says the overall best activity for involving the 
entire group is the class meeting. He suggests holding class meetings at the 
beginning of the year to discuss matters such as, “What makes school awful 
sometimes? Try to remember an experience during a previous year when you 
hated school, when you felt bad about yourself, or about everyone else, and 
you couldn't wait for it to be over. What was going on when you were feeling 
that way? How was the class set up?” Kohn says not enough teachers use this 
practice, particularly in elementary schools, where an aggressively sunny out-
look prevails.
■ Provide classwide and schoolwide activities. To develop a sense of community, 
students need many opportunities for the whole class or the whole school to 
collaborate on group endeavors. This might involve producing a class mural, 
producing a class newsletter or magazine, staging a performance, taking care 
of the school grounds, or doing some community service.
■ Reflect on academic instruction. In class meetings, talk about how the next unit 
in history might be approached, or what the students thought was best and 
worst about the math test. Academic study pursued in cooperative groups en-
ables students to make connections while learning from each other, and units 
of study in language arts and literature can be organized to promote reflection 
on helpfulness, fairness, and compassion.
the kohn model. Think of your students as serious learners who construct 
knowledge from a variety of experiences. Organize the class into a community of 
learners, interconnected and concerned with each other. Use classroom meetings 
to address concerns about instructional matters and personal behavior. ■
what you have learneD in this Chapter
In this chapter, we covered the following:
■ How discipline changed during the second half of the 20th century.
■ How Redl and Wattenberg launched the change with their work in group 
dynamics.
72

The Development of Modern Discipline
■ How Skinner contributed to the change with his principles of reinforcement.
■ How Glasser used reality therapy to help students make better choices.
■ What Kounin discovered about lesson management and its effects on student 
behavior.
■ Ginott's techniques to help teachers communicate more effectively with 
students.
■ Dreikurs's contentions about “belonging” and democratic teaching.
■ The Canters' tactics for helping teachers take charge in the classroom.
■ Albert's suggestions for helping teachers and students cooperate more closely.
■ Nelsen and Lott's efforts to make discipline more humane and positive.
■ Coloroso's prescriptions for helping students develop inner discipline and 
responsibility.
■ Alfie Kohn's suggestions for involving students more deeply in meaningful 
learning.
ac t i vi ti e s
Self-Test: True/False
1. Fritz Redl and William Wattenberg were concerned 
primarily with the types of communication that 
occur between teachers and students.
2. B. F. Skinner did not concern himself with class-
room discipline per se.
3. William Glasser believed that failure had relatively 
little effect on students' motivation to achieve in 
school.
4. Jacob Kounin made discoveries about how lesson 
management affected student behavior.
5. Haim Ginott's term congruent communication refers 
to teachers' efforts to speak with students at their 
level of intellectual development.
6. Rudolf Dreikurs believed that the prime motive for 
student behavior in classrooms is students' need to 
feel they “belong.”
7. Lee and Marlene Canter referred to their system of 
discipline as a “take-charge” approach.
8. Barbara Coloroso is noted for being one of the 
foremost advocates of behavior modification to 
shape student behavior.
9. Linda Albert, Jane Nelsen, and Lynn Lott worked 
to make classrooms more humane and positive.
10. Alfie Kohn exerted considerable influence in help-
ing schools use standardized testing as a means of 
establishing accountability.
Self-Test: Multiple Choice
 1. The term group dynamics refers mainly to
(a) individuals in groups.
(b) forces in groups.
(c) peer pressure in groups.
(d) leaders in groups.
 2. In this chapter, “behavior shaping” was depicted as 
resulting from
(a) reinforcement.
(b) group dynamics.
(c) choice theory.
(d) lesson management.
 3. Which of the following focused his or her research 
on investigations into lesson management?
(a) Coloroso
(b) Albert
(c) Ginott
(d) Kounin
 4. Language described as brief and to the point is 
called _____ language.
(a) congruent
(b) laconic
(c) positive
(d) assertive
73

The Development of Modern Discipline
 5. Strong advocates of “cooperative discipline” 
 include which of the following?
(a) Linda Albert
(b) Rudolf Dreikurs
(c) Lee and Marlene Canter
(d) Jane Nelsen and Lynn Lott
 6. Which of the following authorities wrote about 
moving education away from compliance and to-
ward community?
(a) Kounin
(b) Kohn
(c) Canter
(d) Coloroso
 7. The only authority discussed in this chapter to 
write about students' prime need was
(a) Kounin.
(b) Ginott.
(c) Coloroso.
(d) Dreikurs.
 8. Which of the following husband-and-wife teams 
was featured in this chapter?
(a) Harry and Rosemary Wong
(b) Eddie Singer and Elsie Canter
(c) Rudolf Dreikurs and Pearl Cassel
(d) Sam Abbot and Louise Costello
 9. Which of the following authorities featured in this 
chapter made both pioneering and modern contri-
butions to discipline?
(a) Glasser
(b) Kounin
(c) Dreikurs
(d) Ginott
 10. Which of the following authorities championed 
the notion of “inner discipline”?
(a) Canter
(b) Coloroso
(c) Redl and Wattenberg
(d) Skinner
Self-Test: Explain This
 1. What was the single most important change in dis-
cipline that occurred between 1951 and 2001?
 2. Which ideas (if any) of the authorities featured in 
this chapter are now considered to be invalid?
 3. Define the following terms, and note who ad-
vocated each of them: congruent communica-
tion; reinforcement; choice theory; overlapping; 
group dynamics; prime need; assertive discipline; 
democratic teaching; inner discipline; learning 
communities.
Additional Suggested Activities
 1. In your journal, enter items of information from 
this chapter that you might wish to include in your 
personal system of discipline.
 2. In small groups, discuss your appraisal of the rela-
tive merits of the various contributions presented 
in this chapter and rank them in terms of their ap-
plicability in classrooms today.
G l ossary
Accountability: Showing responsibility is discharging ex-
pected tasks.
Appreciative praise (Ginott): Praise that expresses grati-
tude or admiration for effort.
Assertive teachers (Canter & Canter): Teachers who 
clearly, confidently, and consistently reiterate class 
 expectations and attempt to build trust with students.
Autocratic classrooms (Dreikurs): Classrooms in which 
the teacher makes all decisions and imposes them 
upon students.
Behavior modification (Skinner’s followers): The use of 
Skinnerian principles of reinforcement to control or 
shape behavior.
Belonging (Dreikurs; Glasser; others): A basic  human 
need for legitimate membership in groups, with 
attendant security and comfort. For Dreikurs, the 
primary need that motivates social behavior in 
school.
Conferring dignity (Ginott; Curwin & Mendler; others): 
Showing respect for students by putting aside their past 
74

The Development of Modern Discipline
history, treating them considerately, and being con-
cerned only with the present situation.
Democratic classrooms (Dreikurs): Classrooms in which 
teachers give students responsibility and involve them 
in making decisions.
Evaluative praise (Ginott): Praise that expresses judgment 
about students’ character or quality of work. Consid-
ered to be detrimental by Ginott and various other 
authorities.
Five A’s (Albert): Acceptance, attention, appreciation, 
 affirmation, and affection. Used for establishing and 
strengthening interpersonal connections.
Four essential skills (Nelson & Lott): 1. Intrapersonal. 
(I understand my emotions and can control myself.) 
2. interpersonal. (I can communicate, cooperate, and 
work well with others.) 3. Strategic. (I am flexible, 
adaptable, and responsible.) 4. Judgmental. (I can use 
my wisdom to evaluate situations.)
Genuine discipline (Ginott and others): Personal 
self-discipline.
Genuine goal of class behavior (Dreikurs): Belonging—
a fundamental desire to acquire a sense of place and 
value in a group.
Group alerting (Kounin): Quickly getting students’ atten-
tion to advise them of what they should be doing or 
do next.
Group behavior (Redl & Wattenberg): Behavior occurring 
in groups that is different from the ways individuals 
typically behave—more conforming in some ways, 
combined with more risk-taking.
Group dynamics (Redl & Wattenberg): Psychological 
forces that occur within groups and influence the be-
havior of group members.
Hidden asset, the teacher’s (Ginott): Sincerely asking 
 students, “How can I help you?”
Influence techniques (Redl & Wattenberg; others): Help-
ing students behave properly by providing attention 
and support, rather than punishment.
Inviting cooperation (Ginott): Encouraging and enticing 
students into activities and giving them choices, rather 
than demanding their participation.
Learning communities (Kohn): See communities, 
classroom.
Mistaken goals (Dreikurs): Goals of attention, power, 
 revenge, and avoidance of failure that students seek in 
the mistaken belief they will bring positive recognition 
and sense of belonging.
Momentum (Kounin): Refers to teachers’ getting activities 
started promptly, keeping them moving ahead, and 
bringing them to efficient transition or closure.
Overlapping (Kounin): Refers to teachers’ attending to 
two or more issues in the classroom at the same time.
Ownership of behavior problem (Coloroso; Ford): 
 Students taking responsibility for their improper 
actions in advance of working out appropriate 
solutions.
Permissive classrooms (Dreikurs): Classrooms in which 
teachers overlook students’ failure to comply with rules, 
which suggests teacher acceptance of misbehavior.
Perspective taking (Kohn): Doing one’s best to see and 
understand a situation from another person’s point of 
view.
Reconciliation (Coloroso): A human relations skill in 
which individuals who have been in a dispute take 
steps to resolve and smooth over their differences.
Reinforcing stimuli (Skinner): Stimuli received by an 
 organism immediately following a behavior that in-
crease the likelihood the behavior will be repeated.
Resolution (Coloroso): Identifying and correcting what-
ever caused a behavior problem—one of the follow-up 
steps in dealing with misbehavior.
Restitution (Gossen; Coloroso): Repairing or replacing 
damage done when one behaves irresponsibly—one of 
the steps in resolving the problem.
Right to learn (Canter & Canter): The contention that stu-
dents have a right to learn in classrooms that are safe 
and free from threat.
Right to teach (Canter & Canter): The contention that 
teachers have a right to teach in classrooms that are 
free from disruptions, with backing from administra-
tors and caregivers.
Satiation (Kounin): Getting all one can tolerate of a 
given activity, resulting in frustration, boredom, or 
listlessness.
Sense of community (Kohn): A condition in classrooms 
where students feel safe and are continually brought 
into making judgments, expressing their opinions, 
and working cooperatively toward solutions that affect 
themselves and the class.
Shaping behavior (Skinner): The process of using rein-
forcement to produce desired behavior in students.
Significant seven (Nelsen & Lott): Within a positive 
classroom environment, students develop three 
 empowering perceptions about themselves: (1) per-
sonal capability, (2) significance in primary relation-
ships, (3) personal power. They develop four essential 
skills: (1) intrapersonal, (2) interpersonal, (3) strategic, 
(4) judgmental.
75

The Development of Modern Discipline
Smoothness (Kounin): Absence of abrupt changes or 
 interruptions by the teacher that interfere with stu-
dents’ activities or thought processes.
Social interest (Dreikurs): The concept that one’s personal 
well-being is dependent on the well-being of the group. 
This encourages individuals to behave in ways that ben-
efit the group.
Student roles (Redl & Wattenberg): Roles students assume 
in the classroom, such as instigator, clown, leader, and 
scapegoat.
Successive approximations (Skinner): Behavior that, 
through reinforcement, moves progressively closer to 
the desired goal.
Teacher roles (Redl & Wattenberg): Various roles stu-
dents expect teachers to play, such as surrogate parent, 
 arbitrator, disciplinarian, and moral authority.
Teachers at their worst (Ginott): Teachers, when they 
name-call, label students, ask rhetorical why questions, 
give long moralistic lectures, and make caustic remarks 
to their students.
Three C’s (Albert): To help students feel that they have 
an important place in class; focus on helping students 
(1) feel capable, (2) connect with others, (3) make con-
tributions to class and to others.
Three perceptions (Nelson & Lott) 1. Perception of per-
sonal capability. (I have ability; I can do this.) 2. Percep-
tion of significance in primary relationships. (I am needed; 
I belong.) 3. Perception of personal power to influence 
one’s own life. (I have control over how I respond to 
what happens to me.)
Withitness (Kounin): The teacher’s knowing what is going 
on in all parts of the classroom at all times.
r efer e n Ce s
Dreikurs, R., & Cassel, P. (1995). Discipline without tears. New 
York: Penguin-NAL. (Originally published in 1972.)
Kohn, A. (1993/1999). Punished by rewards: The trouble 
with gold stars, incentive plans, A’s, praise, and other bribes. 
 Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Kohn, A. (1999). The schools our children deserve: Moving 
beyond traditional classrooms and “tougher standards.” 
Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Kohn, A. (1996/2001). Beyond discipline: From compliance 
to community. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Merrill/Prentice 
Hall. [1996 edition—Alexandria, VA: Association for 
Supervision and Curriculum Development.]
76

Ron Morrish on Organizing and 
Presenting a Basic Discipline Plan
From Chapter 4 of Building Classroom Discipline, Eleventh Edition. C. M. Charles. Copyright © 2014 by  Pearson 
Education, Inc. All rights reserved.
77

Ron Morrish on Organizing and 
Presenting a Basic Discipline Plan
Ron Morrish on Organizing and 
Presenting a Basic Discipline Plan
What Does Ronald Morrish Include in a System of 
Discipline, and How Does He Present It to Students?
Ronald Morrish says we have to teach students how to behave properly because 
many of them do not learn how to do so at home. Our ultimate goal is for students 
to develop self-control, but that only happens over time, and almost never without 
the help of supportive adults. Unfortunately, supportive adults are missing from 
many students’ lives today. We teachers are in an ideal position to offer that sup-
port, and it is our duty to do so.
Morrish’s approach to discipline is straightforward, sensible, and easy to teach 
and learn. It consists of four main components: (1) rules of behavior; (2) compliance 
training, in which students are taught how to comply with expectations; (3) a few 
carefully chosen things you will do and say when students break rules; and (4) when 
students are old enough, a provision for allowing and helping them to make 
choices in a responsible manner.
As for rules of behavior, Morrish says teachers, not students, should make 
them. He believes it a major mistake for teachers to involve students in making 
rules before students have sufficient maturity and wisdom to do so.
Once teachers have established clear rules (about five will usually do), they 
should teach them carefully to students, emphasizing what the rules mean and 
why they are needed. After that, students must be taught why and how they 
are to comply with the rules. This is done over time and involves compliance 
 training, in which you begin by helping students understand the difference be-
tween right and wrong behavior in general. From that point, you move to teach-
ing the difference between right and wrong behavior in school. You teach these 
concepts through explanation, examples, demonstration, and guided practice. 
The compliance training process not only clarifies expectations, but also pro-
motes students’ acceptance of your authority. When those two understandings 
become established, students  usually follow class rules consistently without 
hesitation.
78

Ron Morrish on Organizing and Presenting a Basic Discipline Plan
Although rules and compliance training will prevent most problems,  Morrish 
acknowledges that students will still misbehave at times. When that happens, 
you must be able to redirect student misbehavior in positive directions, in a 
manner that leaves no residue of resentment. How is that best done? Simple, 
says Morrish. You make sure students understand that when they break a rule, 
you will ask them to redo the behavior in question, in a correct manner. Insist on 
that, he says, and you will get acceptable behavior from your students almost all 
of the time.
Finally, after compliance has been well established, you should teach students 
how to manage choice, provided they are sufficiently mature to do so. That final 
step will enable them to develop genuine self-discipline.
Components of Morrish’s Approach. (1) Teacher-made rules; (2) compliance 
training; (3) redo misbehavior correctly; and (4) later, make choices.  ■
Who Is RonAld MoRRIsh?
Ron Morrish, an independent consultant in discipline, was for many years a teacher 
and behavior specialist in Canada. He now writes, makes conference presenta-
tions, conducts professional development programs, presents courses for teachers, 
and works with parent groups and child care providers around the world. He has 
 authored three books. The first, Secrets of Discipline (1997), was also produced as 
a video. In that work, Morrish discusses 12 keys for raising responsible children 
without engaging in deal making, argumentation, or confrontations. His second 
book, With All Due Respect (2000), focuses on improving teachers’ discipline skills 
and building effective schoolwide discipline programs through a team approach. In 
2003, he published FlipTips, a mini-book of discipline tips and maxims excerpted 
from his books and presentations. To see Morrish’s own description of his program, 
called “Real Discipline,” consult his 2005 article “What Is Real Discipline?” posted 
on his website at www.realdiscipline.com.
WhAt QuestIons WIll thIs ChApteR AnsWeR foR Me?
■ What does Morrish believe is wrong with today’s discipline?
■ What does Morrish mean by “Real Discipline”?
■ What does Morrish say is needed for an effective system of discipline?
■ What are the four main components or phases in Morrish’s Real Discipline?
■ Why is it important to train students to comply with expectations?
■ Why is it important to teach students how to behave?
■ What does Morrish say about fostering student self-esteem?
■ What does Morrish suggest we do when students do not comply with  directions 
or expectations?
79

Ron Morrish on Organizing and Presenting a Basic Discipline Plan
WhAt Is the MoRRIsh Model of dIsCIplIne?
The Common Goal of All Approaches 
to Discipline Responsible, Civil Classroom  Behavior 
That Becomes Habitual and Lasts over Time
Responsible means paying attention, making a strong 
effort, and doing what is proper without being told.
Civil means respectful, polite, cordial, and well-mannered.
Ron Morrish’s Approach to Discipline
↓
Morrish’s Overarching Strategy
Teach students how to behave properly 
and insist they comply with directions.
↓
Morrish’s Principal Tactics
Use class rules of behavior.
Clearly afﬁ rm teacher authority.
Establish student compliance.
Teach more as a coach than as a boss.
Correct misbehavior by having students 
redo the behavior properly.
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
In MoRRIsh’s VIeW, hoW And Why hAs ModeRn dIsCIplIne 
Gone WRonG?
Morrish (2005) fully agrees with other authorities that discipline continues to be 
a major problem in schools, with students frequently trying to manipulate teach-
ers and refusing to cooperate fully. He assigns some of the blame to undesirable 
trends in society, such as “me-first” attitudes and a general disinclination to accept 
responsibility, but he also assigns much of it to bad advice teachers get in many of 
today’s popular systems of discipline.
All too often, he says, today’s authorities urge teachers to involve students 
in decision making before the students are mature enough to do so responsibly. 
Consequently, teachers waste large amounts of time negotiating and haggling with 
80

Ron Morrish on Organizing and Presenting a Basic Discipline Plan
students about behavior. Morrish says that for decades, experts have erroneously 
claimed that plentiful student choice leads to self-esteem, responsibility, and mo-
tivation to achieve. As those experts see it, the teacher’s role is to encourage good 
choices and discourage poor ones.
That approach has failed, Morrish contends, for three reasons. First, it does 
not demand proper behavior from students, but instead allows them, if they 
don’t mind the consequences, to choose to behave discourteously and irrespon-
sibly. Systems based on fear of consequences, he explains, cannot be effective 
unless students truly find the consequences intolerable, which is virtually never 
the case today.
Second, many discipline approaches do not adequately teach students how 
they are to behave in school.
And third, many approaches leave teachers stuck with bargaining and negoti-
ating endlessly, and often fruitlessly, to get students to cooperate.
Morrish contends that if discipline is to be effective, a different approach is 
required—one in which students are taught what is acceptable and what is unac-
ceptable before they are given latitude to make choices. Otherwise, he says, they 
are likely to choose whatever appeals to them at the time, and teachers will find it 
difficult to live with many of those choices.
Although all of us want students to be successful, the discipline approaches we 
use often allow students to underachieve, behave discourteously, engage in high-
risk behaviors, contribute little or nothing of value to the school environment, and 
use intimidation and violence in dealing with others. Clearly, says Morrish, such 
discipline is not producing the results we want.
WhAt Is the “ReAl dIsCIplIne” MoRRIsh AdVoCAtes?
Morrish calls his approach Real Discipline. He explains that it is not a new theory, 
but an organized set of techniques that great teachers and parents have used for 
generations in teaching children to be respectful, responsible, and cooperative. It 
emphasizes careful teacher guidance to ensure that children learn how to conduct 
themselves in an acceptable manner.
Morrish feels teachers have been sidetracked into focusing on what he calls 
“ behavior management” rather than real discipline. Both management and disci-
pline are needed, he says, but they are not one and the same. Behavior  management 
is about making the learning environment functional, keeping students on task, 
and minimizing disruptions. It attempts to deal with whatever behavior students 
bring to school. Although important in teaching, behavior management is not very 
effective in helping students learn to behave responsibly.
Real Discipline, on the other hand, explicitly teaches students how to behave 
properly. It requires them to show courtesy and consideration. It helps them de-
velop needed social skills and trains them to work within a structure of rules and 
limits. It does these things while protecting students from self-defeating mistakes 
they are otherwise likely to make. As Morrish (1997, p. 33) puts it:
Real Discipline is a lot more than simply giving choices to children and then 
 dealing with the aftermath. We have to teach them right and wrong. We have to 
81

Ron Morrish on Organizing and Presenting a Basic Discipline Plan
teach them to respect legitimate authority. We have to teach them the lessons that 
have been learned by others and by ourselves. Then, and only then, will we enjoy 
watching them develop into adults.
Morrish says these provisions are necessary because children, in their early years, 
are by no means wise and tolerant. They are frequently the opposite—impulsive 
and self-centered. If they are to develop into contributing members of society, 
they must learn to cooperate, behave responsibly, and show consideration for 
others.
Some young students are fortunate to have good caregivers and role models 
who teach them these things. But many children today are overly indulged and 
rarely called to account for their behavior. They remain self-centered and grow up 
concerned only with their own interests. They want things their way, they cooperate 
in school only when they feel like it, and they show little consideration for teachers 
and fellow students. For many, lack of effort, abusive language, and bullying are 
rules of the day.
Morrish says this condition has come about, at least in part, because the so-
ciety in which we live stresses individual rights and freedom, but has lost sight 
of the personal responsibility that must accompany rights and freedom. Without 
responsibility, rights and freedom mean little. Personal responsibility is too impor-
tant to leave to chance. Life requires us to live within certain constraints that limit 
individual freedom. We accept those constraints in exchange for life that is safer, 
more secure, and more orderly.
Morrish does believe students should be allowed to make choices and helped 
to make good ones, but only when they are sufficiently mature to do so intel-
ligently. Students do not innately know how to do so, nor can they do so early in 
their lives. They first have to develop respect for, and a degree of compliance with, 
authority.
WhICh MAxIMs help us undeRstAnd  
the nAtuRe of ReAl dIsCIplIne?
As noted, Morrish also published a small book called FlipTips (2003), which con-
tains comments and maxims from his various publications and presentations. They 
reflect the mindset that Morrish would like teachers to acquire. Here are a few of the 
tips that illustrate Morrish’s ideas on discipline. How would you explain, in your 
own words, what each of them means or suggests?
■ Discipline is a process, not an event.
■ Discipline is about giving students the structure they need for proper behavior, 
not the consequences they seem to deserve for misbehavior.
■ Discipline comes from the word disciple. It’s about teaching and learning, not 
scolding and punishing.
■ Discipline isn’t what you do when students misbehave. It’s what you do so 
they won’t.
■ Discipline isn’t about letting students make their own choices. It’s about 
 preparing them properly for the choices they will be making later.
82

Ron Morrish on Organizing and Presenting a Basic Discipline Plan
■ Don’t let students make choices that are not theirs to make.
■ Train students to comply with your directions. Compliance precedes coopera-
tion. If you bargain for compliance now, you’ll have to beg for it later.
■ Always work from more structure to less structure, not the other way around.
■ To prevent major behavior problems, deal with all minor behavior problems 
when they occur.
■ Students learn far more from being shown how to behave appropriately than 
from being punished.
■ The best time to teach a behavior is when it isn’t needed, so it will be there 
when it is needed. Today’s practice is tomorrow’s performance.
■ If you teach students to be part of the solution, they’re less likely to be part of 
the problem.
■ When dealing with adolescents, act more like a coach and less like a boss.
■ A single minute spent practicing courtesy has more impact than a 1-hour 
 lecture on the importance of it.
■ To stop fights, stop put-downs. Verbal hits usually precede physical hits.
■ Discipline should end with the correct behavior, not with a punishment.
■ Rapport is the magical ingredient that changes a student’s reluctance to be 
controlled into a willingness to be guided.
WhAt ARe the thRee pRoGRessIVe phAses thRouGh  
WhICh We should GuIde students?
Morrish explains that rather than approaching discipline from the perspective of 
choice, Real Discipline asks teachers to guide students through three progressive 
phases he calls training for compliance, teaching students how to behave, and managing 
student choice. Each of these three phases is aimed at a particular goal and involves 
the use of certain strategies, as explained in the following paragraphs.
phase 1: training for Compliance
Note: In a September 2012 memo to the author of this text, Mr. Morrish said some 
people react a bit negatively to the word “compliance.” He wants teachers to think 
of compliance as meaning “following directions,” which students must do if teach-
ing is to be effective. When explaining this point to teachers, Morrish uses driver 
training as an illustration, where it is clear that the driving instructor will be giving 
directions that the learner must follow. In the same way, teachers teach routine 
behaviors that students are to follow. Doing so consistently results in a classroom 
that runs smoothly.
Morrish strongly urges teachers to train their students to comply with rules, 
limits, and authority. Rules are descriptions of how students are to behave. An 
 example might be “Show courtesy and respect for others at all times.” Limits spec-
ify behavior that will not be allowed. An example would be, “No name-calling in 
this room.” Authority refers to power that has been assigned to certain individuals. 
By custom and law, teachers are given legitimate authority to control and direct 
 students in school, and they should use that power to set and maintain standards 
of conduct.
83

Ron Morrish on Organizing and Presenting a Basic Discipline Plan
Teachers’ first task is to train their students to accept authority and comply 
with it automatically. Compliance should be taught as a nonthinking activity. Non-
thinking activities are habits you don’t have to reflect on or make choices about, 
such as stopping at red lights or saying “thank you” when a person does something 
nice for you.
Begin by telling your students straightforwardly that one of your most impor-
tant jobs is to help each and every one of them be successful in school and life. 
Success comes from behaving in approved ways, with limits set on what people are 
allowed to do. He says he finds it astonishing that compliance receives virtually no 
attention in most approaches to discipline, even though compliance helps students 
learn to conduct themselves properly and at the same time provides the basis for 
later decision making.
Further explain to your students that in order to find success, they must learn 
to behave courteously, show self-control, and do what is expected of them to the 
best of their ability. Point out that as a professional teacher, you have been trained 
to help students accomplish those things, and that you have a clear plan for do-
ing so that will bring success for everyone in the class. Indicate that you will begin 
by training your students to pay attention, follow directions, and speak and act 
respectfully to others. Those things will be practiced until they occur automatically, 
without anyone having to think about them.
As you proceed, use direct instruction and close supervision to teach students 
exactly how you want them to behave. For example, if you want students to raise 
their hands before speaking, tell them what you expect and show them how to do 
it. Then have them practice it until it becomes habitual. When students make mis-
takes, show them again how to do the act properly and, again, practice it. Morrish 
says to start small, and you will see a general attitude of compliance grow out of 
many small acts of compliance.
Because compliance is so important, you should address all instances of mis-
behavior. Do not overlook small misbehaviors, as suggested in many discipline 
programs. If you do, you will soon be overwhelmed with explaining, negotiating, 
and tending to consequences. This overload will cause you to “pick your battles” 
and not “sweat the small stuff.” Thus, you might allow students to put their heads 
on their desks during opening routines, talk during announcements, throw their 
jackets in the corner instead of hanging them up, and wander around the room 
instead of getting ready to work.
Such minor misbehavior might seem unimportant, but it should never be 
overlooked. Poor habits easily expand into poor behavior overall. If you walk by 
students who are doing something wrong and you say nothing, they interpret that 
as meaning you don’t care, and the next thing you know they are engaged in dis-
ruptive behavior.
Don’t get the idea you can’t manage such behavior, but do understand that 
you can’t manage it by scolding and doling out consequences. Morrish repeats 
again and again that the most effective approach is to tell students what you want 
them to do and then insist they do it properly. When they do something wrong, 
have them do it right. That is how you establish good practices and habits in your 
classes. Students get the picture quickly.
84

Ron Morrish on Organizing and Presenting a Basic Discipline Plan
What Role Do Rules Play in Training for Compliance?
Just as we need rules for structure and predictability in everyday living, so do we 
need rules for classroom behavior. Teachers should make the rules. There is no 
need to ask students if they agree with them. Students are supposed to learn rules, 
not determine them. Teach students why we have rules and why they are made 
by people in positions of authority. Explain your rules to students and take their 
opinions into account, but don’t pretend they are helping decide what the class 
rules are to be.
Once you’ve established rules, you must commit to ensuring they are obeyed. 
Even after you’ve stated your rules, you really don’t have them unless you can en-
force them. Your enforcement should be consistent, even for misbehavior that 
seems incidental, such as carelessly dropping rubbish on the floor or talking dur-
ing quiet study time. As noted earlier, small infractions have a way of growing into 
large infractions.
Morrish says insistence is the best strategy for enforcing rules. Punishment is 
rarely if ever needed. You must be absolutely determined that students will do what 
you want them to, and you must be willing to persist until they do. You should 
develop the mindset that once you give an instruction, there is no question about 
students doing what you say.
Morrish does not suggest you give up punishment altogether, even though he 
points out that punishment does not encourage cooperation or responsibility and 
that it sometimes produces unwanted side effects. However, he maintains that pun-
ishment can do two things well. First, it can teach that “no means no,” a message 
that students need to learn quickly. Second, punishment can bring misbehavior to 
a stop when other tactics can’t.
Students usually enter Mrs. James’s class casually, talking and joking among 
themselves. Mrs. James doesn’t mind because she likes to use the first few min-
utes of class time to review her lesson plans and chat with individual students 
whose assignments have not been completed correctly.
What do you think Ron Morrish would say about her approach?
What do you think he would have her do differently, if anything?
?
What Role Do Limits Play in Training for Compliance?
Morrish uses the term rule to refer to what students should do (e.g., “Raise your 
hand before speaking”). He uses the term limit to refer to what students should not 
do (e.g., “Absolutely no bullying allowed”). Rules and limits are set and enforced by 
teachers, in accordance with established standards. Teachers do not negotiate them 
with students. Morrish says the first secret of good discipline is: Never give students 
a choice when it comes to limits.
You set limits in many ways, formally and informally. For example, you may 
work with students so they know that when they arrive in the classroom, they are 
to hang up their jackets and get ready for work immediately (these are rules). They 
also know they are not allowed to scuffle or swear (these are limits). You present 
85

Ron Morrish on Organizing and Presenting a Basic Discipline Plan
the rules and limits and have your students practice the behaviors. Students do not 
have any say in them. If they have questions about limits, you should select a time 
to explain the reasons behind them, but in no case are students allowed to ignore 
your directions. Your word is final.
Morrish laments that limits in today’s classrooms are so often compromised 
by bargaining between teacher and students. He says that the more teachers give 
special privileges in exchange for behaving properly, the more students are likely to 
misbehave. Bargaining simply does not produce the results teachers want.
Teachers expect that once the bargaining is done, students will assess the pos-
sible outcomes of their behavior choices and thus make good choices automati-
cally. However, things don’t work that way. The main result for students is not 
better choice making, but feeling that everything in the class is decided through 
bargaining. All that does is give students power in decisions they are ill-prepared 
to make.
What Role Does Teacher Authority Play in Training for Compliance?
Morrish insists we need to reestablish teacher authority in the classroom, and he 
reminds teachers that their authority is based in law, custom, and professionalism. 
The power of teacher authority comes from teachers’ knowing their responsibili-
ties, knowing why they are setting limits, and knowing what they expect students to 
learn. It is conveyed by tone of voice, choice of words, and the way teachers present 
themselves.
Teachers should clearly communicate what they expect of students and then 
accept nothing less. They should make clear that no negotiation is involved. They 
do this without threatening or raising their voices. They simply say, with confidence 
and authority, “This is what you must do. This is the job you are here for. Now let’s 
get on with it” (Morrish, 1997, p. 65).
If, in this process, students question your authority, tell them, “It is my job.” If 
they challenge your right to make demands, tell them, “It is my job.” Morrish says 
not to worry if your students don’t like some of the things you expect them to do. 
It is respect you need at this point, not appreciation. Appreciation will come later, 
provided respect comes first.
Morrish acknowledges that many teachers become uneasy when asked to train 
their students for compliance. They fear automatic compliance will make their stu-
dents passive, submissive, and unable to think for themselves. But as you have seen, 
Morrish disagrees, insisting that today’s discipline gives students too much freedom 
of choice, not too little. What we need, he says, is a balance, which is achieved 
through the three phases of Real Discipline. Now we move ahead to the next phase.
phase 2: teaching students how to Behave
The second phase in Real Discipline involves teaching students the skills, attitudes, 
and knowledge they need for cooperating, behaving properly, and assuming re-
sponsibility. When beginning this phase, you will have already established class 
rules and limits, which you will have taught through explanation, demonstration, 
practice, corrective feedback, and repetition. Students understand the need for rules 
and limits, and they will comply with them if they accept your authority.
86

Ron Morrish on Organizing and Presenting a Basic Discipline Plan
Now you begin to teach them how to be courteous, work and play together 
harmoniously, resolve conflicts, set personal goals, organize tasks, and manage 
time. Most teachers erroneously assume students will somehow learn those skills 
from experience. You can’t wait for experience to produce this desired result, even 
if it were capable of it. If you are to have order and acceptable behavior in your 
classes, you will have to prepare your students. The best way to teach what they 
need to know is through direct instruction and supervised practice.
Again, here is the basic operating principle you should follow: When students 
fail to comply with expectations, don’t scold or punish them. Simply have them 
redo the behavior in an acceptable manner. Do this as often as necessary. You can 
expect them to show improvement very quickly.
Now we proceed to the third phase.
phase 3: Managing student Choice
The third phase of Real Discipline is called choice management. It helps students 
move toward greater independence by gradually allowing them the opportunity 
to make more choices as they show they are able to handle them intelligently. At 
this point, a basic operating principle is that when students make choices, they 
must take into account the needs and rights of fellow students and school person-
nel. They also need to begin learning exactly who has the right, or duty, to make a 
particular choice. Teachers have to make certain choices. Students can be allowed 
to make others.
As a rule of thumb, if students don’t care about the outcome of a particular 
concern, they should not be allowed to make choices about it. Many teachers think 
students who do poor class work should receive low marks, which will motivate 
them to do better in the future. This may work for some highly motivated students, 
but it does nothing for those who don’t care and are perfectly willing to accept the 
low grades. If Alana indicates she doesn’t care about her performance in school, 
then you don’t let her make choices about it. You say to her, “That’s okay, Alana. 
I do care how well you do, so I’ll make the decisions for you. Someday, when you 
care how well you do, you can make your own choices” (Morrish, 1997, p. 101). 
If Alana turns in poor work, you say to her: “Alana, your work is disorganized and 
incomplete. I’m not accepting it. Take it back, please, and fix it up. I’ll mark it when 
it is done properly” (Morrish, 1997, p. 105).
You should never suggest that Alana can choose to do poor work if she wants 
to. Morrish says this is one area where we truly need to get back to basics, meaning 
we should expect students to do quality work and accept nothing less. Remember 
that the goal of Real Discipline is to help students become self-disciplined. You 
don’t promote self-discipline by allowing students to do whatever they please in-
stead of what is right.
In his book Secrets of Discipline: 12 Keys for Raising Responsible Children,  Morrish 
(1997, pp. 93–94) relates a classroom incident that epitomizes self-discipline. 
 Morrish was visiting a combination grade 2/3 class when the teacher told her stu-
dents she would be leaving the classroom for a few minutes. The students were 
to continue working quietly. She asked them, “What does this mean you need?” 
Hands were raised. A student answered, “Self-discipline.” The teacher continued, 
87

Ron Morrish on Organizing and Presenting a Basic Discipline Plan
“What does self-discipline mean?” Another student answered, “It means we behave 
when you’re not with us, exactly the same way we behave when you are standing 
right next to us.”
The teacher and Morrish both left the room but Morrish stopped in the hall-
way to watch the students from a distance. He observed that the students continued 
to work as if the teacher were in the room with them. Later he asked the teacher 
how she had accomplished that result. She said she had the class practice the skill 
from the first day. She would stand next to them and ask them to show their best 
behavior. Then she challenged them to continue behaving that way as she moved 
farther and farther away. Before long, the students had learned how to maintain 
their behavior when the teacher left the room.
As students become older and move toward independence, Real Discipline 
will have already taught them three things about making independent choices: 
(1) independence requires balancing personal rights with personal responsibil-
ity; (2) the rights and needs of others must always be taken into account; and 
(3)  students should look at every unsupervised situation as an opportunity to dem-
onstrate personal responsibility. Morrish reiterates that independence isn’t “doing 
your own thing”: It’s doing what’s right when you are on your own.
speCIfICAlly, WhAt does MoRRIsh AdVIse In ReGARd  
to plAnnInG And IMpleMentInG A Good dIsCIplIne pRoGRAM?
For discipline to be effective, teachers must plan proactively, meaning they an-
ticipate problems, keep them from occurring if possible, and prepare carefully for 
attending to problems that might occur. Morrish (2000) suggests teachers follow 
these 11 steps when organizing their discipline system:
 1. Decide in advance how you want your students to behave. Think through matters 
such as the following: How students will demonstrate courtesy, the words and 
tone of voice they will use, how they will speak to you, what other signs of 
courtesy they will show, how they will treat visitors, how they will welcome 
new students to the class, how they will listen to you and other students, 
how they will contribute to class discussions, how they will help substitute 
 teachers, what they will do when upset or when they disagree with you or oth-
ers, how they will respond to other students who need assistance, how they 
will deal with losing, how they will comply when you tell them what to do, 
how they will respond when you correct them, and how they will behave when 
you step out of the room.
 2. Design a supporting structure. When you have in mind how you want students 
to behave, design a structure that will support your goals. This structure will 
consist mostly of procedures you teach students to follow, such as how stu-
dents will enter and exit the room, what they will do if they arrive late, how 
they will handle completed work, how they will request assistance, what they 
should do about missed assignments, what they should do if they finish work 
early, what they should do if the teacher does not appear on time, how they 
will learn the class rules and enforcement procedures, and what the specific 
limits on behavior are.
88

Ron Morrish on Organizing and Presenting a Basic Discipline Plan
 3. Establish a threshold for behavior at school. You must not allow students to bring 
negative behaviors to the class from home and the community. You must cre-
ate a clear separation between school and outside school. Say to students, 
“You’re now at school. Remember how you behave when you are here.” Then 
enforce the courtesy and work habits required in your class.
 4. Run a 2-week training camp. Effective teachers work hard the first 2 weeks in 
establishing class expectations and procedures. They give particular attention 
to behavior standards, clear limits, routines, and compliance. Morrish main-
tains that the investment you make in discipline during these first 2 weeks 
determines how the rest of the school year will unfold. This does not suggest 
you overlook academic work, but in the early stages, academic work is of lower 
priority than proper behavior. As students acclimate to Real Discipline, aca-
demic work moves to highest priority.
 5. Teach students how to behave appropriately. Morrish believes students should be 
taught a number of skills necessary for school success, not only in the class-
room but also in school assemblies, on school buses, and in the school caf-
eteria. They should practice courtesy and be taught how to treat new students 
and be good role models for younger students. They should be taught how to 
help substitute teachers. They should be taught to recognize and suppress inci-
dents such as teasing and name-calling that escalate into conflicts in class. They 
should be taught always to take others into account, to help someone every day, 
and to acknowledge people who have helped them. And they should be taught 
to be good ambassadors for the class and school, displayed through behavior 
in public that brings credit to themselves, their school, and their families.
 6. Set the stage for quality instruction. Discipline cannot succeed in an environment 
where students must be coerced to endure boring, tedious lessons and activi-
ties. You must make your classes interesting and worthwhile. Ask   questions 
that force students to expand their thinking. Increase the amount of hands-on 
activities. Make use of group learning activities. Include activities based on 
sports, music, drama, and crafts. Ask students to make presentations to the 
class and to younger students. These approaches keep students interested and 
less likely to behave disruptively.
 7. Provide active, assertive supervision. Good discipline requires that you take cer-
tain steps to forestall misbehavior. Remind students of rules and expectations 
ahead of time. Remind them of limits that might apply. Be specific and don’t 
oververbalize. Govern and correct small misbehaviors. Reinforce good social 
skills when you see them. Move briskly around the classroom. Talk briefly with 
various students, provided it doesn’t interrupt their work. Let everyone see 
your presence. Move with a sense of purpose. Make eye contact with students.
 8. Enforce rules and expectations. Most teachers believe they should make students 
aware of unpleasant consequences that will be applied when students misbe-
have. They use the consequences as warnings. But neither warnings nor conse-
quences are very effective in getting students to conduct themselves properly. 
Success depends on the teacher’s ability to require good behavior. You must be 
willing to establish your natural authority and take charge of students. There is 
no game playing involved. Don’t allow them to decide whether or not to comply 
with rules. Don’t allow them to call you by your first name, talk back, run around 
89

Ron Morrish on Organizing and Presenting a Basic Discipline Plan
the room, or throw things at each other. Teachers worry that some students will 
confront them over expectations and rule enforcement they don’t like. You can 
limit that concern by addressing all small infractions such as discourteous lan-
guage or failure to clean up. When students learn to comply on small matters, 
they will continue to comply on larger matters. Meanwhile, connect with your 
students on a personal basis. Listen to them and take their concerns into account. 
Capitalize on their interests. Be understanding and supportive when a student is 
going through a hard time. Establish rapport, but combine it with insistence.
 9. Focus on prevention. Real Discipline goes to lengths to prevent misbehavior. 
Remember, discipline isn’t as much what you do when students misbehave 
as it is what you do in advance so they won’t misbehave. Use the suggestions 
presented earlier for making classes interesting and engaging. Emphasize civil 
behavior and do not allow verbal put-downs. Discuss potential behavior situ-
ations with students and devise ways of avoiding them.
 10. Set high standards. Don’t allow underachievement to be a student choice. You 
must make it clear you will not accept underachievement in any form, whether 
academic or social. When students do something inadequately or improperly, 
have them do it over again. Challenge your students and get them excited 
about improving everything they do in school.
 11. Treat caregivers as partners. Keep caregivers informed about serious incidents 
and repetitive misbehavior involving their child, but don’t worry them with 
minor matters—take care of those things yourself. When you need to com-
municate with caregivers, do so by email or by phone if possible. Don’t send 
notes. Suggest ways they might help the student do better in school, but never 
suggest punishment. Talk with caregivers, not down to them. Reassure them 
that you and they both want success for their child and that you want to work 
together with them to make that happen.
 
Commentary from Anonymous teacher 1
As I read Mr. Morrish’s suggestions, I was aware I already do some of the 
things he recommends and find them effective. For example, I do deal with 
minor problems when they occur in order to keep them from escalating 
into bigger problems. I endeavor to provide a good model for students 
concerning helping others, speaking to them in a kindly way, and avoiding 
saying things they might find personally hurtful. I often have them repeat 
their behavior properly when they misbehave. I also got some ideas from 
Mr. Morrish that I will begin using. My students are young (third grade) and 
I think I may have been involving them too much in giving input into the 
rules of behavior for the class. I think in reality my efforts have been more 
along the lines of leading them to suggest the kind of behavior I want to 
see from them in the first place. I think I might spend too much time on 
that. I like Morrish’s suggestion about my making rules for the class and 
then talking with students to help them see how those rules will help them 
be successful in class, stay safe from harm, get along better with other 
members of the class, and better enjoy their experience in school.
90

Ron Morrish on Organizing and Presenting a Basic Discipline Plan
I also became more aware of a few things I’d like to emphasize more 
with my students. For example, I will try spending more time teaching my 
students how to speak invitingly and encouragingly with each other dur-
ing cooperative work activities. I think that might increase participation by 
all members of the group. I think I will also teach them to make positive 
comments about each other and avoid put-downs in other class activities. 
I think I sometimes just tell my students what is expected of them while 
not actually teaching them how to do things properly or efficiently. Usually 
I get good cooperation from my students. I treat them nicely and show 
them personal attention, and I get the feeling they want to please me—not 
always, but at least most of the time.
hoW does one deVelop posItIVe RelAtIons WIth students?
No approach to discipline is going to accomplish what you hope unless you can 
establish and maintain good personal relations with your students. If students like 
you, they will want to please you and not disappoint you. They will be inclined to 
comply with your requests and will understand and accept that the rules you estab-
lish ensure security and proper treatment for everyone. Morrish offers a number of 
suggestions for strengthening relationships between you and your students:
■ Consistently focus on the positive. Look for things students do right. If they make 
a mistake, help them improve. No need to criticize.
■ Wipe the slate clean after students make behavior mistakes. Deal with the mistake 
in a positive manner and move on. Don’t hold grudges; they don’t help in any 
way. The important thing is what the student does next.
■ Don’t back away from discipline. Students sometimes don’t like having to obey 
rules or practice appropriate behavior. That doesn’t mean they don’t want dis-
cipline. They understand it is important. They expect it and interpret the effort 
you expend on it as a sign of concern for them. Later, they will remember you 
with appreciation.
■ Lead the way. Students learn more from watching you than from hearing what 
you say they should do. Model civilized behaviors and attitudes. Listen to 
students. Speak kindly to them. Be helpful and give credit when it is due.
■ Never humiliate students when correcting their misbehavior. Morrish says  teachers 
unintentionally humiliate students more than they imagine, as when they 
scold students in front of their friends or correct mistakes in an unpleasant 
manner. Whenever students need to be corrected, just make sure they know 
how to behave properly and then insist they do so.
■ Don’t accept mediocrity. Some teachers fail to set standards of learning and be-
havior, believing they need only to befriend students in order to obtain their 
cooperation. Standards are essential if students are to recognize success and 
maintain their determination to improve. If you willingly accept mediocrity, 
that is what you will get. Reasonable standards tell students you believe they 
are bright and sensitive enough to learn and behave properly.
91

Ron Morrish on Organizing and Presenting a Basic Discipline Plan
WhAt ABout ConseQuenCes foR MIsBehAVIoR?
Morrish believes students should face consequences when they misbehave. He 
maintains that consequences, when structured and applied correctly, are very help-
ful in discipline. But the consequences he advocates are not punishments. Instead, 
they involve teaching students to behave properly and then having them show 
they can do so. We have seen that Morrish’s favorite consequence is to have the 
student repeat the behavior in a correct manner. But he uses other consequences 
as well, and would have you explain to students why they are applied and how 
they help students conduct themselves more responsibly. Here are some conse-
quences he suggests you use when students push at boundaries or do something 
that hurts others:
■ Make an improvement plan. Have the student make a plan for handling 
the  situation better in the future. Keep track to ensure the student follows 
through.
■ Provide compensation. Have the student do something positive to make up for 
negative behavior. This might include making the offended person feel better 
or the school or classroom look better.
■ Write a letter. Have the offending student write a letter to the person who was 
offended, including a statement of commitment for better behavior in the 
future.
■ Teach younger children. Have the offending student write and illustrate a story 
about the incident to read to younger children, emphasizing what was done 
wrong and what was learned from the experience. (Morrish, 2000, p. 66)
WhAt ABout MotIVAtIon And ReWARds?
Many experts in discipline assert that we can’t make students do anything—that the 
best we can do is provide an environment and activities so appealing that  students 
will naturally work and otherwise conduct themselves appropriately. Morrish 
doesn’t entirely agree. He says we should certainly provide enticing learning op-
portunities, but it is ridiculous to believe we cannot make students do anything. 
The very purpose of discipline, he says, is to make students do what they don’t 
want to do. He points out that students ordinarily do not want to obey rules, don’t 
want to stay quiet, don’t want to do homework, don’t want to study for tests, and 
so forth. We use discipline to ensure that they set aside their natural desires and 
accept education’s plans for helping them succeed in life.
He goes on to say that good discipline teaches students how to persevere and 
work through activities that are not especially appealing. To the extent you can 
make instructional activities interesting, do so, and everyone will enjoy school 
more, including you. But when that is not possible, don’t shy away from teaching 
students what they need to know, even when lessons are tedious.
Morrish also advises teachers to forego praise and reward when students 
merely do what is expected of them. He says occasional rewards are fine, because 
they give special recognition when it is needed. But overall, rewards are vastly 
overused and students often see them as ends in themselves. Teachers have two 
92

Ron Morrish on Organizing and Presenting a Basic Discipline Plan
powerful natural rewards at their disposal, but they are not stickers, points, or spe-
cial privileges. They are what you always have with you—your personal attention 
and your approval.
Teachers these days typically dispense copious quantities of praise. Some of 
them really spread it on thick. But Morrish says we must be cautious about that, 
too. Beyond a certain point, praise actually reduces motivation and increases de-
pendency. Students develop healthier attitudes if teachers praise student work and 
behavior only when they truly merit recognition.
 Suppose Carmelo has defaced a bulletin board in the room.
What sort of consequence do you think Morrish would apply for that  behavior?
Suppose Carmelo helps Anthony resolve a personal problem with another 
student.
What sort of reward, if any, would Morrish suggest for that behavior?
?
WhAt does MoRRIsh sAy ABout fosteRInG self-esteeM?
Many educators believe low self-esteem is the root cause of antisocial behavior. 
Morrish sees the picture differently. He acknowledges that students who do poorly 
in school and get into trouble sometimes (but not always) have low self-esteem, 
whereas those who do well tend to have higher self-esteem. But self-esteem does 
not determine success or failure. It is the other way around, he says—success 
in school or lack thereof influences self-esteem. If you are competent and suc-
cessful, you usually think better about yourself than if you are incompetent and 
unsuccessful.
Morrish goes on to say that teachers who try to build student self-esteem di-
rectly may actually do more harm than good, especially if they never allow failure, 
never put pressure on students to excel, and permit students to express themselves 
freely without fear of rebuke. These things remove students from the helpful criti-
cism that normally follows misbehavior or lack of effort, and as a result, students 
become more self-indulgent. They gradually lose their sense of shame and begin to 
rationalize their misdeeds with explanations such as “I just felt like it” or “It made 
me feel good.”
Genuine self-esteem comes from increased competence in academic and so-
cial matters and the ability to overcome obstacles. If we teach students academic 
and social skills, and if we help them achieve the high expectations we hold of 
them, we will see them come to think well of themselves. Competence is the goal; 
it comes first, then self-esteem follows.
WhAt should you do When students fAIl to CoMply  
WIth youR dIReCtIons?
Occasionally a student may fail to comply with your directions or may, in the 
heat of the moment, display other inappropriate behavior. Suppose one of your 
 students has behaved discourteously toward you in class. Many teachers will 
93

Ron Morrish on Organizing and Presenting a Basic Discipline Plan
send the offending student to time-out for an indefinite period before allow-
ing him or her to rejoin the class. That does very little positive for the student. 
Instead of time-out or some other consequence, you should insist on a do-over. 
Have the student repeat the behavior in an acceptable manner. If a student 
speaks to you disrespectfully, tell him or her to start over and do it courteously 
this time.
The same procedure applies any time a student fails to follow directions or 
comply with class standards. Many teachers make the mistake of using if–then 
 statements, such as, “If you speak to me in that manner again, then you will be 
going to the principal’s office.” Teachers should not use such statements with mis-
behaving students. They should give students no choice in the matter. They should 
say, “We don’t speak that way in this class. Start over.” Most of the time, that is all 
you need to do.
Remember, your most important and powerful tool is insistence. You must 
convey to students they have no choice in the matter, other than to do as you 
direct. Morrish says that students who are never required to act appropriately 
seldom will.
If a student still refuses to do as you direct, repeat your instruction in a serious 
tone of voice. If that doesn’t work, use a mild punishment such as time-out to get 
across the message that you mean what you say. Then after a short time, bring the 
student back to do the task correctly. The discipline procedure does not end with 
the time-out. The student is still expected to show proper behavior, and only posi-
tive practice ensures that. As discussed previously, punishment is rarely necessary if 
you persistently help students behave properly.
Commentary from Anonymous teacher 2
Some of Dr. Morrish’s suggestions may sound like advice to parents, but 
the fact is I now usually have students in class who have not had the ben-
efit of decent parenting. Sometimes I need to help students with a “reality 
check” of how things work in the real world. This past year, for example, 
I was challenged by the following students. I have changed their names:
✓ Venus, whose family had disintegrated, leaving her in foster care, uncer-
tain and untrusting.
✓ Tristan, the only child of older parents, who hadn’t yet learned to take 
no for an answer.
✓ Josh, treated as a peer by his parents, felt entitled to question my every 
decision.
✓ Sammy, an excellent student and charming to adults, who wielded her 
cell phone as a saber, slicing and dicing her classmates with rumor and 
innuendo on various social networking sites.
✓ Dimitri, who studied me with the intensity of a profiler, figuring out my 
buttons and waiting for the optimal occasion to push them, purely for 
the sport of it.
94

Ron Morrish on Organizing and Presenting a Basic Discipline Plan
The truth is, students expect teachers to be in charge and keep order in 
the classroom, even though many don’t act like it. With a strong structure 
in place and a strong teacher in authority, students feel safer, more confi-
dent, and more secure. At least that’s what I believe. If you don’t assume 
leadership of your students and of your classroom, some of your students 
will step up to fill the void. Personally, I found the following suggestions 
from Dr. Morrish to be right on target:
✓ Don’t make rules you are not prepared to enforce.
✓ Plan interesting lessons and challenge students to achieve.
✓ Stay on your feet, stay on the move, and stay on top of things.
✓ Be patient, pleasant, persistent, and pragmatic.
✓ Cut down on the lecturing, preaching, and scolding, which students 
quickly tune out.
✓ Model your expectations and always try to show kindness, courtesy, 
respect, and appreciation in interactions with students.
WhAt you hAVe leARned In thIs ChApteR
This chapter explained and advocated the following:
■ Real Discipline is a process that leads to cooperation and responsible behavior. 
It takes time. There are no shortcuts.
■ From the beginning, communicate to your students that you are committed 
to providing a classroom in which they can learn easily, without threat or 
put-downs, and where everyone, teacher and students alike, courteously and 
willingly does the jobs expected of them.
■ Tell students about duties in the class—what your job is and what their job 
is. You might wish to explain that your job is to provide a quality learning 
environment, teach students the best you can, and treat everyone with respect 
and courtesy, while their job is to follow your directions, do the best they can 
to learn, and treat everyone with respect and courtesy.
■ Make it plain that you will steadfastly help students make the most of their 
opportunities to learn. Inform them why it is necessary they follow your di-
rections, every time. Show them how you will teach directions for simple ac-
tivities such as beginning work when entering the classroom and handing in 
homework or class assignments.
■ Project an image of friendly authority as you introduce the rules of behavior for 
the class. Discuss the rules thoroughly and make sure students understand how 
rules help everyone learn things they need to know in life. Tell the  students 
you will insist they follow the rules, but you will teach them how to do so and 
always help them. Follow through and have students practice proper behavior.
■ During the first days of school, ask in advance if students remember the rules 
for beginning work, have only school materials on their desks, and so forth.
95

Ron Morrish on Organizing and Presenting a Basic Discipline Plan
Ac tiv i ti e s
Self-Test: True/False
 1. Morrish’s Real Discipline invites students to play 
a strong part in formulating the rules of behavior 
that apply in the classroom.
 2. The best way to correct misbehavior is to require 
students to repeat the improper behavior in an ac-
ceptable manner.
 3. If you require students to comply with the class 
rules you establish, you will be asking for trouble 
later on when you expect them to make decisions 
for themselves.
 4. The best way to improve students’ self-concept is 
to help them succeed in challenging situations.
 5. “Limits” is synonymous with “rules,” in that both 
terms refer to what students are forbidden to do in 
the classroom.
 6. Teaching students to comply with teacher author-
ity is one of the best things you can do to help 
students be successful in school.
 7. Teachers should furnish evident rewards to stu-
dents almost every time students conduct them-
selves in accordance with class rules.
 8. When students misbehave, they should experi-
ence the consequences established for improper 
behavior.
 9. A very effective way to help students behave ap-
propriately is to teach them to follow procedures 
you have established for class activities.
 10. Strong emphasis should be placed on clarifying the 
teacher’s main roles and the students’ main roles in 
class and how those roles are to be carried out.
Self-Test: Multiple Choice
 1. Morrish believes you should teach younger stu-
dents to
(a) fend for themselves.
(b) accept responsibility.
(c) comply with teacher directions.
(d) work with a buddy.
 2. In Morrish’s view, Real Discipline
(a) encourages choice.
(b) focuses on management.
(c) teaches students how to behave.
(d) involves students in formulating class rules.
 3. In Morrish’s view, punishment
(a) should never be used.
(b) can do certain things well.
(c) has no role in Real Discipline.
(d) is the resort of the weak teacher.
 4. Students will usually try to please you if they
(a) aren’t afraid of you.
(b) fear you.
(c) like you.
(d) understand your role.
 5. Many outstanding authorities say you can’t make 
students do anything they don’t want to do. Morrish
(a) agrees.
(b) equivocates.
(c) disagrees.
(d) demurs.
 6. With regard to clarifying teachers’ and students’ 
jobs, Morrish says
(a) it’s a waste of time.
(b) you definitely should.
(c) don’t expect too much.
(d) use common sense.
 7. Morrish thinks discipline should teach students to
(a) become self-analytical.
(b) survive.
(c) relish the moment.
(d) persevere.
 8. When students break a rule, you should insist on
(a) a do-over.
(b) an appropriate apology.
(c) a clarification.
(d) self-restitution.
96

Ron Morrish on Organizing and Presenting a Basic Discipline Plan
 9. Morrish advises that when students do what is ex-
pected of them, you should
(a) give positive reinforcement.
(b) praise them.
(c) smile at them.
(d) skip the praise.
 10. As you introduce rules of behavior, you should 
project an image of friendly
(a) empathy.
(b) authority.
(c) concern.
(d) adversity.
Self-Test: Explain This
 1. Why does Morrish believe you must teach students 
to comply automatically with teacher directives?
 2. Why is Morrish opposed to allowing younger 
 students to make choices as to what they will do 
or how they will behave?
 3. What does Morrish mean when he says discipline 
is a process, not an event?
 4. What does Morrish believe about fostering student 
self-esteem?
 5. What does Morrish think you should do in order 
to get along well with students and entice them to 
follow your lead?
Additional Suggested Activities
 1. Make entries in your journal concerning ideas from 
Morrish’s Real Discipline that you might wish to 
include in your personal system of discipline.
 2. Refer back to the section “What Questions Will 
This Chapter Answer for Me?” at the beginning of 
this chapter. For each item listed there, test your-
self to see if you understand what Morrish was ad-
vising or teaching.
 3. Morrish makes some interesting contentions 
about the role of student choice in discipline. Out-
line your understanding of his points and indicate 
whether you agree with them or not, and why. Dis-
cuss your conclusions in class, if possible.
Con c e p t C a se s
CAse 1 Kristina Will not Work
Kristina, a student in Mr. Jake’s class, is quite docile. She socializes little with other students 
and never disrupts lessons. However, despite Mr. Jake’s best efforts, Kristina will not do her 
work. She rarely completes an assignment. She is simply there, putting forth no effort at 
all. What would Ronald Morrish suggest to help Kristina and Mr. Jake?
Morrish would have Mr. Jake remind Kristina of the class rule about everyone doing their 
best to learn. He would insist that Kristina begin her work and follow through. Mr. Jake might 
need to stand beside her to help her get started. He would not punish her, but would continue 
to press her to comply with the assignment. He might ask questions such as, “Do you know 
what you are supposed to do in this activity?” “Do you understand why it needs to be done?” 
“Can I count on you to do your part?” As Kristina improves, Mr. Jake might make comments to 
her such as, “You made a good effort today. I can see you are trying. Thank you for that.” If more 
intervention was required, Morrish would consider assigning Kristina to the school’s study hall 
or keeping her in the classroom for additional time (a productive extension of her day, rather 
than a punitive detention). He might also have her create a daily plan for accomplishing her 
schoolwork, involve her caregivers in the process, or assign an older student to mentor her.
97

Ron Morrish on Organizing and Presenting a Basic Discipline Plan
CAse 2 sara Will not stop talking
Sara is a pleasant girl who participates in class activities and does most, though not all, of 
her assigned work. She cannot seem to refrain from talking to classmates, however. Her 
teacher, Mr. Gonzales, has to speak to her repeatedly during lessons, to the point that he 
often becomes exasperated and loses his temper. What suggestions would Ronald Morrish give 
Mr. Gonzales for dealing with Sara?
CAse 3 Joshua Clowns and Intimidates
Joshua, larger and louder than his classmates, always wants to be the center of attention, 
which he accomplishes through a combination of clowning and intimidation. He makes wise 
remarks, talks back (smilingly) to the teacher, utters a variety of sound-effect noises such as 
automobile crashes and gunshots, and makes limitless sarcastic comments and put-downs of 
his classmates. Other students will not stand up to him, apparently fearing his size and verbal 
aggression. His teacher, Miss Pearl, has come to her wit’s end. Would Joshua’s behavior be likely 
to improve if Ronald Morrish’s techniques were used in Miss Pearl’s classroom? Explain.
CAse 4 tom Is hostile and defiant
Tom has appeared to be in his usual foul mood ever since arriving in class. On his way to 
sharpen his pencil, he bumps into Frank, who complains. Tom tells him loudly to shut 
up. Miss Baines, the teacher, says, “Tom, go back to your seat.” Tom wheels around, swears 
loudly, and says heatedly, “I’ll go when I’m _____ good and ready!” How would Ronald 
 Morrish have Miss Baines deal with Tom?
you Are  th e  te a c h e r
hIGh sChool BIoloGy
You teach an advanced placement class in biology to 
students from middle- to upper-income families. Most 
of the students have already made plans for attending 
college. When the students enter the classroom, they 
know they are to go to their assigned seats and write 
out answers to the questions of the day that you have 
written on the board. After that, you conduct discus-
sions on text material that you assigned students to 
read before coming to class. During the discussion, you 
call randomly on students to answer questions and re-
quire that they support their answers with reference to 
the assigned reading. Following that, students engage 
in lab activity for the remainder of the period.
A typICAl oCCuRRenCe
You have just begun a discussion about the process 
of photosynthesis. You ask Sarolyn what the word 
 photosynthesis means. She pushes her long hair aside 
and replies, “I don’t get it.” This is a comment you hear 
frequently from Sarolyn, even though she is an intel-
ligent girl. “What is it you don’t understand?” “None 
of it,” she says. You say, “Be more specific! I’ve only 
asked for the definition!” Sarolyn is not intimidated. 
“I mean, I don’t get any of it. I don’t understand why 
plants are green. Why aren’t they blue or some other 
color? Why don’t they grow on mercury? The book says 
plants make food. How? Do they make bread? That’s 
ridiculous.”
98

Ron Morrish on Organizing and Presenting a Basic Discipline Plan
You gaze at Sarolyn for a while, and she back at 
you. You ask, “Are you finished?” Sarolyn shrugs. “I 
guess so.” She hears some of the boys whistle under 
their breath; she obviously enjoys their attention. You 
say to her, “Sarolyn, I hope someday you will under-
stand that this is not a place for you to show off.” 
“I hope so, too,” Sarolyn says. “I know I should be more 
serious.” She stares out the window. For the remainder 
of the discussion, which you don’t handle as well as 
usual, you call only on students you know will give 
proper answers. Now that the discussion is completed, 
you begin to give instructions for the lab activity. You 
notice that Nick is turning the valve of the gas jet on 
and off. You say to Nick, “Mr. Contreras, would you 
please repeat our rule about the use of lab equipment?” 
Nick drops his head and mumbles something about 
waiting for directions. Sarolyn says calmly, “Knock it 
off, Nick. This is serious business.”
She smiles at you. After a moment, you complete 
your directions and tell the students to begin. You walk 
around the room, monitoring their work. You stand be-
hind lab partners Mei and Teresa, who are having a dif-
ficult time. You do not offer them help, believing that 
advanced placement students should be able to work 
things out for themselves. But as they blunder through the 
activity, you find yourself shaking your head in disbelief.
ConCeptuAlIzInG A stRAteGy
If you followed the suggestions of Ronald Morrish, 
what would you conclude or do with regard to the 
following?
■ Pinpointing the problems in your class
■ Preventing the problems from occurring in the first 
place
■ Putting an immediate end to the misbehavior
■ Maintaining student dignity and good personal 
relations
■ Using the situation to help the students develop a 
sense of greater responsibility and self-control
G l ossa ry
Behavior management: Organized efforts to influence 
students to behave in particular ways.
Compliance training (Morrish): Efforts to cause students 
routinely to abide by teacher requests and  directions—
an important element in Morrish’s approach to 
discipline.
Do-over (Morrish): A tactic in which teachers ask students 
to repeat, in a correct manner, a behavior that has not 
been acceptable.
Insistence (Morrish): A discipline tactic teachers should 
use when students show reluctance to comply with 
directions.
Real Discipline (Morrish): An approach to discipline that 
makes use of teacher insistence and careful teaching of 
expectations and procedures.
Three phases of Real Discipline (Morrish): (1) Training 
for compliance, (2) teaching students how to behave, 
and (3) managing student choice.
R efe re n c e s
Morrish, R. (1997). Secrets of discipline: 12 keys for raising 
responsible children. Fonthill, Ontario, Canada: Wood-
stream Publishing.
Morrish, R. (2000). With all due respect: Keys for building 
effective school discipline. Fonthill, Ontario, Canada: 
Woodstream Publishing.
Morrish, R. (2003). FlipTips. Fonthill, Ontario, Canada: 
Woodstream Publishing.
Morrish, R. (2005). What is Real Discipline? Retrieved 
from http://www.realdiscipline.com
99

100

Craig Seganti on Taking Charge in the Classroom
From Chapter 5 of Building Classroom Discipline, Eleventh Edition. C. M. Charles. Copyright © 2014 by  Pearson 
Education, Inc. All rights reserved.
101

Today, most teachers reluctantly accept that their students will misbehave much of 
the time. They are more or less resigned to it. But Craig Seganti insists you should 
not settle for that, although it’s probably what you’ll get if you don’t immediately 
establish one understanding with your students—that you are in charge and are a 
professional who knows what you’re doing.
Who is Craig seganti?
For more than 20 years, Seganti was a teacher in inner-city Los Angeles schools, 
where he not only survived but flourished. He describes how he did so in his 2008 
book Classroom Discipline 101: How to Get Control of Any Classroom. He  believes the 
approach he developed will solve discipline issues for all teachers and will save the 
careers of many who’ve been beaten down by resistant, uncooperative students.
Mr. Seganti taught middle school and high school English and English as 
a second language (ESL) to students from many different backgrounds. He also 
taught juvenile offenders of both sexes in probation camps and interim schools 
for Los Angeles County. He now is devoted full time to disseminating his ideas on 
 discipline. Seganti describes his approach as reality based rather than theory based, 
and says his tactics work with students in the real world. He invites you to examine 
his approach thoroughly. It will, he says, free you to teach, free your students to 
learn in a positive environment without disruptions and turmoil, and bring you the 
overall success you always hoped for.
In this chapter, we explore Seganti’s main concepts and procedures. It is sug-
gested that you also review the short articles he has posted at http://ezinearticles 
.com/?expert=Craig_Seganti (Seganti, 2008b). Those articles include the following:
■ How to Get Any Student to Behave Well All of the Time
■ How to Avoid Useless Arguments with Students
■ Eliminating the Middle Man—the Myth of Giving Warnings
■ The Role of Accountability in Classroom Management
Craig Seganti on Taking 
Charge in the Classroom
Craig Seganti on Taking 
Charge in the Classroom
How Does Craig Seganti Establish Control, 
Especially When Students Are Hard to Manage?
102

Craig Seganti on Taking Charge in the Classroom
What Questions Will this Chapter ansWer for Me?
■ What does Seganti do when he first meets a new class?
■ What does Seganti mean by “stopping problems before they get into the 
classroom”?
■ What teacher attitude tends to promote the best student behavior in the 
classroom?
■ How does Seganti ensure that students will comply with class rules?
■ What does Seganti mean by teacher leverage and student accountability?
■ What rules or rule topics best promote student accountability in the classroom?
■ What sort of “leverage” ensures that students will conduct themselves 
responsibly?
■ How do leverage and accountability work together to promote learning and 
desirable behavior?
■ Which management efforts best enhance the classroom experience for stu-
dents and teacher?
the seganti Model of disCipline
The Common Goal of All Approaches 
to Discipline Responsible, Civil Classroom  Behavior 
That Becomes Habitual and Lasts over Time
Responsible means paying attention, making a strong 
effort, and doing what is proper without being told.
Civil means respectful, polite, cordial, and well-mannered.
The Craig Seganti Approach to Discipline
↓
Seganti’s Overarching Strategy
Establish and maintain a calm, orderly, 
and purposeful classroom environment.
↓
Seganti’s Principal Tactics
Establish detailed class rules for 
orderliness and efﬁ ciency.
Thoroughly teach students the rules 
and how to comply with them. 
Provide for leverage that ensures 
compliance with rules.
Strongly focus on academic learning.
Use an orderly, businesslike style of teaching, 
but make it enjoyable for students.
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
103

Craig Seganti on Taking Charge in the Classroom
What does seganti say about disCipline?
Here is a preview of some of Seganti’s main points of advice. We will examine them 
further throughout the chapter:
■ Adopt and share with students the attitude that your class is, first and fore-
most, for academic learning.
■ Emphasize that behavioral disruptions interfere with all students’ right to a 
good education.
■ Make it your first priority to teach all students to understand and comply with 
class rules of behavior. Then hold all students accountable for complying with 
those rules.
■ Establish “leverage” that ensures you can enforce the rules. (Seganti recom-
mends as very effective a 15-minute detention that misbehaving students must 
attend after school.)
In short, you can manage a productive class even for “difficult” students if you 
establish and clarify rules of behavior, teach the rules, and establish leverage that 
ensures student compliance with rules.
At first glance, Seganti’s approach may appear a bit harsh. But he maintains it 
works wonders in fostering respectful behavior and motivating effort to learn. He 
contends it is exactly what hard-to-manage students need, and that there is nothing 
better you can do for students than help them develop responsibility and gain a 
good education in a classroom that is focused on learning.
We now proceed to examine Seganti’s core ideas and suggestions, organized 
around four elements featured in his approach: teacher attitude, class rules for stu-
dent accountability, leverage for obtaining compliance, and management tactics 
that support desirable behavior. We will explore these elements in turn. If you wish 
to examine more deeply the nuances of Seganti’s approach and see how he makes 
his points, you can view his video and obtain his e-book and other materials on the 
Internet at www.classroomdiscipline101.com.
What attitude does seganti reCoMMend for teaChers?
Seganti says it is the teacher’s attitude toward discipline that ultimately affects 
how students behave, for better or worse. The attitude he recommends is conveyed 
to students via the following four messages, which are central and powerful and 
should be repeated as often as necessary:
■ Any student who disrupts the class is interfering with other students’ constitu-
tional right to a good public education.
■ We have separate roles in this class, which are equally important. My role: I am 
the expert, trained and experienced in how to teach and help you learn. I make 
the decisions about how to do those things. Your role: You are the students 
who are here to study under my guidance. Your job is to support our efforts 
and do your best to learn.
■ The classroom is for academic learning. I’ll make it as enjoyable as I can, but 
everything we do in class will be aimed at learning. Your duty is to focus and 
participate and learn. That is what I will always expect of you.
104

Craig Seganti on Taking Charge in the Classroom
■ I know you want to enjoy school and feel good about yourselves. I will 
help you do just that. But you need to understand that self-esteem doesn’t 
come from messing around in the classroom. It comes from doing hard 
work to acquire the knowledge and skills that will enable you to enjoy a 
good life.
Seganti suggests many principles for greatly improving teacher effectiveness. For 
example:
■ Rely on Actions. When dealing with students, make your points through ac-
tions, which speak far louder than words. It is worse than useless to spend 
time cajoling, arguing, and continually trying to justify your decisions to stu-
dents. Just make good rules and enforce them without fail. No explanations 
are needed. If you don’t enforce your rules, students will act as though your 
rules don’t exist.
■ Don’t Give Warnings. Giving students warnings is self-defeating and it wastes 
time. Students beyond first or second grade know when they are misbehaving, 
so there is no need to warn them about it or say you are thinking of doing 
something about it. You can spend your day (week, month, career) giving 
warnings instead of teaching. If you don’t want students to manipulate you, 
don’t give warnings. (Seganti does give students one warning, on the first day 
of class only, as we will see when we review his rules.)
■ Don’t Give Superfluous Rewards. Don’t spend time doling out rewards for learn-
ing. Learning is what students are supposed to do. Of course you want your 
students to enjoy your classes and you will help them do so, but their reward 
for doing the assigned work lies in seeing their abilities expand as part of a 
good education. Emphasize that principle and help students keep track of 
what they have learned. Recognition of genuine progress is the only reward 
that truly counts. If you try to motivate students with gimmicks, pep talks, and 
tangible rewards, you send a poor message about education—that it is of so 
little value you need to bribe students to endure it. If students ask you what 
the reward will be for behaving properly, tell them the reward will be a good 
education, which is priceless.
■ Provide for Enjoyment. All the while, you must do what you can to make the 
class enjoyable for students. Provide numerous fun activities. Treat students 
with kindness and consideration. Give them personal attention. Be helpful. 
Celebrate learning and show there can and should be some fun and enjoy-
ment in the classroom.
■ Speak Effectively. Learn how to talk effectively with students. (The suggestions 
presented here have to do with teaching information and proper behavior. If 
you were counseling students or commiserating with them, you would speak in 
a different manner.) Look at the following exchange as an example of what not 
to do:
Teacher: Stop talking, Johnny.
Johnny: I wasn’t talking.
Teacher: You were talking—I just saw you talking to Henry.
Johnny: Well, Jason was talking. He was doing it first.
(and so forth, on and on)
105

Craig Seganti on Taking Charge in the Classroom
Seganti comments, “What’s your strategy here? Are you going to stand there 
 arguing with Johnny about whether or not he was talking? That only perpetuates 
the problem.” The following shows how Seganti would interact with Johnny:
Teacher: There is no talking in my class, Johnny—stay after school 15 minutes 
today for detention.
Johnny: But I wasn’t talking!
Teacher: Show up for detention. If you don’t want another 15 minutes, stop 
disrupting now.
rules: hoW do they proMote student aCCountability?
Seganti insists on holding students accountable for their behavior. There should be 
no getting around it. Class rules of behavior provide the specifics of accountability. 
You, the teacher, must establish effective rules and make sure students understand 
them clearly. Compose the rules yourself, before you see your students, and make 
copies to hand out. Every possible behavior that concerns your class, positive or 
negative, should be addressed somewhere in the rules. You are the professional and 
you know how students should behave. Don’t waste time asking students to help 
you decide what the rules should be.
Right away when students arrive at your door for the first day of class, teach 
them the rules for your class and exactly what those rules mean. This is to be done 
so no misunderstanding is possible. The students’ first assignment in class is to copy 
the rules neatly, sign their copy, and hand it in. From that point onward, students 
are held accountable for their actions in class. They can no longer claim they didn’t 
know the rules. If they try that ploy, have them once again copy the rules, sign the 
copy, and give it to you.
The following are rule topics Seganti advocates. The first two are given in 
 Seganti’s words. After that, additional topics for rules are presented with brief sug-
gestions. In Seganti’s book Classroom Discipline 101 (Seganti, 2008a), you can find 
his exact wording for his 11 rules and the procedures he uses for teaching them to 
students.
seganti’s rule 1 and rule 2
Rule 1
You are to enter the classroom calmly and quietly and go immediately to your as-
signed seat. You are to sit at a 90-degree angle to your desk with your feet on the 
floor, showing good posture and a straight spine.
How to Teach Rule 1 to Students. Stand in the door on the first day and teach this 
rule to each student in turn. This procedure is immediately established as a rule, 
not an option. A student who enters the room improperly has defied a rule and 
is subject to the consequence you have established for violating rules (Seganti’s 
15-minute detention consequence will be explained later). Once all students are 
seated, explain this rule again to the class as a whole.
106

Craig Seganti on Taking Charge in the Classroom
Rule 2
Students are to show respect at all times and in all manners toward staff, others, 
and themselves. This includes all verbal and nonverbal forms of communication, 
including body language, facial expression, and tone of voice.
How to Teach Rule 2 to Students. When all students are in the room, read this 
rule once. Even in the wildest schools there is usually a window of time the 
first day when students are curious and will listen. Now, read it again, piece 
by piece.
This can become a good lesson on nonverbal communication. Tell the stu-
dents that most communication is nonverbal. Take your time here. Be a teacher—
give examples and demonstrate. Tell the students, “If I give you a direction and you 
roll your eyes, it is just as disrespectful as if you insult me verbally, and you will get 
detention.” Act it out—“Suppose I say: Jack, open your book to page 134.” Pretend 
to be Jack and roll your eyes. Explain again that eye rolling and other disrespectful 
actions are just as unacceptable as saying something rude and will be met with the 
same consequences.
additional topics seganti suggests for rules
Working on Task
This topic centers on clarifying when students should be on task, how they should 
be working, what they should do when they have completed their assigned work, 
and when and how they may talk.
Begin by clarifying exactly what being on task and paying full attention mean. 
Act out for students what these requirements look like and do not look like. Then, 
have selected students demonstrate behavior that complies with and violates the 
rule.
You absolutely must train your students to get their materials out immediately 
and be quietly at work by the time the bell rings. You must insist on this, or else 
students will begin to dawdle more and more when entering the room. In addi-
tion, you must help students identify productive and respectful activities they can 
do when they have completed their work. This heads off the future manipulation 
technique in which students say “I’m done with my work.”
Eliminating Distractions
This topic centers on potential distractions, such as food, playthings, electronic 
media, and the like that students might intentionally or inadvertently bring to class. 
Seganti provides a list of potential distractions and carefully explains exactly what 
he will do if any of those distractions appear in noncompliance with the class rule. 
He explains again to students that class time is devoted entirely to learning and 
strongly reiterates that nothing will be permitted to interfere with that time.
One of the distractions Seganti highlights is chewing gum. He says he is 
famous for his “no-chewing” rule, which helps make him manipulation-proof. 
Students sometimes appear to be chewing, but claim they are not, sticking their 
tongues out to prove it. Seganti says this act can earn two detentions—one for 
107

Craig Seganti on Taking Charge in the Classroom
chewing gum and one for lying. As Seganti explains it, here is how this situation 
usually plays out:
Teacher: Spit out the gum, Jane, and come after school for 15 minutes.
Jane: I’m not chewing gum.
Teacher: Well, there’s no chewing in my class, even if you aren’t chewing any-
thing, so come to detention.
Jane: But I’m not chewing anything!
Teacher: I don’t argue with students. You can either spit out the gum or get 
suspended for defiance.
(Jane then either spits out the gum or the teacher suspends her from the class.)
Seganti says you won’t have to do this often. Once or twice and everyone gets the 
idea you are manipulation-proof. Caregivers or administrators may complain if 
you suspend a student from class for merely chewing gum. If that happens, point 
out that the student has violated two rules—one for chewing gum and another for 
noncompliance with teacher directions. This point will be addressed again when 
we explore the roles of administrators, counselors, and caregivers.
Beginning the Period
This topic centers on what students must be doing when the bell rings at the begin-
ning of class and what will happen to them if they violate the rule. Simply explain 
to students what the rule requires of them when the beginning bell rings. Although 
Seganti does not say so explicitly, it would be a good idea to have students practice 
moving into full compliance with the rule at least several seconds before you pre-
tend to ring the tardy bell.
Being Ready for Work
This rule centers on how students should be prepared for class, which includes 
bringing any materials they need for immediate class participation. It also stipu-
lates what students will not be allowed to do once the bell rings. This admonition 
covers several matters that might seem trivial, but are serious because they take 
away time for learning.
For example, your students may be accustomed to coming to class without 
having at hand all the materials they need for successful learning. They may have 
the feeling that missing an item or two is not very bad. Seganti would have you 
quickly correct that misconception. He says you should insist to students they are 
old enough to take responsibility for this requirement. He advocates firm regula-
tions regarding pencil sharpening in particular, because students often use sharpen-
ing as a distraction and manipulation tactic. Unless you are insistent on compliance 
with the readiness rule, your more disruptive students will be asking for various 
school-related materials all period long.
Attending to Miscellaneous Behavior
This topic centers on matters such as students calling out, leaving their seats, 
and dealing with the scrap paper and other trash that accumulates around desks 
and elsewhere in the room. Have students act out the behaviors associated with 
108

Craig Seganti on Taking Charge in the Classroom
speaking out improperly, raising their hands, getting permission, and keeping the 
classroom environment neat. Show them the wrong way of doing things—such as 
raising their hands as they begin to speak—and the right way, such as raising their 
hands, waiting for permission, and then speaking. Have them practice everything 
you expect of them.
Remind them that you cannot get around to answering each and every ques-
tion promptly—sometimes they will have to wait a minute when you are busy.
Regarding Procedures
This topic centers on procedures for various activities, including leaving the room 
when necessary. You might be surprised at what Seganti requires of students who 
request restroom passes, but he says his tactic has worked wonders in stopping the 
debates between teacher and students on whether or not the student really has to 
go. If a student begs and squirms to prove the need is real, do the following:
Teacher: Sure, here’s the pass—but you have to make up 10 minutes after 
school.
Student: Huh? Why 10 minutes?
Teacher: (Don’t say anything; just hold the hall pass and wait. The procedure 
has been stated and clarified. No need to repeat it.)
Regarding Teacher Requests and Directions
This topic centers on how students are to conduct themselves when the teacher asks 
them to do anything, such as change seats or pick up trash. Seganti has a steadfast 
way of interacting with students in these cases—he doesn’t argue. Instead, he tells 
students that if they feel the direction is unreasonable, they may arrange to discuss 
it with the school counselor, vice principal, or in a conference involving student, 
parent, and teacher. He does not use class time for arguing with students, insisting 
the limited time for learning is too valuable to waste in that way.
As before, in teaching the rule, he advises you to read the rule aloud, then go 
back, explain, and have students practice complying in the manner expected. This 
rule must make it abundantly clear that you do not argue or debate discipline issues 
or directions with students. The focus is always on actions, not words.
End of Class
This topic centers on what students are to do when the bell rings at the end of class. 
Have students practice the procedure you require. Seganti suggests you make a bell 
noise and have students pack up their materials, then wait for you to say, “Okay, 
you are dismissed.” Don’t fall for the old “that’s not my paper” retort when it’s time 
to make sure the floor is clean. Students are accountable for their area.
Clarifying the System of Consequences
This topic centers on what will happen to students who violate any of the class 
rules. This system, once it is presented so students understand it, is the only warn-
ing Seganti gives. If students who have violated any of the prior rules do not abide 
by the indicated consequences, they are suspended from class and not allowed to 
reenter until they have fulfilled the requirement.
109

Craig Seganti on Taking Charge in the Classroom
By this time, you have carefully gone through how you expect students to con-
duct themselves in class. You and your students will be tired of reading and talking 
about the rules, but rules must be stressed hard the first day so there is no room for 
doubt about what is expected. The time investment is very productive in making 
sure things go smoothly the rest of the year.
leverage: how do you get students to follow the rules?
The purpose of rules is to make sure your class operates responsibly and efficiently. 
But remember—rules are of no value unless you can enforce them and do so con-
sistently. For that reason, you must create the mindset in all your students that 
breaking class rules is not going to get them what they want. To establish that 
mindset, you need some kind of leverage that makes students choose to follow 
the rules.
Seganti has determined that the most effective leverage for his classes is 
“Mr. Seganti’s famous 15-minute detention after school.” This detention is only 
slightly inconvenient for students, but nevertheless they dislike it. And it works 
because they can’t get out of it. Seganti calls this detention the “lever that can move 
boulders.” It promotes psychological compliance while causing very little resent-
ment. It doesn’t punish teachers, either, because they usually have to stay after 
school for a while anyway.
A student who comes to your detention is tacitly agreeing that you are in posi-
tion of authority. Once you have established that understanding, behavior prob-
lems dwindle. But what if students simply don’t appear at detention as directed? 
That rarely happens, Seganti says, but if it does, suspend the student from class, 
in accordance with the class rules. Don’t let the student back into your class until 
(1) his or her parents or caregiver have been notified, (2) the student has once again 
copied all the class rules, and (3) the student has served the detention. Students 
quickly realize they simply cannot escape the detention.
In a 2008 personal communication with the author of this book, Mr.  Seganti 
made these further observations about students adjusting to the 15-minute 
detention:
Some students who are difficult to manage will not come to detention the first 
time you assign it unless they are convinced they cannot get out of complying 
with the consequence. Therefore, they all must learn very quickly that it is better 
to show up than not. The whole system depends on the idea that testing the rules 
will bring more discomfort than simply following them. You must make it clear 
that if students do not show up for detention when it is assigned, they will be sus-
pended from your class and not allowed to attend until they do so. They must see 
that you will indeed follow through on this requirement. Once this is clear, you 
will seldom be tested.
If you suspend a student from class, you will need to inform your administrator 
and the student’s parent or caretaker. Preparations for doing so should be made in 
advance.
Figure 1 presents Seganti’s protocol for calling caregivers.
110

Craig Seganti on Taking Charge in the Classroom
Seganti maintains that detention of 10 to 15 minutes is the most effective 
leverage available to most teachers, but he recognizes that after-school detention 
is difficult or impossible in many schools because students have to catch buses. 
He advises teachers who encounter an obstacle to discuss with their administrator 
ways in which after-school detention can be managed. If no solution is evident, 
Seganti suggests three alternatives:
■ Arrange for students to serve detention during school time by going to a  fellow 
teacher’s room for 10 or 15 minutes to copy rules—this could be done as a 
favor or as an exchange.
■ If most of class is misbehaving, stop and have everyone spend 15 minutes 
copying the rules. The well-behaved students seldom complain about this 
 because they intuitively realize you are trying to help everyone.
■ In cooperation with four fellow teachers, work out a detention schedule during 
lunch time. Each teacher can stay 20 minutes or so one day a week. This has 
the added advantage of establishing a consistent behavior code that  involves 
other classes.
figure 1 Craig Seganti’s Protocol for Calling Caregivers
“Hello, Mrs. Smith? I’m Mr. Jones, James’s history teacher. James was dis-
rupting my lesson today and I assigned him a 15-minute detention after 
school, but he didn’t come. As he knows, that means he is suspended from 
my class until he does two things—copy the class rules and come to deten-
tion for 15 minutes. Can you make sure he copies the rules for me and comes 
to detention tomorrow so he can return to class?”
Sometimes the parent will take the student’s side and say, “What exactly 
did he do?” Then you can say, “He was disrupting the lesson by talking,” or 
“He deﬁ ed instructions to change his seat,” or whatever. Sometimes a parent 
will misunderstand and say, “You are suspending him for talking in class?” 
Answer like this: “No. I am suspending him for deﬁ ance of my rules and re-
fusing to come to his 15-minute detention. As soon as he makes up his 
15 minutes, he can return to class. Can you ensure that he does this and 
 copies the rules for me?” 
If you get the parent’s assurance that James will come to detention the 
next day, you might delay the suspension until you see if he does. If James 
comes to class the next day, you should say in front of the class, “James, as 
you know I talked to your mother last night and she assured me you are com-
ing to detention today—is that correct?” (James says, “Yes.”)
“Okay, then I will hold off the suspension until tomorrow. But let’s be clear 
that if you don’t show today, you are suspended.” This exchange lets the rest 
of the class know what will happen if they don’t show up.
Source: Seganti, C. (2008). Classroom discipline 101: How to get control of any classroom  
(pp. 89–90), retrieved from http://www.classroomdiscipline101.com. Reproduced with permission.
111

Craig Seganti on Taking Charge in the Classroom
ManageMent: What should you do to support  
desirable behavior?
Seganti has identified several things teachers can do, both before and after they 
meet their students, to make this discipline approach more effective. Here are some 
of his suggestions:
Organize the room arrangement. The success of your program is affected by how 
you arrange your room physically. Have your desks in rows and, if you think 
students might deface the furniture, number each chair and desk so they re-
main together and students are accountable for them. Have everything in the 
room, including your materials, neat and organized—a sloppy room encour-
ages sloppy behavior. Place one or two desks adjacent to your desk for students 
who are most likely to be disruptive. Put one desk in the back corner facing 
the wall, to use for in-class suspensions. If a student doesn’t show up for de-
tention, but is not usually disruptive, put him or her in the back of the room 
facing the wall to copy the rules. Then if he or she comes to detention that 
afternoon, permission is given to rejoin class the next day.
Cultivate quiet. Cultivate a quiet classroom for a week or two with no group 
work and minimal talking—give a lot of reading and written work to acclimate 
the students to the idea that this classroom is quiet. The resultant habits are 
very powerful. When students get used to them, you can move into more vo-
cal lessons.
Be at the ready. Have your referrals, detention logs, teaching props, and parent 
phone numbers at hand.
Dress professionally. In various walks of life, people who are leaders dress dif-
ferently from those with whom they work. You see this, for example, in the 
military, religious institutions, and even the workaday world. Seganti believes 
the way you dress helps determine the impact you have on students by sepa-
rating you from them psychologically, just as a priest looks different from the 
congregation or a general from a private. Seganti advises male teachers to wear 
ties and female teachers to dress in a professional manner. A professional ap-
pearance projects authority; but if you dress in a way that says, “I am one of 
you,” then students will tend to treat you as one of them. When you establish 
a psychological separation from your students, they are less likely to challenge 
your authority.
Make eye contact. Looking students in the eye and having them look you in 
the eye reinforces your authority. When you give a direction, and it looks as 
though your students are not committed to it, get their undivided attention. 
Say, “Look at me. Did you understand?” Remember, you are looking for full 
nonverbal and verbal compliance with your directions.
Give something back to students. Teach in a way you can be truly proud of. Teach 
useful information in an engaging manner all period long. Students are not ea-
ger to cooperate with teachers who show little sparkle and assign meaningless 
tasks. If you teach as though you are just going through the motions, students 
will think you don’t care about learning and are using rules as a power trip. 
112

Craig Seganti on Taking Charge in the Classroom
But when you combine tight boundaries with teaching that is interesting and 
valuable, students see that you care enough about them to work hard for their 
benefit. They will be thankful there is an adult around who can take charge 
and help them become more competent.
Organize your procedures. Good organization is your best friend. Make sure 
you have procedures for everything. Clarify them for students—seating charts, 
labeled desks, referrals, detention, what you will do when students try to ma-
nipulate you, and so on. Everyone should know exactly what they should be 
doing from bell to bell and what you are likely to do.
Listen to students. Listen attentively to students. Don’t listen merely to what 
students say. Listen for the motivation behind their words.
Speak in statements. When speaking with students about discipline matters, use 
statements, not questions—for example, “This is work time,” rather than “Why 
aren’t you working?”
Educate students. Recognize that your job is to educate students, not to counsel 
them or deal with emotional problems they may have. That’s what counselors 
are for.
Hold students accountable for proper behavior. After a few years in school, your 
students know how to behave properly. Except for new procedures, you don’t 
have to teach them how to behave. Your rules for the class are simply to make 
students accountable. Your main job is to educate. Every student can under-
stand that message.
Prepare. Know in advance exactly what action you will take every time a stu-
dent breaks a rule.
Hold the line. Do not settle for anything less than a quiet, respectful, focused 
classroom. Repeat all procedures as often as necessary to maintain that kind 
of classroom. Make sure students stay on task and complete their work. It is 
not enough just to be quiet.
Keep ‘em busy. Keep your students busy from bell to bell. Don’t have any down-
time and don’t leave any time for talking.
Review the rules. You can have a near-perfect classroom if you continue having 
students review the required rules and procedures. Do this every day if neces-
sary until they get it. In a personal communication with the author of this text, 
Mr. Seganti commented that feedback he has received from teachers confirms 
the powerful effect of teaching class rules two days in a row. You may say to 
your students, “Everybody got this yet? No?” (Laughingly) “Okay, we will go 
over the rules again tomorrow.”
Assess yourself. Review your performance every day. Identify mistakes you have 
made and decide what you can do next time to get better results.
Take care of things. Don’t count on administrative or parental support except to 
ensure that your established consequences are enforced.
Don’t be manipulated. Students will invariably manipulate you if you allow 
them to do so. To students, it’s a game. They will argue, waste time, cause you 
to become exasperated, and so forth. Seganti devotes much attention to this 
113

Craig Seganti on Taking Charge in the Classroom
matter and shows teachers how to avoid being manipulated. The dialogs that 
follow indicate what you should do when students try to manipulate you. No-
tice that Seganti responds by stating a rule, rather than arguing with students. 
This tactic keeps attention on the teacher’s agenda (in this case, following the 
rules) instead of moving attention to the student’s agenda (such as wasting 
time, getting the better of the teacher, or trying to get out of detention).
Violation of Rule 1. Miguel is talking during quiet study time.
You: “Miguel, that’s a 15-minute detention for talking.”
Miguel: “I wasn’t talking.”
You: “I don’t argue with students.”
Violation of Rule 2. Megan is chewing gum.
You: “Megan, that’s a 15-minute detention for chewing gum.”
Megan: “I’m not chewing gum.”
You: “Fine, but since giving the appearance of chewing gum is against the 
rules, you have detention anyway.” Or you might say, “If you don’t spit it 
out I will have to send you out for defiance.”
Seganti provides more advice on answering manipulators in a piece called 
“Mr.  Seganti’s Big Kahuna Manipulation Destroyer” (Seganti, 2008a, p. 126). The 
manipulation destroyer he describes is silence. Seganti explains that when students 
make manipulative, irrelevant comments like those in the preceding dialogs, you 
just look at the students and say nothing. After all, there is no real answer to a ma-
nipulative question. A student is talking. You say, “Stop talking.” They say, “I wasn’t 
talking.” What good can come of arguing back and forth in a silly exchange? So try 
just saying nothing. Just look at the student, deadpan, showing that you will not 
engage in the matter. Silence stops most manipulation in its tracks. The student 
may make a last feeble protestation such as, “Man, I wasn’t even talking,” but the 
matter will usually end there. If the student does continue talking, assign detention 
if you’ve not already done so.
hoW Might i put seganti’s ideas into effeCt?
The following are suggestions from Mr. Seganti.
use effective doorway tactics
Seganti places great emphasis on doorway tactics, meaning what you do when 
students arrive at your classroom door. Before you let students through the door, 
make sure they are ready to get down to business. Do not wait inside the room for 
everyone to enter any way they like and then try to calm them down and get their at-
tention afterward. When they approach your room they may be noisy, rude, jumpy, 
eating, distracted, or doing other things that are not conducive to academics. Don’t 
allow any of this. Make sure that as students walk through your doorway they are 
moving into a mindset for learning. Be attentive to students’ body language, not 
just their words.
114

Craig Seganti on Taking Charge in the Classroom
Here are details of his recommendations for interacting with students the first 
time they arrive for class (Seganti, 2008a, pp. 21–34):
■ Stand in your doorway and stop every student briefly before they enter. You 
might have to block the entrance with your body.
■ Hand each student a copy of the class rules and say, “I want you to go directly to 
the seat I have assigned you without talking and in an orderly manner. You are to 
sit down quietly, take out your materials and immediately copy these rules onto a 
separate sheet of paper. Do this without talking. Do you understand?” Point to the 
exact seat you want each student to sit in. Make an effort to repeat the part about 
“being quiet” and “not talking” three times before you let them in. Conveying 
these messages of “strictness” will help your classroom atmosphere enormously.
■ If any students say they already know how to behave or if they ask why they 
need to copy the rules, or if they do or say anything disrespectful, say, “I gave 
you a direction. You need to follow it.” Do not enter into a discussion or 
 rationalize your requirements. Don’t fool yourself by thinking that copying 
the rules is a small matter that can just be let go. From the beginning, get stu-
dents to realize they have to comply with all your directions, great and small. 
Before long, that is what they will do.
■ If students are disrespectful, or do not have their materials, or in any other 
way appear unprepared for class, do not let them through the door. They can 
borrow what they need from a friend, but they can’t enter the room until they 
have all of their materials.
■ If their nonverbal cues say they are not ready to study, have them stand to the 
side. Tell them what you expect and say honestly, “To me, you don’t look ready 
to study.” When they manage to meet your standards of a proper attitude for 
entry to the class, let them in. Otherwise just wait. There is no hurry.
■ If any students begin disrupting after entering, call them back to try again. 
You can say something like, “Now try again—go to your seat quietly, take out 
your materials without talking, and copy the rules.” If the student interrupts 
while you are speaking, say, “Do not interrupt me again. This is not a conver-
sation but a simple direction you can comply with, or else leave the room for 
defiance.” Do this every day until students enter in a manner that meets your 
standards for entering and getting to work. Repeat this procedure for as long 
as necessary. Students do not resent it and they soon respond well. They will 
even start saying your entry rules before you do.
Watch for and address three types of behavior on the first day
There are roughly three types of behavior you can expect to see among your stu-
dents the first day of school. Seganti refers to them as Type A, Type B, and Type C. 
He comments on them as follows:
 1. Type A behavior—these students are polite, prepared, and ready to enter class. 
Give them their instructions quickly and send them in.
 2. Type B behavior—these students are basically respectful but appear a bit rowdy 
or distracted. Tell them to stop, take a deep breath, calm down, and then get 
115

Craig Seganti on Taking Charge in the Classroom
ready to enter the class in an orderly manner. Make sure they look you in the 
eye and are clear about your directions—then send them in.
 3. Type C behavior—these students appear disrespectful, arrogant, and/or rowdy. 
These are the students who are most likely to present problems. Show the class 
they are not going to be a problem for you. Establish right away that poor be-
havior in your presence will not go unchallenged. Have these students stand to 
the side while the rest of the class enters. Every small thing you do here helps or 
hurts your cause. You save many problems later on when students see that you 
are on top of everything from the start. Get compliance from all Type C students 
before you let them enter. Direct them to a specific seat right next to your desk if 
possible. If they are noncompliant, argumentative, or rude, give them the simple 
choice of complying or being suspended for defiance. Do this as calmly as pos-
sible. You can say, “I don’t argue with students. You can follow my directions or 
be sent out of the room for defiance.” This is what sets your authority.
assign seats and begin learning students’ names
Once students are all in the room and are busy copying the rules, get their attention 
and say the following: “I’m going to call roll now and assign new seats. When I tell 
you where to sit, get up immediately and move to that desk without questioning 
or complaining. There is no discussion about it, and if you try to engage me in a 
discussion about your assigned seat you will be sent from the room. Just move to 
your seat right away. Does everyone understand?”
You should have a class roster with names in alphabetical order. As you call the 
names, assign the seats and tell students to return to the same seat the next day. When 
all students are seated and are again copying class rules, do the following: Silently 
to yourself say the names of the students in the first row. Repeat a few times. Then 
do the same with students in the next row. Review frequently. Rememorize the ones 
you forgot by checking the seating chart. Their names will come back to you quickly.
explain leverage for rules and exclusion from Class procedures
As noted, Seganti’s “leverage” consists of a 15-minute detention. As soon as stu-
dents have finished copying the class rules, tell them you will enforce the rules 
through the 15-minute detention. Explain how you will do so. You might enlist 
two or three students to help you demonstrate enforcement.
In Seganti’s approach, only three things call for students to get excluded from 
the room—defiance, repeated disruption, and gross disrespect. The following sce-
narios depict those reasons, as Seganti would explain them.
Reason 1: Defiance
I tell Judy to change her seat. She says, “Why?” I reply that I do not argue with stu-
dents. She does not immediately change her seat and I assign her a 15-minute de-
tention and tell her to change her seat. She continues to argue or just doesn’t move. 
I write up a referral, whether or not she moves at this point, and send her from the 
class for defiance. She goes to the counselor. I have written on the referral that Judy 
is suspended for defiance until she comes to detention and copies the class rules.
116

Craig Seganti on Taking Charge in the Classroom
Five minutes later Judy returns from the counselor’s office with a note say-
ing “Student counseled—please re-admit student to class.” If I re-admit Judy now, 
I  will be making a big mistake. I say to her, “No, you are suspended from my class. 
Come to detention after school today for 15 minutes, copy the rules, and you may 
reenter tomorrow.”
At my first opportunity, I explain to the counselor once again how my system 
works, and that the only help I need from him or her is in enforcing my require-
ment that Judy comes to detention and copies the rules. If Judy does not meet my 
requirement, I will send her back again for defiance of my detention rule. I don’t 
care if the counselor provides her counseling or not, so long as Judy comes to deten-
tion and copies the rules. Judy can copy rules in the counselor’s office or she can be 
moved to somebody else’s class, but will not be re-admitted to my class until she 
copies the rules and does the 15-minute detention. The matter is simply about the 
necessity that Judy comply with my class rules.
Reason 2: Repeated Disruption
Disruption is anything that interferes with student concentration in class. It might 
be a little buzz of talk that I have to try to talk over. It might be a student tapping a 
pencil on the desk, or rumpling papers, or loudly sighing to show disinterest in the 
class, or turning away from me while I am talking. Those are all disruptions. They 
are specified in the class rules and are not allowed.
Let’s say there is a lot of buzz in class, an undercurrent of noise I can’t pin-
point. I’m not sure where to start—no one is being really bad, it seems, nothing that 
would normally call for detention. So, not knowing what else to do, I say “Quiet!” 
to the whole class. They get quiet for a minute, like boiling water does when you 
cut the heat.
But then it starts to boil again and you say, “Quiet! Okay, quiet down!” This 
vacillation can go on for awhile—in some cases for an entire teaching career. What 
do I do? I start with individuals. I pick one student.
“Brian, you are disrupting the class. Be quiet or come to detention.”
Brian replies, “Everyone else is talking.”
I ignore his comment, write down his name, and say, “Come 15 minutes after 
school today. If you continue disrupting I will have to suspend you from the class.”
I don’t wait for the big disruptions. I make students adjust to the boundary 
being squeaky tight. My standard is no disruption during my lesson—not even a 
little. Follow this advice and, tomorrow, count the times you say “quiet” to your 
class. If it is more than once per class or five times per day, it is too much and likely 
to escalate. So, I have the counselor ensure that Brian will come to detention for 
15 minutes that day and copy the rules in the meantime. If he doesn’t, I won’t 
 re-admit him.
Reason 3: Gross Disrespect
If a student swears at you or insults you or engages in any other highly offensive 
behavior, immediately suspend the student, send him or her from your class, and 
demand a parent conference as well as the detention and copying the rules or other 
consequence you use. Any of these things should include your basic consequence 
of detention because some students would rather have their caregivers called than 
117

Craig Seganti on Taking Charge in the Classroom
have to serve detention. If it looks like a student is going to be a real problem, start 
a paper trail on him or her right away. You need to minimize the damage these 
students do to your teaching and other students’ education.
outside support: What does seganti Want  
of adMinistrators, Counselors, and Caregivers?
Seganti says to make sure you inform your administrator clearly about your disci-
pline plan, including its logic, rules, and procedures. Administrators don’t want to 
be caught off guard if a parent complains, and they need to know how they can 
help you make your program work. They will usually be pleased to know you are 
handling discipline problems on your own and only need their help as backup 
when students are suspended from your class.
As for caregivers, Seganti doesn’t believe they will be of much help to you in dis-
cipline matters. He says he cannot recall a single instance in his career when a parent 
conference had a significant long-term effect on a student’s behavior. Parent confer-
ences are simply not a consequence that students care about. However, they are use-
ful in establishing a paper trail on students who chronically misbehave and defy the 
teacher. Most administrators have no objection to your sending a student from your 
room for defiance, so it is helpful to document your calls to caregivers when you give 
detention for serious and repetitive breaches of the rules, especially those rules over 
which caregivers have some control, such as having class materials in hand.
When you talk with caregivers, most will listen to the problem and say some-
thing like, “Okay, I’ll talk to her/him.” Occasionally caregivers will take the stu-
dent’s side and express concern that you are not doing your job properly. When that 
happens, don’t go on the defensive. Explain your rules and ask the parents if they 
see anything unfair in them (they won’t). Explain that their child has not shown up 
for detention or continually violates the rules, which interferes with your teaching 
and educational rights of other students.
a Closing CoMMent froM Mr. seganti
The following comment was provided to the author by Mr. Seganti:
Our schools are currently doing things out of sequence—trying to let students 
know all their rights and encouraging self-expression and independent thought, 
etc., before working to establish basic respect for others and the environment. 
Schools seem oblivious of the misery they cause students and teachers by empha-
sizing things in this order. In a more effective sequence, respect must be established 
first, as a fundamental principle of all classroom interactions.
Commentary from anonymous teacher 1
Most of the time, my third-grade class is not very disruptive, and I would 
not need the detention leverage that Mr. Seganti describes. However, 
 although his suggestions are new to me, I find I do use many that are simi-
lar. In teaching students how they are expected to behave, I make use of 
118

Craig Seganti on Taking Charge in the Classroom
role-playing, in which I have them act out how they are to enter and exit the 
room, clean up after work, keep track of their materials, and so forth. The 
students actually enjoy acting these things out. Right from the beginning I 
explain how students are expected to behave. If they fail to do as directed, 
I have them show me they know the proper way of behaving. This takes a 
bit of time, but I only have to do it a few times before students get the idea 
I won’t accept their behaving inappropriately. In addition to having them 
act out the desirable behaviors, I give them oral explanations and some-
times written explanations, too, that include what they are to do when they 
have completed assigned work earlier than expected. I add reminders now 
and then just to make sure they remember.
Mr. Seganti explains how he forbids students to bring various “dis-
traction” objects into the room with them. I also have rules about those 
things—such as erasers, bracelets, hair clips, and so on—which I call “doo-
dads.” I explain that if they bring such things to class, I will take them and 
keep them until the end of the school year. I have a collection of doo-dads 
to prove I mean business. I have informed parents of this rule and that I 
will return the objects at the end of the year. Everybody knows my expec-
tations, why they are used, and how they will be enforced. The students 
accept my policies and only rarely does a parent ask about them.
 
Commentary from anonymous teacher 2
I think these suggestions and strategies have merit and reinforce ideas about 
good classroom management. I especially like the focus on academics, the 
notion of holding students accountable, the emphasis on teacher consis-
tency in rule enforcement, and most of all the idea of teaching with energy 
and enthusiasm the entire class period. I think the keys to making this ap-
proach work are, as Mr. Seganti suggests, planning, organization, and deter-
mination from the teacher along with buy-in from administrators and parents.
One of the aspects of Mr. Seganti’s approach that I find particularly 
valuable is the notion of the teacher taking care of the detentions, parent 
contacts, and record-keeping. I do think it is important to be seen by your 
students as being willing and able to manage your own students and their 
behavior, rather than passing them off to the assistant principal for disciplin-
ary action. I’d just add the caution that a teacher who wants to implement 
leverage as Mr. Seganti suggests should be sure to consider carefully the 
requirements for enforcement. For example, in my district, it is necessary to 
give a parent or guardian 24 hours notice if you want to keep a child after 
school. We have forms available to use for this parent notification. In my state 
a teacher can “suspend” a student for up to 3 days from his or her classroom. 
(If you have a student “hold-out” who refuses to serve detention, you will 
need to make a plan for that student. Office? Another teacher’s room? Have 
the student sit out in the hallway? All of these solutions end up with the stu-
dent missing out on class and basically becoming someone else’s problem.)
119

Craig Seganti on Taking Charge in the Classroom
One of my colleagues, Mr. Albert, had very exacting standards for stu-
dent classroom behavior. He also had stringent requirements for supplies that 
students were to bring to class daily. If students did not have the required 
supplies or did not complete a homework assignment, he would write out 
referrals and send the students to the AP’s office for the period. In short order, 
some students figured out that an easy way to get out of class and spend time 
with friends in the AP office was to not comply with Mr. Albert’s requirements. 
This practice put a burden on the school administration, office staff, and other 
personnel. Ultimately, Mr. Albert backed down and gave up. He wouldn’t 
have had to do that if he had used the ideas as presented by Mr. Seganti.
What you have learned in this Chapter
You have seen how teacher Craig Seganti takes charge in his classes of “hard-to-
manage” students by placing priority on academic learning and backing it with 
rules and leverage. You saw, specifically, what Mr. Seganti does to establish produc-
tive rules and gain compliance that leads to student success. You learned about his 
“leverage” system (the 15-minute detention) that helps keep students on task. You 
also noted that he uses a charismatic personality and interesting activities to keep 
students involved and makes sure that, while students have some fun in learning, 
they master the academic knowledge and skills needed for a productive life.
ac tiv i ti e s
Self-Test: True/False
 1. By “stopping problems before they get into the 
classroom,” Seganti means informing caregivers 
by phone or email about your discipline approach 
and asking for their support.
 2. The relationship between leverage and account-
ability is as follows: leverage is used to ensure stu-
dent accountability.
 3. Seganti emphasizes the importance of involving 
students in helping establish the rules of behavior 
for the class.
 4. Seganti suggests you introduce class rules 
through  discussion and then have students 
write  from memory as many of the rules as  
they can.
 5. When Seganti sends a student to the counselor, he 
doesn’t expect the counselor to grant permission 
for the offending student to reenter Mr. Seganti’s 
class.
 6. Because after-school suspension damages  students’ 
self-concept, Seganti is very reluctant to assign it 
more than once for any given student.
 7. Seganti says to place students’ desks facing the 
front of the room and seat the more unruly stu-
dents near the teacher’s desk.
 8. The first thing Seganti does when he first meets a 
new class is tell the students about his family, hob-
bies, and favorite pastimes.
 9. Although Seganti is reluctant to call caregivers 
about student misbehavior, he says doing so al-
most always results in better student behavior.
 10. Seganti says administrators are pleased when 
teachers resolve most of their discipline problems 
on their own.
120

Craig Seganti on Taking Charge in the Classroom
Self-Test: Multiple Choice
 1. Seganti says any student who disrupts is interfering 
with other students’ constitutional
(a) rights.
(b) guarantees.
(c) protections.
(d) freedoms.
 2. Seganti’s Rule #1 has to do with students’
(a) entering the room.
(b) completing their work.
(c) showing respect.
(d) accepting responsibility.
 3. Seganti says he is famous for his rule about
(a) talking back.
(b) restroom passes.
(c) chewing.
(d) swearing.
 4. Seganti suggests that teachers should dress
(a) casually.
(b) professionally.
(c) comfortably.
(d) stylishly.
 5. Seganti’s “leverage” consists of
(a) parental consent.
(b) administrator backup.
(c) provisions for detention.
(d) making up any work not completed.
 6. Regarding warnings, Seganti says
(a) limit them to two.
(b) be sure to inform caregivers.
(c) make them unpleasant.
(d) don’t give them.
 7. For Seganti, which of the following would not 
warrant excluding or removing a student from the 
class?
(a) defiance
(b) repeated disruption
(c) gross disrespect
(d) inattention
 8. In discipline problems, Seganti says he never re-
ceived much help from
(a) caregivers.
(b) administrators.
(c) fellow teachers.
(d) textbooks.
 9. Seganti says the first thing you must establish in 
discipline is
(a) understanding.
(b) personal relations with students.
(c) responsibility.
(d) respect.
 10. To begin a class, spend a week or so cultivating a 
climate of
(a) excitement.
(b) quiet.
(c) high activity.
(d) give and take.
Self-Test: Explain This
 1. What does Seganti do when new students first ar-
rive at his classroom door?
 2. What attitude does Seganti attempt to establish in 
his classes, and what does he say about disruptions?
 3. What does Seganti mean by “leverage,” and how 
does he establish it?
 4. What roles would Seganti like for administrators, 
counselors, and caregivers to fill in his approach to 
discipline?
 5. What does Seganti mean by “stopping problems 
before they get into the classroom”?
Additional Suggested Activities
 1. In your journal, enter ideas from Seganti’s ap-
proach that you might wish to incorporate into 
your personal system of discipline.
 2. With colleagues, if possible, practice Seganti’s 
doorway tactics and his method of responding to 
students who break class rules.
121

Craig Seganti on Taking Charge in the Classroom
Conc ep t C a se s
Case 1 Kristina Will not Work
Kristina, a student in Mr. Jake’s class, is quite docile. She socializes little with other students 
and never disrupts lessons. However, despite Mr. Jake’s best efforts, Kristina will not do her 
work. She rarely completes an assignment. She is simply there, putting forth no effort at 
all. How would Craig Seganti deal with Kristina?
Mr. Seganti provided the following commentary on this particular case: Kristina is 
required by the rules to be on task at all times. Therefore she will be assigned a 15-minute 
detention if she does not stay on task. At the detention I will try to determine the root of 
the problem: It is almost always that the work is too challenging, so in this case I might 
help her with the work after school a bit and/or contact her caregivers to see if they can 
help her at home. 
Case 2 sara Will not stop talking
Sara is a pleasant girl who participates in class activities and does most, though not all, 
of her assigned work. She cannot seem to refrain from talking to classmates, however. 
Her teacher, Mr. Gonzales, speaks to her repeatedly during lessons, to the point that he 
often becomes exasperated and loses his temper. What suggestions would Craig Seganti give 
Mr. Gonzales for dealing with Sara?
Case 3 Joshua Clowns and intimidates
Joshua, larger and louder than his classmates, always wants to be the center of attention, which 
he accomplishes through a combination of clowning and intimidation. He makes wisecrack 
remarks, talks back (smilingly) to the teacher, utters a variety of sound-effect noises such as 
automobile crashes and gunshots, and makes limitless sarcastic comments and put-downs of 
his classmates. Other students will not stand up to him, apparently fearing his size and verbal 
aggression. His teacher, Miss Pearl, cannot control his disruptive behavior. Would Joshua’s be-
havior be likely to improve if Miss Pearl implemented Seganti’s approach in her class? Explain.
Case 4 tom is hostile and defiant
Tom has appeared to be in his usual foul mood ever since arriving in class. On his way to 
sharpen his pencil, he bumps into Frank, who complains. Tom tells him loudly to shut 
up. Miss Baines, the teacher, says, “Tom, go back to your seat.” Tom wheels around, swears 
loudly, and says heatedly, “I’ll go when I’m _____ good and ready!” How would Craig 
 Seganti have Miss Baines deal with Tom?
122

Craig Seganti on Taking Charge in the Classroom
you  are  th e  te ac h e r
Class CloWns
Your new fifth-grade class consists of students from a 
small, stable community. Because the transiency rate 
is low, many of your students have been together since 
first grade, and during those years they have developed 
certain patterns of interacting and assuming various 
roles such as clowns and instigators. Unfortunately, 
their behavior often interferes with teaching and learn-
ing. During the first week of school you notice that 
four or five students enjoy making smart-aleck remarks 
about most things you want them to do. When such 
remarks are made, the other students laugh and some-
times join in. Even when you attempt to hold class 
discussions about serious issues, many of the students 
make light of the topics and refuse to enter genuinely 
into an exploration of the issues. Instead of the pro-
ductive discussion you have hoped for, you find that 
class behavior often degenerates into flippancy and 
horseplay.
a typiCal oCCurrenCe
You have begun a history lesson that contains a refer-
ence to Julius Caesar. You ask if anyone has ever heard 
of Julius Caesar. Ben shouts out, “Yeah, they named 
a salad after him!” The class laughs and calls out en-
couraging remarks such as “Good one, Ben!” You wait 
for some semblance of order, then say, “Let us go on.” 
From the back of the classroom, Jeremy cries, “Lettuce 
and cabbage!” The class bursts into laughter and chat-
ter. You ask for their cooperation and no more students 
call out or make remarks, but you see several continue 
to smirk and whisper, with a good deal of barely sup-
pressed giggling. You try to ignore it, but because of the 
disruptions you are not able to complete the lesson on 
time or to get the results you hoped for.
ConCeptualizing a strategy
If you followed Seganti’s suggestions, what would you 
do with regard to the following?
■ Preventing the problem from occurring in the first 
place.
■ Putting an immediate end to the misbehavior now.
■ Maintaining student dignity and good personal 
relations.
■ Using follow-up procedures that would prevent the 
recurrence of the misbehavior.
glo ssa ry
Doorway tactics (Seganti): Tactics teachers use as students 
enter the room to help ensure that students do not 
misbehave.
15-minute detention (Seganti): The requirement that 
 misbehaving students must attend after-school deten-
tion for 15 minutes; provides strong leverage in ensur-
ing that students comply with class rules.
Leverage (Seganti): Something that teachers can use to 
ensure student compliance with rules. In Seganti’s 
 approach, leverage exists in the form of the 15-minute 
detention after school.
ref e re n c e s
Seganti, C. (2008a). Classroom discipline 101: How to get 
control in any classroom. Retrieved from http://www 
.classroomdiscipline101.com
Seganti, C. (2008b). Ezine. [See articles on the Seganti ap-
proach to discipline.] Retrieved from http://ezinearti 
cles.com/?expert=Craig_Seganti
123

124

Harry and Rosemary Wong on the 
First Things You Should Teach
From Chapter 6 of Building Classroom Discipline, Eleventh Edition. C. M. Charles. Copyright © 2014 by  Pearson 
Education, Inc. All rights reserved.
125

Harry and Rosemary Wong on the 
First Things You Should Teach
Harry and Rosemary Wong on the 
First Things You Should Teach
What Do Harry and Rosemary Wong Say About 
Scripting the First Minutes and Days of a New Class?
In 2009, Harry Wong and Rosemary Wong, two of the most highly acclaimed edu­
cators in America, interviewed four administrators of schools where students were 
showing unusually high levels of achievement. The Wongs wanted to know what 
those leaders did to promote such strong learning and outstanding behavior. What 
they discovered was rather simple—it was just that everyone—students, teachers, and 
administrators—knew exactly what they were supposed to do at all times and how to 
do it. Consequently, they did those things as expected, more or less automatically.
As the Wongs put it, there was no hocus­pocus, bag of tricks, special pro­
grams, or funding from multimillion­dollar endowments. There was simply a 
schoolwide mindset of success, where teachers continually sought to become 
more effective. Those teachers began by teaching students very thoroughly the 
roles, procedures, processes, and routines they were expected to follow. That was 
done schoolwide. Once students understood those requirements and procedures, 
 teachers were left free to focus almost entirely on promoting learning.
That simple process, say the Wongs, opens the royal road to success in teaching. 
Their view is that the main trouble in classrooms is not discipline, as most people think, 
but rather teachers’ failure to teach students very clearly the roles, responsibilities, and 
procedures that make classrooms run like clockwork. They point out that everything 
teachers ask students to do involves a procedure. When students learn to follow pro­
cedures automatically, they behave better, learn more, and are far easier to teach.
The beginning of a new class or term is an especially important time. That is 
when teachers set the structure and expectations of the class. The first few days 
should be devoted to two matters: (1) clarifying the proper roles and responsibili­
ties of students and teacher, and (2) teaching students exactly how to follow the 
various procedures expected of them. The result that follows will be good learning, 
good behavior, and a thoroughly successful school year.
126

Harry and Rosemary Wong on the First Things You Should Teach
What Questions Will this Chapter ansWer for Me?
■ What are Harry and Rosemary Wong’s suggestions for establishing classes that 
run smoothly with little misbehavior?
■ What is meant by procedures, and what do they have to do with well- functioning 
classrooms?
■ What are examples of the many important classroom procedures students 
should learn to follow automatically?
■ What do the Wongs suggest we do in the first 5 minutes, the first day, and the 
first 10 days of school?
■ What is meant by “scripting,” and why it is so strongly recommended?
■ What do the Wongs have to say about cooperative group work?
What is the Wongs’ Model for ClassrooM ManageMent?
The Common Goal of All Approaches to Classroom 
Management: Responsible, Productive Classroom 
Behavior That Becomes Habitual and Lasts over Time
Responsible means paying attention, making a 
strong effort, and doing what is proper without being 
told. Civil means respectful, polite, cordial, and well 
mannered.
Harry and Rosemary Wong’s Approach 
to Classroom Management
The Wong’s Overarching Strategy
Ensure that all students understand their 
duties and learn to follow all class procedures 
automatically.
The Wongs’ Principal Tactics
Clarify roles: what you expect students to do 
and what you will do.
Carefully script what you will do and say for
the ﬁ rst 10 days of school.
Write out procedures for students to follow
in all class activities.
Have students practice the procedures until
they can follow them automatically.
↓
→
↑
↓
↓
↓
↑
↑
↑
↑
127

Harry and Rosemary Wong on the First Things You Should Teach
Who are harry and roseMary Wong?
Harry and Rosemary Wong are among today’s most widely acclaimed authorities 
in teaching and classroom management. Harry Wong, now an educational speaker 
and consultant, previously taught science at the middle school and high school 
levels. He received numerous awards for outstanding teaching and high student 
achievement, including the Horace Mann Outstanding Educator Award and the 
National Teachers Hall-of-Fame Lifetime Achievement Award. Instructor magazine 
named him one of the 20 most admired people in education.
Rosemary Wong taught grades 1–8 and served as media coordinator and 
 student activity director. She was selected as one of California’s first mentor teach-
ers and has received numerous awards for her contributions to the profession. She 
speaks around the world with her husband, Harry.
At the time of this writing, their book The First Days of School had sold over 
4  million copies, making it the best-selling education book of all time. It has been trans-
lated into five languages. They have also produced a video series entitled The  Effective 
Teacher, which won the Gold Award in the International Film and Video Festival and 
the Telly Award as the best educational staff development video. Harry and Rosemary 
write a monthly column for www.teachers.net that provides easy access to how their 
ideas have been implemented in classrooms, schools, and school districts. You might 
wish to peruse that site as well as the Wongs’ website at www.effectiveteaching.com.
The Wongs get their points across through maxims such as:
■ The main problem in classrooms is not poor discipline, but poor classroom 
management.
■ Responsibilities help clarify what everyone is supposed to do.
■ As a teacher, what you do on the first day of school determines your success 
for the rest of the year.
■ Effective teachers spend most of the first 2 weeks teaching students to follow 
classroom procedures.
■ If you do not plan, your students will plan for you.
a QuiCk read of the Wongs’ prinCipal suggestions
The Wongs’ ideas you see here are gleaned from the following sources: Starr (1999), 
Wong and Wong (2004b, 2007, 2009b), Glavac (2005), Wong, Wong, Rogers, and 
Brooks (2012) and numerous articles by Wong and Wong currently posted on 
 www.teachers.net.
about roles and responsibilities
Help students understand your responsibilities and their responsibilities in the 
classroom. The following example, appropriate for secondary classes, appears on 
the cover of The First Days of School Wong and Wong (2004b):
My Responsibilities as Your Teacher
■ To treat you with respect and care as an individual.
■ To provide you an orderly classroom environment.
128

Harry and Rosemary Wong on the First Things You Should Teach
■ To provide the necessary guidance for success.
■ To provide the appropriate motivation.
■ To teach you the required content.
Your Responsibilities as My Students
■ To treat me with respect and care as an individual.
■ To attend classes regularly.
■ To be cooperative and not disruptive.
■ To study and do your work well.
■ To learn and master the required content.
about Classrooms and procedures
■ The single most important factor affecting student learning is not discipline; it 
is how a teacher manages a classroom.
■ Your classroom need not be chaotic; it can be a smoothly functioning learning 
environment.
■ A well-managed classroom is task-oriented and predictable.
■ Ineffective teachers begin the first day of school attempting to teach a subject. 
They then spend the rest of the school year running after students.
■ Effective teachers spend most of the first 2 weeks of school teaching students to 
follow classroom procedures that help them become responsible learners.
■ What is done on the first day of school or a class—even the first few minutes—
can make or break a teacher.
■ The very first day, the very first minute, the very first second of school, teachers 
should begin to establish a structure of procedures and routines for the class.
about school
■ School is where students go to learn how to be productive citizens and reach 
their potential as human beings.
■ School should be challenging, exciting, engrossing, and thought-provoking, 
but its program must have structure to ensure success.
■ You cannot give students self-esteem, which has no validity in education, but 
you can ensure they find success in school.
about teaching
■ Teaching is a craft—a highly skilled craft that can be learned.
■ By far the most important factor affecting school learning is the ability of the 
teacher. The more capable the teacher, the more successful the student.
■ Good teachers enhance the life and spirit of the students they teach.
■ Stop asking, “What am I supposed to do?” Start asking, “What must I know 
that will help me accomplish what I need to do?”
■ What you do on the first day of school determines your success for the rest of 
the year.
■ When students arrive, start class immediately. Do not take roll until later.
129

Harry and Rosemary Wong on the First Things You Should Teach
■ Learning is often most effective when it takes place in a supportive community 
of learners.
■ The more students work together responsibly, the more they learn.
■ Shorter assignments produce higher student achievement.
■ Intersperse questions throughout a lesson. Ask a question after you have spo-
ken a few sentences rather than many. By doing so, you significantly increase 
student learning and retention.
■ Students usually learn more from an activity–question approach than from a 
textbook-lecture approach.
■ Teachers go through four stages of development—fantasy, survival, mastery, 
and impact. Good management moves you quickly from fantasy to mastery.
■ You can have your achievements or you can have your excuses.
■ Those who teach well never cease to learn.
about testing and evaluation
■ Use criterion-referenced tests rather than norm-referenced tests to evaluate 
student performance. Grade on what is learned, not on the curve—a practice 
that has done great harm.
■ Within reason, the more frequent the tests, the higher the achievement.
about student Behavior
■ Classroom rules indicate the behavior you expect from students. In order 
to provide a safe and effective learning environment, establish and enforce 
 appropriate rules.
■ Rules of behavior set limits, just as do rules in games. They create a work-
oriented atmosphere in the classroom.
■ Behavior associated with rules must be taught through discussion, demonstra-
tion, and practice.
■ Consequences should be attached to rules—positive consequences for compli-
ance and negative consequences (but not punishment) for noncompliance.
■ Explain your management plan to students on the first day of school.
about the first day of Class
■ Have your classroom ready for instruction and make it inviting.
■ Organize your class by preparing a written script that covers precisely what you 
will say and do.
■ Plan for more than you can get around to, so there will be no dead time with 
a chance of losing the students’ involvement in the class.
■ Stand at the door and greet students as they enter.
■ Give each student a seating assignment and a seating chart.
■ Position yourself in the room near the students. Problems are proportional to 
the distance between you and students.
■ Post an assignment in a consistent location so students can begin when they 
enter the room.
130

Harry and Rosemary Wong on the First Things You Should Teach
■ Display your diploma and credentials with pride.
■ Dress in a professional manner that models success and suggests you expect 
achievement.
about the first Week of teaching
■ The two most important things you must teach the first week of school are 
procedures and rules.
■ Explain your management plan to students and put it into effect immediately.
■ State your procedures and have students rehearse until they follow them 
automatically.
More about a Management plan
Although the Wongs focus mainly on the management of procedures, they remind 
us that in addition to good management, teachers need an approach that specifies 
and teaches procedures. This approach helps students know how to be successful in 
the class. The Wongs have found that most teachers want to begin teaching lessons 
before procedures are addressed. Then, when misbehavior occurs, those teachers 
apply harsh measures that are counterproductive. Without an effective classroom 
management plan that begins the first day, you are setting yourself up for failure.
The Wongs do say you need a discipline plan, but they are not particular about 
the plan you use, other than to say that you should (1) develop one that is suited to 
your requirements and your students’ needs, and (2) make sure it includes rules of 
behavior, steps for teaching those rules, and actions that are applied when students 
comply with or break rules.
As for class rules, the Wongs (2004b) suggest you think carefully about what 
your students need to do in order to be successful and, when necessary, write those 
expectations as rules, post them in the class, and go over them with students on the 
first day. You will have firm confidence in your ability to manage the class if you 
and your students understand clearly what is expected.
The Wongs suggest you limit the number of rules to a maximum of five, stated 
in a positive manner (although in some cases it is more effective to state them in 
a negative manner, such as “No fighting”). Here are five universal rules the Wongs 
(2004b, p. 146) provide as examples:
■ Follow directions the first time they are given.
■ Raise your hand and wait for permission to speak.
■ Stay in your seat unless you have permission to do otherwise.
■ Keep hands, feet, and objects to yourself.
■ No cursing or teasing.
Introduce the rules on the first day of class and post them in a prominent place. 
The Wongs suggest introducing them approximately as follows, using your own 
language and explanations:
Rationale for rules. The rules are to help you learn in a classroom that is safe 
and effective. They help make sure nothing keeps you from being successful 
in this class.
131

Harry and Rosemary Wong on the First Things You Should Teach
Working together comfortably. We will be working together closely. We need to 
keep this classroom a place where you will never have fear of being ridiculed or 
threatened. I care about all of you, and I will not allow anyone to do anything 
that interferes with someone trying to learn.
My job. My job is to teach you and help you be successful, so I will not allow 
you to do anything that interferes with my teaching and our group success 
and enjoyment.
Our class rules. So I can teach and all of us can learn in the best possible condi-
tions, I have prepared a set of rules that help make this classroom safe, orderly, 
and productive. I’ll explain those rules to you now so you understand clearly 
what they mean, how you are to follow them, and how I will enforce them.
about planning and organizing
Begin by acknowledging and accepting the overriding importance of organization. 
It enables you to keep on schedule, know where things are, and make your time 
and space work for you. It eliminates chaos, lets you get things done, and allows 
you some time to enjoy life.
procedures and What they entail
Think of procedures as involving what you want students to do in the classroom 
and precisely how they will do those things. Student behavior and learning will 
be determined in large part by how well you establish good, workable classroom 
procedures, beginning the very first day.
Students accept and appreciate procedures that provide security while mini-
mizing confusion. If you don’t put those procedures in place, students will likely 
behave undesirably and develop poor work habits that are difficult to correct later.
To establish good procedures, do three things: First, decide what routines are 
necessary in the activities you intend to conduct; second, list the steps students 
must follow in order to participate in and benefit from the activities; and third, 
teach students through explanation, demonstration, and practice in how to follow 
the procedures.
You will find you end up with a very large number of procedures for students 
to learn. Don’t worry; students can learn them. Just keep in mind that every time 
you want students to do something, they need to know the procedure to follow—
for example, how to enter and exit the classroom; how to begin the period or day; 
how to come to attention; how to begin and finish work; what to do when the 
class is dismissed; what to do on returning after being absent; what to do when 
arriving tardy; how the class is to get quiet when necessary; how to ask for help 
from the teacher or others; how to move about the classroom; how papers, materi-
als, and supplies are to be distributed and collected; how everyone is to listen to 
and respond to questions; how to work cooperatively with others; how groups are 
changed; how to organize student notebook/binder; how directions are given for 
each assignment and how to find the directions; and how to walk in the corridors. 
And the list goes on.
132

Harry and Rosemary Wong on the First Things You Should Teach
The Wongs give specific attention to these matters and many more. Good pro-
cedures allow a variety of activities to occur without confusion, often several at the 
same time. But you have to teach students the procedures, not just talk about them. 
The Wongs suggest a three-step method for teaching procedures:
 1. Teach. You state, explain, and demonstrate the procedure.
 2. Rehearse. The students practice the procedure under your supervision.
 3. Reinforce. You reteach the procedure, have students rehearse it, and keep 
 repeating it until students follow it automatically.
Examples of Procedures in a Fourth-Grade Classroom
The Wongs provide the following guidelines and procedures for structuring success-
ful classes: which the Wongs credit to teacher Nathan Gibbs, show how one teacher 
has structured his fourth-grade class for success. This is an example of how a skilled 
teacher uses procedures to create a safe and caring learning environment. You may 
teach kindergarten or high school physical education and feel these procedures do 
not apply to you. But the Wongs remind us that this scheme reflects realities that 
exist in all classrooms. As you read these procedures, consider how they can assist 
you in creating procedures for your own classroom.
Make your classroom a place where students feel genuinely cared for. Provide per-
sonalized instruction within a warm, relaxed, refined learning environment. On the first 
day of school give your students a written list of all the classroom procedures, with a 
cover page that says, “Follow these procedures to reward yourself with complete success.”
Spend the first 2 weeks of class teaching the procedures, and expect students 
to follow them to the letter. The number of procedures may seem overwhelming, 
but the students soon learn and appreciate them. Here are some of the things you 
might emphasize (Wong & Wong, 2004a):
“You will be safe in this class. I will do my best for you, and I want you to do 
your best for yourself. Be ready to begin learning very well.”
Morning Entry Procedures
✓ Enter the classroom in a quiet and orderly manner.
✓ Greet your teacher as you enter and say “hi” to your classmates.
✓ Turn in homework or keep at desk if it is to be graded in class.
✓ Begin on your seat work.
Desk Procedures
✓ Only your notebook, assignment book, textbooks, reading book, and supply 
box belong in your desk. Toys, food, and loose paper do not belong in your desk.
✓ Keep hands, feet, paper, books, and pencils off your neighbors’ desks.
✓ Push in your chair every time you get up.
✓ Clean your desk and the area around it before you leave.
Line-Up Procedures
✓ When dismissed, stand in two equal lines and wait quietly.
✓ First excused line goes out of room, and then the second line follows.
✓ Walk quietly in the hallway.
133

Harry and Rosemary Wong on the First Things You Should Teach
Lunch Procedures
✓ When excused for lunch, get your lunch if you brought it.
✓ Lunch Leaders stand in front with lunch buckets.
✓ Follow the line-up procedures.
✓ When dismissed by teacher, walk to the cafeteria.
✓ If you have brought your lunch, go and sit at the correct table.
✓ If you are buying lunch, get your card from the slot and wait quietly in line.
✓ Talk with a low voice.
✓ Clean up your area and raise your hand when you want to be dismissed.
✓ Put all leftover food and trash in the trashcans.
✓ Place your lunchbox in the bucket when you leave.
Bus Pick-Up Procedures
✓ Walk quickly to bus area.
✓ Quietly wait behind the line for the bus.
✓ Show respect for the teacher on duty.
✓ Show respect for the bus driver.
Car Pick-Up Procedures
✓ Walk to car pick-up area.
✓ Don’t walk onto the blacktop where cars park or drive.
✓ Show respect for the teacher on duty.
✓ Quietly wait for your ride.
✓ If your ride is more than 10 minutes late, go sit quietly in the office and wait.
Bicycle Rider Procedures
✓ Walk your bike on campus before and after school.
✓ Lock your bike to the bike rack and leave other bikes alone.
✓ Wear your helmet while riding your bike.
✓ Obey all traffic laws.
✓ Come straight to school and go straight home.
Walker Procedures
✓ Walk straight to school.
✓ Walk straight home.
✓ Obey all traffic laws.
Basic Assembly Procedures
✓ Line up inside or outside our classroom first.
✓ Follow the student council representatives to the correct area.
✓ Pay attention and sit where you are instructed to.
✓ Show respect for the presentation.
✓ Be patient if you have a question for the presenter.
✓ Return to the classroom in a quiet, orderly manner.
134

Harry and Rosemary Wong on the First Things You Should Teach
End-of-Day Procedures
✓ Copy down the homework assignment in your notebook.
✓ Clean around your desk.
✓ Pack your assignment book and what you need for homework.
✓ Leave only when dismissed.
✓ Remember to tell your family about your day at school.
Restroom Procedures
✓ Only one person at a time may go.
✓ Quietly hold up three fingers and shake your fingers if it is an emergency.
✓ Wash your hands afterward.
✓ Come right back and enter quietly.
Drinking Fountain Procedures
✓ Do not line up at the drinking fountain outside or inside the classroom after 
the recess bell has rung.
✓ No more than three people at the sink area at any time.
✓ Wipe the sink after you drink.
Computer Procedures
✓ Wash your hands before using the computer.
✓ No more than two people at a computer.
✓ Refer your questions to the technology assistant.
✓ Log out of all programs you have been using.
✓ Shut off the computer at the end of the day if you are the last to use it.
When You Have a Substitute Teacher
✓ Respect and follow the substitute’s directions and rules, even if they are not 
exactly the same as ours.
✓ Remember the substitute is taking my place and is an equal of mine.
✓ Be as helpful as possible. The substitute has a copy of all our class procedures.
✓ Assist the substitute in finding supplies.
Group Work
✓ Be prepared with the necessary tools and resources to be successful.
✓ All members participate, share, learn from, and help one another. Collabora-
tion is the key to being a successful learning club.
✓ Use the same procedures for speaking as you do during class.
✓ Practice active listening.
✓ Cooperate.
✓ Do your best.
To view these procedures and more in detail, access http://teachers.net/wong/
MAR04.
135

Harry and Rosemary Wong on the First Things You Should Teach
What do the Wongs suggest for Beginning  
a Class suCCessfully?
As we have seen, the Wongs place great emphasis on what teachers should do to 
begin the term effectively (for review, see Wong & Wong, 2005). New teachers, 
the Wongs say with a note of irony, often have bags brimming with lesson plans, 
boxes of activities, the state performance appraisal instrument, five interpretations 
of educational foundations, nine theories of child development, conflicting advice 
from a plethora of educational specialists, and a collection of buzzwords and cur-
rent educational fads. But they have little idea about exactly what to do in the first 
days and weeks of school.
To help new teachers overcome this problem, the Wongs (2007) present a First 
Day of School Action Plan, which they credit to teacher Sarah Jondahl. Ms. Jon-
dahl developed a plan of step-by-step procedures having to do with preparing the 
classroom before students arrive, academic expectations, time frames, lesson plans 
and activities for first days of school, steps in establishing working relations with 
students and caregivers, class schedules, maintaining a good learning environment, 
and procedures for documenting and evaluating student progress.
To illustrate, in preparing the classroom before the first day of school, Sarah 
lists the following matters that require her attention:
✓ “Be Prepared” sheet
✓ Preparation checklist
✓ Getting organized
✓ “Cooperative Classroom” dry-erase board
✓ Student contract for classroom materials
✓ “Our Class Fits Like a Puzzle” bulletin board
✓ Classroom door decoration
✓ “Brag About Me” bulletin board
✓ “All About Me” bulletin board
✓ Room arrangement
In the section on establishing relationships with students and caregivers, she in-
cluded the following:
✓ Letter to students
✓ Open house activities
✓ Substitute teacher handbook
✓ New student folder
✓ Parent letter
✓ Homework policy
✓ Homework tip list
✓ Transportation checklist
✓ Rules, consequences, and rewards
✓ Volunteer sheet
✓ “Welcoming Phone Call” planning sheet for caregivers of potential problem 
students
136

Harry and Rosemary Wong on the First Things You Should Teach
✓ “Positive phone call” form
✓ Parent conferences outline
For the section on maintaining a good learning climate, she detailed what she 
would do concerning the following:
✓ Reasons for the behavior management plan
✓ Rules, consequences, and rewards
✓ Procedures in behavior management
✓ First morning greeting and seating arrangement
✓ Housekeeping ideas
✓ “Duty Wheel” for student jobs
✓ Intervention plan packet
✓ Socio-gram
✓ Form used to create a socio-gram
✓ Notes of encouragement
✓ Student postcard
✓ “Special News About a Very Special Student” certificate
✓ “Super Job/Way to Go/Great Day” letter form
In summary: The Wongs stress that teachers should set high expectations on the 
first day, plan the entire day right down to the minute, and make sure to give at-
tention to establishing routines and learning students’ names.
They emphasize that during the first week, the most important thing you can 
do is provide the security of consistency.
They add that if the furniture is movable, you do best to align all the desks 
facing the teacher during the first day of school. Keep them that way until there is 
a purpose for changing the arrangement. Make sure to provide a well-organized, 
uncluttered, attractive classroom. Have the room ready and inviting when students 
arrive on the first day.
On a bulletin board or elsewhere, post schedules, rules, procedures, and a pre-
view of what is to come. Also post information about yourself, including a picture 
and a sign that welcomes students to the class. Wear neat clothing—first percep-
tions affect how students relate to you. Stand when you speak and use short, clear 
sentences or phrases. Use a firm but soft voice. When emphasizing something, do 
not point your finger, as it presents an accusatory image.
Your major mission during the first few days is to establish student routines 
and classroom procedures. If you have very young students, place their name on 
their coat hooks, desks, and cubbyholes and tell them to use that particular coat 
hook, desk, or cubbyhole every day. Set up a seating plan beforehand, as this 
helps you to get to know your students quickly. Begin addressing your students 
by name as quickly as you can.
On the first day, go to school early and take time to double-check everything. 
Have your first bell-work assignment ready (a short assignment that students be-
gin working on when they first arrive in the room). Make it interesting but fairly 
easy so students will have an initial sense of accomplishment. Students who fail 
137

Harry and Rosemary Wong on the First Things You Should Teach
early tend to create problems in the classroom. Before class begins, tell yourself 
the following:
■ I will establish classroom management procedures from the beginning.
■ I will convey that this class will be work-oriented, with a competent, and car-
ing teacher.
■ I will establish work habits in my students first before teaching content.
As the students arrive, position yourself outside the door to greet them. This estab-
lishes rapport and relationships and shows you consider the students important. If 
young children are to line up before entering, insist on an orderly line. If you pick 
up your class from another area, don’t say: “Follow me” or “Come on.” Rather, greet 
the students, introduce yourself and then teach the procedure you want students to 
follow as they walk to your room.
What do the Wongs say aBout the first  
5 Minutes of Class?
The Wongs say you should always have an assignment posted for the students to 
begin working on the second they walk into the room (Wong & Wong, 2000a). 
They say if you establish that, you eliminate 90% of the discipline problems that 
otherwise arise. Engaging students in learning keeps them involved and less prone 
to off-task behavior. If free time happens for students, then a list of choices should 
be available for students to always be responsible for selecting something to do in 
the classroom while waiting for others. It is far better to have too much planned for 
the class period than too little.
The first few minutes with your students are crucial to maintaining a produc-
tive tone in your class. Students must know what they are expected to do. When 
they come in, explain what you want to have happen at the start of the day or 
period. For instance, let them know what materials they need that day and that 
they should have pencils sharpened and paper ready. Explain where the warm up 
activity will be located each day and they are to start on it even before the bell rings 
to start class.
As students work, take roll while you walk around and observe. Check home-
work, if needed, and assure yourself that your students are ready for learning.
What else do the Wongs say aBout the first  
day of sChool?
As you have seen, the Wongs suggest you carefully plan your first day of class or 
school in detail. They describe how art teacher Melissa Pantoja attends to this task 
(see Wong & Wong, 2000c). They liken Mrs. Pantoja to a football coach who scripts 
the first several plays of a game. They say a teacher should not “wing it” in a class-
room any more than a coach would wing it on a football field or a pilot would 
wing it on a flight from Baltimore to Kansas City. The effective teacher goes in with 
a plan and modifies that plan as needed. Each teacher’s plan will be different. Here 
is Mrs. Pantoja’s plan for the first day:
138

Harry and Rosemary Wong on the First Things You Should Teach
Greeting Each Student at the Door
✓ Hand each student a classroom rules sheet (goes in notebook).
✓ Direct the student to his or her assigned seat (alphabetical).
✓ Tell the student to read and follow the instructions that are written on the 
board.
Welcoming Students to Class and Introducing Myself
✓ My name
✓ My family (spouse, kids)
✓ Where I’m from and where I live
✓ Why I wanted to teach
Establishing Rules and Procedures
✓ Explain and teach the rules, which are posted at the front of the room.
✓ Introduce the daily procedures for arrival and dismissal of class.
Assigning Numbers to Students
✓ Explain that each person will have a number that represents him or her.
✓ The numbers will be on all of their art papers and on their art folders to help 
all of us keep the papers straight.
Respecting the Classroom and the Art Supplies
✓ Teach students how to be responsible for the art supplies and room.
✓ Teach the procedures for obtaining, using, and replacing art supplies.
Clarifying Teacher’s Things and Students’ Things
✓ Explain with examples that some things are only for me, while other things are 
for students to use as needed.
Using the Art Centers
✓ Everyone will get the opportunity to go to all the centers.
✓ The art center board will have names (numbers) that tell us who does what 
that day.
Keeping Portfolios and Notebooks
✓ Each student will receive a portfolio he or she can take home.
✓ Each student will keep a notebook for recording grades and vocabulary words 
and for writing a weekly entry about what he or she liked most in the week’s 
work.
What do the Wongs say aBout the first 10 days of sChool?
The Wongs (2005) further provide detailed suggestions for procedures to be fol-
lowed in the first 10 days of school. In that regard, they present a guide they credit 
to Jane Slovenske, a National Board Certified Teacher. Ms. Slovenske’s class uses 
139

Harry and Rosemary Wong on the First Things You Should Teach
a self-manager plan in which students are taught to manage their own behavior in a 
responsible manner.
Standards are established through class discussions about responsible 
 behavior, treatment of others, and working promptly to the best of one’s ability. 
Once a list of behaviors is agreed on, the students are presented a self-manager 
application to use as a self-evaluation of their behaviors and standards. When 
students are able to manage all of the items on the application, they fill in the 
form and take it home for parental review. When the adults are in agreement 
with the student’s self-evaluation, they sign the form and have the student return 
it to school.
Ms. Slovenske must then see if she agrees with the student’s self-evaluation. 
She discusses with students any differences of opinion. She reports that most 
 students, with input from the adults at home, are honest about self-evaluating their 
performance. Here, space limitations preclude the inclusion of Ms. Slovenske’s plan 
in detail. If you wish to examine it you can find it on the Internet at http://teachers.
net/wong/JAN05.
What do the Wongs say aBout proCedures for 
Cooperative Work groups?
The Wongs maintain that, generally speaking, most students do better in school 
when allowed to work in cooperative learning groups. The Wongs suggest you call 
your cooperative groups support groups, with each member of the group known 
as a support buddy. Instead of isolating children with seat work, consider sur-
rounding them with support buddies and teach them how to support each other. 
Group procedures must be taught clearly, and it is important that each student in 
the group has a specific job to do. Ineffective teachers divide students into groups 
and simply expect the students to work together. Effective teachers teach the group 
procedures and social skills needed for functioning in a group. Before you begin 
your first group activity, teach students how to do the following:
■ Be responsible for your own work and behavior.
■ Ask a support buddy for help if you have a question.
■ Help any support buddy who asks for help.
■ Ask for help from the teacher only when support buddies cannot supply it.
As you can see, the Wongs identify a multitude of procedures that come into play 
every day in the classroom. For further detailed information on how to work with 
groups, consult Chapter 24 in The First Days of School (Wong & Wong, 2005a).
do the Wongs’ ideas Work for seCondary teaChers?
Secondary teachers sometimes comment that the Wongs’ suggestions appear to 
be too elementary for use in high school, but the Wongs emphasize that their ap-
proach works equally well at the high school level. Their website includes testimo-
nials from secondary teachers, many of whom assert that the Wongs’ suggestions 
actually saved their professional careers.
140

Harry and Rosemary Wong on the First Things You Should Teach
For example, Chelonnda Seroyer (see http://teachers.net/wong/FEB05), a 
first-year teacher, used the Wongs’ ideas as the basis for managing her class and 
had a very successful year academically. In addition, she was senior class sponsor, 
homecoming parade assistant, and a member of the support team for the school’s 
efforts related to the No Child Left Behind Act. In recognition of her contributions 
she received the Bob Jones High School “First Year Patriot Award,” which is given 
to the first-year teacher who is recognized for outstanding accomplishments and 
 achievements in academics, athletics, or co-curricular pursuits.
Jeff Smith (see http://teachers.net/wong/APR04), a teacher of welding at a Ca-
reer Tech Center in Pryor, Oklahoma, reports he was almost fired during his first 
year because of his poor classroom management. But he happened to hear one of 
the Wongs’ tapes and later wrote the Wongs to say, “You saved my job, and someday 
I want to help other beginning teachers just like you helped me.” Jeff went on to 
set the state record for the most Career Tech students certified under the industry 
standard welding certification. He reports that his former students have the highest 
pay average for high school graduates in the state. He goes on to say that he always 
knew his subject matter, but had no clue about classroom management until he 
encountered the Wongs’ ideas.
Ed Lucero (see http://teachers.net/wong/MAR05), a high school teacher of 
business, marketing, and finance in Albuquerque, New Mexico, wrote, “Last year 
was my eleventh year of teaching. I was miserable! Students weren’t paying at-
tention. I constantly repeated myself. Students would ignore my instructions 
and at times talk back. Some students would attempt to call me ‘bro’ instead of 
Mr. Lucero.”
Ed decided if things did not improve, he would leave teaching and return to 
public accounting. His wife suggested he read the Wongs’ The First Days of School: 
How to Be an Effective Teacher. He spent the summer studying their suggestions and 
when the next school year began he was able to implement them. He reported that 
very quickly he began enjoying the pleasures of teaching.
other examples of Management success
New teacher Amanda Brooks started her school year with a plan and as she says, 
“I had no behavior problems. I simply taught and enjoyed my students.” See 
www.teachers.net/wong/AUG10.
Kara Moore succeeded because she started the school year with a plan, even 
though her assignment was changed a week before school began. See www.teachers 
.net/wong/AUG12.
One principal created a school with consistent procedures and produced the 
first public school on an Indian reservation to ever achieve AYP (Adequate Yearly 
Progress). She did this by teaching her teachers how to start the first day with a 
script. See www.teachers.net/wong/AUG11.
What you have learned in this Chapter
■ You have particular roles to fill and so do students. Help students understand 
what you will do and what you expect them to do.
141

Harry and Rosemary Wong on the First Things You Should Teach
■ Smooth-running classes are those in which students understand how to follow 
the procedures required of them.
■ Effective teachers spend most of the first 2 weeks of class teaching students 
how to follow procedures and comply with expectations.
■ Your first 5 minutes with your students set a lasting tone for your class.
■ It is helpful to script (write out) exactly what you intend to say, do, and ac-
complish during the first day or days of class.
■ Teaching your students to follow expected procedures is one of the most im-
portant things you can do as a teacher.
■ Students often learn best in cooperative work groups (support groups). You 
must teach students how to be contributing members of such groups.
Commentary from anonymous teacher 1
Now with many years of teaching under my belt, I have my opening­ 
of­class instructions well memorized, so I don’t need to script the first day 
of school. But I could certainly have used that information (but didn’t have 
it) when I first began teaching. Back then, I sort of began the year with trial 
and error, plenty of both. I really didn’t know quite what to convey to my 
students or how to do so.
Even now, although I have most things under control, I learn a lot from 
the Wongs. It is no wonder they have such a large following. I especially like 
what they suggest we tell students about rules—that rules ensure a calm, 
respectful classroom where everybody will be safe and successful. I also 
like their ideas about teaching procedures to the point that students have 
a complete understanding of what they are to do. That suggestion alone 
really cuts down on confusion and disorder.
Commentary from anonymous teacher 2
Rosemary and Harry Wong are great champions of teachers and of 
the teaching profession. The suggestions they provide for managing 
a classroom are uplifting and empowering. The collective wisdom of 
their experiences and of the many teachers who have used their ideas 
is readily accessible and inspires pride and self­confidence. Their ideas 
are not just pretty words; they are practical, classroom­tested solutions 
to some of the most annoying situations in a classroom. Here are sit­
uations I often encounter that are easily controlled with the Wongs’ 
suggestions:
Problem: 
Students come in very chatty and rambunctious from passing 
period, recess, lunch.
Solution: 
Bell work. I, and almost every teacher I know, use this tried­
and­true method to achieve a calm and orderly start to the 
class.
142

Harry and Rosemary Wong on the First Things You Should Teach
Problem: 
Students bombard you with the same questions (totally unre­
lated to subject matter), over and over, the sheer volume of 
which is exhausting and exasperating.
Solution: 
Create and teach procedures for all of these common situations:
“May I use the restroom? I really need to pee. Ms. Forsythe 
wouldn’t let me go!”
“Can I go call my mom? I forgot my PE clothes/homework/
project at home!”
“I need to go take my project/model/essay/book to _____. Can 
I please, please go, really fast?”
“Where do I turn in my late work?”
“I’m done. What do I do with this and what do I do now?”
“I’ve been absent for 3 days. Did I miss anything important?”
The Wongs’ advice does help us make things easier for ourselves and our 
students. I use PowerPoint presentations to teach my students the pro­
cesses of creating group posters, murals, role­plays, and skits. Sometimes 
we make a Jeopardy­style game for reviewing and reinforcing what has 
been learned. I like the visuals to reinforce the words and also keep every­
thing more interesting for the kids. Also, PowerPoint presentations keep 
me on track so I don’t forget something I intended to say. Power Point 
slides are easy to move around or replace as needed without redoing an 
entire presentation. As follow­up, I have students make charts and other 
displays and sometimes let groups act out what we should be doing when 
we go out to fire drills or other activities.
ac t i vi ti e s
Self-Test: True/False
 1. The Wongs believe that more teachers fail because 
of poor management skills than because of faulty 
knowledge of subject matter.
 2. The Wongs advise teachers to carefully explain 
their responsibilities as well as students’ responsi-
bilities in the class.
 3. The Wongs use the term “procedures” to refer only 
to teachers’ carefully thinking through the steps 
they will follow in presenting lessons.
 4. The Wongs, believing testing is overrated, advise 
teachers instead to evaluate students on the basis 
of projects they complete.
 5. The Wongs maintain that what teachers do during 
the first few minutes of class is crucial to success in 
teaching and learning.
 6. The Wongs’ advise against using cooperative work 
groups because the less capable students usually 
get left out of the interaction.
 7. How primary students are to use the drinking 
fountain is one example of a “procedure.”
 8. “Scripting” refers to writing a description of what 
happened in a given class for later analysis of 
strengths and weaknesses.
 9. The Wongs maintain that their suggestions work 
just as well for secondary teachers as they do for 
teachers at the elementary level.
143

Harry and Rosemary Wong on the First Things You Should Teach
 10. The Wongs urge you, when first meeting your 
students, to teach a typical academic lesson so 
 students will get a feel for how you teach.
Self-Test: Multiple Choice
 1. The Wongs urge you to spend the first days of class
(a) teaching responsibilities and roles.
(b) learning students’ names.
(c) reviewing objectives.
(d) getting acquainted.
 2. Your success for the year is most strongly influ-
enced by what you do
(a) on the first day.
(b) at the end of first month.
(c) during the first grading period.
(d) during the last 2 weeks of the year.
 3. The Wongs say effective teachers spend most of the 
first 2 weeks teaching
(a) courtesy.
(b) responsibility.
(c) procedures.
(d) subject matter.
 4. The Wongs say the main problem in schools 
 today is
(a) discipline.
(b) poor class management.
(c) unmotivated students.
(d) ineffective administrators.
 5. To increase student achievement, teachers should 
(within reason)
(a) visit students’ homes.
(b) communicate with caregivers.
(c) give frequent tests.
(d) use discovery learning.
 6. Ineffective teachers begin the first day of school 
trying to teach
(a) subject matter.
(b) routines.
(c) the discipline plan.
(d) roles and responsibilities.
 7. You should limit the number of rules of behavior to
(a) three.
(b) five.
(c) seven.
(d) none of the above—it depends on the class.
 8. The Wongs say their approach works
(a) better for elementary classes.
(b) better for secondary classes.
(c) better for preschool classes.
(d) equally well for any level.
 9. On the first day, you should greet each student
(a) at his or her desk.
(b) on the school grounds.
(c) at the bus drop-off.
(d) at the classroom door.
 10. Throughout lessons, you should intersperse
(a) questions.
(b) time for quiet reflection.
(c) positive reinforcement.
(d) compliments.
Self-Test: Explain This
 1. What do the Wongs mean by “procedures”?
 2. What do the Wongs say about “the first 5 minutes 
of class”?
 3. What do the Wongs say about tests and testing?
 4. What do the Wongs mean by “scripting”?
 5. What do the Wongs say about cooperative student 
work?
Additional Suggested Activities
 1. In your journal, make notes of suggestions 
from the Wongs that you might wish to incor-
porate into a personalized system of classroom 
management.
 2. What would you communicate to students con-
cerning your roles and their roles in the class? 
What would you do to make sure they remem-
bered their roles? How might you tie your man-
agement plan into your explanation of their 
roles?
 3. Following the Wongs’ suggestions, outline what 
you would script for the first 10 minutes of your 
first class.
144

Harry and Rosemary Wong on the First Things You Should Teach
Con c e p t C a se s
Case 1 kristina Will not Work
Kristina, a student in Mr. Jake’s class, is quite docile. She socializes little with other students 
and never disrupts lessons. However, despite Mr. Jake’s best efforts, Kristina will not do her 
work. She rarely completes an assignment. She is simply there, putting forth no effort at all. 
What would Harry and Rosemary Wong suggest to help Kristina and Mr. Jake?
The Wongs would advise Mr. Jake to carefully teach Kristina the procedures associ-
ated with completing assignments and other work activities. He should ask her to show 
him that she understands the procedures. He might consider having Kristina work with a 
support buddy with whom she feels comfortable. He would supply positive consequences 
for all improvements Kristina shows. If Kristina does not improve, Mr. Jake should talk 
further with her privately, and in a positive, supportive tone reiterate that he cares about 
her, wants her to succeed, will let nothing interfere with her progress if he can help it, and 
will help correct anything that might be standing in the way of her completing her work.
If Kristina still doesn’t improve, Mr. Jake should seek help from school personnel who are 
trained to assess Kristina and help provide conditions that improve her likelihood of success.
Case 2 sara Will not stop talking
Sara is a pleasant girl who participates in class activities and does most, though not all, of 
her assigned work. She cannot seem to refrain from talking to classmates, however. Her 
teacher, Mr. Gonzales, has to speak to her repeatedly during lessons, to the point that he 
often becomes exasperated and loses his temper. What suggestions might Harry and Rose-
mary Wong give Mr. Gonzales for dealing with Sara?
Case 3 Joshua Clowns and intimidates
Joshua, larger and louder than his classmates, always wants to be the center of attention, 
which he accomplishes through a combination of clowning and intimidation. He makes 
wise remarks, talks back (smilingly) to the teacher, utters a variety of sound-effect noises 
such as automobile crashes and gunshots, and makes limitless sarcastic comments and 
put-downs of his classmates. Other students will not stand up to him, apparently fearing 
his size and verbal aggression. His teacher, Miss Pearl, has come to her wit’s end. Do Harry 
and Rosemary Wong provide suggestions that might improve Joshua’s behavior? Explain.
Case 4 tom is hostile and defiant
Tom has appeared to be in his usual foul mood ever since arriving in class. On his way to 
sharpen his pencil, he bumps into Frank, who complains. Tom tells him loudly to shut 
up. Miss Baines, the teacher, says, “Tom, go back to your seat.” Tom wheels around, swears 
loudly, and says heatedly, “I’ll go when I’m _____ good and ready!” What suggestions might 
Harry and Rosemary Wong offer to help improve Tom’s behavior?
145

Harry and Rosemary Wong on the First Things You Should Teach
you are  th e  te a c h e r
Middle sChool Media Center
You are the specialist in charge of the middle school 
media center. You see your job as serving as a resource 
person to students who are seeking information, and 
you are always eager to give help to those who request 
it. Each period of the day brings different students 
to your center. Usually, small groups come to do co-
operative research. In addition, unexpected students 
frequently appear who have been excused from their 
regular classes for a variety of reasons, but often have 
no particular purpose for visiting the center.
a typiCal oCCurrenCe
You have succeeded in getting students settled and 
working when Tara appears at your side, needing a 
book to read as makeup work for missing class. You 
ask Tara what kinds of books interest her. She resign-
edly shrugs her shoulders. You take her to a shelf of 
newly published books. “I read this one last night,” you 
tell her. “I think you might like it. It’s a good story and 
fast reading.” Tara only glances at it. “That looks stu-
pid,” she says. “Don’t you have any good books?” She 
glances down the shelf. “These are all stupid!”
Another student, Jaime, is tugging at your elbow. 
He is trying to deliver a note to you from his history 
teacher. You ask Tara to look at the books for a moment 
while you keep Jaime as your side. At that moment you 
notice that a group of students, supposedly doing re-
search, are watching Walter and Teo have a friendly 
pencil fight, hitting pencils together until one of them 
breaks. You address your comments to Walter, who ap-
pears to be the more eager participant. Walter answers 
hotly, “Teo started it! It wasn’t me!” “Well,” you say, 
“if you boys can’t behave yourself, just go back to your 
class.” Teo smiles and Walter feels he is being treated 
unjustly. He sits down and pouts.
Meanwhile, Tara has gone to the large globe and 
is twirling it. You start to speak to her but realize that 
Jaime is still waiting at your side with the note from his 
teacher. Somehow, before the period ends, Tara leaves 
with a book she doesn’t want and Jaime takes a citation 
back to his teacher. The research groups have been too 
noisy. You know they have done little work and wonder 
if you should speak to their teacher about their man-
ners and courtesy. After the period is over, you notice 
that profane remarks have been written on the table 
where Walter was sitting.
ConCeptualizing a strategy
If you followed the suggestions of the Wongs, 
what would you conclude or do with regard to the 
following?
■ Pinpointing the problems in your class
■ Preventing the problems from occurring in the first 
place
■ Putting an immediate end to the misbehavior
■ Maintaining student dignity and good personal 
relations
■ Using the situation to help the students develop a 
sense of greater responsibility and self-control
Procedures (Wong & Wong): Detailed instructions that 
show students how to perform all activities in class—
effective use can eliminate a number of discipline 
problems.
Support buddies (Wong & Wong): Students assigned to 
help or support each other; members of cooperative 
learning groups.
Support groups (Wong & Wong): Groups of students who 
help and support each other; cooperative learning groups.
glo ssary
146

Harry and Rosemary Wong on the First Things You Should Teach
Glavac, M., (2005). Summary of major concepts covered 
by Harry K. Wong. The Busy Educator’s Newsletter. 
 Retrieved from http://www.glavac.com/
Starr, L. (1999). Speaking of classroom management—an inter-
view with Harry K. Wong. Education World. Retrieved from 
http://www.educationworld.com/a_curr/curr161.shtml
ref e re n c e s
147

148

Fred Jones on Keeping Students 
Willingly Engaged in Learning
From Chapter 7 of Building Classroom Discipline, Eleventh Edition. C. M. Charles. Copyright © 2014 by  Pearson 
Education, Inc. All rights reserved.
149

Some years ago, psychologist Fred Jones conducted large-scale studies of out-
standing teachers who were identified as “naturals” by their administrators and 
colleagues. He hoped to discover what those teachers did that made teaching and 
discipline seem so effortless. The answer, he found, was that those teachers kept 
students fully engaged in learning while teaching them to be self-disciplined. Jones 
decoded what these teachers did and translated the techniques into coachable 
skills. He then taught a set of struggling teachers in the same school to use these 
skills. The results showed that disruptions decreased by 87%. To validate that the 
intervention was what changed the behavior, he did a reversal study wherein the 
teachers stopped using their new skill set. The students’ behavior reverted, indicat-
ing that the new skills were the critical factor. In this chapter, we examine Jones’s 
findings and conclusions and see how they are applied in the classroom.
Who Is Fred Jones?
Dr. Jones, an independent consultant in teaching and classroom management, is the 
author of Fred Jones’s Tools for Teaching (2007a), in which he explains tactics for moti-
vating students, instructing them effectively, and helping them develop self-discipline. 
He first became interested in the nature of better teaching while on the faculties of 
the UCLA Medical Center and the University of Rochester School of Medicine and 
Dentistry. He now devotes himself to making presentations and developing materi-
als for educators. In addition to Tools for Teaching, Jones is author of Positive Classroom 
Discipline (1987a) and Positive Classroom Instruction (1987b). Jones has also developed 
a video course of study called The Video Toolbox (2007b) and has published a number 
of articles on effective teaching in Education World. The manual for The Video Toolbox is 
authored by Patrick T. Jones. Descriptions of these materials, programs, and available 
presentations are posted on Dr. Jones’s website at www.fredjones.com.
What QuestIons WIll thIs Chapter ansWer For Me?
■ What does Jones identify as the main problem in discipline?
■ How does Jones keep students actively engaged in learning?
Fred Jones on Keeping Students 
Willingly Engaged in Learning
Fred Jones on Keeping Students 
Willingly Engaged in Learning
How Does Fred Jones Help Students 
Focus and Stay on Task?
150

Fred Jones on Keeping Students Willingly Engaged in Learning
■ What does Jones mean by “body language,” and how is it used?
■ What is Say, See, Do teaching, and how is it done?
■ What does Jones mean by “working the crowd,” and what does it entail?
■ What are visual instructional plans, and how are they used?
■ What is preferred activity time (PAT), and what is it used for?
■ How can teachers provide help to students most effectively?
■ How might I apply Jones’s ideas in my own classroom?
the Jones Model
The Common Goal of All Approaches to Discipline 
Responsible, Civil Classroom Behavior That Becomes 
Habitual and Lasts over Time
Responsible means paying attention, making a 
strong effort, and doing what is proper without being 
told. Civil means respectful, polite, cordial, and 
well-mannered.
Fred Jones’s Approach to Discipline
Jones’s Overarching Strategy
Keep students actively and purposefully involved 
in lessons and enable them to follow directions on 
their own.
Jones’s Principal Tactics
Use Say, See, Do Teaching
Work the Crowd (interact with students)
Use Body Language Effectively
Provide Help Efficiently 
Use Visual Instructional Plans
Use Preferred Activity Time to Motivate
↓
→
↑
↓
↓
↓
↑
↑
↑
↑
151

Fred Jones on Keeping Students Willingly Engaged in Learning
What FIve probleMs dId Jones brIng to lIght?
Jones and his associates spent thousands of hours observing and recording in 
hundreds of elementary and secondary classrooms. Their analyses of those record-
ings pinpointed the misbehaviors that most often occurred in classrooms and 
located the points in lessons where they usually appeared. The information also 
revealed many tactics that highly effective teachers used to prevent and deal with 
misbehavior.
Jones concluded that five major conditions are usually evident in less effective 
classrooms. They are massive time wasting, student passivity, student aimlessness, 
“helpless handraising,” and ineffective nagging by teachers. Here is how he de-
scribes those conditions and how he suggests you can address them. His research 
showed that by using the skills sets he developed, you can reduce misbehavior, in-
crease learning, make schooling enjoyable for you and your students, and promote 
positive attitudes for everyone concerned.
regarding Massive time Wasting
Jones found that the main problem in less productive classes was simply  massive 
time wasting. Even though many of the classrooms he studied were in inner-
city schools and alternative schools for students with behavior problems, Jones 
found relatively little student hostility and defiance—the behavior teachers fear 
and that many people believe predominates in schools. Instead, students wasted 
huge amounts of time by talking, goofing off, daydreaming, and moving about. He 
found they were doing one or more of those things in about 95% of the classroom 
disruptions that affected teaching and learning.
Jones also determined how frequently disruptions occurred. In well-managed 
classrooms, one disruption occurred about every 2 minutes. In louder, more un-
ruly classes, the disruptions averaged about 2.5 per minute. He found that the 
typical class did not get down to business until 5 to 7 minutes after the bell rang, 
while in-class transitions from one activity to another normally took 5 minutes. 
The resultant inefficiency contributed to teachers losing almost 50% of the time 
that could have been devoted to teaching and learning (Jones, 1987a).
Jones described students in the less effective classes as “expert time wasters” 
who had no vested interest in “hustle” and took every opportunity to dawdle. Jones 
consequently set out to determine how this time wasting could be reduced. He 
concluded it could best be remedied by: (1) clearly communicating class require-
ments to students and following through with class rules, (2) establishing and 
practicing class routines, (3) increasing students’ initial inclination to participate, 
(4) using tactics and activities that keep students actively involved in lessons, and 
(5) efficiently providing help to students who need it. Presently we will see Jones’s 
suggestions for making those improvements.
regarding student passivity
Jones found that students in typical classes were passive most of the time, rather 
than active. Passivity tends to reduce attention, and so students would disengage 
152

Fred Jones on Keeping Students Willingly Engaged in Learning
from lessons and daydream, look out the window, or talk with others. Jones con-
cluded that this passivity was fostered by the teaching methods being used, which 
only infrequently asked students to participate or show accountability, especially 
in the early phases of lessons. Students mainly sat and (supposedly) listened while 
teachers explained and demonstrated.
Jones hastens to add that the teachers who encountered problems were work-
ing hard at their jobs—he described their efforts as “bop ‘til you drop” and lik-
ened their activities to actors performing five matinees a day. Yet, despite all their 
effort, when the lesson transitioned from teacher input to independent student 
seat work, waving hands would shoot into the air because students simply didn’t 
know what to do. The hands, Jones noted, usually belonged to the same “helpless 
 handraisers” every day. When hands went up, the teachers would begin chasing 
from student to student, repeating over and over the same information they had 
tried so hard to impart earlier in the lesson.
regarding aimlessness
Another problem Jones found was that students either had scant knowledge of 
the procedures they were to follow or else chose not to follow them. This lack of 
knowledge, or disregard, resulted in apathetic inaction. Jones believes students usu-
ally know, generally if not specifically, what is expected of them, yet many disregard 
those expectations.
The students Jones observed did not behave the same in all their classes. 
They adjusted their behavior to match the standards that each teacher was able 
to uphold. As Jones put it, if your second-period teacher let you talk and fool 
around while your third-period teacher did not, you talked in second period and 
cooled it in third period. The standards in any classroom, he says, are defined 
by whatever students can get away with. If teachers do not take the time to teach 
expectations and procedures carefully—and if they fail to ensure compliance with 
those  expectations—they will invariably get whatever the students feel like giving 
them, which usually is not much. Jones’s views correspond with those of Harry 
and Rosemary Wong that teaching and enforcing classroom procedures is prob-
ably the most neglected aspect of classroom management.
regarding helpless handraising
Jones found that when teachers were working hard in the first parts of lessons, stu-
dents seemed to pay attention and understand well enough. But when students were 
directed to continue work on their own, hands went up, talking began, students rum-
maged around or stared out the window, and some got out of their seats. As Jones 
(1987b) put it, “that was when the chickens came home to roost” (p. 14), meaning 
the natural results of incomplete student understanding became painfully evident.
Often, teachers did not know what to do at that time other than admonish, 
nag, or reteach the lesson to the handraisers. That scene, said Jones (1987b), re-
flected “another day in the life of a typical classroom” (p. 14). Teachers everywhere 
can relate to that scenario and the frustration it brings. Later we will examine Jones’s 
solution to that problem.
153

Fred Jones on Keeping Students Willingly Engaged in Learning
regarding Ineffective nagging
Jones’s observations revealed that many teachers spend a great deal of time nagging 
students—telling them over and over what they ought to be doing and admonish-
ing them when they don’t comply. Jones calls that the nag-nag-nag syndrome, which 
many teachers use even though experience has repeatedly shown them it doesn’t 
work. Jones says instead of nagging, teachers should calmly show they mean busi-
ness. As we will see later, Jones believes they can do this more effectively through 
body language than through verbal language.
hoW Would Jones help teaChers beCoMe More eFFeCtIve?
Jones says that all the highly touted efforts to improve education—all those poli-
cies, mandates, and well-intentioned “solutions”—don’t mean a thing until they 
are translated into workable practices in the classroom. Most teachers try their best 
not only to maintain reasonable behavior in the room, but also to implement the 
latest and best teaching practices. And what does that get them? Usually, little more 
than an increasingly heavy workload that over time becomes more and more dif-
ficult to manage.
But, says Jones, there is a much easier way to get things done, and done well. 
By using a better approach, teachers can raise their effectiveness without working 
themselves to exhaustion, as many do today. Here we review 11 of Jones’s sugges-
tions for promoting active involvement, purposeful behavior, and responsibility.
First, Conserve time and don’t allow students to Waste It
The most effective teachers make maximum use of the time available for instruc-
tion. They do this by establishing a classroom structure of rules, routines, and re-
sponsibility training that uses time efficiently. The structure puts students on task 
when the bell rings and allows 30-second transitions from one activity to another. 
These two tactics alone can save 10 minutes of learning time that is wasted in the 
usual 50-minute class period.
second, arrange Class seating to Facilitate active 
teaching and Close proximity to students
Jones would have you maintain close proximity and eye contact with students and 
move among them, both during direct instruction and while students are engaged 
in seat work or cooperative learning. To allow you to move easily among students, 
classroom seating must provide generous walkways. Jones advocates an interior 
loop arrangement, where desks or tables are set with two wide aisles from front to 
back, with enough distance between side-to-side rows for you to walk comfortably 
among the students. Your path of circulation would be along the black loop, as 
shown in Figure 1.
This seating arrangement not only allows you to maintain close proximity 
to all students, but is especially helpful when you work the crowd, as Jones says, 
meaning you monitor and interact with students who are doing independent or 
group work. It also allows you to bring body language more effectively into play, 
154

Fred Jones on Keeping Students Willingly Engaged in Learning
as will be described later in this chapter. These conditions keep students attentive 
and actively involved.
third, teach Your students the Meaning 
and purpose of discipline
Jones wants you to make it plain to your students that the purpose of discipline is to 
help them learn, be successful in school, and have an enjoyable time doing so. Think 
of discipline in that way—a means of helping students rather than clashing with them. 
Help students see it that way, too. Jones suggests a number of positive, unobtrusive 
tactics that provide good results in that kind of discipline. Here are three examples:
■ Prevent the occurrence of misbehavior. Jones stresses that the best way to man-
age behavior problems is to prevent their occurrence, and that the best preven-
tive strategy involves setting limits, specifying class rules, giving students class 
responsibilities, organizing an effective seating arrangement, and establishing 
a routine for beginning the class.
■ Set limits on behavior. In setting limits, you clearly demarcate the boundaries 
that separate acceptable behavior from unacceptable behavior. Those bound-
aries are then verbalized as class rules, which you must enforce. Jones urges 
you to begin this process when you first meet your students. At that time, 
discuss with them the class rules and explain how they ensure behavior that 
allows everyone to learn and feel safe.
■ Use workable class rules. Jones describes two types of class rules—general and 
specific. General rules, fairly few in number, define your broad guidelines, 
standards, and expectations for work and behavior. Examples of general rules:
■ Do quality work every time; don’t settle for anything else.
■ Treat every member of the class as you would like them to treat you.
Rules of this type should be posted, referred to regularly, and reviewed 
periodically.
Figure 1 Jones’s Interior Loop Seating Arrangement.
Source: Jones, F. (2007). Tools for teaching. Santa Cruz, CA: Fredric H. Jones & Associates.
155

Fred Jones on Keeping Students Willingly Engaged in Learning
Specific rules refer to procedures and routines. They detail exactly what 
s tudents are to do in various learning activities. Examples:
■ When you enter the room, sit down and begin bell work immediately.
■ When you wish to speak, raise your hand and wait to be called on.
There will be many specific rules. The behaviors they specify must be taught 
and rehearsed until they are learned, just like any academic skill. Jones ad-
vocates spending the first 2 weeks making sure students understand them 
thoroughly.
Introduce rules by involving your students in identifying examples of 
desirable and undesirable classroom behavior. This process helps students rec-
ognize the need for rules. You will have formalized your rules in advance, but 
you should go through them with students until students clearly understand 
their purpose and the behavior they require. Then you should have students 
practice complying with rules until doing so becomes second nature.
In your discussions about rules, be sure to explain what you will do to 
help students abide by the rules. Indicate how you will teach the required 
behavior when necessary. Explain how you will show your approval and ap-
preciation when students follow rules properly, and also explain what you will 
do when students break rules.
Fourth, assign Your students specific 
responsibilities in Caring for the Classroom
Jones believes in assigning a classroom chore to every student, if possible. This practice 
helps students develop a sense of personal responsibility and ownership in the class 
program. The number and type of classroom jobs you assign depends upon your grade 
level, teaching assignment, and personal preferences. Here are some examples of jobs 
that many teachers use: teacher assistants, classroom librarians, paper distributors, 
assignment collectors, zoologists/animal handlers, gardeners, homework monitors, 
media monitors, computer technicians, bulletin board designers, materials managers, 
room inspectors, mail carriers, and job managers. You can check the Internet to learn 
how other teachers have organized their systems for classroom jobs. You will find 
teachers are very generous in sharing their systems and ideas with fellow educators.
Fifth, begin every Class with bell Work
Class sessions in many schools begin in a fragmented way, with announcements, 
taking attendance, handling tardies, and the like. This fragmentation causes the loss 
of 5 to 8 minutes at the beginning of most classes.
You can avoid losing this time simply by beginning lessons promptly. Jones 
would have you teach students to sit down and begin doing bell work immediately 
upon entering the room. Bell work engages students and focuses their attention. No 
active instruction from you is required. Examples of bell work are answering review 
questions, doing warm-up problems, solving brain teasers, doing silent reading, 
and writing in journals.
156

Fred Jones on Keeping Students Willingly Engaged in Learning
sixth, Keep Your students actively engaged in learning
To help teachers maintain student involvement, Jones emphasizes a teaching ap-
proach he calls Say, See, Do teaching. In that approach, the teacher says the task, 
the students see the teacher perform the task, and then the students do it. This pro-
cess is used frequently through the lesson.
You can see that Say, See, Do teaching is preferable to the traditional approach 
in which teachers tell about, explain, and demonstrate a quantity of informa-
tion before students do anything active. Jones (2007) graphically depicts the old- 
fashioned approach as follows:
Teacher input, input, input, input, input → Student output
This traditional approach contains some built-in faults, such as:
■ The large amount of teacher input produces cognitive overload in students, 
which makes them want to disengage from the lesson.
■ The students sit passively for too long and the urge to do something builds up.
■ The teacher does not adequately work the crowd, that is, interact with indi-
vidual students, particularly in the back of the classroom.
Say, See, Do teaching is different. Teachers present smaller bits of information and 
then quickly have students do something with it. This approach is doing oriented, 
with activities occurring often and at short intervals. Jones depicts it as follows:
Teacher input → Student output → Teacher input →  
Student output → Teacher input → Student output
seventh, use visual Instructional plans
Say, See, Do teaching becomes even more effective when augmented with visual 
instructional plans (VIPs). VIPs are graphics or picture prompts that students 
use as guides in completing processes or activities. They come into play during 
the second part of the lesson, when students are asked to work on their own. VIPs 
are displayed in the room, and students are taught to consult them for guidance 
instead of raising their hands and waiting for the teacher when they get stuck. To 
illustrate, Fred Jones (2007) asks you to imagine you are teaching a class how to 
divide 495 by 6. Typically, you would explain and demonstrate the calculation one 
step at a time, and, when finished, your work on the chalkboard might look like 
that in Figure 2.
Now, Jones says, imagine the helpless handraiser during independent work, 
stuck on step four. What does the student do? Step four is not evident in the sum-
mary graphic in Figure 2. Our typical technique of laying one step over another pro-
duces only a single summary graphic. The helpless handraiser will now call for help 
and do nothing until the teacher arrives to provide yet another tutoring session.
Jones’s remedy is to display a graphic plan that shows one step at a time and a 
picture for every step. Such plans are easy to consult and follow, allowing students 
6
495
– 48
15
– 12
3
82 r 3
Figure 2 Summary 
Graphic.
Source: Jones, F. (2007). 
Tools for teaching. Santa 
Cruz, CA: Fredric H. Jones & 
Associates.
157

Fred Jones on Keeping Students Willingly Engaged in Learning
to continue working on their own. Figure 3 shows a guide to helping students who 
forget the steps in long division. This VIP, with the first six steps shown along the 
top, offers guidance that is simple, clear, and permanent. A student can refer to it at 
any time to answer the question, “What do I do next?”
eighth, use body language to Communicate 
pleasantly and Clearly that You Mean business
It is essential that your students understand that their job is to acquire important 
learning, while your job is to help them do so in pleasant circumstances. You need 
to convince them that you will not permit any behavior that interferes with those 
basic jobs. But, says Jones, you have to show them you mean business, and many 
teachers don’t know how to do so convincingly. If students don’t believe that you 
mean what you say, they will push back at you and you will find yourself nagging 
and cajoling for compliance—you’d do better to save your breath.
Here is Jones’s main suggestion for showing you mean business: Say what 
you mean and use body language to reinforce your words. Body language works 
nonverbally through body carriage, eye contact, and tone of voice. When used prop-
erly, it is low key and nonadversarial, and it eliminates most student backtalk and 
argumentation. Better yet, it increases learning for those who need it most—the low 
achievers who typically spend vast amounts of class time goofing off. Jones claims 
that simply by using body language, you can increase achievement for the bottom 
half of your class by as much as 50% while eliminating the majority of classroom 
disruptions—and you hardly have to open your mouth.
Bring body language to students’ attention right away. When discussing 
rules, demonstrate examples of body language you will use to help students stay 
on task. Include eye contact, facial expressions, gestures, and physical proximity. 
Jones says teachers are most effective in setting limits when they use their bod-
ies correctly but say nothing and take no other action. He emphatically reminds 
us that we cannot discipline with our mouths—that if we could, nagging would 
have fixed every kid a million years ago. He warns that when you open your 
mouth, you often do more harm than good. Jones does not leave to chance the 
interpretation of what constitutes effective body language. He coaches teachers in 
every detail. The prompts used for coaching are available free in the study Group 
6  495
8
6  495
8
48
6  495
8
48
1
Compare
6  495
?
Compare
6  495
8
48
1
?
Bring Down
6  495
8
48
15
Figure 3 Portion of a Step-by-Step Graphic.
Source: Jones, F. (2007). Tools for teaching. Santa Cruz, CA: Fredric H. Jones & Associates.
158

Fred Jones on Keeping Students Willingly Engaged in Learning
Activity explained later in this chapter. Following are further suggestions Jones 
makes about body language.
Regarding Body Carriage
Posture and body carriage are both very effective in communicating authority. 
Good posture and confident carriage suggest strong leadership, whereas drooping 
posture and lethargic movements suggest resignation or fearfulness. Students read 
body language and are able to tell whether you are feeling in charge or are tired, 
disinterested, or intimidated. Even when you are tired or troubled, remember to 
stand tall and move assertively.
Regarding Calm and Proper Breathing
Teachers do well to remain calm in all situations. Calm conveys strength. In part, it 
is attained and conveyed through proper breathing. The way teachers breathe when 
under pressure signals how they feel and what they are likely to do next. Teach 
yourself through practice to breathe slowly and deliberately before responding to 
annoying situations. Jones noted that some teachers take two deep breaths before 
turning to a misbehaving student. In doing so, they project an aura of self-control.
Regarding Eye Contact
Suppose you are explaining the process of multiplying fractions. You see that Jacob 
has stopped paying attention. You pause. The sudden quiet causes everyone to look 
at you. Jacob sees you are looking directly at his eyes. He straightens up and waits at-
tentively. Jones says few physical acts are more effective than eye contact for convey-
ing the impression of being in control. He adds that turning and pointing the eyes 
and the feet toward misbehaving students shows your commitment to discipline.
Regarding Physical Proximity
Suppose you have explained a process and have directed students to complete some 
exercises on their own. After a time, you notice that Jacob has stopped working and 
has begun talking to Jerry. You move toward Jacob. When he becomes aware of you, 
he immediately gets back to work. Jones maintains that teachers who use physical 
proximity rarely need to say anything to get offending students back on task.
Regarding Facial Expressions
Your facial expressions communicate a great deal. They can show enthusiasm, serious-
ness, enjoyment, and appreciation, all of which encourage good behavior; or they can 
reveal boredom, annoyance, and resignation, which may promote student lethargy 
and inattention. Facial expressions such as winks, smiles, and raised eyebrows demon-
strate a sense of humor and personal connection, traits students appreciate in teachers.
ninth, Increase Motivation and responsibility 
through Wise use of Incentives
An incentive is a proffered condition that prompts an individual to act. To illus-
trate, you promise (as an incentive) to allow students to engage later in a specific 
159

Fred Jones on Keeping Students Willingly Engaged in Learning
activity you know they enjoy, but first they must do their work and behave properly. 
The incentive is held in abeyance until the behavior occurs acceptably. Examples of 
incentives include the opportunity to work with a group to present a report or play 
an instructional game that reviews material pertinent to the subject. Jones features 
such incentives prominently as a means of motivating students and teaching them 
to be responsible. He found that some of the most effective teachers use incentives 
systematically, whereas less effective teachers use them improperly or not at all.
As for effective incentives, Jones says you should discuss with students the kinds 
you will make available and how you will manage them. He says the incentives should 
be provided in the form of preferred activity time (PAT), meaning instructional ac-
tivities students especially enjoy. To obtain them, students must work steadily rather 
than fool around. The time they save in doing so is then returned to them in the form 
of the incentive—the activity they enjoy. Jones says those activities must all have in-
structional value. Don’t use any that are simply for play or filling in time.
In elaborating further on PAT, Jones provides comments and reminders re-
lated to (1) Grandma’s rule, (2) student responsibility, (3) genuine incentives, 
(4)  preferred activities, (5) educational value, (6) group concern and management, 
(7) omission training, and (8) backup systems. Let us see what is involved in each.
Grandma’s Rule
Grandma’s rule states: “First eat your vegetables, and then you can have your des-
sert.” Applied to the classroom, this rule requires that students first do their as-
signed work, and then they can enjoy a favorite activity. It is a fact of life that 
children—and we adults, too—prefer to dive into the dessert, promising to eat our 
vegetables afterward. But as we all know, even the best intentions fade away once 
the motivation behind them is gone. Incentives are of no value unless they are de-
livered after, and only after, students have done their work in an acceptable manner. 
If they don’t eat their broccoli first, they don’t get their ice cream.
Student Responsibility
Jones contends that properly used incentives help foster student responsibility, 
by which students learn to take responsibility for their decisions and actions. For 
example, one way students can show responsibility is through cooperating with 
others. However, because cooperation is voluntary, it is difficult to force it on any-
one. When asked to cooperate, students who enjoy goofing off and daydreaming 
can ask themselves, “Why should I? What’s in it for me?” Jones argues that when 
incentives are provided for cooperation, students see they have something to gain 
by it. At first, they may cooperate primarily to obtain the incentive bonus, but over 
time, cooperation becomes natural and enjoyable in itself.
Genuine Incentives
There is a wide difference between what many teachers might consider to be incen-
tives (e.g., “Let’s all work in such a way that we will later be proud of what we do”) 
and what students consider genuine incentives (e.g., “If you complete your work 
on time, you can have 5 minutes of preferred activity time”). Certainly students are 
more motivated by specific outcomes they like than by vague outcomes that mean 
little to them. Jones comments on the different effects promoted by a promise of 
160

Fred Jones on Keeping Students Willingly Engaged in Learning
“free time” versus a promise of “preferred activity time.” He says students won’t 
work for long to earn free time, but they will work hard to gain time for an activity 
they enjoy. Teachers simply have to be sure the incentive is genuine in students’ 
eyes. The following, for example, are not incentives for most students:
■ “The first person to complete a perfect paper will receive two bonus points.”
■ “If you really work hard, you can be the best class I have ever had.”
The first may motivate a few of the most able students, but all the others know 
they have little chance to win so they see no point in trying. The second statement 
sounds good to the teacher but means very little to the students and is not sufficient 
to get them to make extra effort.
On the other hand, students respond well to the anticipation of activities such 
as art, games for learning or review, viewing a video, or having time to pursue in-
teresting topics with friends. Such group activities are effective because almost all 
students desire them sufficiently to make extra effort to obtain them and they are 
available to all students, not just a few.
Tangible objects, awards, and certificates should not be used as incentives. 
They do not motivate students highly, nor do they have educational value.
Earning Preferred Activity Time
PAT may be earned in a number of different ways. Mr. Jorgensen gives his fourth 
graders 3 minutes to put away their language arts materials and prepare for math. 
Any time left over from the 3 minutes goes later to PAT. In Mrs. Nguyen’s English 
class, if everyone is seated and ready when the bell rings, the class earns 2 min-
utes of additional PAT. However, if some or all of the class continues to be noisy, 
the class loses PAT commensurate with the amount of time they have wasted. Some 
classes use PAT on the day it is earned, whereas others accumulate PAT for a future 
activity.
Educational Value
It has been emphasized that to the extent feasible, class time, including PAT, should 
be devoted to activities that have educational value. Work that keeps students oc-
cupied but teaches them nothing of value can seldom be justified. Although most 
educators are comfortable in allowing occasional frivolity in the class, the opposite 
extreme of holding daily or weekly parties as incentives is difficult to condone. 
What, then, should one use as PAT?
Jones maintains that when teachers introduce PAT to their students, they must 
make sure of three things: (1) the activity has educational value, (2) students want 
to participate in the activity, and (3) students understand they earn the activity 
by conducting themselves responsibly. There are many activities with educational 
value that students enjoy greatly, both individually and in groups. Among the best 
activities are learning games and enrichment activities, which are both fun and 
educational. Examples of such activities are using new vocabulary words to play 
hangman, completing an art project, or reading a book for pleasure.
In PAT, students are never left to do just anything, nor do they proceed with-
out guidance. The freedom they enjoy lies in being able to choose from a variety of 
161

Fred Jones on Keeping Students Willingly Engaged in Learning
approved activities. Activities can be chosen by vote, with all students engaging in 
the same activity during the time allotted. Elementary school students often  select 
physical education, art, music, drama, or construction activities, or having the 
teacher read to them. Secondary students often choose to hold class discussions 
on special topics, participate in performances by class members, or work together 
on projects such as a class magazine. Posted on the Jones website (Jones, n.d.) 
you can find suggestions from teachers for a large number of educationally sound 
 activities that are effective as preferred activities; see www.fredjones.com/PAT/ 
index.html.
Group Concern and PAT Management
Jones also emphasizes the importance of making sure every student has a stake in 
earning the PAT incentive for the entire class. This group concern motivates all stu-
dents to keep on task, behave well, and complete assigned work. PAT can be man-
aged thus: The teacher agrees to set aside a period of time in which students might 
be allowed to engage in a preferred activity. The PAT can be at the end of the school 
day for self-contained classes—perhaps 15 to 20 minutes. For departmentalized 
classes, the time can be set aside at the end of the week—perhaps 30 minutes on 
Friday. The students can decide on the activity for their “dessert” time, and to earn 
it, they have only to work and behave in accordance with class standards.
The teacher keeps track of the time that students earn. Of course, it is possible 
that a single student, by misbehaving, can prevent the class from earning full PAT. 
Teachers often think it unfair to penalize the entire class when only a few have 
transgressed. In practice, this is rarely a problem, because the class quickly un-
derstands that this is a group effort, not an individual one. The group is rewarded 
together and punished together regardless of who misbehaves. A strength of this 
approach is that it engenders peer pressure in favor of proper behavior.
In ordinary circumstances, a misbehaving student obtains reinforcement from 
the group in the form of attention or laughter. With proper PAT, the opposite is 
true. The class is likely to discourage individual misbehavior because it takes away 
something the class members want. Nevertheless, some students do occasionally 
misbehave to the detriment of responsible students. When this occurs, the teacher 
may decide to work with the offending student individually.
Omission Training
Generally speaking, incentives and PAT bonuses are earned by the entire class. 
Teachers cannot possibly monitor incentives for all students individually. The ex-
ception lies in the occasional student whose misbehavior repeatedly ruins PAT for 
the rest of the class. The following case shows how omission training is useful in 
earning PAT for the entire class:
Kevin is a student in Ms. VanEtten’s class. He disregards the requirements of PAT 
and is continually late, loud, and unprepared, thus ruining PAT for the others. 
Ms. VanEtten privately explains to Kevin that he doesn’t have to participate in PAT 
because he doesn’t care about it, but she does want him to be successful with his 
own work and behavior. She explains that she will use a timer, and when Kevin 
behaves in accordance with class rules, he will earn time for himself individually, 
162

Fred Jones on Keeping Students Willingly Engaged in Learning
and also extra time for the class. When he misbehaves, he will lose time for himself 
but not for the class. Kevin soon learns he can gain status in the class by earning 
PAT for other members of the class.
Backup Systems for Misbehavior
As a last option for students who subvert PAT, Jones suggests backup systems, 
which are hierarchical arrangements of sanctions for putting a stop to unacceptable 
student behavior. Jones identifies three levels of backup:
 1. Small backup responses, conveyed privately or semiprivately to the student: 
“I expect you to stop talking so we can get on with our work.” With such low-
key messages, the student knows the teacher means business.
 2. Medium backup responses, delivered publicly in the classroom: “Emily, sit 
in the thinking chair for 3 minutes and think about what you have done 
that caused me to send you there.” Or, “Brian, because you are late again, 
you will have detention with me tomorrow after school.” Other medium 
backup responses include warnings, reprimands, loss of privileges, and parent 
conferences.
 3. Large backup responses are used to deal with repeated disruptions or other 
intolerable behavior. They require the involvement of at least two profession-
als, usually the teacher and an administrator. They include trips to the office, 
in-school or out-of-school suspension, and occasionally placement in special 
classes or special schools.
tenth, provide help efficiently during Independent Work
As noted earlier, Jones puts particular emphasis on how teachers should provide 
help to students who get stuck during seat work. Suppose Mrs. James is teaching a 
lesson in determining percentages. She illustrates at the board by showing how to 
calculate 4% of three different amounts, asks a couple of questions to verify that 
students are understanding, and then assigns independent exercises for students to 
calculate a number of percentages ranging from 5 to 120%.
Almost immediately, Arnell raises his hand for help. If he were the only one 
to do so, there would be little problem. But Mrs. James sees other hands began to 
wave, as well. She knows most of those students will sit and do nothing productive 
while waiting for her.
In his research, Jones asked teachers how much time they thought they spent, 
on average, when providing help to individuals who raised their hands. The teach-
ers felt that they spent from 1 to 2 minutes with each student, but when Jones’s 
researchers timed the episodes, they found that teachers actually spent around 
4 minutes with each student. The total amount of time consumed made it impos-
sible for the teacher to attend to more than a few students during the work period. 
Even if the teacher spent only 1 minute per contact, several minutes would pass 
while some students sat and waited.
Jones’s research led him to conclude that independent seat work is espe-
cially susceptible to four problems: (1) wasted time, (2) insufficient time for 
teachers to answer all requests for help, (3) high potential for misbehavior, and 
163

Fred Jones on Keeping Students Willingly Engaged in Learning
(4) perpetuation of student dependency on the teacher. Jones determined that all 
four could be resolved if teachers learned to provide help efficiently, using the fol-
lowing tactics we have examined previously.
First, organize the classroom seating so that all students can be reached quickly. 
The interior loop seating arrangement previously described is suggested because it 
allows quick and easy access to all students in the room.
Second, use visual instructional plans, which, as noted, are graphic reminders 
displayed in the room that provide clear examples and step-by-step instructions 
for students to consult. The reminders are posted where students can see them and 
thus continue on their own without needing to call for the teacher.
Third, minimize the time used for giving help to students. To see how this can 
be accomplished, consider that teachers normally give help through an inefficient 
questioning tutorial, in which the teacher poses questions and makes comments 
similar to the following:
“What’s the problem?”
“All right, what did we say was the first thing to do?” [Waits; repeats question.]
“No, that was the second. You are forgetting the first step. What was it? Think
again.” [Waits until student finally makes a guess.]
“No, let me help you with another example. Suppose . . .”
In this manner, the teacher often reteaches the concept or process to each student 
who requests help. Four minutes can be spent very easily in each interaction. In place 
of these tutorials, Jones trains teachers to give help in 20 seconds or less, with an 
optimal goal of 10 seconds. If the VIP does not help a student know what to do next, 
Jones would have teachers to do the following when arriving beside the student:
 1. (Optional for initial contact.) Quickly find anything that the student has done 
correctly and mention it favorably: “Your work is very neat.” or “Good job up 
to here.”
 2. Give a straightforward prompt that will get the student going: “Follow step 2 
on the graphic,” or “Regroup here.” Jones also recommends that, instead of 
tutoring students through the whole exercise, teachers should prompt students 
to ask themselves, “What do I do next?”
 3. Leave immediately. Don’t stay to see if students follow the prompt you have given.
Help provided in this way solves the time problem that plagues teachers during 
independent work. Students who need help receive it quickly, with little lost time. 
Rapid circulation also permits the teacher to monitor the work of students who do 
not raise their hands. When errors are noted in those students’ work, the teacher 
should provide help just as for students who have raised their hands.
eleventh, have stronger backup systems 
ready for use If and When needed
As noted earlier, you will need to organize backup systems for use when students 
refuse to comply with rules or directives. Discuss and explain them to students. 
Ordinarily you can limit misbehavior by using benign tactics such as proximity, 
164

Fred Jones on Keeping Students Willingly Engaged in Learning
eye contact, or showing personal interest. But there will be times when those tactics 
come up short. In those cases, tell the offending student, “If you are not going to do 
your work, sit there quietly and don’t bother others. I’ll speak with you later.” And 
for yet more serious defiance or aggression, you need to plan for, stronger backup 
systems—such as isolating the student or calling for help if needed. You should 
explain and demonstrate to students these stronger tactics, which you should clear 
in advance with your administrator.
Commentary from anonymous teacher 1
I think I mentioned in a previous context that I use body language quite a 
bit to keep students on task and behaving properly. However, I said “ouch” 
when reading Dr. Jones’s comments on nagging because, honestly, I do 
that quite a bit, way more than necessary, I know. It seems I feel it is my 
teacherly duty to add a lot of verbiage to what I have already accomplished 
through body language. I realize it sometimes makes students want to an-
swer back, and then I have another problem to deal with. Aside from that, 
I don’t think I waste a lot of time in my classes, except for trying to teach 
students during seat work what I already taught (I thought). I have my share 
of helpless handraisers, and spending lots of time with them probably does 
more harm than good. I’m going to make myself learn to provide adequate 
help in under 15 seconds. We’ll see if I can do it.
What Is Jones’s studY group aCtIvItY?
Jones makes available a free Study Group Activity Guide that can be downloaded 
from his website. It is associated and aligned with The Video Toolbox and is for use 
by small groups of teachers or student teachers who meet regularly to discuss and 
practice the skills Jones advocates. The Study Group Activity Guide and The Video 
Toolbox also present class activities that you can use immediately to perfect your 
management skills.
Jones highly recommends meeting and working with colleagues. He suggests 
the ideal group size is three to eight people. The structure he provides includes 
focus questions, study-group questions, and performance checklists, with 12 meet-
ings titled as follows:
■ Working the Crowd and Room Arrangement
■ Praise, Prompt, and Leave
■ Visual Instructional Plans
■ Say, See, Do Teaching
■ Rules, Routines, and Standards
■ Understanding Brat Behavior
■ Calm Is Strength
■ The Body Language of Meaning Business
■ Eliminating Backtalk
165

Fred Jones on Keeping Students Willingly Engaged in Learning
■ Responsibility Training
■ Omission Training and Preferred Activity Time
■ Dealing with Typical Classroom Crises
In revIeW, hoW MIght I IMpleMent Jones’s approaCh  
In MY ClassrooM?
Jones (1987a, p. 321) suggests you organize a five-tiered system that gives careful 
attention to: (1) physical classroom organization; (2) limit setting; (3) Say, See, Do 
teaching; (4) incentives; and (5) backup systems. The system should be planned in 
advance and introduced as a whole. In the planning phase, you might wish to keep 
the following in mind:
■ Do what you can to preserve and make wise use of instructional time that is so 
often wasted. A few simple management techniques will conserve this time.
■ Present instruction in a way that maximizes attention, active involvement, and 
student responsibility.
■ Use an effective seating arrangement, establish clear routines, and assign indi-
vidual chores to students.
■ Use Say, See, Do teaching to increase student alertness, involvement, and 
learning.
■ Actively “work the crowd,” moving about and interacting frequently with in-
dividual students as you teach and monitor their work.
■ Use visual instruction plans (VIPs) and other graphic reminders to help stu-
dents follow procedures.
■ Learn to give individual help to students in 20 seconds or preferably less, a 
tactic that eliminates student dependence on your presence and enables you 
to provide help as needed to all students quickly.
■ Use class incentives to foster student involvement and increase responsibility.
■ Use body language and personal-relations skills more than verbal messages to 
limit misbehavior and help students stay on track.
If you decide to implement Jones’s system at midsemester or midyear, it is not ab-
solutely necessary to present it as a full-blown system. You can assess your own be-
havior and isolate certain of his suggested tactics, and then add them incrementally.
Commentary from anonymous teacher 2
When it comes to Fred Jones’s ideas for better teaching, seeing is believ-
ing. I, along with the rest of our staff, was encouraged by my principal to 
read Dr. Jones’s Tools for Teaching. She was impressed with the research 
behind his ideas as well as with the practicality of his suggestions. I started 
by taking small steps and then building on those. First, I changed the furni-
ture arrangement to create an interior loop. I really liked the idea of being 
able to move around the room easily and quickly. I appreciated the notion 
of being no more than a few steps away from any student. I had a perfect 
layout in place before classes began, which I then had to modify slightly 
166

Fred Jones on Keeping Students Willingly Engaged in Learning
once actual students were sitting in those chairs. I found I needed a little 
more room in the aisles so I could walk without getting my feet tangled up 
in backpacks or tripping over outstretched legs. It was easy to fix that and 
the students and I both liked the seating arrangement. The principal had 
already indicated she believed teachers should be on their feet, “moving 
continuously, like a shark,” 80% of the time. She firmly believed in the con-
cept of proximity in maintaining acceptable student behavior.
I improved my lessons with more frequent guided practice and inde-
pendent practice, as suggested in Say, See, Do teaching. It really did work 
better for my students and was less frustrating for me. Using graphic orga-
nizers and/or picture prompts and reminders became part of my standard 
operating procedures. I found that I learned better with a visual representa-
tion of concepts and steps in a process, and so did many of my students. 
I even created a few reminders on sticky notes (such as taking two deep 
breaths before responding to a negative event, and a reminder not to nag!) 
and placed them on my desk. What I found very useful for the students 
was to provide them with blank graphic organizers and let them fill in and 
illustrate their own VIPs as they learned.
For PAT, I just assigned each activity a certain amount of time for suc-
cessful completion. I would subtract a given amount for noncompliance. I 
usually had the minutes add up over the course of a week so there would 
be a reward on Fridays, and then we could start over again the follow-
ing Monday. My students loved playing Jeopardy, Wheel of Fortune, Who 
Wants to Be a Millionaire, and other such games. We would play as an 
entire class at least once a month. I regulated their activities by the choices 
I offered. Some students liked learning a poem or dialog in French, some 
loved written games or board games (like Scrabble) where they could use 
their new vocabulary, and so forth. Everyone’s favorite activity, though, was 
something I offered once each trimester—croissants and hot chocolate for 
everyone as we practiced French conversation. I admit, that was my favor-
ite PAT as well.
What You have learned In thIs Chapter
You have learned that the major discipline problem in most classes is massive time 
wasting. You have seen why it occurs so frequently and what you can do to avoid it. 
You have also learned how to counter student passivity, help the “helpless handrais-
ers,” and eliminate the ineffective nagging used by many teachers. You have seen 
Jones’s suggestions for improving your teaching by conserving time, using an effec-
tive seating arrangement, teaching students the meaning and purpose of discipline, 
giving students chores in the classroom, and beginning every class with bell work. 
You learned about the effectiveness of body language and how it is used to help 
students remain engaged in lessons, and you have seen how to engage students 
through Say, See, Do teaching. Finally, you have seen how to use visual instructional 
plans and incentives to strengthen your instructional program.
167

Fred Jones on Keeping Students Willingly Engaged in Learning
ac tiv i ti e s
Self-Test: True/False
 1. According to Jones, the main discipline problem 
in most classes is simply what he calls “massive 
time wasting.”
 2. Astonishingly, most teachers do not tell students 
what they are supposed to do during independent 
work time.
 3. The “helpless handraisers” to whom Jones refers 
tend to be different students from day to day and 
lesson to lesson.
 4. Say, See, Do teaching means the teacher tells, the 
students watch, and then the teacher demonstrates.
 5. “Preferred activity time” refers to a segment of reg-
ularly scheduled time when students are allowed 
to do whatever they prefer doing.
 6. Jones says when students raise their hands for 
help, you should provide the help they need in 20 
seconds or less.
 7. Visual instructional plans that help students know 
what to do are a major tool Jones advocates for 
“working the crowd.”
 8. Jones advises teachers to “sit down and shut up” 
when students are doing independent seat work.
 9. Grandma’s rule refers to a cluster of time-honored 
sayings, such as, “Wash your hands before eating.”
 10. Incentives can serve to motivate students to 
 complete their assigned work.
Self-Test: Multiple Choice
 1. According to Jones, a main problem in classrooms is
(a) student insolence.
(b) excessive pressure.
(c) ineffective communication.
(d) massive time wasting.
 2. PAT refers to
(a) parents and teachers.
(b) patience and training.
(c) preferred activity time.
(d) pause and think.
 3. Jones says effective teachers are good at
(a) conserving time.
(b) expending abundant energy.
(c) counseling with caregivers.
(d) communicating verbally.
 4. Physical proximity is an aspect of
(a) body language.
(b) taking charge.
(c) showing concern.
(d) providing reassurance.
 5. “First do what you must do, and then you can do 
what you’d like to do” is the key idea in
(a) Grandpa’s folly.
(b) Grandma’s rule.
(c) Molly’s dictum.
(d) Jasper’s delusion.
 6. Most closely related to procedures and routines are
(a) general rules.
(b) alternative rules.
(c) congruent rules.
(d) specific rules.
 7. “Working the crowd” requires much
(a) attention to individuals.
(b) miming by the teacher.
(c) knowledge of students’ backgrounds.
(d) storytelling ability.
 8. Jones says the goal for the amount of time teachers 
spend helping students who raise their hands is
(a) 2 minutes or less.
(b) 1 minute or less.
(c) 20 seconds or less.
(d) unspecified.
 9. An especially notable feature of classrooms as sug-
gested by Jones is
(a) bulletin boards.
(b) materials display.
(c) a focal area.
(d) seating arrangement.
168

Fred Jones on Keeping Students Willingly Engaged in Learning
 10. “Say, See, Do” refers to a style of
(a) learning.
(b) thinking.
(c) teaching.
(d) analyzing.
Self-Test: Explain This
 1. What does Jones mean by “helpless handraisers”?
 2. How does Jones advise teachers to deal with help-
less handraisers?
 3. What is Say, See, Do teaching, and what is its 
purpose?
 4. What does Jones mean by “body language,” and 
how is it used?
 5. What is the interior loop, and what purpose does 
it serve?
 6. What does Jones say about teacher nagging?
 7. What are PAT and VIP, and how are they used?
Additional Suggested Activities
 1. Make notes in your journal concerning elements 
from Jones’s model that you would like to include 
in your personalized system of discipline.
 2. Review the questions listed at the beginning of 
the chapter. In as few words as possible, write your 
answers to those questions.
 3. Suppose you have decided to implement Jones’s 
discipline system in your classroom. You have de-
termined to use incentives, provide help quickly 
to students at work, stop directing your students 
by nagging, and use body language to show you 
mean business. Does this list leave out any of 
Jones’s major suggestions?
 4. Working with a partner, see if you can state the 
meaning and implications of: backup systems, 
bell work, body carriage, body language, genuine 
incentives, Grandma’s rule, helpless handraisers, 
interior loop, massive time wasting, physical prox-
imity, preferred activity time (PAT), visual instruc-
tional plans (VIPs), working the crowd, and Say, 
See, Do teaching.
 5. For each of the following scenarios, first identify 
the problem that seems to promote the undesired 
behavior, then describe how Jones would have the 
teacher deal with it.
■ Mr. Anton tries to help all of his students dur-
ing independent work time but finds himself 
unable to get around to all who have their 
hands raised.
■ Ms. Sevier wants to show trust for her class. She 
accepts their promise to work hard if she will 
allow them first to listen to a few favorite songs. 
After listening, the students talk so much that 
they fail to get their work done.
■ Mr. Gregory wears himself out every day deal-
ing ceaselessly with three class clowns who 
disrupt his lessons. The other students always 
laugh at the clowns’ antics.
■ Mrs. Swanson, who takes pride in her lec-
tures, is becoming frustrated because students 
begin to gaze out the window and whisper 
before she has completed what she wants to 
tell them.
Con c e p t C a se s
Case 1 Kristina Will not Work
Kristina, a student in Mr. Jake’s class, is quite docile. She socializes little with other students 
and never disrupts lessons. However, despite Mr. Jake’s best efforts, Kristina will not do her 
work. She rarely completes an assignment. She is simply there, putting forth no effort at 
all. What would Fred Jones suggest to help Kristina and Mr. Jake?
169

Fred Jones on Keeping Students Willingly Engaged in Learning
Jones would probably suggest that Mr. Jake take the following steps to improve 
 Kristina’s behavior:
■ Make frequent eye contact with her. Even when she looks down, Mr. Jake should 
make sure to look directly at her. She will be aware of it, and it may be enough to 
encourage her to begin work.
■ Move close to Kristina. Stand beside her while presenting the lesson.
■ Give Kristina frequent help during seat work. Check on her progress several times 
during the lesson. Give specific suggestions and then move quickly on.
■ Increase the amount of Say, See, Do teaching so Kristina has less information to deal 
with and is called on to respond frequently.
■ Set up a personal incentive system with Kristina, such as doing a certain amount of 
work to earn an activity she especially enjoys.
■ Set up a system in which Kristina can earn rewards for the entire class. This brings 
attention and support from her peers.
Case 2 sara Will not stop talking
Sara is a pleasant girl who participates in class activities and does most, though not all, of 
her assigned work. She cannot seem to refrain from talking to classmates, however. Her 
teacher, Mr. Gonzales, has to speak to her repeatedly during lessons, to the point that he 
often becomes exasperated and loses his temper. What suggestions would Fred Jones give 
Mr. Gonzales for dealing with Sara?
Case 3 Joshua Clowns and Intimidates
Joshua, larger and louder than his classmates, always wants to be the center of attention, 
which he accomplishes through a combination of clowning and intimidation. He makes 
wise remarks, talks back (smilingly) to the teacher, utters a variety of sound-effect noises 
such as automobile crashes and gunshots, and makes limitless sarcastic comments and 
put-downs of his classmates. Other students will not stand up to him, apparently fearing 
his size and verbal aggression. His teacher, Miss Pearl, has come to her wit’s end. What 
specifically do you find in Fred Jones’s suggestions that would help Miss Pearl with Joshua?
Case 4 tom Is hostile and defiant
Tom has appeared to be in his usual foul mood ever since arriving in class. On his way to 
sharpen his pencil, he bumps into Frank, who complains. Tom tells him loudly to shut 
up. Miss Baines, the teacher, says, “Tom, go back to your seat.” Tom wheels around, swears 
loudly, and says heatedly, “I’ll go when I’m _____ good and ready!” How effective do you 
believe Fred Jones’s suggestions would be in dealing with Tom?
170

Fred Jones on Keeping Students Willingly Engaged in Learning
Yo u  are  th e  te ac h e r
Mrs. Wardes’ sCheMe oF dIsCIplIne
You are a student teacher in an inner-city magnet 
school that emphasizes academics. Half of your stu-
dents are African American. The other half, of various 
ethnic groups, have been bused in to take advantage 
of the instructional program and rich resources. All 
are academically talented and none has what would be 
called a bad attitude toward school. Mrs. Warde, the 
regular teacher of the class, does not seem to rely on 
any particular scheme of discipline, at least not any that 
is obvious to you. She simply tells the students what to 
do and they comply. For the first few lessons you have 
taught, Mrs. Warde has remained in the room, serving 
as your aide. The students worked well, and you felt 
pleased and successful.
When Mrs. Warde leaves  
the rooM
Mrs. Warde tells you that she will leave the room during 
the math lesson so that you can begin getting the feel of 
directing the class on your own. Mrs. Warde warns you 
that the class might test you with a bit of naughtiness, 
although nothing serious is likely to occur. “Just be in 
charge,” Mrs. Warde counsels. The math lesson begins 
well, without incident. The lesson has to do with begin-
ning algebra concepts, which you approach through a 
discovery mode. You tell the class, “I want you to work 
independently on this. Think your way through the 
following equations and decide if they are true for all 
numbers.”
a + 0 = a
a + b = b + a
a (b + c) = ab + c
a + 1 = 1
a × 0 = a
The students begin work, but within 2 minutes hands 
are shooting up. You go to help Alicia, who is stuck on 
the third equation.
“What’s the matter?” you whisper.
“I don’t understand what this means.”
“It was like what I showed you on the board. The 
same.”
“Those were numbers. I don’t understand it with 
these letters.”
“They are the same as the numbers. They take the 
place of the numbers. I showed you how they were in-
terchangeable, remember? Go ahead, let me see. Tell 
me what you are doing, step by step.”
You do not realize it, but you spend almost 5 min-
utes with Alicia. Meanwhile, a few of the students have 
finished and are waiting, but most are holding tired arms 
limply in the air. You rush to the next student and repeat 
your questioning tutorial. Meanwhile, Matt and Alonzo 
have dropped their hands and are looking at each other’s 
papers. They begin to talk, then laugh. Others follow, 
and soon all work has stopped and the classroom has 
become quite noisy. You repeatedly say, “Shhh, shhh!” 
but with little effect. Finally, you sternly tell the class how 
disappointed you are in their rude behavior.
ConCeptualIzIng a strategY
If you followed Jones’s suggestions, what would you do 
with regard to the following?
■ Preventing the problem from occurring in the first 
place.
■ Putting an immediate end to the misbehavior 
now.
■ Maintaining student dignity and good personal 
relations.
■ Use follow-up procedures to prevent the recurrence 
of the misbehavior.
171

Fred Jones on Keeping Students Willingly Engaged in Learning
Backup system (Jones): The planned action teachers take 
when students misbehave seriously and refuse to com-
ply with positive teacher requests—often involves be-
ing sent to the principal’s office.
Bell work (Jones; Wong & Wong): Work students do to 
begin a class period that does not require instruction 
from the teacher, such as reading, writing in journals, 
or completing warm-up activities.
Body carriage (Jones): Posture and movement—can in-
dicate to students whether the teacher is well, ill, in 
charge, tired, disinterested, or intimidated.
General rules (Jones): Rules that define class standards 
and expectations that apply at all times, as distinct 
from specific rules related to certain activities.
Genuine incentives: (Jones) Incentives that truly motivate 
students to work or behave appropriately, as contrasted 
with vague incentives such as “become a better person.”
Grandma’s rule (Jones): “First eat your vegetables, then 
you can have your dessert,” or, “First finish your work, 
then you can do something you especially enjoy.”
Group concern (Jones): A condition in which every stu-
dent has a stake in the behavior the group uses to earn 
preferred activity time.
Helpless handraisers (Jones): Those students who sit with 
hands raised, not working unless the teacher is hover-
ing nearby.
Incentive (Jones): Something outside of the individual that 
can be anticipated and that entices the individual to act.
Interior loop (Jones): A classroom seating arrangement 
with wide aisles that allows teachers to move easily 
among students at work.
Massive time wasting (Jones): A condition Jones found 
prevalent in classrooms where discipline was not done 
efficiently.
Omission training (Jones): An incentive plan for an 
 individual student who, by cutting down on undesired 
behavior, can earn preferred activity time for the entire 
class.
Physical proximity (Redl & Wattenberg; others): The 
teacher’s moving close to a student who is becoming 
restive or is misbehaving.
Preferred activity time, or PAT (Jones): Time allocated 
for students to engage in activities of their prefer-
ence; used as an incentive to encourage responsible 
behavior.
Say, See, Do teaching (Jones): A teaching method of 
repeated short cycles of teacher input, each followed 
by student response. Keeps students attentive and 
involved.
Setting limits: Clarifying with the class exactly what is ex-
pected of them.
Specific rules (Jones): Rules relating to procedures and 
routines that detail exactly what students are to do in 
various learning activities.
Student responsibility (Jones; Glasser; Marshall; others): 
The contention that students have the obligation to 
reflect on their behavior choices, recognize how they 
effect themselves and others, and deal with whatever 
consequences occur.
Unobtrusive tactic (Jones): A discipline tactic directed at a 
particular student that is unnoticed by most of the class 
members, such as facial expression, eye contact, hand 
signal, or physical proximity.
Visual instructional plans (VIPs) (Jones): Graphic 
prompts that guide students through the process of the 
task or performance at hand.
Work the crowd (Jones): Moving about the class while 
teaching and interacting with students.
glo ssary
refere n c e s
Jones, F. (1987a). Positive classroom discipline. New York: 
McGraw-Hill.
Jones, F. (1987b). Positive classroom instruction. New York: 
McGraw-Hill.
172

Marvin Marshall on Fostering 
Responsible Behavior
From Chapter 8 of Building Classroom Discipline, Eleventh Edition. C. M. Charles. Copyright © 2014 by  Pearson 
Education, Inc. All rights reserved.
173

Students happily engage in class activities when they find school satisfying, and they 
come to behave more responsibly when taught how to make responsible decisions. 
Some teachers seem naturally able to promote satisfaction and responsibility, but 
many are not, and so they unwittingly teach in ways that leave students disaffected 
with school and inclined to do as little work as possible. This chapter reviews Marvin 
Marshall’s suggestions for helping students be more successful in school and for restor-
ing the pleasure in teaching. He identifies the ineffective practices that many teachers 
use and then outlines positive alternatives that produce the results all teachers want.
Who Is MarvIn Marshall?
Dr. Marshall is one of today’s most influential authorities in discipline. He is 
an experienced teacher, counselor, and administrator who has served at all lev-
els of public education. Currently, he devotes himself to writing, helping with 
staff development in schools, and speaking nationally and internationally. His  
views on classroom discipline and how it can be improved are set forth in his 
book Discipline without Stress, Punishments, or Rewards: How Teachers and Caregiv-
ers Promote Responsibility & Learning (2001, 2007, 2012) and his monthly elec-
tronic newsletter entitled Promoting Responsibility & Learning, which is available 
free of charge at www.marvinmarshall.com; and from his foundation, Discipline 
without Stress, Inc., where any school in the U.S.A. that would like a thoroughly 
 noncoercive—but not permissive—Discipline without Stress Teaching Model can 
receive free books and materials (www.disciplinewithoutstress.org).
Marshall believes classroom discipline improves significantly when students 
are helped to increase their personal level of responsibility, which occurs naturally 
when internal motivation (rather than “external” motivation) is activated. Teachers 
can activate that motivation, he says, by consistently working with students as fol-
lows: (1) Teach and practice procedures, (2) Infuse positivity into communications, 
(3) empower students by giving choices, and (4) Learn to ask reflective questions to 
influence students—rather than trying to force obedience. In this chapter, you will 
see how these four processes improve both teaching and learning.
Marvin Marshall on Fostering 
Responsible Behavior
Marvin Marshall on Fostering 
Responsible Behavior
How Does Marvin Marshall Help Students Learn to Make 
Good Choices and Take Responsibility for Their Behavior?
174

Marvin Marshall on Fostering Responsible Behavior
What QuestIons WIll thIs Chapter ansWer for Me?
■ What is the difference between obedience and responsible behavior?
■ What are McGregor’s Theory X and Theory Y, and what do they have to do with 
teaching?
■ What is Marshall’s “hierarchy of social development”?
■ How does Marshall’s hierarchy help students raise their level of responsible behavior?
■ How does Marshall teach his hierarchy to students?
■ How should teachers and students use Marshall’s hierarchy?
■ In what ways do teachers unknowingly alienate students?
■ How does Marshall differentiate between coercion and influence?
■ What does Marshall mean by “empowerment of choice”?
■ How does Marshall advise you to intervene when students misbehave?
■ How does Marshall’s Discipline without Stress Teaching Model promote respon-
sibility and learning?
What Is the Marshall Model of dIsCIplIne?
The Common Goal of All Approaches to Discipline 
 Responsible, Civil Classroom Behavior That Becomes 
 Habitual and Lasts over Time
Responsible means paying attention, making a strong  effort, 
and doing what is proper without being told.
Civil means respectful, polite, cordial, and well mannered.
Marvin Marshall’s Approach to Discipline
Marshall’s Overarching Strategy
Help students analyze, reflect on, and adopt per-
sonal behavior that brings them success in school.
Marshall’s Principal Tactics
Rely on teaching procedures rather than rules.
Teach the Hierarchy of Social Development.
When students misbehave, ask them to identify 
the level of development they are choosing.
If disruptions continue, elicit a procedure or 
 consequence, rather than imposing one.
Become aware of the 10 common practices that 
damage teaching.
Show positivity in all dealings with students.
↓
→
↑
↓
↓
↓
↑
↑
↑
↑
175

Marvin Marshall on Fostering Responsible Behavior
shall We BegIn WIth What Not to do?
Marshall says virtually all teachers would like to organize meaningful, challenging 
lessons for their students, and they would like for students to control themselves 
and make reasonable efforts to learn. But in many classes, these results are rarely 
achieved. Why? One of the reasons, says Marshall (2008a), is that many teachers 
unknowingly engage in 10 practices that are counterproductive to success. He insists 
you can greatly improve your effectiveness if you avoid those damaging practices and 
replace them with alternatives that bring out the best in students. Here are the 10 
damaging practices. Later we will see Marshall’s suggestions for better approaches.
Damaging Practice 1: Being reactive rather than proactive. Reactive teachers are 
those who wait for misbehavior to occur and then react to it. They have not 
anticipated misbehavior or made plans for dealing with it. Consequently, their 
reactions are too often inappropriate and even counterproductive, especially 
when they are under stress.
Damaging Practice 2: Relying on rules of behavior. Rules are meant to control; 
they do not inspire. Rules are necessary in games, but when used between 
people, enforcement of rules automatically creates adversarial relationships. 
Instead of rules, teach procedures.
Damaging Practice 3: Aiming for obedience rather than responsibility. Obedience 
does not create desire. Successful teaching requires inspiration rather than 
obedience.
Damaging Practice 4: Creating negative images. You create the wrong image 
when you tell students what they should not do instead of what they should 
do. When people tell others what not to do, what follows the “don’t” is what 
the brain visualizes. The reason is that the brain thinks in pictures, not words. 
To illustrate, if you say, “Don’t run,” you create an image of running. Instead 
when you say, “We walk in the hallway,” the person visualizes walking.
Damaging Practice 5: Unknowingly alienating students. Even the poorest sales-
person knows not to alienate a customer, but teachers often criticize students 
or talk to them in ways that prompt negative feelings. That dampens students’ 
desire to cooperate with the teacher.
Damaging Practice 6: Confusing classroom management with discipline. 
Management has to do with making instruction efficient by classroom organiza-
tion, procedures, and the efficient use of materials. It is the teacher’s responsi-
bility. Discipline has to do with self-control and appropriate behavior. It is the 
student’s responsibility.
Damaging Practice 7: Assuming that students know what is expected of them. Too 
often, teachers assume students know how to do what is expected of them. 
Never assume students know. Teach them how to do what you would like 
them to do.
Damaging Practice 8: employing coercion rather than influence. Although teach-
ers can use coercion (meaning harsh or forceful means) to control students 
temporarily, this aiming at obedience does little to increase cooperation or 
motivate students to learn.
176

Marvin Marshall on Fostering Responsible Behavior
Damaging Practice 9: Imposing consequences rather than eliciting procedures or 
consequences. When you impose a consequence, you take away students’ own-
ership of the problem and their desire for changing themselves. Anything im-
posed is weak or transitory.
Damaging Practice 10: Relying on external influences rather than internal processes. 
We make a serious mistake when we use reward and punishment to manipu-
late and coerce young people. Rewards and punishments come from outside 
the individual, rather than from inside. Behavior may temporarily change 
when external influences are applied, but the new behavior usually disappears 
when the teacher is not there to watch. Using external agents to foster internal 
responsibility is counterproductive.
so What should We do Instead?
Marshall urges you to abandon the 10 negative practices just listed and replace 
them with the following:
Inspire responsible behavior. You will enjoy much better results if, instead of 
waiting for and reacting to misbehavior, you proactively inspire students at 
the outset to want to behave responsibly. This is accomplished by teaching his 
 Hierarchy of Social Development, especially the difference between “internal” 
and “external” motivation. To inspire more effort in learning, the levels are vis-
ited before an activity and then students reflect on the level they had chosen after 
the activity. The nature of a hierarchy inspires achievement to the highest level.
emphasize the importance of procedures. Rather than relying on rules that prompt 
an enforcement mentality, teach students the procedures and have students 
practice them so they know what is expected.
Promote responsibility rather than obedience. Rather than aiming at obedience, 
focus on promoting responsibility. Obedience then follows as a natural by-
product. (Later you will see how Marshall’s hierarchy of social development is 
used for this purpose.)
Create positive images in students’ minds. To help students behave responsibly, 
have them create pictures of what you want—images that depict what they 
should do rather than what they should not do. For example, instead of say-
ing, “Stop talking,” it is more effective to say, “This is quiet time.”
Cultivate a tone of positivity. People perform better when they feel positive, rather 
than negative. If you speak with students in a friendly and supportive manner, 
they are more likely to make an effort and cooperate with you willingly.
Clarify your expectations. Explain that you will provide a safe and supportive 
classroom in which students can learn comfortably. It is students’ responsibil-
ity to conduct themselves in an acceptable manner. Let your students know 
you will not punish them. When they are not mature enough to act responsi-
bly, you will show them how to control their inappropriate impulses.
Clarify the reasons for responsible behavior. After teaching procedures (the key 
to good classroom management) and expected standards of behavior, assure 
177

Marvin Marshall on Fostering Responsible Behavior
students that the positive feelings they receive for acting responsibly are more 
satisfying than any token given them.
Teach and inspire, rather than coerce. Recognize that people change themselves 
and will do so willingly when inspired and taught. Most students resist in 
some degree when made to do anything. Therefore, focus on inspiring and 
influencing students rather than trying to coerce them.
elicit responsible ideas from students. When students misbehave or fail to meet 
expectations, elicit from the student involved a consequence or a procedure 
that he or she feels will improve the likelihood of responsible behavior. When 
you elicit, rather than impose, the student has ownership of the decision. 
 People do not argue with their own decisions.
Help students build desirable behavior from within. Long-lasting change comes 
from self-satisfaction gained by one’s own efforts, not from threats that induce 
fear or prizes that reinforce childish values. Therefore, do what you can to help 
students find pleasure in making personal improvements in learning and be-
havior. This is best accomplished by empowering them by communicating in 
positive terms, by offering choices, by prompting reflection, and by teaching 
the Hierarchy of Social Development.
What Is Internal MotIvatIon, and Why Is It so poWerful?
Marshall emphasizes that although humans are influenced by many external fac-
tors, all motivation emanates from within the person. Motivation can be stimulated 
from the outside, but the action emanates from within. Successful teachers tap into 
internal motivation so students want to become responsible. A way to begin is to 
resist thinking that students should automatically do what teachers want. Instead, 
we should create curiosity, interest, enjoyment, and challenge with activities that 
will have students want to put forth effort in their learning.
In working with students, teachers have traditionally relied on urging, direct-
ing, cajoling, admonishing, criticizing, and using rewards and punishments. These 
“external motivators” have little to do with motivation that activates long-term desire. 
Mainly what external motivation approaches do is bribe students to do something 
you want them to do. It uses rewards and punishments, which are two sides of the 
same coin. Rewards ask, “What will I get if I do what you want?” and punishments 
ask, “What will you do to me if I don’t?” It is fair to say those external approaches are 
responsible for much of the stress and poor relations seen in many classrooms today.
What are MotIvatIonal theorIes X and y?
Marshall says if we are to get the best results in our classes, we must inspire students 
to achieve and ensure they find enjoyment in learning. He describes two opposite 
approaches to managing people, set forth by Douglas McGregor in 1960. McGregor 
called the approaches Theory X and Theory Y.
Theory X holds that people usually dislike their work, try to avoid it, and 
must be directed, coerced, controlled, or threatened with punishment before they 
will work as expected. (Does that sound familiar in your experience as a student?) 
178

Marvin Marshall on Fostering Responsible Behavior
Theory Y holds that people work gladly if their jobs bring satisfaction and allow 
them to exercise self-direction, self-control, and personal responsibility.
Marshall’s approach to discipline is concordant with Theory Y. He says that 
even though students are generally inclined to behave responsibly, they often 
don’t—either because they don’t know how or because peer pressure or lack of self-
control overrides their better judgment. In keeping with Theory Y, Marshall (2005e) 
advises you to teach in ways that promote positive attitudes and good relationships 
that make school enjoyable for students and for you too. He suggests that using 
the three practices of positivity, choice, and reflection in your daily interactions with 
students produces these desired results.
Positivity leads to feelings of optimism. Being around optimistic people makes 
us feel better, whereas being around negative people has the opposite effect. Students 
will probably like you and be pleased to be in your class if they see you as positive in 
outlook and in your dealings with others, rather than being negative and demanding.
Unfortunately, students often perceive their teachers and schools in a negative 
light. That is because teachers unwittingly set themselves up as enforcers of rules 
rather than encouragers, mentors, and role models. They aim at promoting obedi-
ence, without realizing that obedience has no energizing effect on students, but in-
stead promotes reluctance, resistance, resentment, and, in extreme cases,  rebellion 
and retaliation.
Choice empowers students by offering them options. Marshall (2005b) re-
ports the following comments about the empowerment of choice he received from 
a school administrator:
I began to experiment with giving choices to students. When speaking 
to students about their behavior at recess, in the lunchroom, or on the 
bus, I would try to elicit from them what choices they had and how they 
could make better choices. If a consequence were needed, we would talk 
together about some of the choices. I would usually start with, “What do 
you think we should do about the situation?” When I was satisfied with the 
student’s choice, I would say, “I can live with that.” The process worked 
every time and I would wonder at its simplicity.
Reflection is a process of thinking about and evaluating one’s choices. It is the most 
successful approach to having people change and improve. It is exemplified in what 
every super salesperson knows: The art of influence is to induce people to influence 
themselves. We can control students by aiming at obedience, making demands, or 
imposing consequences. But we cannot change anyone but ourselves. We cannot 
force change in how students think, want to behave, or will behave once our pres-
ence is no longer felt. Coercion is not long-lasting and pride cannot be mandated.
What we can do is establish expectations and empower students to attain 
them. This is done in a noncoercive manner by asking reflective questions that 
prompt students to think about their choices. Reflection often sets in motion a 
positive change in behavior. The way to jumpstart reflection is to prompt students 
to ask themselves questions such as, “If I wanted to be successful in this class right 
179

Marvin Marshall on Fostering Responsible Behavior
now, what would I be doing?” In most cases, the answer will be apparent and stu-
dents begin behaving accordingly.
What Is Marshall’s hIerarChy of soCIal developMent,  
and hoW Is It used?
Marshall developed the hierarchy of Social development that many teachers now 
use in promoting responsible behavior in their classrooms. When students are 
taught the four levels of social development, they naturally begin moving  upward 
on the hierarchy toward more responsible behavior. If students should slip and 
behave irresponsibly, teachers seldom have to do more than ask students to iden-
tify their chosen levels. This reflection prompts students to self-correct. Here is 
 Marshall’s Hierarchy:
Marshall’s hierarchy of social development
■ Level A—Anarchy (an unacceptable level of behavior). This is the lowest level 
of social development. When students are functioning at this level, they are 
narcissistic, think only of themselves, and have little concern for others.
■ Level B—Bossing/bullying/bothering (also an unacceptable level of behavior). When 
functioning at this level, students are bossing, bullying, or bothering others 
without considering the harm they are doing. They only obey the teacher 
when authority is used. In effect, they are saying to the teacher, “We are un-
able to control ourselves. We need you to boss us.” Marshall says sharing this 
concept with students has a profound effect on how they behave.
■ Level C—Cooperation/conformity (an acceptable level of motivation). When func-
tioning at this level, students conform to, comply, and cooperate. The key to 
understanding is that, at this level, behavior comes from external influences. 
Discussing and thinking about the nature and effects of external motivation 
helps students understand how and why many people are motivated.
■ Level D—Democracy and taking the initiative to do the right thing (the highest and 
most desirable level of motivation). When functioning at Level D, students take 
the initiative to do what is right and proper—they behave responsibly without 
having to be told to do so. Marshall advises teachers to explain to students 
that democracy and responsibility are inseparable. At this motivational level, 
people do the right thing because they understand it is best for themselves and 
for the people around them.
Marshall says that although Level C behavior is acceptable in school, teachers 
should have students aim for Level D, where students are motivated to make good 
decisions about their personal behavior regardless of circumstances, personal urges, 
or influence from others.
To illustrate how the Hierarchy of Social Development is used to help students 
reflect on their behavior, suppose two boys are talking audibly while another stu-
dent is making a class report. The teacher quietly asks the disruptive boys, “At what 
level is that behavior?” They think for a moment and answer, “Level B.” Their mis-
behavior typically ceases at that point and they return to behavior at a higher level.
180

Marvin Marshall on Fostering Responsible Behavior
how does the hierarchy help students develop self-Control?
Marshall says that once students understand the hierarchy, their attention turns away 
from compliance and toward self-control and social responsibility. This process is 
greatly helpful not only to teachers but to administrators as well  (Marshall2005b). 
He describes the attributes that give the hierarchy its power, as follows:
■ Enables teachers (and administrators) to separate the act from the actor, the 
deed from the doer. Without that separation, students become defensive when 
asked to change their behavior.
■ Helps students realize they are constantly making choices, both consciously 
and unconsciously.
■ Helps students understand and deal with negative or inappropriate peer 
pressure.
■ Fosters internal motivation to behave responsibly and put forth effort in 
learning.
■ Promotes good character development without calling attention to personal 
values, ethics, or morals.
■ Serves as a vehicle for communication that uses the same conceptual vocabu-
lary for youths and adults.
■ Encourages students to keep their classroom conducive to learning, rather 
than relying solely on the teacher to do so.
■ Raises awareness of individual responsibility.
■ Empowers students by helping them analyze and correct their own behavior.
■ Serves as an inspiration to improve.
■ Encourages mature decision making.
■ Fosters understanding about internal and external motivation.
■ Promotes self-management and interest in doing the right thing, even when 
no adult is around or when no one else is watching.
Commentary from anonymous teacher 1
I’ve become a convert to Dr. Marshall’s approach. My third graders can 
understand the levels and are showing the ability to take personal respon-
sibility for their behavior. Previously I had been using a “card system” of 
three different colors, based on Canter’s assertive discipline. That system 
worked all right, but I think my students responded to it more out of fear 
than anything else. The Marshall approach provides a number of additional 
benefits that help me and my students keep everything more positive and 
productive.
how should I teach the hierarchy to My students?
Marshall (2007) suggests a number of activities that are useful in teaching students 
the names and characteristics of the four levels in the hierarchy. Examples include 
visualizing each level and then drawing a picture of it, describing it in writing, 
181

Marvin Marshall on Fostering Responsible Behavior
describing it orally to others, and listening to others’ examples of applying the lev-
els to what goes on in school. Marshall explains that these various modalities help 
turn the levels into pictures students hold in their minds. He argues that it is the 
pictures in our minds that drive behavior—toward those activities we believe will 
bring satisfaction and away from those we believe will bring displeasure.
Marshall urges teachers to explain to students that the major difference be-
tween the acceptable levels of C and D is the nature of the motivation and where 
it comes from. Level C is motivation for behaving responsibly because of adult 
directions and may involve rewards and punishments. At that level, students are 
not really taking charge of themselves, and they remain overly susceptible to inap-
propriate peer influence. At Level D, students take the initiative to do the right thing 
because they consider it best for the class, the school, and themselves.
You might wonder how well students can understand these levels and re-
late them to real life. The brief excerpts from “A Letter Worth Reading” (Marshall, 
2005a) presented in Figure 1 provide commentary on that question. The letter, sent 
to Dr. Marshall by a teacher using his system, is presented here with Dr.  Marshall’s 
permission.
For additional information on how the hierarchy promotes learning in read-
ing, mathematics, spelling, physical education, and other areas, see “Samples of 
Hierarchies for Promoting Learning” (Marshall, 2005g).
What other taCtICs does Marshall suggest for 
stIMulatIng students to Behave responsIBly?
Marshall suggests 25 specific tactics that stimulate responsibility in students and 
help them increase their reliance on internal motivation. Here, the tactics are 
grouped into clusters for easier consideration:
general tactics
 1. Think and speak with positivity.  If we approach students and situations in a pos-
itive manner, we enjoy ourselves more and bring greater pleasure to our students. 
Students are often put off if they perceive a negative tone in our communications 
with them. By helping students think in positive terms, we reduce stress, improve 
relationships, and help them become more successful.
 2. Use the power of choice.  We all have the power to choose our responses to and 
attitudes toward situations, events, impulses, and urges. The optimists among us 
perceive that choices are available; the pessimists perceive a lack of choice. Optimistic 
thinking engenders responsibility and helps students move away from seeing them-
selves as victims of life events. All of us like to feel we have control over our lives. 
When we are encouraged to make choices, we become more aware of that control. 
Consider offering your students choices in school activities, including homework. 
Doing so noncoercively promotes optimism and desire to do what you ask.
 3. emphasize the reflective process.  Reflection increases positivity and choice 
and, when applied to one’s own behavior, can lead to self-evaluation, correction, 
and gratitude (a major key to happiness). Ask students reflective questions and 
182

Marvin Marshall on Fostering Responsible Behavior
Just this week we had a discussion with our students about how they could 
use their understanding of the four levels of development to help themselves 
become better readers. We talked about our 30-minute “Whole School 
Read” time that we participate in each morning. We had the children come 
up with scenarios of what it would look like if someone were operating at 
each of the four levels. Students were able to clearly describe conduct at 
each level.
At Level D, the students described that a person would be using reading 
time each morning to really practice reading. They wouldn’t have to have an 
adult directly with them at all times; they would keep on task simply because 
they know what is expected of them. They would read and re-read sections 
of their book because they know that by doing so they will become better 
readers. The motivation would be INTERNAL. They wouldn’t be wasting any 
time watching the teacher in hopes of being specially noticed as “someone 
who was reading,” and they wouldn’t rely on an adult to keep then on task. 
Instead they would be reading in an effort to become the best reader that 
they could be.
The children discussed further that Level D is where people take the ini-
tiative to do things that are truly going to pay off for them—what is right or 
appropriate. People at this level motivate themselves to work and achieve. 
The results are long lasting and powerful. These people put in the neces-
sary effort to become good readers and therefore can get a lot of enjoyment 
from reading. Because they get enjoyment, they keep reading and therefore 
become even better readers. People behaving at this level feel good about 
themselves because they experience improvement and are aware that it is a 
result of choices that they have consciously made.
It is amazing to see the results of discussions such as these. That night, 
without any suggestion or prompting on my part, our poorest reader in 
the class went home and read his reader over and over again. Although his 
parents are kind people, they haven’t understood the importance of nightly 
reading for their child despite many conversations with us. That night they 
watched as their little boy independently read and re-read his reader. Both 
the parents and little boy could see the dramatic improvement in his ability 
to read. They experienced the powerful impact that internal desire, coupled 
with one night of true effort, could have on someone’s skill at reading. He 
came back to school the next day bursting with pride and determination to 
practice more and more so that he could move on to a new, more difﬁ cult 
reader. It only took one more night of practice, and he was able to do that.
Source: Marshall, M. (2005a). letter worth reading, retrieved from http://www.marvinmarshall.com/
discipline/responsibility-system-letters/a-letter-worth-reading/.
figure 1 A Letter Worth Reading.
183

Marvin Marshall on Fostering Responsible Behavior
encourage them to ask themselves questions, especially about behavior they have 
chosen. The questioning process activates the thinking process.
 4. establish trust.  Relationships with others are extremely important to students, 
especially students at risk or from low-income families. Students who do not value 
school will be motivated to put forward effort only for a teacher they trust and who 
they believe cares about them. Trust inside the classroom requires removing any 
sense of coercion and providing emotional and psychological safety. To promote 
trust, employ the three principles of positivity, choice, and reflection.
tactics for Interacting with students
 5. Use acknowledgment and recognition more than praise. Providing acknowledg-
ment and recognition of students’ efforts helps them feel affirmed and validated. 
Such a simple comment as, “I see you picked up the trash,” fosters reflection and 
feelings of competence. In contrast, praise too often implies that the action was 
done to please someone else, as “I’m so pleased that you picked up the trash.”
 6. encourage students. One of the most effective techniques for stimulating stu-
dents is to let them know you believe they can accomplish the assigned task. For 
many students, a word of encouragement following a mistake is worth more than 
a great deal of praise after a success. Emphasize that learning is a process and no 
one can learn and be perfect at the same time. Not being successful at a task is a 
valuable way of learning. It should be seen as a learning experience, not as failure 
(see Marshall, 2005f).
 7. Foster interpersonal relationships in the class. Connecting with your students one 
on one is extremely valuable, but helping them connect with each other one on one 
is also valuable. Relationships are extremely important to young people. At the end 
of a lesson, consider having students participate in think, pair, and share, in which 
they work in pairs and then share what they have learned with a partner.
 8. Control the conversation by asking questions. One way for teachers to remain in 
control of conversations is to ask questions. When you ask people questions, they 
have a natural inclination to answer them. If, in a discussion or argument, you find 
yourself in a reactive mode and want to move into a proactive mode, ask a question 
of your own. For example, a student asks you, “Why do we have to do this assign-
ment?” Instead of answering, redirect the conversation by simply asking, “Why do 
you think this lesson is in the curriculum?”
tactics for Motivating and teaching
 9. Get yourself excited.  You can’t expect others to get excited about what you are 
teaching if you are not excited about it yourself. Relate a story or elicit one from 
students. When lecturing, use a little more animation than when you are convers-
ing, facilitating, or reviewing.
 10. Raise your likeability level.  Most teachers want students to like them. Many 
believe they can make that happen by trying to be friends with students and may 
decide, for example, to let students call them by their given name. There is much to 
be said for friendliness, but personal friendship is not what students need or even 
184

Marvin Marshall on Fostering Responsible Behavior
want from teachers. If you provide encouragement and empowerment through 
positivity, choice, and reflection, your students will like you.
 11. Create curiosity.  Marshall says curiosity may be the greatest of all motivators 
for learning. He suggests presenting a problem or a challenge to students and al-
lowing them to grapple with it at the beginning of a lesson.
 12. Create desire to know. Allow some time at the beginning of each lesson to talk 
about what the lesson offers. Students like to know what’s in it for them. Point out 
how new knowledge, skills, and insights can help them solve problems, make better 
decisions, get along better with others, and live life more effectively and enjoyably. 
A simple way to start is to ask yourself, “Why am I teaching this lesson?” and share 
your responses with your students.
 13. Use collaboration. Generally speaking, allowing students to work together co-
operatively promotes better learning than does competition. Competing with oth-
ers is not effective for youngsters who never reach the winner’s circle. Students who 
never feel successful would rather drop out or misbehave than compete and never 
win. Instead of competing, allow students to work together, preferably in pairs. 
Even a very shy student will usually participate with one other person (see Marshall, 
2005d).
 14. Use variety. Variety spices up topics that students might otherwise find tedious. 
A myriad of visual, auditory, and manipulative techniques can be employed in 
teaching, such as charts, cartoons, models, videos, PowerPoint creations, overhead 
transparencies, listening to music, recording music, rapping, creating verse, creating 
rhythms, physical movements, enacting the roles of characters in stories or events, 
large-group discussions, case studies, and working with small groups or buddies.
 15. Tutor a few students every day. Tutoring students one on one is the easiest, 
quickest, and most effective way of establishing personal rapport with students.
tactics for Influencing positive Behavior
 16. See situations as challenges, not problems. If we help students take a positive ap-
proach and view situations as challenges, rather than as problems, we help students 
feel they have more control. Emphasize to students that they can use adversity as 
a catalyst to becoming better, stronger, wiser, and more capable to deal with life’s 
challenges.
 17. Use responsibility rather than rules. Consider calling behaviors you expect in 
class responsibilities rather than rules. You will discover that rules are either proce-
dures, in which case they should be taught, or they are expectations. Responsibili-
ties should always be stated in positive terms—what you want, rather than what 
you do not want.
 18. Use listening to influence others. It is surprising how strongly we can influence 
students simply by listening to them. The more students open to us, the greater our 
influence. Asking reflective and evaluative-type questions accomplishes this.
 19. Be careful when challenging students’ ideas. Very few people like to be put on 
the defensive. Instead of disagreeing with a student’s idea, aim at clarification by 
probing, as in, “Tell me more.”
185

Marvin Marshall on Fostering Responsible Behavior
 20. Think in terms of sharing, rather than telling. When we tell someone to do some-
thing, the message is often perceived as criticism or an attempt to control, regard-
less of our intentions. Rather than telling, phrase your idea as a suggestion, such 
as, “You may want to consider doing that later and focusing on the current lesson 
now.” Or use a reflective question stated as if you were curious, such as, “What 
would be the long-term effect of doing that?” Three more questions you will find 
useful are: “Is there any other way this could be handled?” “What would a respon-
sible action look like?” and “What do you think a highly responsible person would 
do in this situation?”
tactics for empowering students
 21. empower by building on successes. Great teachers know that learning is based 
on motivation, and students are best motivated when they can build on existing 
interests and strengths. That doesn’t mean we should ignore the negative or dis-
regard what needs improvement. But students are more likely to achieve success 
through their assets than through their shortcomings. The more they are successful, 
the more they are willing to put effort into areas that need improvement. This is 
especially true for students at risk who have negative perceptions of their success in 
school.
 22. Nurture students’ brains. Marshall refers often to Marian Diamond, an interna-
tionally known neuroscientist who has studied mammalian brains for decades and, 
with Janet Hopson, is the author of Magic Trees of the Mind: How to Nurture Your 
Child’s Intelligence, Creativity, and Healthy emotions from Birth Through Adolescence. 
In that book, Diamond and Hopson (1998) present some of the best advice on 
teaching you will ever receive, such as: Provide a steady source of positive emotional 
support for students, stimulate all the senses (though not necessarily all at the same 
time), maintain an atmosphere free of undue pressure and stress but suffused with 
a degree of pleasurable intensity, present a series of novel challenges that are neither 
too easy nor too difficult for the students, allow students to select many of their 
own instructional activities, offer opportunities for students to assess the results of 
their learning and modify it as they think best, provide an enjoyable learning at-
mosphere that promotes exploration and fun, and allow time for students to reflect 
and let their brains assimilate new information.
 23. emphasize the four classical virtues. The four classical virtues are prudence, 
temperance, justice, and fortitude. Prudence is making proper choices without doing 
anything rash. Temperance is remaining moderate in all things, including passions 
and emotions. Justice refers to ensuring fair outcomes based on honesty. Fortitude 
is showing courage, strength, and conviction in pursuit of the right path. Through 
the ages, philosophers have contended that these four virtues help people meet 
challenges effectively and find greater satisfaction in life.
tactics for addressing problems (or Meeting Challenges)
 24. Hold frequent classroom meetings. Classroom meetings provide excellent oppor-
tunities for all members of the class to think together. These meetings are valuable 
for resolving challenges that confront the whole class and for helping individual 
students deal with certain problems (see Marshall, 2005c).
186

Marvin Marshall on Fostering Responsible Behavior
 25. Resolve conflict in a constructive manner. When people are involved in conflict, 
ask each of them what they are willing to do to resolve the situation. Get across the 
notion that we can’t force other people to change, but we can influence them through 
our actions, including the changes we are willing to make in ourselves. This is a criti-
cally important understanding. Your students will come to your class as they always 
have. If students change, it will be a result from the change you make in yourself.
hoW should teaChers Intervene  
When students MIsBehave?
When considering any discipline plan, teachers always want to know the proce-
dures for stopping misbehavior. You have seen how Marshall’s Hierarchy of Social 
Development is used to empower students to move toward more responsible be-
havior. Let’s suppose one of your students behaves inappropriately and you need to 
intervene. Here’s how Marshall would have you proceed. (It is assumed that the hi-
erarchy has been taught and students understand how it applies in the classroom.)
Step 1: Use an Unobtrusive Tactic. Suppose Syong is annoying Neri. Before say-
ing anything to Syong, you would prompt her to stop by using an unobtru-
sive technique, such as facial expression, eye contact, a hand signal, moving 
near Syong, changing your voice tone, thanking other students for working, or 
saying, “Excuse me.” Marshall (2001) lists 22 unobtrusive visual, verbal, and 
kinetic techniques that are useful at this juncture.
Step 2: Check for Understanding. Disruptions are handled by this second phase 
of the Raise Responsibility System. (Teaching the hierarchy is the first phase.) 
The strategy is to have the student identify their chosen level—not the action—
thereby eliminating the natural desire to deny or self-defend. Spend no time 
quibbling if the behavior is on Level A or B; neither is acceptable. Most situa-
tions are handled using this simple two-step approach of teaching and having 
students reflect on their self-chosen level. Consider: When you tell, who does 
the thinking? When you ask, who does the thinking? Consistently asking stu-
dents to reflect is the key for actuating change. For example, if the unobtrusive 
tactic doesn’t stop Syong’s misbehavior, check to see if she understands the level 
she had chosen. Use a neutral, unemotional tone of voice and phrase the ques-
tion as, “Syong, which level are you choosing?” or “Syong, reflect on the level 
you have chosen.” No mention is made of the nature of the behavior or what 
Syong is doing, only the level of chosen behavior. This helps prevent a natural 
self-defense and a possible confrontation. Without the hierarchy—which sepa-
rates the student from the student’s inappropriate behavior—a teacher may ask, 
“What are you doing?” This too often leads to a confrontational situation, es-
pecially if Syong responds, “Nothing.” However, asking, “On what level is that 
behavior?” prompts not only acknowledgment but also self-evaluation. You are 
not attacking Syong; you are separating her as a person from the inappropriate 
behavior, something educators often talk about but find difficult to do.
Step 3: Use Guided Choice. If disruptions continue, the third phase of the 
Raise Responsibility System is employed. This final phase is used for students 
who have already acknowledged irresponsible behavior and continue to be-
have on an unacceptable level. Guided Choices stop the disruption by using 
187

Marvin Marshall on Fostering Responsible Behavior
authority without being coercive or punitive. Rather than imposing punish-
ment,  Marshall elicits a procedure or consequence to help the student prevent 
repetition of Level A/B behaviors. When something is imposed, the student 
feels like a victim and relationships between the teacher and student become 
adversarial. In contrast, eliciting allows for ownership because people do not 
argue with their own decisions. Marshall says this tactic allows you to use 
 authority without punishment.
Another option is to use a variety of forms with upper grade students. If Syong 
continues to bother Neri, you can place an essay form on Syong’s desk while quietly 
offering her three choices such as, “Do you prefer to fill out this form in your seat, 
in the rear of the room, or in the office?” The form, prepared in advance, contains 
the following headings Syong is to write about:
What did I do? (Acknowledgment)
What can I do to prevent it from happening again? (Choice)
What will I do? (Commitment)
Guided Choice should be adjusted in accordance with the grade level, the indi-
vidual student, and the class. Before leaving class, the student is asked two ques-
tions: (1) “Do you know the reason the form was given to you?” and (2) “Do you 
think it is personal?” Students understand that the form was given because when 
the student behaves on an unacceptable level, the teacher needs to quickly resolve 
the disruption and return to the lesson. The second question is asked to assure the 
student that the teacher is only interested in the student’s accepting responsibility 
and has no ill feelings against the student.
After the student responds to the second question, the teacher (of grades 4 and 
above) asks, “What would you like me to do with the form?” Students generally 
respond, “Throw it away.” Although some teachers might wish to keep the forms, 
Marshall’s approach is to tear up the form and place it in the wastepaper basket 
right then in front of the student, thus allowing the student to leave the class with-
out negative feelings.
Guided Choice effectively stops the disruption, provide the student a 
 responsibility-producing activity to encourage self-reflection, and allow the teacher 
to return promptly to the lesson. It is crucial to understand that when providing 
guided choices, the teacher does so by asking the student, not telling. This reduces 
confrontation, minimizes stress, and helps preserve student dignity.
It is very unlikely that Syong, having completed the essay form, will continue 
to bother others. If the teacher uses the forms, rather than eliciting a procedure or 
consequence, Marshall suggests using a Self-Diagnostic Referral as the next step.
Before moving to this more in-depth reflective form of using authority with-
out punishment, Syong is given the essay form to complete a second time. If this 
procedure is not effective, then referral is given. This form contains items such as 
the following:
■ Describe the problem that led to writing this.
■ Identify the level of behavior.
■ Explain why this level of behavior is not acceptable.
188

Marvin Marshall on Fostering Responsible Behavior
■ On what level should a person act in order to be socially responsible?
■ If you had acted on an acceptable level, what would have happened?
■ List three solutions that would help you act more responsibly.
Marshall advises keeping the completed referrals on file for the entire year, as they 
might be used in discussions with caregivers or administrators.
If Syong continues to bother other students, assign an additional referral to 
complete, in the same manner as the first. Then mail a copy of the first and second 
referrals to Syong’s caregiver, together with a brief note explaining the problem.
If Syong continues to behave on an unacceptable level, assign a third and final 
self-diagnostic referral. Mail a copy to her caregivers, along with copies of the first 
two referrals and both notes. The final note indicates to the caregivers that you have 
exhausted all positive means of fostering social responsibility and will refer future 
disruptions to the administration. Marshall points out that in all of these cases, 
it is the student who has identified the problem and proposed positive solutions. All the 
teacher does is write brief notes to caregivers and mail them copies of the student’s 
self-diagnostic referrals. The student has done most of the thinking and planning, 
which gives ownership to the student—a necessary ingredient for lasting change. 
Marshall says the last few steps rarely, if ever, need to be used.
Marshall (2008a) goes on to emphasize that having a system to rely on is superior 
to having a talent for teaching. Even teachers with natural talent are challenged by 
student behaviors that teachers in former generations did not have to deal with. To 
retain the joy that the teaching profession offers and to reduce your stress, be proac-
tive by teaching the Hierarchy of Social Development at the outset. Marshall advises 
explaining the system to caregivers when implementing the system. A form letter for 
this purpose is shown in Figure 2 in the section summarizing Marshall’s teachings.
hoW does Marshall suggest teaChers  
evaluate theMselves?
If you wish to move in the direction Marshall advocates, the following questions 
will help you evaluate your progress:
■ Are you teaching students the procedures you expect them to follow?
■ Are you communicating with your students in a positive manner?
■ Do you give your students choices (preferably three)?
■ Do you ask questions that prompt reflection?
pertInent CoMMents In dr. Marshall’s Words
These statements are excerpted from a response Dr. Marshall (2010) made to a 
teacher who wrote to him. The original material is posted in Promoting Responsibility & 
Learning, Dr. Marshall’s monthly newsletter, Vol. 10, No. 9, September 2010, avail-
able at www.MarvinMarshall.com.
■ The difference between Level C (external motivation) and Level D (internal 
motivation) is not in the behavior; it is in the motivation. Level C is expected; 
Level D is voluntary.
189

Marvin Marshall on Fostering Responsible Behavior
■ It is virtually impossible to know someone’s motivation. And many kids have 
no idea how to articulate their motivation. (This is one reason that asking 
“Why?” leads to problems.)
■ Someone behaving at Level B only understands a greater authority. So the 
students are saying to the teacher, “We are not mature enough to be respon-
sible, so you need to boss us.” The message to students is that they decide on 
the type of teacher they have. If they act on Level B, the teacher also needs 
to act on that level because the students will only behave responsibly when 
authority is used. (Notice the paradoxical approach: No one wants to be 
bossed.)
■ Discipline without Stress (the official name of Marshall’s total system) empha-
sizes that everyone always has a response to any situation, stimulation, or urge. 
He maintains that the only way to change an emotion is to change the thought 
because an emotion always follows cognition. For example, if a student gets 
angry with you, simply ask this question, “Are you angry at me or at the situ-
ation?” Reflection is engendered, the student is prompted to think, and the 
negative emotion immediately dissipates.
■ Empower students by having them reflect on their motivational level—Level 
C or Level D—rather than on unacceptable behavior levels of A or B.
■ The sooner you get in the habit of asking reflective questions, the more effec-
tive and easier it will be for you—and the better for your students.
Commentary from anonymous teacher 2
When considering Dr. Marshall’s ideas, I immediately thought of Mrs. Mack, 
a colleague with whom I have taught for many years. Students love her, 
including those who have a hard time and seldom care much for their 
teachers. As I heard one boy say, “She doesn’t hold it against us that we’re 
just kids.” Her classes are always packed, partly because of her reputation 
and partly because the school counselor recommends her classes as places 
where “challenging” students can fit in.
What Mrs. Mack seems to do naturally, I now realize, is quite similar 
to what Dr. Marshall suggests. I don’t believe she knows about his hierar-
chy of social development, which I think can bring many “natural teacher” 
qualities easily within reach of all of us. Dr. Marshall’s suggestions definitely 
prompt me to think in terms of positive messages and promoting student 
self- reflection. And they appear to help us teachers break away from in-
grained habits of making rules, looking for mistakes, offering unbounded 
criticism, and all the while expecting student compliance. His procedures 
also show students that school need not be something that is done to 
them, but rather something that helps them increase self-control and as-
sume responsibility for more enlightened behavior. In my opinion, students 
are always seeking those capabilities but often have the wrong idea about 
how to get them.
I very much like Dr. Marshall’s approach to intervening when students 
misbehave. It relieves me from the frequent “policing” I do to make sure 
students don’t get away with wantonly breaking rules. Guiding the student to 
190

Marvin Marshall on Fostering Responsible Behavior
pause and reflect on his or her own behavior and then describe solutions in 
writing seems to me more effective than repeatedly telling students how to 
behave and threatening punishment if they don’t. I think students appreciate 
the opportunity to manage their behavior and, at the same time, understand 
how their behavior affects the way they are treated by others, including adults.
suMMary of the MarvIn Marshall teaChIng Model
A summary of Marshall’s teaching model is provided in Figure 2.
 I. Classroom Management Versus Discipline
The key to effective classroom management is teaching and practicing pro-
cedures. This is the teacher’s responsibility. Discipline, on the other hand, 
has to do with behavior and is the student’s responsibility.
II. Three Principles to Practice
1)  Positivity. Communicate in positive terms. This may often require 
changing negatives into positives. “No running!” becomes “We walk in 
the hallways.” “Stop talking!” becomes “This is quiet time.”
2)  Choice. Give options whenever possible. Teach choice-response 
thinking—that regardless of the stimulation, situation, or urge, people 
always have a choice as to the response. Also, teach choice-response 
thinking and impulse control in order to redirect impulsive behavior.
3)  Reflection. Although you can control someone, you cannot change 
anyone but yourself. The key to effectiveness is to hone the skill of asking 
reflective questions to prompt change.
III. The Raise Responsibility System
1) Teaching the Hierarchy (Teaching).
The hierarchy, by its very nature, engenders a desire to behave responsibly 
and put forth effort to learn. Students differentiate between internal and 
external motivation—and learn to rise above inappropriate peer influence.
2) Checking for Understanding (Asking).
When students act on an inappropriate level, they are prompted to re-
flect on their chosen level. This approach separates the person from the 
behavior, thereby negating the usual tendency toward self-defense that 
leads to confrontations between student and teacher.
3) Guided Choices (Eliciting).
If disruptions continue, a consequence or procedure is elicited to redi-
rect the inappropriate behavior so it will not be repeated. This approach 
contrasts with the usual coercive approach of imposing consequences.
IV. Using the System to Increase Academic Performance
Using the hierarchy for review before a lesson and for reflecting after a les-
son increases effort and raises academic achievement.
figure 2 The Marvin Marshall Teaching Model.
Source: Courtesy of Marvin Marshall.
191

Marvin Marshall on Fostering Responsible Behavior
Dear Parent(s) or Caretaker(s):  Our classroom houses a small society. Each 
student is a citizen who acts in accordance with expected standards of be-
havior. With this in mind, rewards are not given for expected behavior—just 
as society does not give rewards for behaving properly. Also, irresponsible 
behavior is seen as an opportunity for growth, rather than for punishment. 
Our approach encourages students to exercise self-discipline through reﬂ ec-
tion and self-evaluation. Students learn to control their own behavior, rather 
than always relying on the teacher for control. We want our classroom to be 
encouraging and conducive to learning at all times. In this way, young people 
develop positive attitudes and behavioral skills that are so necessary for suc-
cessful lives.
Sincerely, (teacher)
figure 3 Sample Letter to Caregivers.
Source: Courtesy of Marvin Marshall.
A sample letter Dr. Marshall suggests you send to caregivers to explain the 
discipline system is shown in Figure 3.
What guIdanCe does Marshall provIde for applyIng  
hIs systeM In the ClassrooM?
Marshall provides the following guidance for implementing his system:
■ Carefully review the 10 practices that damage teaching.
■ Clarify and differentiate Theory X and Theory Y and which mindset you 
will use.
■ Understand the nature and power of internal motivation. Teach the difference 
between internal and external motivation.
■ Evaluate yourself in terms of:
✓ Have I carefully taught, and have my students adequately learned, the unac-
ceptable behavior levels of A and B and the motivational levels of C and D 
of the Hierarchy of Social Development?
✓ Do I use the hierarchy to promote a desire in students to put forth effort in 
learning?
✓ When disruptions occur, do I ask questions in a noncoercive, nonthreaten-
ing manner that prompts student reflection and self-evaluation?
✓ If disruptive behavior continues, do I elicit a procedure or consequence 
from the student for redirecting future impulsive behavior?
■ Place a card on your desk with the following three reminders: positivity, choice, 
reflection.
192

Marvin Marshall on Fostering Responsible Behavior
■ Keep a list of reflective questions, even considering posting them around the 
room to help when an immediate response is called for. Remember that the 
person who asks the question controls the situation. Learn to respond by ask-
ing, rather than telling.
What you have learned In thIs Chapter
You have learned the Discipline without Stress Teaching Model, which includes teach-
ing procedures, rather than relying on rules; the essential practices of communicat-
ing in positive terms, employing the empowerment of choice, and asking reflective 
questions to actuate change; and the three phases of the Raise Responsibility System of 
teaching, asking, and eliciting. You have reviewed 10 practices that are detrimental to 
teaching and have learned effective alternatives. You understand Theory X and Theory 
Y and how your choice of which you use determines how you will relate to your stu-
dents. Finally, you have reviewed teaching practices that Dr. Marshall recommends as 
highly effective and compatible with his Discipline without Stress Teaching Model.
ac t i vi ti e s
Self-Test: True/False
 1. Marshall’s hierarchy of social development con-
sists of four levels, of which Level A is the highest 
and most desirable.
 2. Marshall’s hierarchy is aimed more at promoting 
responsibility than at student obedience to rules.
 3. Marshall emphasizes that class management has 
to do with organizing and directing the class (the 
teacher’s responsibility), whereas discipline has to 
do with behavior (the students’ responsibility).
 4. One of the main purposes of Marshall’s hierarchy 
is to help teachers foster student self-control and 
sense of responsibility.
 5. According to Marshall, Level C behavior is gener-
ally acceptable, although not optimal.
 6. Marshall claims that allowing students to have a 
“choice” in how they behave is highly overrated 
and even a main contributor to misbehavior.
 7. When a student misbehaves after being exposed to 
Marshall’s hierarchy, the teacher’s first step should 
be to “check for understanding” to make sure the 
student understands what is expected.
 8. When it comes to discipline, Marshall would have 
teachers emphasize student responsibility even 
more than obedience to class rules.
 9. Marshall says his hierarchy is very useful in mo-
tivating students, but not very useful in helping 
teachers evaluate their own performance.
 10. Marshall urges teachers to plan how they will in-
tervene when students misbehave, and then prac-
tice the intervention procedure until it becomes 
second nature.
Self-Test: Multiple Choice
 1. The number of levels in Marshall’s hierarchy of so-
cial development is
(a) seven.
(b) six.
(c) five.
(d) four.
 2. The highest and most desirable level in Marshall’s 
hierarchy is
(a) Level A.
(b) Level Y.
(c) Level X.
(d) Level D.
193

Marvin Marshall on Fostering Responsible Behavior
 3. Marshall’s hierarchy is used to help students raise 
their level of
(a) obedience.
(b) responsibility.
(c) enthusiasm.
(d) participation.
 4. Marshall describes Level C as “expected,” and 
Level D as
(a) mandatory.
(b) voluntary.
(c) superfluous.
(d) degrading.
 5. Marshall says discipline is the responsibility of the
(a) teacher.
(b) site administrator.
(c) caregivers.
(d) students.
 6. When teachers intervene in response to student 
misbehavior, they should
(a) analyze.
(b) elicit.
(c) apply Theory X.
(d) engage in dialog.
 7. The best way to control conversations with stu-
dents is by
(a) setting an agenda.
(b) asking questions.
(c) reviewing the hierarchy.
(d) following Theory Y.
 8. Teachers sometimes unknowingly alienate stu-
dents by the way they
(a) smile.
(b) criticize students.
(c) try to befriend students.
(d) provide helpful suggestions.
 9. Bossing, bullying, and bothering are characteris-
tics of behavior at
(a) Level D.
(b) Level C.
(c) Level B.
(d) Level D.
 10. Of the following, which receives the most atten-
tion in Marshall’s approach?
(a) affirmation
(b) reflection
(c) analysis
(d) reinforcement
Self-Test: Explain This
 1. What is meant by McGregor’s Theory X and 
Theory Y?
 2. What does Marshall say about relying on class-
room rules for behavior?
 3. What does Marshall mean by “reflective ques-
tions,” and what does he consider to be their 
benefits?
 4. What does Marshall see as the difference between 
internal motivation and external motivation, con-
cerning their nature and the results they promote?
 5. What does Marshall mean by “eliciting responses” 
from students?
Additional Suggested Activities
 1. In your journal, enter ideas from Marshall’s 
 Discipline without Stress you might want to incor-
porate into your personal system of discipline.
 2. With a classmate or colleague, discuss the differ-
ences between Level A and Level B behaviors ver-
sus Level C and Level D behaviors in the Hierarchy 
of Social Development.
 3. With a classmate or colleague, review two inter-
vention approaches Marshall suggests you use 
when students misbehave.
194

Marvin Marshall on Fostering Responsible Behavior
Case 1 Kristina Will not Work
Kristina, a student in Mr. Jake’s class, is quite docile. She socializes little with other students 
and never disrupts lessons. However, despite Mr. Jake’s best efforts, Kristina will not do her 
work. She rarely completes an assignment. She is simply there, putting forth no effort at 
all. What would Marvin Marshall suggest to help Kristina and Mr. Jake?
Marshall would classify this as a learning challenge, not as a behavior problem. He would 
tell Mr. Jake not to attempt to force Kristina to learn. Mr. Jake could not force her even if he 
wanted to: To learn or not to learn is Kristina’s choice. Mr. Jake has seen that Kristina is capa-
ble of learning and would reassure her of this fact. If she chooses to put forward the effort to 
learn, she will feel more competent, enjoy herself more, and be happier. But this is her choice.
Accordingly, Mr. Jake would attempt to establish a positive relationship by sharing 
with her his belief in her competency. He would then find out what Kristina likes to do and 
weave into the assignments some activities that would capitalize on her interests. He would 
continually check with her to see how she is doing, and thereby communicate his interest in 
her. He would suggest that what she chooses to do or not do affects her more than anyone 
else and that she will not gain any satisfaction if no effort is put forth. Marshall also would 
encourage Mr. Jake to employ the hierarchy of social development as follows:
 
1. Ask Kristina to identify the level she is choosing.
 
2. Elicit from Kristina a few guided choices.
 
3. Ask her to start on one and see how it feels.
 
4. Reiterate the belief that Kristina is capable.
 
5. Ask her to reflect about her future decisions.
Case 2 sara Will not stop talking
Sara is a pleasant girl who participates in class activities and does most, though not all, of 
her assigned work. She cannot seem to refrain from talking to classmates, however. Her 
teacher, Mr. Gonzales, speaks to her repeatedly during lessons, to the point that he often 
becomes exasperated and loses his temper. What suggestions would Marvin Marshall give 
Mr. Gonzales for dealing with Sara?
Case 3 Joshua Clowns and Intimidates
Joshua, larger and louder than his classmates, always wants to be the center of attention, 
which he accomplishes through a combination of clowning and intimidation. He makes 
wisecrack remarks, talks back (smilingly) to the teacher, utters a variety of sound-effect 
noises such as automobile crashes and gunshots, and makes limitless sarcastic comments 
and put-downs of his classmates. Other students will not stand up to him, apparently 
Con c e p t C a se s
195

Marvin Marshall on Fostering Responsible Behavior
fearing his size and verbal aggression. His teacher, Miss Pearl, has come to her wit’s 
end. Would Joshua’s behavior be likely to improve if Marvin Marshall’s noncoercion—but not 
permissive—approach were used in Miss Pearl’s classroom? explain.
Case 4 tom Is hostile and defiant
Tom has appeared to be in his usual foul mood ever since arriving in class. On his way 
to sharpen his pencil, he bumps into Frank, who complains. Tom tells him loudly 
to shut up. Miss Baines, the teacher, says, “Tom, go back to your seat.” Tom wheels 
around, swears loudly, and says heatedly, “I’ll go when I’m _____ good and ready!” 
How would Marvin Marshall have Miss Baines deal with Tom?
you are  th e  te a c h e r
CloWnIng around and horseplay
Your new fifth-grade class consists of students from a 
small, stable community. Because the transiency rate is 
low, many of your students have been together since first 
grade, and during those years, they have developed cer-
tain patterns of interacting and assuming various roles, 
such as clowns and instigators. Unfortunately, their be-
havior often interferes with teaching and learning. Dur-
ing the first week of school, you notice that four or five 
students enjoy making smart-aleck remarks about most 
things you want them to do. When such remarks are 
made, the other students laugh and sometimes join in. 
Even when you attempt to hold class discussions about 
serious issues, many of the students make light of the 
topics and refuse to enter genuinely into an explora-
tion of the issues. Instead of the productive discussion 
you have hoped for, you find that class behavior often 
degenerates into flippancy and horseplay.
a typICal oCCurrenCe
You have begun a history lesson that contains a refer-
ence to Julius Caesar. You ask if anyone has ever heard 
of Julius Caesar. Ben shouts out, “Yeah, they named 
a salad after him!” The class laughs and calls out en-
couraging remarks such as “Good one, Ben!” You wait 
for some semblance of order, then say, “Let us go on.” 
From the back of the classroom, Jeremy cries, “Let-
tuce and cabbage!” The class bursts into laughter and 
chatter. You ask for their cooperation and no more 
students call out or make remarks, but you know 
several continue to smirk and whisper, with a good 
deal of barely suppressed giggling. You try to ignore 
it, but because of the disruptions you are not able to 
complete the lesson on time or to get the results you 
hoped for.
ConCeptualIzIng a strategy
If you followed Marvin Marshall’s suggestions, what 
would you conclude or do with regard to:
 1. Preventing the problem from occurring in the first 
place.
 2. Maintaining student dignity and good personal 
relations.
 3. Using follow-up procedures to prevent the recur-
rence of the misbehavior.
196

Marvin Marshall on Fostering Responsible Behavior
Authority without punishment (Marshall): Methods of 
exerting authority in the classroom without resorting 
to threat or punishment.
Elicit (Marshall): Asking offending students to suggest 
positive options that might replace misbehavior.
Empowerment of choice (Marshall): Allowing students 
to select from acceptable choices how they will con-
duct themselves—a tactic that empowers students to 
succeed.
External motivation: Synonymous with extrinsic motivation—
that which comes from outside the individual.
Four classical virtues (Marshall): Prudence,  temperance, 
justice, and fortitude. Should be emphasized in 
the process of helping students develop desirable 
behavior.
hierarchy of Social development (Marshall): A hierar-
chy of four levels used to help students reflect on their 
chosen behaviors. From lowest to highest, the four lev-
els are: (A) anarchy, (B) bossing/bullying, (C) coop-
eration/conformity, and (D) democracy (inseparable 
from responsibility). Levels A and B are unacceptable 
in the classroom. Level C is the expected level of be-
havior and is essential for a civil society. Level D con-
notes taking the initiative to do the right thing without 
supervision.
Internal motivation (Marshall): The desire to behave re-
sponsibly without having to be told to do so, because 
of innate needs or beliefs rooted in ethics and values.
Positivity (Marshall): Maintaining an inclination toward 
optimism.
Reflective questions (Marshall): Questions posed to stu-
dents to help them make better behavioral choices and 
assume responsibility.
Self-diagnostic referral (Marshall): A self-diagnosis done 
by a student who has violated class rules and submit-
ted as a plan for improvement—includes description of 
what was done wrong and the steps that will be taken 
to improve.
Theory X and Theory Y (Marshall): Theories of managing 
people. Theory X holds that people must be directed 
and controlled, whereas Theory Y holds that people 
should be encouraged and given responsibility.
glo ssa ry
Diamond, M., & Hopson, J. (1998). Magic trees of the 
mind: How to nurture your child’s intelligence, creativ-
ity, and healthy emotions from birth through adolescence.  
New York: Dutton.
Marshall, M. (2001). Discipline without stress® punishments, 
or rewards: How teachers and parents promote responsibility 
& learning. Los Alamitos, CA: Piper Press.
Marshall, M. (2005a). A letter worth reading. Retrieved 
from 
http://www.marvinmarshall.com/aletter-
worthreading.html
Marshall, M. (2005b). A principal’s experience. Retrieved 
from http://www.marvinmarshall.com/principal.htm
Marshall, M. (2005c. Classroom meetings. Retrieved from 
http://www.disciplinewithoutstress.com/sample_ 
chapters.html
Marshall, M. (2005d). Collaboration for quality learning. 
Retrieved from http://www.disciplinewithoutstress 
.com/sample_chapters.html
Marshall, M. (2005e). Promoting positivity, choice, and 
reflection. Retrieved from http://www.MarvinMarshall.
com/promoting_positivity.htm
Marshall, M. (2005f). Reducing perfectionism. Retrieved 
from http://www.disciplinewithoutstress.com/sample_
chapters.html
Marshall, M. (2005g). Samples of hierarchies for promot-
ing learning. Retrieved from http://www.marvinmar-
shall.com/hierarchy.htm
Marshall, M. (2007). Discipline without stress® punishments, 
or rewards: How teachers and parents promote responsibil-
ity & learning (2nd ed.). Los Alamitos, CA: Piper Press.
Marshall, M. (2008a). A system is superior to talent. Retrieved 
from http://teachers.net/gazette/MAR08/marshall/
Marshall, M. (2010, September). A response from 
Dr.  Marshall to a letter received. Promoting Responsibility 
& Learning, the Monthly Newsletter by Marvin Marshall, 
10(9). Retrieved from http://www. marvinmarshall.com
ref e re n c e s
197

198

William Glasser on Releasing 
the Power of Positive Choice
Everybody wants students to behave responsibly in school, but educators have 
been unsuccessful in getting many of them to do so. William Glasser believes 
the problem lies in the approach teachers have used, one that ultimately relies 
on force. We face a losing battle, he says, when we try to force students to do 
anything. We get far better results when, instead of using force, we use positive 
influence to get students to behave more effectively. We do this by employing non-
coercive behaviors in working with students—strategies such as relating personally 
with students, providing a curriculum that is genuinely attractive to students, and 
helping students understand how responsible choices lead to personal success. 
Glasser makes an additional strong suggestion—he urges us to emphasize quality 
in all aspects of teaching and learning. In this chapter you will see what he means 
and how he thinks we should proceed.
Who Is WIllIam Glasser?
Psychiatrist William Glasser is one of the great educational thinkers of our time. He 
has made a number of important contributions to classroom management through 
his work with Quality Schools. Between 1965 and 1985, he introduced two major 
strategies that are still in vogue. The first focuses on helping students learn to choose 
more effective conduct, rather than trying to force it on them. That new strategy 
grew out of a psychiatric approach Glasser developed called reality therapy, in which 
clients are helped to deal with present-day reality instead of addressing matters that 
went wrong for them in the past.
Note 1: The author gratefully acknowledges the helpful review of this chapter by Jean Seville 
Suffield, Senior Faculty and International Communications Consultant, The William Glasser 
Institute, July 2012.
Note 2: Because the word “discipline” often implies the use of force, Dr. Glasser prefers to use 
the term “management” in regard to helping students make more effective choices.
William Glasser on Releasing 
the Power of Positive Choice
How Does William Glasser Use Noncoercive Choice to 
Promote Quality Learning and Student Self-Control?
From Chapter 9 of Building Classroom Discipline, Eleventh Edition. C. M. Charles. Copyright © 2014 by  Pearson 
Education, Inc. All rights reserved.
199

William Glasser on Releasing the Power of Positive Choice
At that same time, Glasser promoted the notion of eliminating failure from 
students’ school experience. He believed the sense of failure was highly damaging 
to student motivation to work and learn. His remedy is to structure school learning, 
or what he calls “education” rather than “schooling,” so that it leads to a genuine 
sense of accomplishment for virtually all students.
Glasser set forth those ideas and others in his 1969 book Schools Without Fail-
ure, which featured his assertion that all students choose to behave as they do—that 
they are not victims of circumstances that force them to do one thing or another. 
When given proper guidance, students can learn to make more effective choices 
and, in so doing, improve their lives overall.
The second period in which Glasser made major contributions began in 
1986 and has continued to the present. In 1986 he published Control Theory 
in the Classroom, in which he provided new insights into how we can influence 
students to make more effective behavioral choices. In that book, he made two 
strong assertions. The first was that teacher forcefulness does not help students do 
better in school, but the use of noncoercive influence does. (He then explained 
how teachers can influence students noncoercively.) The second assertion was 
that we simply cannot expect students to work and behave properly unless they 
“believe that if they do some work, they will be able to satisfy their needs enough 
so that it makes sense to keep working” (Glasser, 1986, p. 15). Glasser insisted 
that teachers had the power to make school interesting and fulfilling for students, 
and that the key to doing so was to help students satisfy their needs for security, 
love and belonging, power, fun, and freedom in order to match their ideas of 
school as an important place that would bring quality to their lives (termed a 
Quality World picture).
In 1996, he changed the name of this approach from control theory to 
Choice Theory® in order to emphasize that student behavior is not controlled 
from the outside, but is the result of choices students make internally, motivated 
by their Quality World pictures, in order to satisfy one or more of their basic 
needs. It is up to teachers, he said, to interact with students in ways that influ-
ence them to make more effective choices, mainly by building relationships 
with them.
In 1998, Glasser published a succession of three books that greatly ex-
panded his views about teaching and learning. Those books included the 
 second edition of The Quality School: Managing Students Without Coercion 
(1998b), Choice Theory in the Classroom (1998a), and The Quality School Teac-
her (1998c). In 2001, he published Every Student Can Succeed, which he said 
wrapped up his conclusions about teaching and would be his last book in 
education.
In these later works, Glasser expresses his strong conviction that students will 
engage willingly in schoolwork if it offers interesting information that is accessed 
through activities that help students meet their needs. All of us, he says, continu-
ally make choices in trying to meet our needs, which are genetically encoded and 
cannot be denied. Some of our choices lead to success, whereas others lead to 
200

William Glasser on Releasing the Power of Positive Choice
trouble or failure. Teachers’ main obligation is to teach students how to make 
choices that lead to high-quality learning and socially acceptable behavior—and 
hence, success.
But what, exactly, can and should schools do? To repeat, Glasser would have 
us (1) provide a genuinely engaging curriculum, (2) emphasize quality in teach-
ing and learning, and (3) influence students—in a noncoercive manner—to make 
choices that bring academic and social success.
Glasser says teachers will remain disappointed, and their students short-
changed, if teachers continue to use the traditional teaching style he calls boss 
management. He describes boss management as follows: Teachers and schools select 
the curriculum, and then teachers deliver it to students, attempt to make students 
learn it, and attempt to make students behave acceptably in class. The results have 
always fallen well short of expectations.
Teachers do much better, he says, when they use a style he calls lead 
 management. He describes lead management in education as follows: Students 
are helped to explore topics they find interesting or useful; teachers help stu-
dents pose questions they would like to answer; teachers help students locate 
and use helpful  resources; and teachers help students learn to do high-quality 
work.
Glasser also gives strong attention to how teachers relate with students. He 
identified what he considered to be some serious interactive mistakes teachers 
make, which he called seven deadly habits. He said teachers are far more effec-
tive when they replace the deadly habits with seven connecting habits. Later in 
this chapter, we will see what Glasser means by “deadly habits” and “connecting 
habits.”
What QuestIons WIll thIs Chapter ansWer for me?
■ Why do so many students fail to do well in school, despite teachers’ diligent 
efforts?
■ What does Glasser mean by “noncoercive management?”
■ What is “boss management,” and why is it less effective in the classroom?
■ What is “lead management,” and why is it more effective than boss manage-
ment in the classroom?
■ What does Glasser mean by “deadly habits” and “connecting habits”?
■ What are the basic premises of Choice Theory, and how are they used in 
teaching?
■ What does Glasser mean by quality teaching, quality learning, and quality 
classrooms?
■ How are quality teaching, quality learning, and quality classrooms 
achieved?
■ How would Glasser have teachers respond to students who break class 
rules?
201

William Glasser on Releasing the Power of Positive Choice
What are Glasser’s major assertIons about nonCoerCIve 
Classroom manaGement?
Noncoercive classroom management relies on the use of positive influence rather 
than forceful tactics to motivate student effort. It is based on long experience with 
the fact that, in schools, demands and other types of force seldom motivate stu-
dents to want to learn or behave responsibly. Motivation comes from within the 
individual; accordingly, the teacher’s role is to influence students, without coercion, 
to voluntarily make choices that bring success combined with pleasure, as fun is the 
natural payoff of learning. Here are some of Glasser’s basic concepts:
■ All human behavior is purposeful. Our behavior is never aimless or accidental. 
For the most part, it reflects our attempts to satisfy specific needs.
What Is the Glasser model of Classroom manaGement?
William Glasser’s Approach to Classroom Management
Glasser’s Overarching Strategy
Provide positive conditions that help students meet their 
needs and inﬂ uence students, without  coercion, to  conduct 
themselves responsibly and do high-quality work.
Glasser’s Principal Strategies
Use noncoercive inﬂ uence strategies to help students 
make responsible behavior choices.
Conscientiously use connecting habits in your 
interactions with students.
Provide quality teaching and help students strive 
for quality learning.
Address discipline issues as “incidents” by looking 
for resolutions rather than using punishment. 
Engage students in problem solving.
↓
→
↑
↓
↓
↓
↑
↑
↑
The Common Goal of All Approaches to  Noncoercive 
Classroom  Management Responsible, Civil Classroom 
Behavior That Becomes Habitual and Lasts over Time
Responsible means paying attention, making a strong 
effort, and doing what is proper without being told. Civil 
means respectful, polite, cordial, and well mannered.
↑
202

William Glasser on Releasing the Power of Positive Choice
■ We are naturally disposed to be in charge of our own behavior. Because our behav-
ior is purposeful and self-chosen, we cannot ascribe it to circumstances, fate, or 
other people. Any credit for proper behavior, or blame for improper behavior, 
goes right back to us.
■ Our behavior can be thought of as our best attempts to meet our basic needs, five of 
which are for survival, love and belonging, power, fun, and freedom. The school 
experience should be refined so that it helps students meet those five needs.
■ At least half of today’s students will not commit themselves to learning if they find 
their school experience boring, frustrating, or otherwise dissatisfying. There is no 
way teachers can “make” students commit to learning, although they can usu-
ally force behavioral compliance temporarily.
■ Few students in today’s schools do their best work. Most are apathetic about 
schoolwork. Many do no schoolwork at all.
■ If today’s schools are to be successful, they must maintain quality conditions that ensure 
psychological comfort and reduce frustration for both students and teachers. To be at 
their best, everyone must feel safe, feel they belong, have a degree of power, find 
fun in learning and teaching, and experience a degree of freedom in the process.
■ What schools require now is a new commitment to quality education—meaning 
education that promotes competence and behaviors that lead to success. Quality 
education occurs naturally when the curriculum is made attractive to students 
and students are encouraged, supported, and helped to learn.
■ In order to be adequately attractive, the school curriculum must be comprised of 
learnings that are engaging, useful, or otherwise relevant to students’ lives. Useful-
ness and relevance are hallmarks of a quality curriculum, which is delivered 
through activities that attract student interest, involve students actively, pro-
vide enjoyment, and lead to meaningful accomplishments.
■ Students should be helped to acquire in-depth information about topics they consider 
useful or interesting. Doing so increases the likelihood of quality learning.
■ Quality learning is evident when students become able to demonstrate or explain how, 
why, and where their learnings are valuable. Opportunity and practice in making 
such explanations should be incorporated into the daily classroom activities.
■ Instead of scolding, coercing, or punishing, teachers should endeavor to befriend their 
students, build strong supportive relationships with them, provide encouragement and 
stimulation, and show unending willingness to help.  
■ Teachers who dictate procedures, order students to work, and berate them when they 
do not comply are increasingly less effective with today’s students. Glasser calls 
teachers who function in this way boss managers.
■ Teachers who provide a stimulating learning environment, encourage students, and 
help them as much as possible are most effective with today’s learners. Glasser calls 
teachers who function in this way lead teachers.
■ Motivation is the single most important factor in learning. Students are motivated 
by what they find pleasurable or clearly part of their Quality World at any 
given time. It is up to teachers to ensure that the curriculum and instruction 
are pleasurable and/or worthwhile for students. When that is done, learning 
difficulties and behavior problems are seldom evident.
In summary, Glasser’s convictions are as follows: Human behavior is purpose-
ful. We are all driven to satisfy five basic needs that are set by our genetic code. 
203

William Glasser on Releasing the Power of Positive Choice
Behavior is compared to a car with the student as the driver; the driver has very 
strong beliefs about the direction the car should head, or pictures of the way the 
 student wants things to be. Behaviors are chosen to match those pictures and, in 
so doing, students are able to satisfy one or more of their basic needs. Glasser calls 
all behavior Total Behavior because there are four components operating concur-
rently with each and every behavior, corresponding to the four wheels of the car on 
the ground: acting and thinking (front wheels) and feelings and physiology (back 
wheels).  Behavior choices spring from our values, customs, information available 
to us, and the Quality World pictures we hold. Because we choose our behavior, we 
are personally responsible for it. All students can do competent work, and many 
can do very high-quality work in school.
Why Is Classroom boss manaGement ConsIdered futIle?
Glasser repeatedly points to the futility of attempting to force students to behave 
in ways that are contrary to their natural inclinations. For example, when a student 
is not paying attention because the lesson is boring, it is a losing battle to try to 
force the student’s attention. When lessons are interesting, students pay attention 
naturally and don’t have to be continually cajoled. This fact is fundamental in 
Glasser’s focus on what he calls quality education, in which students are seen to 
engage willingly in work that they perceive to be worthwhile (congruent with their 
Quality World pictures).
As mentioned, Glasser has concluded that many of today’s students are con-
tent to do low-quality school work or even none at all. As he put it, “No more than 
half of our secondary school students are willing to make an effort to learn, and 
therefore cannot be taught” (Glasser, 1986, p. 3) and “. . . no more than 15 percent 
of high school students do quality work” (Glasser, 1990, p. 5). His solution is to 
offer instruction in a form that influences students to do at least some high-quality 
schoolwork. Nothing less, he says, will suffice.
Glasser says that meeting this goal requires only modest changes in  curricula, 
materials, and physical facilities, but a significant change in the way teachers work 
with students. Glasser acknowledges that teaching is difficult, and he expresses sym-
pathy for beleaguered teachers who yearn to work with dedicated, high-achieving 
students but are continually frustrated by students’ lack of effort. Glasser says those 
teachers have told him that the main behavior problems they encounter do not 
involve defiance or disruption, but students’ overwhelming apathy.
Students, for their part, tell Glasser that they dislike schoolwork not because it is 
too difficult, but because it is too boring. In Glasser’s mind, that means schoolwork 
is not helping students meet their needs. If schooling is to be effective, he says, needs 
must be recognized and the curriculum organized to help students match their Qual-
ity World pictures of what school is all about and enable them to meet their needs.
Teachers, for their part, must move toward quality teaching and the imple-
mentation of Choice Theory, which holds that our actions are not determined by 
external causes, but by what goes on inside us. When we teach others, we cannot 
“make” them learn. All we can do is open possibilities, provide information, and 
expose them to the influence of good models (such as ourselves), and in so doing 
influence them to make more effective choices in what they do in school.
204

William Glasser on Releasing the Power of Positive Choice
hoW Can sChools help students meet theIr basIC needs?
It is not difficult to manage the classroom to help students meet the needs Glasser 
identifies. He says students’ survival (safety) needs are met when the school envi-
ronment is kept safe and free from personal threat.
Students sense belonging when they receive attention from the teacher and 
others and are enabled to take part in class matters. In this regard, Glasser fre-
quently mentions the value of cooperative learning teams (Glasser, 1998a) and the 
use of classroom meetings.
Students sense power when asked to participate in making decisions about 
topics to be studied and procedures for working in class, and also when given 
responsibility for classroom chores such as caring for class plants and animals, dis-
tributing and taking care of materials, keeping the classroom neat, being in charge 
of media equipment, and so forth.
Students experience fun when they are able to work and talk with others, en-
gage in interesting activities, and share their accomplishments.
Finally, they sense freedom when the teacher encourages them to make re-
sponsible choices concerning what they will study, how they will learn the material, 
and how they will demonstrate their accomplishments.
hoW does Glasser CharaCterIze a QualIty CurrICulum?
Glasser says that if schools are to be effective, they must provide a quality curricu-
lum that helps students learn useful information and learn it well. He believes that 
the present-day curriculum focuses far too much on memorizing facts that are irrel-
evant to students’ lives, while quality of teaching is judged by how many fragments 
of information students can retain long enough to be measured on written tests. 
Glasser (1992) advises that any part of the school curriculum that doesn’t help stu-
dents learn useful information and learn it well should be discarded as “nonsense.”
Glasser says if students are old enough, you can ask for their input concerning 
what they would like to explore in depth. Once the topics have been selected, ade-
quate time should be allocated for students to explore the topics thoroughly. Learn-
ing about a smaller number of topics in depth is always preferable to covering many 
superficially. Quality learning requires depth of understanding combined with clear 
awareness of its value. To ensure students recognize that value, they should always 
seek to explain why the material they are learning is valuable and how and where 
it can be used or make their lives better.
hoW does Glasser CharaCterIze QualIty teaChInG?
Glasser (1993, 1998c) stresses the importance of quality teaching and says it is 
reasonably easy to accomplish, although it requires a change in approach for many 
teachers. He recognizes that it is sometimes difficult for teachers to change their 
teaching style, but he nevertheless urges them to work toward the following:
 1. Provide a warm, supportive classroom climate. This is done by helping students 
know and like you. Use natural occasions over time to tell students who you 
are, what you stand for, what you will ask them to do, what you will not ask 
205

William Glasser on Releasing the Power of Positive Choice
them to do, what you will do for them, and what you will not do for them. 
Show them you are always willing to help.
 2. Use lead management rather than boss management. This means using methods 
that encourage students and draw them out, rather than trying to force infor-
mation into them.
 3. Ask students only to do work that is useful. Useful work consists of knowledge 
and skills that students will make use of in their lives. At times, teachers may 
have to point out the value of the new learnings, but if that value doesn’t 
become quickly evident to students, they will not make a sustained effort to 
learn. Information to be taught and learned should meet one or more of the 
following criteria:
■ The information is directly related to an important skill.
■ The information is something that students express a desire to learn about.
■ The information is something the teacher believes to be especially useful.
■ The information is required for college entrance exams.
 4. Always ask students to do the best work they can. The process of doing quality 
work occurs slowly and must be nurtured. Glasser suggests that a focus on 
quality can be initiated as follows:
■ First, discuss quality work so that students understand what it means.
■ Next, begin with an assignment that is clearly important enough for stu-
dents to want do well.
■ Then ask students to do their best work on the assignment. Do not grade 
the work at this point because grades suggest to students that the work is 
finished.
 5. Ask students to evaluate work they have done and improve it. Quality usually 
comes from modifications made through continued effort. Glasser suggests 
that when students feel they have completed work on an important topic, 
you should help them make value judgments about their work through the 
process of self-evaluation, as follows:
■ Ask students to explain why they think their work has high quality.
■ Ask students how they think they might improve their work still further. As 
students see the value of improving their work, higher quality will result 
naturally.
■ Progressively help students learn to use self-evaluation, improvement, and 
repetition (SIR) until high quality is achieved.
 6. Help students recognize that they feel good when doing quality work. There is no 
better human feeling than that which comes from the satisfaction of doing 
something worthwhile that you believe is the very best you can do and finding 
that others agree. As students begin to sense this feeling, they will want more 
of it (Glasser, 1993).
 7. Help students see that quality work must never be destructive to oneself, others, or 
the environment. Teachers should help students realize that it is not possible to 
achieve the good feeling of quality work if their efforts harm people, property, 
the environment, or other creatures.
206

William Glasser on Releasing the Power of Positive Choice
What else does Glasser say about boss manaGement  
and lead manaGement?
We have seen Glasser’s strong recommendation that teachers give up boss manage-
ment and replace it with lead management. He asks teachers to recognize that they 
cannot force motivation into students and, in the long run, can seldom do high-
quality teaching when using the boss approach. The following scenario depicting 
boss management illustrates Glasser’s point:
Mr. Márquez (a boss teacher) introduces his unit of study on South American ge-
ography as follows: “Class, today we are going to begin our study of the geography 
of South America. You will be expected to do the following things:
 1. Learn the names of the South American countries.
 2. Locate those countries on a blank map.
 3. Describe the types of terrain typical of each country.
 4. Name two products associated with each country.
 5. Describe the population of each country as to ethnic make-up and wealth.
 6. Name and locate the most important river in each country.
You will learn this information from our textbooks and reference books. You will 
have two tests, one at . . . “
(Given these requirements, it is unlikely the students will pursue the work 
eagerly. Most will do only enough, and only well enough, to get by.)
Lead managers proceed differently. They attempt to activate the genuine motivation 
that resides within students. Therefore, they spend most of their time organizing 
interesting activities and providing assistance to students. They follow a regimen 
similar to the following:
■ They lead the class into the discussion of several topics of interest.
■ They encourage students to identify topics they would like to explore in depth.
■ They discuss with students the nature of the schoolwork that might ensue, 
asking students what they would do to show evidence of quality.
■ They explore with students resources that might be needed for quality work 
and anticipate the amount of time such work might require.
■ They review ways in which the work can be done and, if possible, show or 
describe examples of finished work that reflect quality.
■ They emphasize the importance of students continually self-evaluating their 
effort and progress.
■ They clearly affirm that students will be provided good tools and a safe 
workplace.
To illustrate how lead teaching might proceed, consider this example of Mr. Garcia’s 
introduction to a unit of study on the geography of South America.
“Class, have any of you ever lived in South America? You did, Samuel? Which 
country? Perú? Fantastic! What an interesting country! I lived for a while in Brazil. 
I traveled in the Amazon quite a bit and spent some time with jungle Indians. 
207

William Glasser on Releasing the Power of Positive Choice
Supposedly they were head hunters at one time. But not now. At least so they say. 
Tomorrow I’ll show you a bow and arrow I brought from that tribe. Samuel, did 
you ever eat monkey when you were in Perú? I think Perú and Brazil are very alike 
in some ways but very different in others. What was Perú like compared to here? 
Did you get up into the Andes? They have fabulous ruins all over Perú, I hear, and 
those fantastic “Chariots of the Gods” lines and drawings on the landscape. Do 
you have any photographs or videos you could bring for us to see? What a resource 
you could be for us! You could teach us a lot! “
“Class, Samuel lived in Perú and traveled in the Andes. If we could get him 
to teach us about that country, what do you think you would most like to learn?” 
(The class discusses this option and identifies topics.)
“We have the opportunity in our class to learn a great deal about South Amer-
ica, its mountains and grasslands, its dense rain forests and huge rivers, and its 
interesting people and strange animals. Did you know there are groups of people 
originally from England, Wales, Italy, and Germany now living in many parts of 
South America, especially in Argentina? Did you know there are still thought to be 
tribes of Indians in the jungles that have had no contact with the outside world? 
Did you know that almost half of all the river water in the world is in the Amazon 
Basin, and that in some places the Amazon River is so wide that from the middle 
you can’t see either shore?”
“Speaking of the Amazon jungle, I swam in a lake there that contained pira-
nhas, and look, I still have my legs and arms. Surprised about that? If you wanted 
to learn more about living in the Amazon jungle, what would you be interested in 
knowing?” (Discussion ensues.)
“How about people of the high Andes? Those Incas, for example, and their 
ancestors who in some unknown way cut and placed enormous boulders to make 
gigantic, perfectly fitting fortress walls? Samuel might have seen them. The Incas 
were highly civilized and powerful, with an empire that stretched for three thou-
sand miles. Yet they were conquered by a few Spaniards on horseback. How in the 
world could that have happened? If you could learn more about those amazing 
Incas and the area in which they lived, what would you like to know?”
(Discussion continues in this manner. Students identify topics about which 
they would be willing to make an effort to learn.)
“Now let me see what you think of this idea: I have written down the topics 
you said you were interested in, and I can help you with resources and materials. I 
have lots I can share with you, including photographs, South American music, and 
many cultural objects I have collected. I know people who lived in Argentina and 
Colombia that we could invite to talk with us. We can concentrate on what you 
have said you would like to learn about. But if we decide to work in that manner, I 
want to see if we can make this deal: We explore what interests you and I will help 
you all I can. For your part, you agree to explore some information I think you 
should know, and all along you agree to do the very best work you are capable of. 
We would need to discuss what you’d like to learn about and some things I want 
you to learn, and from that we could decide what you might do to show the quality 
of your learning. In addition, I hope I can persuade each of you to regularly evalu-
ate yourselves as to how well you believe you are doing. Understand, this would 
not be my evaluation, it would be yours—not for a grade but so you can see what 
208

William Glasser on Releasing the Power of Positive Choice
you are doing very well and what you think you might be able to do better. What 
do you think? Want to give it a try?”
hoW Is ChoICe theory applIed In the Classroom?
Given a high level of motivation, students can learn almost anything taught in 
school, and when fully engrossed in learning, they seldom misbehave. This chapter 
has emphasized Glasser’s contentions that educators too often assume that student 
motivation comes from teacher exhortation. You know Glasser’s  counterargument—
that students are highly likely to do whatever is most satisfying to them at any point 
in time, if they can. That being the case, most students work hard and comply with 
expectations only when they get satisfaction from doing so. If natural satisfaction 
does not occur, they may work to please you, but usually not for long. To persevere, 
they must find satisfaction in the activity itself.
Glasser says one way to improve behavior in your class is to involve students in 
specifying what a quality existence in the classroom would be like—in other words, ex-
ploring students’ Quality World pictures. Then, you plan for allowing the choices that 
would help bring about the realization or attainment those pictures. You can do the 
same with your manner of teaching. Try it: Begin by identifying one thing you could 
easily choose to change or add in your lessons that would make your classes more 
enjoyable for everyone—perhaps role-playing, enacting skits that verify learning, hold-
ing debates, working in small groups—things of that sort. What would you have to do 
to put the change into practice? Exchange ideas with fellow professionals if possible.
hoW does QualIty teaChInG affeCt dIsCIplIne?
Glasser acknowledges that no instructional approach can eliminate all less desir-
able or less effective behavior, but he maintains that such behavior can be reduced 
greatly if teachers do the following:
■ Know your students and begin to build and maintain strong supportive rela-
tionships with them.
■ Work with students to establish standards of conduct in the classroom.
■ Begin with a discussion of the importance of quality work (to be given priority 
in the class) and explain that you will do everything possible to help students 
learn and enjoy themselves without using force.
■ Lead the discussion on quality work by asking students about class behavior 
they believe will help them get their work done and truly help them learn. 
Glasser says that if teachers can get students to see the importance of courtesy, 
no other rules may be necessary.
■ Solicit student input on what should happen when behavior agreements are 
broken. Glasser says students usually suggest punishment, even though they 
know punishment is not effective. If asked further, they will agree that behav-
ior problems are best solved by looking for ways to remedy whatever is causing 
the rule to be broken.
■ Once agreements and consequences are established, they should be put in writ-
ing and all students should sign the document, attesting that they understand 
209

William Glasser on Releasing the Power of Positive Choice
the agreements and that, if they break them, they will endeavor—with the 
teacher’s help—to correct the underlying problem. Agreements established 
and dealt with in this way, says Glasser, show that the teacher’s main concern 
lies in quality, not power, and that the teacher recognizes that power struggles 
usually damage the quality of learning.
■ Show interest in students and, when appropriate, ask them, “What might I do 
to help?”
■ Try to avoid adversarial encounters with students. Adversity dampens enthusi-
asm, damages cooperation, and reduces one’s inclination to do quality work. 
When you have important disagreements with students, look for solutions 
without getting angry.
■ Hold classroom meetings to explore what students like and dislike about the 
class. Show them you are willing to change what they dislike if you can.
 Other authorities do not agree with Glasser on involving students in mak-
ing class rules of behavior. They consider rule making to be the teacher’s job, 
although they would have you explain to students why the rules exist and what 
they are intended to accomplish. At this point in time, which would be your pre-
ferred approach—making and explaining the rules yourself, or involving students 
in a total class effort to establish the rules? What is your rationale?
?
What Would Glasser have me do When students 
break Class rules?
Glasser says you must intervene when a student breaks rules or class agreements, 
in order to help the student choose a more effective behavior and direct the stu-
dent’s mind back to productive class work. Suppose Jonathan comes into the room 
obviously upset. As the lesson begins, he turns heatedly and throws something at 
Michael. Glasser suggests you say the following:
“It looks like you have a problem, Jonathan. How can I help you solve it?”
[Jonathan frowns, still obviously upset, and says nothing.]
“If you will calm down, I will discuss it with you in a little while. I think we 
can work something out.”
Glasser says that you should make it clear to Jonathan that you are unable to help 
him until he calms down. You should say this without emotion in your voice, recog-
nizing that anger on your part will only put Jonathan on the defensive. If  Jonathan 
doesn’t calm down, there is no good way to deal with the problem. Glasser (1990) 
says to allow him 20 seconds, and if he isn’t calm by then, admit that there is no 
way to solve the problem at that time. Give Jonathan a time-out from the lesson, 
but don’t threaten or warn him. Say something like the following:
“Jonathan, I want to help you work this out. I am not interested in punishing you. 
Whatever the problem is, let’s solve it. But for now you can go sit at the table. When 
you are calm, come back to your seat.”
210

William Glasser on Releasing the Power of Positive Choice
Later, at an opportune time, discuss the situation with Jonathan, approximately as 
follows:
“What were you doing when the problem started? Was it against the rules? Can 
we work things out so it won’t happen again? What could you and I do to keep it 
from happening?”
If the problem involves hostilities between Jonathan and Michael, the discussion 
should involve both boys and proceed along these lines:
“What were you doing, Jonathan? What were you doing, Michael? How can the 
three of us work things out so this won’t happen anymore?”
It is important to note that no time is spent trying to find out whose fault it was, and 
no blame is assigned to either Jonathan or Michael. You make clear to the boys that 
all you are looking for is a solution so that the problem won’t occur again. Glasser 
says if you treat Jonathan and Michael with respect and courtesy, if you show you 
don’t want to punish them or throw your weight around, and if you talk to them as 
a problem solver, their classroom behavior and the quality of their work will both 
improve. Glasser brings a third entity into the discussion with the boys, that of the 
relationship. He will encourage the boys to engage in behavior that helps them 
build or rebuild a friendly relationship and avoid behavior that might damage or 
break that relationship.
What does Glasser mean by “QualIty Classrooms,” 
and hoW do We Get them?
Many educators avidly support Glasser’s ideas concerning teaching and education. 
Numerous teachers have met the stringent requirements for earning the Choice 
Theory, Reality Therapy, and Lead Management (CTRTC) certification given by The 
William Glasser Institute. Several entire schools have done so as well, and when 
they meet the requirements, they declare themselves a Glasser Quality School and 
are officially recognized by The William Glasser Institute as such. Glasser (2001) 
describes them as schools that display the following (as updated on the Glasser 
website, www.wglasser.com) characteristics:
Criteria for a Glasser Quality School
■ Relationships are based upon trust and respect, and all discipline problems, 
not incidents, have been eliminated.
■ Total learning competency is stressed, and an evaluation that is below compe-
tence or what is now a “B” has been eliminated. All “schooling” as defined by 
Dr. William Glasser has been replaced by “useful education.”
■ All students do some quality work each year that is significantly beyond 
competence. All such work receives an “A” grade or higher, such as an “A+.”
■ Students and staff are taught to use Choice Theory in their lives and in their 
work in school. Parents are encouraged to participate in study groups to be-
come familiar with the ideas of Dr. William Glasser.
211

William Glasser on Releasing the Power of Positive Choice
■ Students do better on state proficiency tests and college entrance examinations 
(typically at the 80th percentile or better). The importance of these tests is 
emphasized in the school.
■ Staff, students, parents, and administrators view the school as a joyful place.
A Quality School rubric is available at www.wglasser.com.
In 2006, Therese Hinder conducted an independent review of seven Glasser 
Quality Schools in various states in America with enrollments that reflected a cross-
section of the American school population. She found that all of the schools she 
reviewed adhered closely to Glasser’s teachings and that student achievement in 
all of them ranked in the top category on their statewide student testing program.
What are the seven deadly habIts In teaChInG,  
and hoW do I avoId them?
A fundamental operating principle in Glasser’s approach is that teachers and ad-
ministrators must make school a happy place for students. Glasser asserts that if 
you are having trouble with a student, you can be absolutely sure the student is 
unhappy in your class and very likely unhappy in school. Glasser believes most 
problems between teachers and students are caused by unsatisfactory relationships; 
he therefore maintains that good relationships are of fundamental importance.
You can immediately improve relationships with and among students simply 
by avoiding what Glasser refers to as the seven deadly habits and replacing them with 
the seven connecting habits.
The seven deadly habits are actions or behaviors that prevent the establish-
ment of caring relationships, specifically: criticizing, blaming, complaining, nagging, 
threatening, punishing, and rewarding others to control them. (These same deadly hab-
its are equally detrimental to relationships with others outside of school.) If you are 
to establish good relationships with students and gain their willing cooperation, 
get rid of those habits immediately and help students do so as well.
In place of the deadly habits, find ways of promoting connections with others, as 
epitomized in the seven connecting habits Glasser identifies as caring, listening, sup-
porting, respecting, encouraging, trusting, and negotiating differences. Glasser believes—and 
results at his Quality Schools support his contentions—that all students who come to 
school can do competent work. You make this possible when you strongly connect with 
your students on a personal level and show them how to maintain good connections as 
well. Glasser makes his point by describing how we relate with friends: We do not criti-
cize, blame, or speak harshly to them. Instead, we build and maintain strong relation-
ships and use the connecting habits Glasser has identified. Teachers who build strong 
relationships with their students discover that they have been added to their students’ 
Quality World pictures, meaning that the teachers are important people in their lives.
Commentary from anonymous teacher 1
As a classroom teacher with 20 years of experience in a low-income neigh-
borhood, I find myself in close agreement with Dr. Glasser’s commentaries 
on the “seven deadly habits” and the “seven connecting habits.” I try very 
212

William Glasser on Releasing the Power of Positive Choice
hard to maintain a good personal relationship with my students, in the be-
lief it helps them feel all right about school, want to be there, and in turn 
want to do good work to please me. I know for sure the younger students 
don’t perform nearly as well when they are overly criticized. They seem to 
have a strong need for positive comments from me. That’s human nature, 
I think. I tell my students that, and I try to exemplify it in how I treat my 
students. I also tell them it is difficult for me to teach well and it also makes 
me feel bad when my students misbehave and don’t show any interest in 
school.
Realistically, no teacher is going to have perfectly behaving students 
100% of the time, no matter what they do. And some classes are definitely 
more difficult than others. However, I find that Glasser’s connecting habits 
win over most students’ cooperation and loyalty before long and the result 
is a more pleasant classroom environment, fewer behavior problems, and a 
higher level of student engagement and competent work. I just try to treat 
my students as good friends. It’s rather easy, actually.
In summary, hoW Can I move toWard buIldInG  
a QualIty Classroom?
Here is a review of Glasser’s main suggestions:
■ Replace deadly habits with connecting habits. Determine that beginning today, 
you will assiduously avoid the seven deadly habits when working with your 
students, replace them with the seven connecting habits, and help your stu-
dents do the same.
■ Make plain to students how you will work with them. The message you want to get 
across to students is the following: “We are in this class together. I want to help 
you to become very competent. My job is to teach you and help you learn, not 
to find out what you don’t know and punish you for not knowing it. If you 
have a question, ask me. If you need more time, I’ll give it to you. If you have 
an idea how to do what we are trying to do better, tell me. I’ll listen” (Glasser, 
2001, p. 113).
■ Build strong relationships with your students. Instead of telling students what they 
must do and not do, endeavor to befriend all of them. To begin, say something 
like, “I think an important part of my job is to do all I can to make sure you 
have a good time learning. You have to come to school and no one’s going to 
pay you for doing schoolwork. So the least I can do is make this class fun for 
both you and me. I think we can learn a lot and still have a very good time” 
(Glasser, 2001, p. 54). Then implement a quality curriculum and steadfastly 
use the seven connecting habits.
■ Establish reasonable rules of class behavior. Rely on one fundamental rule of 
 behavior—the Golden Rule. Discuss the Golden Rule with students. A few other 
rules may occasionally be necessary, but the Golden Rule is fundamental to all.
■ Take the energy out of impending less-effective behavior. Replace traditional disci-
pline (external control) with talking and listening to students as soon as you 
213

William Glasser on Releasing the Power of Positive Choice
sense that undesirable behavior is likely to occur. Listen carefully. Inject humor 
into the situation if you can, but do not make light of students’ concerns.
■ Teach things that make a real difference in students’ lives. It is very important that 
students be able to make good use of what they learn in school. Therefore, 
ensure that your curriculum focuses on skills and knowledge that interest stu-
dents and make them more knowledgeable and competent. Don’t have them 
memorize anything just so they can repeat it back on tests. Explain to students 
that you will not ask them to learn anything that is not useful to them, and 
when there might be doubt, you will explain clearly how the new learning will 
benefit them.
■ Help students learn to strive for quality. Tell students you use a way of teaching 
that makes sure everyone can do competent work and everyone will make 
good grades (meaning a grade of B or better). Explain that you will ask stu-
dents to work at any given assignment until they have achieved an acceptably 
high level of competence. Nobody will fail or receive a low grade. They can 
use any resources available to help them, including textbooks, caregivers, and 
other students. The primary objective is to do competent work. Beyond that, 
encourage students to work for even higher quality to help them learn what it 
feels like to do A-level work.
■ Test students frequently, but productively. Teach students using your best tech-
niques, help them self-evaluate their work, and then test them regularly. Ex-
plain that the tests are for learning only and promise that no one will fail or 
receive a poor grade on them. When they have completed a test, have them 
go back over it and correct any incorrect or incomplete answers. Ask them to 
explain why each correction is better. Give them the time and help needed to 
achieve success.
■ Emphasize understanding and making use of new learning. Ask students always 
to focus on understanding and using the information and skills being taught. 
Ask them to share and discuss the learnings with caregivers.
■ Provide options for students after competence is achieved. Students who complete 
their work competently can then have the option of helping other students or 
moving ahead to doing something of yet higher quality. To experience the full 
sense of Glasser’s ideas, consult his 2001 book entitled Every Student Can Succeed 
and/or visit his websites at www.wglasser.com and www.wglasserbooks.com.
Commentary from anonymous teacher 2
I cringed when I read Glasser’s list of deadly habits, because I am guilty 
of all of them. I would like to believe I have been a positive model for my 
students, but am ashamed to admit I have criticized, blamed, complained 
about, nagged, threatened, punished, and rewarded students, with the 
intent of shaping their behavior and work habits. I can, of course, see the 
downside to blaming, complaining about, nagging, and threatening stu-
dents or anyone else. I am a little confused about criticizing, though. Isn’t 
it part of a teacher’s function to offer a critique on student work in an ef-
fort to improve it? Most students have not had enough academic or life 
214

William Glasser on Releasing the Power of Positive Choice
experience to know if their work is quality, and must depend upon the 
teacher for guidance. Feedback can be given gently.
I am conflicted (or possibly just lack complete understanding) about 
viewing punishing and rewarding as deadly habits. Every school in which 
I have taught has had a schoolwide discipline plan, and this plan has in-
variably included rewards (special activities, events, treats, recognition for 
good grades, awards, privileges) and punishment (exclusion from reward 
activities). I think most kids (and parents) expect this, and I am not sure what 
would take its place in individual classrooms or in schoolwide plans if the 
notion were abandoned.
I felt a little better about myself as a teacher when I reflected on the 
connecting habits. I have exhibited all of those behaviors at one time or 
another, as have most teachers. But before I pat myself on the back too vig-
orously I must add the caveat: with some students. And there’s the rub, for 
it is easy to connect with students who are bright, cheerful, good-natured, 
respectful, and seem to like me and the subject. I have not always done 
everything possible to befriend the more difficult students. This is my own 
failing, and maybe I can rectify it.
I very much like Dr. Glasser’s suggestions on creating interesting les-
sons and being friends with students as means of creating a joyful class-
room where students achieve and don’t misbehave. I like the notion of 
ditching the “boring” parts of the curriculum, because, frankly, those parts 
are harder to teach. But I’m struggling a bit with visualizing how it would all 
look in practice, with real teachers and real students. A series of webcasts 
offering observation of and discussion with lead teachers in Glasser Quality 
Schools would be very helpful.
hoW Can I Go about ImplementInG Glasser’s Ideas  
In my Classes?
Glasser’s ideas for increasing quality in teaching and learning need not be imple-
mented in one fell swoop. They can be introduced gradually, allowing you to evalu-
ate each suggestion in terms of class climate and morale. Here are some of Glasser’s 
suggestions:
■ Remember that your students’ behavior is internally motivated and purpose-
ful, directed at matching their pictures to meet certain needs. Adjust your cur-
riculum as necessary to help students share their pictures of what a classroom 
conducive to learning might be like so that students can meet those needs.
■ Remember also that most of your students will not commit themselves to class 
activities they find boring, frustrating, or otherwise dissatisfying. Therefore, do 
what you can to eliminate those topics and replace them with alternatives that 
students like and find beneficial.
■ Hold a discussion with your class on how school could be made more in-
teresting and enjoyable. Identify a topic in which they show interest and 
215

William Glasser on Releasing the Power of Positive Choice
brainstorm ways to explore the topic, procedures for reporting or demonstrat-
ing accomplishment, personal conduct that would make the class function 
better, and how disruptions might be handled positively and effectively. The 
process is mainly for student input, but you might offer some of your opin-
ions as well.
■ Following that, indicate that you will try to organize a few activities as students 
have suggested and that you will do all you can to help them learn and suc-
ceed. Meanwhile, give yourself a crash course on functioning as a lead teacher, 
eliminating the seven deadly habits and establishing the seven connecting 
habits in your relations with students.
■ As you get things under way, hold meetings with your class to discuss the new 
efforts and any results you see in effort and behavior. The meetings should fo-
cus only on improving learning and never be allowed to degenerate into fault 
finding, blaming, or criticizing.
■ Instead of coercing, scolding, and punishing your students to get them to learn 
and behave properly, build supportive relationships with them, provide en-
couragement and stimulation, and show unending willingness to help.
■ Ask students what kinds of class behavior will help them acquire quality learn-
ing. Ask them to reach class agreements that promote such behavior. Ask them 
what should happen when anyone breaks a behavior agreement. Ensure that 
all their suggestions are positive rather than negative.
■ When students choose a less-effective behavior, discuss this behavior and why 
it was not appropriate for the class. Refer to the agreement or class contract. 
Ask students what they can do to differently in the future. Remember that 
students have more direct control over acting and thinking (the front wheels 
of the Total Behavior car) and less control over feelings and physiology (the 
back wheels of the Total Behavior car). A student can replace a behavior that 
may be less effective with one that is more effective only if the more effective 
behavior is at least as need-satisfying as the original behavior, the one that 
teachers often call not appropriate or undesirable. So, just saying, “Stop it!” 
may work immediately as an external measure, but it does not help students 
develop new ways of dealing with situations that are not satisfying their needs. 
If the behavior is serious or chronic, make time to talk with those students 
privately. Some schools have set up the Connecting Place where students are 
taught Choice Theory and begin to understand why they behave the way they 
do, giving them more control over their own lives.
What you have learned In thIs Chapter
You have learned that Glasser strongly believes—and has evidence to back his 
 beliefs—that student achievement and responsible behavior are fostered by teach-
ers’ organizing instruction to emphasize the following:
■ Quality curriculum consisting of useful and meaningful information that 
matches students’ Quality World pictures in order for students to meet inborn 
needs (survival, love and belonging, power, fun, and freedom) and make life better 
for students.
216

William Glasser on Releasing the Power of Positive Choice
■ Quality teaching, meaning lead teaching and classroom lead-management 
strategies that energize students, as opposed to boss teaching and classroom 
boss management strategies that have a dampening effect on students.
■ Application of Choice Theory, which emphasizes the value of positive influence 
and the understanding that all of us choose the behavior we display and are 
therefore responsible for it.
■ Assiduous avoidance of the seven deadly habits in teaching (criticizing, blam-
ing, complaining, nagging, threatening, punishing, and rewarding students to control 
them), which should be replaced with the seven connecting habits (accepting, 
listening, supporting, respecting, encouraging, trusting, and negotiating differences).
■ Noncoercive classroom management practices (using positive influence) in-
stead of coercive classroom management (using threat and force) to encourage 
students to conduct themselves responsibly.
ac t i vi ti e s
Self-Test: True/False
 1. According to Glasser, one of human beings’ basic 
needs is to experience “fun.”
 2. Glasser concluded that about half of today’s high 
school students make little effort to do well in 
school.
 3. Glasser says it is immaterial whether students 
know how to use what they are learning because 
many of the things we need to know are not used 
until later in life.
 4. “Lead teaching” attempts to draw students out so 
they become naturally engaged in learning infor-
mation they find useful.
 5. Glasser would not have teachers intervene when 
students break rules, but instead would let stu-
dents learn from the consequences of their actions.
 6. Glasser stresses that teachers and administrators 
must endeavor to help students be happy at school.
 7. Among Glasser’s seven deadly habits in teaching is 
one he calls “rewarding students in order to con-
trol them.”
 8. Glasser says schools should replace the seven 
deadly habits with the seven connecting habits, 
one of which is teachers’ respecting their students.
 9. Glasser says we can make education better for stu-
dents if we ask them to clarify what a quality life 
in school would be like, and then plan the choices 
that would lead to it.
 10. Because students are reluctant to commit them-
selves to class activities they find boring, you 
should always replace them with activities stu-
dents find valuable and enjoyable.
Self-Test: Multiple Choice
 1. Which was not included in Glasser’s list of human 
needs?
(a) freedom
(b) fun
(c) power
(d) achievement
 2. According to Glasser, the approximate percentage 
of high school students who do not make a rea-
sonable effort to learn is
(a) 25%.
(b) 40%.
(c) 50%.
(d) 70%.
 3. _____ is Glasser’s term for teaching that opens 
many avenues and provides support.
(a) Lead teaching
(b) Expansion teaching
(c) Discovery teaching
(d) Guided teaching
217

William Glasser on Releasing the Power of Positive Choice
Conc ep t C a se s
Case 1 kristina Will not Work
Kristina, a student in Mr. Jake’s class, is quite docile. She socializes little with other students 
and never disrupts lessons. However, despite Mr. Jake’s best efforts, Kristina will not do her 
work. She rarely completes an assignment. She is simply there, putting forth no effort at 
all. What would William Glasser suggest to help Kristina and Mr. Jake?
 4. For Glasser, frequently rewarding students as a 
means of controlling behavior is
(a) beneficial.
(b) counterproductive.
(c) impossible in practice.
(d) fine in theory.
 5. Glasser’s view of teachers’ building relationships 
with their students is
(a) wary.
(b) lukewarm.
(c) hot and cold.
(d) positive.
 6. Choice Theory would have teachers drop which of 
the following strategies in motivating students?
(a) coercion
(b) positive influence
(c) encouragement
(d) support
 7. Choice Theory holds that motivation resides mainly
(a) in the environment.
(b) in the social group.
(c) inside the individual.
(d) in the collective imagination.
 8. Glasser’s level of enthusiasm about classroom 
meetings is
(a) not enthusiastic.
(b) lukewarm.
(c) accepting.
(d) very positive.
 9. Glasser said this about class rules:
(a) keep them to about 10 in number.
(b) don’t have them.
(c) let students help make them.
(d) leave them mainly to the teacher.
 10. Which of the following is not a connecting habit?
(a) accepting
(b) listening
(c) supporting
(d) laying out a plan
Self-Test: Explain This
 1. What does Glasser mean by “basic needs,” and 
what are they specifically?
 2. What does Glasser mean by “quality teaching”?
 3. What are the main concepts that comprise Glass-
er’s Choice Theory?
 4. What does Glasser mean by “quality learning,” 
and how can teachers promote it?
Additional Suggested Activities
 1. Make notes in your journal concerning informa-
tion from Glasser’s teachings that you might like 
to incorporate into your personal system of class-
room management.
 2. Explain what Glasser means by each of the fol-
lowing terms: basic needs, boss teachers (boss 
management), Choice Theory, lead teachers (lead 
management), noncoercive classroom manage-
ment, quality curriculum, quality teaching, seven 
connecting habits, seven deadly habits, SIR, useful 
work.
 3. Give your appraisal of Glasser’s system concern-
ing the following: effectiveness in suppressing 
less-effective behavior, effectiveness in improving 
long-term behavior, ease of implementation, stu-
dent willingness to cooperate and do the expected 
work, establishing trust between teacher and 
student.
218

William Glasser on Releasing the Power of Positive Choice
Glasser would first suggest that Mr. Jake think carefully about the classroom and the 
program to try to determine whether they contain obstacles to Kristina’s meeting her basic 
needs. He would then have Mr. Jake discuss the matter with Kristina, not blaming her but 
noting the problem of nonproductivity and asking what is at the root of the problem and 
what he might be able to do to help. In that discussion, Mr. Jake might ask Kristina ques-
tions such as the following:
■ It appears that you may have a problem with this work. I believe the work is impor-
tant and will help you in the future, but only you can decide whether or not to do it. 
Is there anything I can do to help you get started?
■ Is there anything I could do to make the work more interesting for you?
■ Is there anything in this class that you especially enjoy doing? Do you think that, for 
a while, you might like to do only those things? Is there anything we have discussed 
in class that you would like to learn very, very well? How could I help you do that?
Glasser would not want Mr. Jake to use a disapproving tone of voice with Kristina, but every 
day make a point of talking with her in a friendly and courteous way about nonschool matters 
such as trips, pets, and movies. He would do this casually, showing he is interested in her and 
willing to be her friend. Glasser would remind Mr. Jake that there is no magic formula for suc-
cess with all students. Mr. Jake can only encourage and support Kristina. As Mr. Jake continues 
to build a relationship with Kristina, she is likely to begin to do more work of better quality.
Case 2 sara Will not stop talking
Sara is a pleasant girl who participates in class activities and does most, though not all, 
of her assigned work. She cannot seem to refrain from talking to classmates, however. 
Her teacher, Mr. Gonzales, has to speak to her repeatedly during lessons, to the point that 
he often becomes exasperated and loses his temper. What suggestions would Glasser give 
Mr. Gonzales for dealing with Sara?
Case 3 joshua Clowns and Intimidates
Joshua, larger and louder than his classmates, always wants to be the center of attention, 
which he accomplishes through a combination of clowning and intimidation. He makes 
wise remarks, talks back (smilingly) to the teacher, utters a variety of sound-effect noises 
such as automobile crashes and gunshots, and makes limitless sarcastic comments and 
put-downs of his classmates. Other students will not stand up to him, apparently fearing 
his size and verbal aggression. His teacher, Miss Pearl, has come to her wit’s end. How do 
you think Glasser would have Miss Pearl deal with Joshua?
Case 4 tom Is hostile and defiant
Tom has appeared to be in his usual foul mood ever since arriving in class. On his way to 
sharpen his pencil, he bumps into Frank, who complains. Tom tells him loudly to shut 
up. Miss Baines, the teacher, says, “Tom, go back to your seat.” Tom wheels around, swears 
loudly, and says heatedly, “I’ll go when I’m _____good and ready!” What would Glasser advise?
219

William Glasser on Releasing the Power of Positive Choice
you are  th e  te a c h e r
mIddle sChool World hIstory
Your third-period world history class is comprised of 
students whose achievement levels vary from high to 
well below average. You pace their work accordingly, 
ask them to work cooperatively, and make sure every-
one understands what they are supposed to do. For 
the most part you enjoy the class, finding the students 
interesting and refreshing. Your lessons follow a con-
sistent pattern. First, you ask the students to read in 
groups from the textbook, then you call on students at 
random to answer selected questions about the mate-
rial. If a student, who is called on, is unable to answer 
a question, the group he or she represents loses a point. 
If able to answer correctly, the group gains a point. For 
partially correct answers, the group neither receives nor 
loses a point. For the second part of the period, the 
class groups do something productive or creative con-
nected with the material they have read, such as mak-
ing posters, writing a story, doing a skit, or the like. As 
appropriate, these efforts are shared with members of 
the class.
a typICal oCCurrenCe
You call on Hillary to answer a question. Although she 
has been participating, she shakes her head. This has 
happened several times before. Not wanting to hurt 
Hillary’s feelings, you simply say, “That costs the group 
a point,” and you call on someone else. Unfortunately, 
Hillary’s group gets upset at her. The other students 
make comments under their breath. Later, Clarisse also 
refuses to answer. When you speak with her about it, 
she says, “You didn’t make Hillary do it.”
You answer, “Look, we are talking about you, not 
Hillary.” However, you let the matter lie and say no 
more. Just then, Deonne comes into the class late, ap-
pearing very angry. He slams his pack down on his desk 
and sits without opening his textbook. Although you 
want to talk with Deonne, you don’t know how to ap-
proach him at that time. Will is in the opposite mood.
Throughout the oral reading portion of the class, 
he continually giggles at every mispronounced word 
and at every reply students give to your questions. 
Will sits at the front of the class and turns around to 
laugh, seeing if he can get anyone else to laugh with 
him. He makes some oooh and aaaah sounds when 
Hillary and Clarisse decline to respond. Although 
most students either ignore him or give him disgusted 
looks, he keeps laughing. You finally ask him what is 
so funny.
He replies, “Nothing in particular,” and looks 
back at the class and laughs. At the end of the period, 
there is time for sharing three posters students have 
made. Will makes comments and giggles about each 
of them. Clarisse, who has not participated, says, “Will, 
how about shutting up!” As the students leave the 
room, you take Deonne aside. “Is something wrong, 
Deonne?” you ask. “No,” Deonne replies. His jaw is 
clenched as he strides past you.
ConCeptualIzInG a strateGy
If you followed Glasser’s suggestions, what would you 
do with regard to the following?
■ Preventing the problems from occurring in the first 
place.
■ Putting an immediate end to the less-effective 
behavior.
■ Involving other or all students in addressing the 
situation.
■ Maintaining student dignity and good personal 
relations.
Using follow-up procedures that would prevent 
the recurrence of the misbehavior.
220

William Glasser on Releasing the Power of Positive Choice
Boss managers (Glasser): Teachers who set the tasks, direct 
the learning activities, ask for little student input, and 
grade student work. (Contrasted with lead managers.)
Choice theory (Glasser): Theory that we all choose how 
to behave at any time, cannot control anyone’s behav-
ior but our own, and that all behavior is purposeful in 
meeting basic needs.
Freedom (Glasser): A basic student need that can be met 
when teacher allows choices in subject matter and in 
methods of study.
Fun (Glasser): A basic student need that can be met when 
the teacher provides opportunities for students to work 
and talk with others, engage in interesting activities, 
and share accomplishments.
Noncoercive tactics (Glasser; Marshall; many others): Dis-
cipline in which teachers invite, encourage, and oth-
erwise influence students to behave properly, without 
using demands or threats.
Power (Glasser): A basic student need for control, satis-
fied when students are given significant duties in the 
class and are allowed to participate in making decisions 
about class matters.
Quality curriculum (Glasser): A program of study that 
emphasizes excellence in learning in topics that stu-
dents consider useful.
Quality teaching (Glasser): Instruction in which teach-
ers help students become proficient in knowledge and 
skills the students consider important. This is usually 
done via “lead teaching.”
SIR (Glasser): An acronym standing for the process of 
self-evaluation, improvement, and repetition, used to 
promote quality.
Survival (Glasser): A basic need that motivates self-pro-
tective behavior.
Useful work (Glasser): Schoolwork that deals with skills and 
information that students deem valuable in their lives.
Value judgments (Glasser): Students evaluate their own 
work in terms of quality—a step in moving toward 
high-quality work.
G l ossa ry
ref e re n c e s
Glasser, W. (1986). Control theory in the classroom.  
New York: HarperCollins.
Glasser, W. (1990). The quality school: Managing students 
without coercion. New York: HarperCollins.
Glasser, W. (1992). The quality school curriculum. Phi 
Delta Kappan, 73(9), 690–694.
Glasser, W. (1993). The quality school teacher. New York: 
HarperCollins.
Glasser, W. (1998a). Choice theory in the classroom.  
New York: HarperCollins.
Hinder, T. (2006). An overview of seven Glasser Quality 
Schools in the USA. NSW Department of Education 
and Training Leadership Fellowship 2005–2006. A 
 Report of a Study Tour to the USA—April 2006. Therese 
Hinder. Principal. Epping West Public School. 96 Car-
lingford Road. Epping NSW 2121. Australia. [Use title 
of the article for browser to locate this report on the 
Internet.]
221

222

Spencer Kagan on Working on 
the Same Side with Students
How Does Spencer Kagan Foster Good Behavior 
by Working in Tandem with Students?
Here's an abridged version of a little story told by Spencer Kagan:
Two women are standing on a bank of a swift river. In the strong current, flailing 
about and desperately struggling to stay afloat, is a man being carried downstream 
toward them. The women both jump in and pull the man to safety. While the brave 
rescuers are tending to the victim, a second man, also desperate and screaming for 
help, is carried toward them by the current. Again the women jump to the rescue. 
As they are pulling out this second victim, they spot a third man flailing about as he 
is carried downstream toward them. One woman quickly jumps in to save him. As 
she does, she turns and sees the other woman resolutely walking upstream. “Why 
aren't you helping?” she cries. “I am,” states the other. “I am going to see who is 
pushing them in!” (Kagan, 2001)
What do you think is the point of Kagan's story?
Who Is spencer Kagan?
Spencer Kagan, originator and principal disseminator of Win-Win Discipline, 
is a professor of psychology and head of Kagan Publishing and Professional 
Development. For several years, Dr. Kagan has been conducting research into 
how teachers can best establish harmonious classrooms, promote responsible 
behavior, and improve students' social skills, character qualities, and academic 
achievement. Kagan believes discipline is not something you do to a student, but 
rather something you help a student achieve. All disruptive behavior is an im-
mature attempt to meet a need associated with a student position. For example, 
a student disrupts the class by acting like a clown. The student's position is 
attention-seeking. The job of the teacher, rather than disciplining the student, is 
to help the student learn responsible ways to meet the need for attention. When 
the student has responsible ways to meet her/his needs, the student is no longer 
From Chapter 10 of Building Classroom Discipline, Eleventh Edition. C. M. Charles. Copyright © 2014 by  Pearson 
Education, Inc. All rights reserved.
223

Spencer Kagan on Working on the Same Side with Students
disruptive. Thus, the focus in Win-Win Discipline is to help teachers recognize 
the seven positions from which disruptive behaviors spring, and to provide ways 
the teacher can help students learn responsible alternatives to their disruptive 
behaviors. It is a win-win. Disruptive students win: they learn responsible ways 
to meet their needs. The class and the teacher also win, as they have to deal with 
fewer disruptive behaviors. To help teachers teach students responsible behav-
iors, Kagan and his colleagues have developed many structures—step-by-step 
procedures to use to prevent disruptive behaviors, to deal with disruptive be-
haviors in the moment of disruption, and to help students learn responsible 
behaviors following a disruption. Thus, Win-Win is a before, during, and after 
approach to discipline.
Kagan believes discipline is established more satisfactorily when teachers and 
students work together from the same side to make decisions about behavior issues. 
Toward that end, he has developed a large number of structures—meaning sets of 
organized steps—that are applied to help students find greater success and to help 
teachers redirect irresponsible behavior when it occurs. The structures, which Kagan 
has aligned with the brain's multiple intelligences and ways of learning, are now 
being used internationally at levels from kindergarten through university, across a 
wide range of academic subjects.
Kagan is extremely enthusiastic about the value of structures in various aspects 
of teaching. To see what he has to say about them, you might take a few min-
utes to read his online article, “A Brief History of Kagan Structures,” Kagan Online 
 Magazine, Spring 2003, at www.kaganonline.com. You will find several other Kagan 
articles also available at that site.
What QuestIons WIll thIs chapter ansWer for Me?
■ How can students and teachers learn to work together on the same side to find 
solutions to behavior concerns?
■ What are the primary goals of Win-Win Discipline, and how do those goals 
relate to students' lives in general?
■ What four categories of irresponsible behavior are emphasized in Win-Win 
Discipline?
■ What seven student positions (states of mind/body) can be identified in 
 association with disruptive behavior?
■ What is the nature of the structures (plans of action) teachers can use for 
 interacting productively with misbehaving students?
■ How do teachers apply Kagan's discipline tactics?
■ What does Kagan say about befriending students and showing genuine 
 fondness for them?
224

Spencer Kagan on Working on the Same Side with Students
What Is the Kagan Model of dIscIplIne?
The Common Goal of All Approaches to 
Discipline Responsible, Civil Classroom Behavior 
That  Becomes Habitual and Lasts over Time.
Responsible means paying attention, making a strong 
effort, and doing what is proper without being told. Civil 
means respectful, polite, cordial, and well mannered.
↑
 
Spencer Kagan’s Approach to Discipline
Kagan’s Overarching Strategy
Establish same-side cooperation with students and use 
“structures” to prevent and address student misbehavior.
Kagan’s Principal Tactics
Foster a same-side relationship with students.
Recognize four categories of irresponsible behavior.
Recognize seven “positions” that might exist within 
 students when they misbehave.
Develop and/or apply “structures” for short- and long-
term effect when addressing various combinations of 
 irresponsible behavior and positions.
↓
→
↑
↓
↓
↓
↑
↑
↑
What Is the fundaMental proposItIon In Kagan's 
approach?
Discipline occurs best, Kagan maintains, when teachers do two things: (1) work on 
the same side with students to establish mutual agreements (rules) concerning ac-
ceptable and unacceptable behavior in the classroom, and (2) continue thereafter 
to work collaboratively with students by using “structures” to help them make good 
decisions that lead to responsible behavior.
We will now explore Kagan's ideas, beginning with a clarification of what he 
means by irresponsible behavior, positions, and structures. Irresponsible  behavior 
means disruptive student behavior (i.e., misbehavior), which Kagan assigns to 
four categories: aggression, breaking rules, confrontations, and  disengagement. 
He refers to the four categories as the ABCD of disruptive behavior.
225

Spencer Kagan on Working on the Same Side with Students
Student positions refer to the physical and emotional states students are expe-
riencing at the time they misbehave. In Kagan's terminology, misbehaving  students 
are said to be “coming from” one or more of seven positions, which Kagan identi-
fies as: attention-seeking, avoiding failure, angry, control-seeking, energetic, bored, 
and uninformed. By “coming from” he means the state of mind the student is 
experiencing at the time he or she misbehaves. When addressing misbehavior, the 
teacher acknowledges and accepts the student's emotional state (e.g., “I can see you 
are angry”) but explicitly does not accept the inappropriate behavior (e.g., “But it is 
not all right to push anyone”).
Structures are specific plans of action that teachers use for two purposes—to 
teach the curriculum and to address misbehavior. Here, we focus mainly on struc-
tures for addressing misbehavior. Kagan says all misbehavior is linked to one or 
more of the seven student positions. An example of a misbehavior-position com-
bination, as indicated earlier, is a student behaving aggressively (the misbehavior) 
while being angry (the position). Another example is a student breaking a rule (the 
misbehavior) because he or she is attempting to avoid a sense of failure (the posi-
tion the student is coming from).
Kagan says teachers master the skills of discipline by learning to select and ap-
ply a structure that deals effectively with a particular combination of misbehavior 
and student position. Kagan has developed a large number of structures, which he 
presents in Win-Win Discipline (Kagan, Kyle, & Scott, 2004, 2007) and in some of 
his website articles. Kagan shows teachers how to identify the category of misbehav-
ior, identify the position the student is “coming from,” and apply an appropriate 
structure to help the student contend with the situation in a positive manner. You 
can visualize the process as follows:
Teacher Identifies Misbehavior → Teacher Identifies Student Position → 
Teacher Selects and Applies a Structure That Addresses the Particular 
Combination of Misbehavior and Position
Up to this point, you have learned that Win-Win Discipline emphasizes same-
side collaboration by teacher and students. It uses class rules of behavior, identifies 
types of misbehavior evident when students break rules, identifies students' states 
of mind when they display particular types of misbehavior, and applies structures 
that are appropriate for addressing various combinations of disruption and posi-
tion. The Win-Win process is organized to accomplish two things: First, it helps 
students move away from misbehavior and return to appropriate behavior, and 
second, it promotes long-term improvement in behavior.
What else should We KnoW about WIn-WIn dIscIplIne?
Here is further information that will help you conceptualize Win-Win Discipline 
and how it is used:
 1. The name and goal of Win-Win Discipline. The name—Win-Win Discipline—
indicates that teachers and students both win, or benefit from using the ap-
proach. The goal is to help students develop lifelong responsible behavior.
226

Spencer Kagan on Working on the Same Side with Students
 2. Three pillars of Win-Win Discipline. Three pillars form the philosophical struc-
ture of Win-Win Discipline. They are (1) same side, meaning students, teach-
ers, and sometimes others all work together on the same side to enhance the 
school experience for students; (2) collaborative solutions, meaning students 
and teachers cooperate in formulating workable solutions to discipline prob-
lems; and (3) learned responsibility, meaning students acquire the desire to be-
have appropriately as they practice self-management and the skills of getting 
along with others.
 3. Class rules. Win-Win Discipline makes use of class rules, which are agree-
ments worked out cooperatively by teacher and students. You can have the 
class begin by discussing what they believe to be responsible behavior—you 
might call the result “The Way We Want Our Class to Be.” Rules (agreements) 
are then derived from statements about responsible behavior. They should 
be worded simply, limited to about five in number, posted in the room for 
easy reference, and reviewed periodically. Students are guided in practicing 
the behavior associated with each rule. All the while, teachers and other adults 
conduct themselves in a manner that is consistent with the class rules.
This process builds student involvement and cooperation. Students begin 
to behave responsibly without feeling that rules are being imposed on them. 
Although rules may vary somewhat from class to class, they usually turn out 
to be quite similar overall. Kagan suggests that the following rules are likely 
to emerge:
Ready rule: Come to class ready to learn.
Respect rule: Respect the rights and property of others.
Request rule: Ask for help when needed.
Offer rule: Offer help to others.
Responsibility rule: Strive to act responsibly at all times.
Kagan says that some teachers prefer to condense rules into only one, such 
as: In our class, we agree to foster our own learning, help others learn, and allow the 
teacher to teach.
If, at this point, you had to select one or two rules of behavior for your class, 
what would those rules be, and why?
?
 4. Attention to types of misbehavior. In Win-Win Discipline, classroom misbehav-
ior is categorized into four types—aggression, breaking rules, confrontations, 
and disengagement. As we noted, Kagan refers to these four types as the ABCD 
of disruptive behavior. In Win-Win Discipline, disruptive behavior is not referred 
to as “misbehavior,” but is instead thought and spoken of as ineffective behavior 
choices students make when trying to meet specific needs. As George and Jaime 
come into the classroom, George shouts an obscenity at Jaime. Jaime responds 
in kind. Which category or categories of ineffective behavior choice do you 
think the boys' actions represent?
227

Spencer Kagan on Working on the Same Side with Students
 5. Attention to student positions. Student positions refer to the physical/emotional 
states that students are experiencing when they disrupt. We noted that Kagan 
identifies seven such positions: attention-seeking, avoiding failure, angry, con-
trol-seeking, energetic, bored, and uninformed. The positions are not considered 
to be right or wrong, good or bad. They simply indicate individual students' nat-
ural emotional and physical states at the time students misbehave. The positions 
provide teachers a starting point in addressing ineffective behavior choices. As 
we noted before, whenever a student makes ineffective choices, teachers should 
acknowledge the student's position as being normal, but should indicate that 
the behavior being exhibited is not acceptable. For example, “Jaime, we all get 
angry at times, but even when we do, it is not acceptable to swear at others.” 
Once again, Jaime is “coming from” anger, his position, which is acceptable; his 
ineffective behavior choice is swearing, which is not acceptable.
 6. Structures. When teachers recognize ineffective choices, they identify the posi-
tion the student is coming from, as shown in the preceding example. At that 
time, they select and apply an appropriate structure (a procedure or set of 
steps) to help the student return to responsible behavior. Kagan provides over 
200 such structures and shows how they are matched to the type of misbehav-
ior and the student's position at the time of disruption. The structures do more 
than stifle disruptions; they help students learn to behave responsibly. Some of 
Kagan's structures are used proactively to prevent disruptions, whereas others 
are used reactively to address disruptions after they occur. Some are effective 
in the short term (e.g., stopping misbehavior), whereas others are effective in 
the long term (e.g., developing better self-control).
 7. Attention to needs. Kagan asks us to think of disruptions as students' ineffec-
tive efforts to meet their needs. William Glasser lists five predominant needs 
of students in school: survival (safety), belonging, power, fun, and freedom. 
Students grow noticeably uncomfortable when any of those needs is not being 
met. Win-Win Discipline helps students meet those needs in acceptable ways 
that do not disrupt teaching or learning.
 8. Application of the process. As suggested earlier, here is Kagan's paradigm for 
applying his approach when disruptions occur: For a given misbehavior, we 
quickly (1) identify the category of misbehavior, (2) identify the student's 
emotion or state of mind when disrupting, and (3) apply one or more helping 
structures that stop the disruption and direct the student back to appropriate 
behavior. Later we will examine some of the structures he suggests.
In order to be fully effective, the Win-Win process requires a classroom en-
vironment that consistently emphasizes and supports a “we” approach that gives 
teachers and students a joint interest in maintaining responsible behavior. Kagan 
refers to the “we approach” as teacher–student same-side collaboration. Now let's 
look at some of his suggestions in more detail.
hoW does Kagan descrIbe the abcd of dIsruptIve behavIor?
We saw that Kagan categorizes disruptive behavior as aggression, breaking rules, 
confrontation, and disengagement. He believes all misbehavior fits one or more of 
these categories. Here is what he says about them:
228

Spencer Kagan on Working on the Same Side with Students
Aggression. Student aggression can be shown physically, verbally, and some-
times passively. Physical aggression includes hitting, kicking, biting, pinching, 
pulling, and slapping. Verbal aggression includes put-downs, swearing, ridi-
culing, and name-calling. Passive aggression involves stubbornly refusing to 
comply with reasonable requests.
Breaking Rules. When unable to meet certain needs satisfactorily, students often 
try to do so through behavior that violates class rules. Common examples of 
rule-breaking behavior are talking without permission, making weird noises, 
chewing gum, passing notes, being out of seat, and not turning in work. Some-
times students break rules just to see what it feels like or to see what happens 
when they do.
Confrontation. Confrontations occur among students or between student and 
teacher when the parties involved try to get their way, vie for control, or at-
tempt to show dominance. Examples of confrontational behavior are refusing 
to comply, complaining, arguing, calling names, and giving myriad reasons 
why things are no good or should be done differently. When students don't 
get their way in confrontations, they often pout or make disparaging remarks 
about the task, teacher, or fellow students.
Disengagement. Students may disengage from lessons for a variety of rea-
sons. They may have something more interesting on their minds, feel in-
capable of performing the task, or find the task boring or meaningless. 
Passive disengagement includes inattention, being off task, not finishing 
work, and pretending to be incapable. Active disengagement includes put-
downs, excessive requests for help, and comments such as, “This stuff is 
stupid.”
What else does Kagan say about structures?
Kagan, Kyle, and Scott (2007) explain that teachers continually use structures with-
out recognizing them as such. They explain that structures are simply plans of ac-
tion and ways of reacting. For example, one of the most frequently used (and least 
effective) structures in discipline is posing the why question, which proceeds as 
follows:
[Teacher hears and sees Anthony talking abusively to Jason during silent work 
time.]
Teacher asks: “Anthony, why are you talking?”
Anthony replies: “Just answering a question for Jason.”
Teacher replies: “Well it didn't sound like it. You both know better than that.”
In Win-Win Discipline (2007) Kagan, Kyle, and Scott describe in detail a 
large number of structures for dealing with types of disruption and student 
positions. These structures are similar, but not identical, to the “procedures” 
emphasized by Harry and Rosemary Wong, indicating steps and the order in 
which they occur. Some of those structures are designed to prevent disruptions. 
Examples of such preventive structures are reviewing class rules, having students 
practice complying with rules, and having students familiarize themselves with 
class routines.
229

Spencer Kagan on Working on the Same Side with Students
Other structures are designed for responding to disruptions when they occur. 
These responsive structures are applied at three different points in time: (1) at the 
moment of disruption, to stop the behavior and rechannel it into responsible behav-
ior; (2) during follow-up, when students require further assistance in moving  beyond 
a particular disruptive behavior; and (3) repeatedly over the long-term, to help stu-
dents develop and maintain effective life skills such as positive self- direction and 
getting along with others.
Once the Win-Win philosophy of same-side collaboration has been inter-
nalized, students who disrupt usually need only a reminder to get back on track. 
 Teachers can refer to the chart of rules posted in the room and ask, “Are we living 
up to the way we want our class to be?” If more is required, the teacher might use a 
structure such as Picture It Right, which asks students to picture how they would like 
the class to be and verbalize what they need to do to make it that way.
More on structures for the Moment of disruption
At the moment of disruption, you should intervene in a way that ends the disrup-
tion and quickly refocuses attention on the lesson. You might acknowledge the 
student's position, communicate that the disruptive behavior is not acceptable, 
request cooperation, or involve the student in specifying a satisfactory alternative. 
Here are three examples of structures designed for use at the moment of disruption:
■ Picture It Right. “If we were at our very best right now, how would we look?”
■ Make a Better Choice. “Try to think of a better choice to make right now.”
■ To You . . . To Me. “To you, this lesson may be boring; to me, it is important 
because . . .”
More on structures for follow-up
Follow-up structures are used when students need additional assistance in behav-
ing responsibly. They are applied when moment-of-disruption structures do not 
bring about a complete or lasting result. Typical follow-up structures include the 
following:
■ Establish a new preventive procedure or reestablish an existing preventive 
procedure.
■ Select a new moment-of-disruption procedure for use the next time the  student 
disrupts.
■ Implement a follow-up structure, such as a “same-side chat,” or explore ways 
in which students might behave responsibly.
■ Provide training in a life skill such as self-control or relating well with others.
Follow-up structures often involve highly prescriptive activities such as directly 
practicing appropriate behavior. They may even call on students to make apologies 
and restitution, or endure time away from the lesson. If still stronger measures are 
needed, students may be required to develop a personal improvement plan that speci-
fies behavior changes the student intends to make and how those changes will be 
accomplished.
230

Spencer Kagan on Working on the Same Side with Students
If it is necessary to administer consequences to control disruptive behavior, 
they should be applied in the following sequence:
 1. The student is given a warning.
 2. If that doesn't work, the student is given reflection time to sit alone and think 
about the disruptive behavior and how to improve it.
 3. If that doesn't work, a personal improvement plan is formulated by the dis-
ruptive student to help develop responsible ways of meeting needs in the 
classroom.
 4. If that doesn't work, the student's parent or guardian is contacted.
 5. If that doesn't work, the student is assigned to make a visit to the principal's 
office.
More on structures for long-term success
Long-term structures are intended to help students get along with others, become 
more self-directing, and control their volatile emotions. They fortify proper behav-
ior after preventive and moment-of-disruption structures have begun producing 
their desired results. Keep in mind that the major goal of Win-Win Discipline is to 
help students learn to control themselves responsibly over time in various situa-
tions. Thus, when opportunities present themselves, teachers should allow students 
to try to resolve problems on their own and display responsible behavior. Different 
long-term goals come into play for various student positions. For example:
■ Students who continually seek attention need help with self-validation.
■ Students who avoid failure or embarrassment need help with self-confidence.
■ Students who are often angry need help with self-control.
■ Students who seek control need help with recognizing others' capabilities.
■ Students who are overly energetic need help with self-direction.
■ Students who are frequently bored need help with self-motivation.
■ Students who are frequently uninformed need help in obtaining information 
for themselves or from others.
Win-Win Discipline offers a progression of follow-up structures to help  students 
move toward these long-term goals. Here are a few such structures, ranging from 
less directive to more directive:
Same-Side Chat. Teacher and student talk together in a friendly manner. In so 
doing, they get to know each other better and come to see themselves as work-
ing on the same side toward better conditions for all.
Responsible Thinking. Discussions are used to prompt students to reflect on 
three considerations: (1) their own and others' needs, (2) how they treat oth-
ers, and (3) how they conduct themselves. Applied to a specific misbehavior, 
students can be asked to consider the following three questions in relation to 
their own behavior:
■ What if everyone acted that way? (How would our class be if everyone acted 
that way?)
231

Spencer Kagan on Working on the Same Side with Students
■ How would I like to be treated? (Did I treat others the way I would like to be 
treated?)
■ What would be a win-win solution? (What would meet everyone's needs?)
Reestablishing Expectations. Discuss and, if necessary, reteach expectations con-
cerning rules, procedures, and routines.
Identifying Replacement Behavior. Guide students to generate, accept, and prac-
tice responsible behavior they can use in place of disruptive behavior.
Agreeing on Contracts. Make written contracts in which teacher and individual 
students clarify and formalize agreements they have reached. Contracts some-
times increase the likelihood that the student will remember, identify with, 
and honor the agreement.
Establishing Consequences. Agree on actions the teacher will take when students 
chronically disrupt. These consequences are held as a last resort and are used 
only when all other follow-up efforts have failed. Consequences should be 
aligned with the three pillars of Win-Win Discipline—they begin with same-
side orientation, are established through teacher–student collaboration, and 
are instructive and aimed at helping students learn to conduct themselves with 
greater personal responsibility.
When disruptions harm others and responsible thinking is not enough, stu-
dents may need to apologize to those they have offended or make restitution of some 
sort. Genuine apologies have three parts: a statement of regret, a statement of ap-
propriate future behavior, and the request for acceptance of the apology. Restitution 
means making amends for emotional damage that was done or repairing or replac-
ing physical damage or damaged materials. Restitution is a tangible way of taking 
responsibility and dealing with the consequences of inappropriate choices. It also 
has the potential to “heal the violator.”
More on structures for promoting life skills
One of the major goals of Win-Win Discipline is to promote the progressive devel-
opment of a number of life skills that help students live more successfully. Examples 
of life skills are self-control, anger management, good judgment, impulse control, 
perseverance, and empathy. Teachers are urged to teach these skills as part of the 
curriculum and exhibit them at all times, especially when responding to misbe-
havior. Kagan says that when teachers foster life skills, they move beyond interven-
tions that simply end disruptions while leaving students likely to disrupt again. He 
 illustrates his points in this manner (2007):
A student puts down another student. The recipient of the put-down, having been 
publicly belittled, has the impulse to retaliate by giving back a put-down or even 
initiating a fight. If the recipient has developed adequate self-control and/or anger 
management, he might smile and rise above the affront.
A student is finding an assignment difficult. She is tempted to avoid a sense of 
failure by saying to herself and others, “This assignment is stupid.” But if she has ac-
quired adequate self-motivation and pride in her work, she may decide to persevere.
232

Spencer Kagan on Working on the Same Side with Students
A student is placed on a team with another student he does not like. He 
is tempted to mutter, “Oh no! Look who we are stuck with!” If the student has 
developed sufficient empathy and kindness, he might dispose himself to working 
with the other student.
hoW do I Match InterventIon structures to varIous types 
of dIsruptIon?
Interventions are the actions teachers take to deal with disruptions. They usually 
involve a structure the teacher applies to stop the disruption and help students re-
turn to appropriate behavior that lasts over time. Kagan provides many suggestions 
for such interventions. Following are some examples.
Interventions for attention-seeking behavior
Most individuals have a strong need for attention. They want to know others care 
about them or at least take notice of them. When they feel left out or not cared for, 
they often behave undesirably in trying to get the attention they crave. They may 
interrupt, show off, annoy others, work more slowly than others, ask for extra help, 
or simply goof off. These acts seldom bring the results students would like—in fact, 
they are likely to lead to further disruption and increased teacher annoyance.
What You Can Do
For the moment of disruption, you can use physical proximity and hand or facial 
signals to stop the disruption, or provide additional personal attention, apprecia-
tion, and affirmation. If attention seeking becomes chronic, ask students to identify 
other positive ways they can get attention, such as helping others or doing exem-
plary work. You can follow up by meeting with disruptive students and discussing 
the need for attention and how it can often be obtained in a positive manner. 
Strategies for long-term solutions include helping students strengthen their self-
concepts and acquire the skills involved in self-validation.
Interventions for attempts to avoid failure or embarrassment
We have all been in situations where we rationalize our inadequacies in order to 
soften the embarrassment of failure. No one likes to appear inept. The student who 
says, “I don't care about the stupid math quiz,” knows it is more painful to fail, 
especially in front of others, than not to try at all, and therefore will rationalize 
failure as lack of caring.
What You Can Do
Win-win teachers help students find ways to persist and continue to perform with-
out feeling bad if they aren't first or best. For the moment of disruption, you can 
encourage students to try to complete the task, assign them partners or helpers, or 
reorganize the task into smaller pieces. For follow-up and long-term strategies, ask 
students how they think responsible people might deal with fear of failure. You can 
233

Spencer Kagan on Working on the Same Side with Students
also provide for peer support, review the fact that mistakes are always part of the 
learning process as people move toward excellence, and use “team–pair–solo,” a 
structure in which students practice first as a team and then in pairs before doing 
the assigned activities by themselves.
Interventions for anger
Anger is a natural reaction many students have to situations that involve frustration, 
humiliation, loss, or pain. Angry students may act out in unacceptable ways be-
cause they do not know to deal effectively with the emotions they are experiencing.
What You Can Do
Teachers don't enjoy interacting with angry students. They sometimes experience 
hurt or indignation. Often, because they feel personally attacked, their immediate 
reaction is to retaliate against the students, which does little to help students man-
age their anger. Win-Win Discipline provides several structures to help you respond 
positively to angry disruptions. Three of those structures are teaching responsible 
ways of handling anger, allowing students to cool down and have time to think, 
and tabling the matter for attention at a later time. Long-term interventions include 
having students practice the skills of self-control and teaching them how to resolve 
conflicts in a positive manner.
Interventions for control-seeking behavior
All of us want to feel we are at least partly in charge of ourselves and able to make 
our own decisions. In our efforts to exercise self-direction, we sometimes try to con-
trol others as well. At times, students display this take-charge attitude by disregard-
ing or defying directions from the teacher. Doing so often leads to power struggles 
between student and teacher. Teachers don't take kindly to noncompliance, argu-
ing, or making excuses, and they often counter in ways that show their dominance, 
which does little to help the student.
What You Can Do
At the moment of disruption, acknowledge the student's power, use language of choice 
(a structure in which the teacher provides students with a choice such as, “You may 
either . . . or . . .”), or provide options for how and when work is to be done. For 
 follow-up you might schedule a conference or class meeting at a later time to discuss 
the situation, ask the class why they think students often struggle against the teacher, 
and consider how such struggles can be avoided. Long-term strategies include involv-
ing students in the decision-making process and requesting their help in establish-
ing class agreements about showing respect for the teacher and fellow students.
Interventions for the overly energetic
At times, humans experience periods of high energy, so strong they cannot sit still 
or concentrate. Some students are in this state a good deal of the time, moving and 
talking incessantly.
234

Spencer Kagan on Working on the Same Side with Students
What You Can Do
If overly energetic behavior becomes troublesome, at the moment of disruption take a 
brief class break or switch to another activity that allows energy to dissipate. You might 
also provide time for progressive relaxation, remove distracting elements and objects, 
and channel energy productively. Follow-up strategies include teaching a variety of calm-
ing strategies and providing activities that allow students to work off energy in posi-
tive ways. Long-term solutions include managing energy levels during instruction and 
helping students learn how to channel their energy in ways that bring positive results.
Interventions for boredom
To say that students are bored is to say they are no longer enjoying particular 
 activities sufficiently to continue in them willingly. Their boredom will be evident 
in their body language, disengagement, and disinclination to participate.
What You Can Do
To help bored students at the moment of disruption, you can restructure the learn-
ing task, involve students more actively, and inject short activities that energize the 
students. As follow-up, you might talk privately with the students and assign them 
helping roles such as caretakers for the classroom, materials assistants, or coaches 
to assist other students. For long-term solutions, you can provide a rich, relevant, 
and developmentally appropriate curriculum that actively involves students in the 
learning process, emphasizes cooperative learning, and calls on students to use 
their multiple intelligences.
Interventions for the uninformed
Sometimes students respond or react disruptively because they simply don't know 
what to do or how to behave responsibly. Disruptions stemming from being unin-
formed do not occur because of strong emotions, but because of lack of informa-
tion, skill, or appropriate habit. Even when these disruptions are not emotionally 
volatile, they are nonetheless frustrating to teachers.
What You Can Do
To determine whether students know what is expected of them, at the moment of dis-
ruption gently ask students to say or do what is expected of them. If they are unable 
to do so, you can reteach them at that time. If they only need support, let them work 
with a buddy. Follow-up strategies include more careful attention to giving directions, 
modeling desired responses, and providing practice in responsible behavior. Long-
term solutions include encouragement and focusing on student strengths.
What does Kagan say about parent and coMMunIty 
allIances and schoolWIde prograMs?
Kagan, more than most other authorities in discipline, urges teachers to establish 
partnerships with caregivers and the wider community to assist students in making 
responsible behavior choices. Caregivers and community citizens usually appreciate 
235

Spencer Kagan on Working on the Same Side with Students
and support teachers who handle disruptive behavior in a positive manner. Input, 
support, follow-through, and backup from caregivers and other adults strengthen 
the likelihood of success. Teacher–parent–community cooperation depends largely 
on teachers reaching out to make contacts. Kagan urges you not to give up when 
caregivers or community members seem reluctant to participate. Continue inviting 
them to become actively involved.
Win-Win Discipline provides many helpful suggestions for teacher–parent–
community communication and interaction. Contact with potential participants 
should be made during the first week of school. Phone calls, letters, class newslet-
ters, class websites, and emails are efficient ways to connect with caregivers. Parent 
nights and open houses offer opportunities for person-to-person communication, 
showing caregivers and others they are valued as allies and possibly mentors and 
 tutors. The broader community can become involved through field trips, guest 
speakers, apprenticeships, and having students work with day-care and senior 
 centers. Schoolwide efforts in this endeavor usually bring good results.
The school principal is urging teachers to make better connections with par-
ents and the community, but is leaving it up to teachers to decide how they will 
do so. Miss Able sets up a class website describing class activities that interested 
people can access. Mr. Beeson sends out personalized invitations to attend a 
class performance at school. Mrs. Calipari calls 10 parents on the phone and tells 
them how pleased she is to have their child in class and describes something 
each child has done especially well. How do you assess the impact and value of 
these three different attempts to reach out for support?
?
commentary from anonymous teacher 1
Several of the principles Dr. Kagan teaches have worked effectively for me 
over the years, although I tweak some of them so they are better suited 
to my students (third grade, lower performing). For example, I regularly 
review class rules and expectations when it seems students are not com-
plying with them. This is helpful not only in the beginning weeks of school, 
but throughout the year. At the time I am writing this, there are only 3 
weeks left in our school year. Yet, only last week, as a class we reviewed our 
 expectations and rules, not only for the classroom but for the playground, 
as well, helping students remember that expectations last right up through 
the last day of school.
One of our expectations has to do with “responsible thinking,” which 
many of my students do not learn at home very well. For this reminder, 
I use role-playing (a favorite activity of my students) to help get the mean-
ing across.
My students also respond very well to same-side chats, in which 
I  often ask students privately if they have ideas on how we might cut down 
on interruptions during learning time. If no one overhears them, students 
usually tell me honestly what they can do to help. But if peers can hear, 
236

Spencer Kagan on Working on the Same Side with Students
their responses are not so honest or helpful. I also find the “to you . . . to 
me” structure effective with individuals, groups, and the class as a whole. 
When more serious misbehavior occurs, such as name-calling or hitting, 
I  sometimes ask students to write apology notes to the person or  persons 
they have offended. Just last week, I asked a student to write such a note 
for continually teasing a girl about liking a certain boy. The unwanted 
 behavior stopped and everyone seemed to feel okay. In that case, I kept 
the matter private to the persons involved.
hoW do I IMpleMent WIn-WIn dIscIplIne In My classrooM?
the three essentials
In order to implement Win-Win Discipline as intended, you must do three things. 
The first is to commit yourself to complying with what Kagan calls teaching's Big 
Three:
■ Establish an interesting and challenging curriculum.
■ Provide cooperative activities that allow students to work together meaningfully.
■ Be an interesting, stimulating teacher who adapts the curriculum to student 
 interests and needs.
The second is to familiarize yourself with the seven student positions and relate 
them to the types of misbehavior you are likely to encounter. Remember, you are 
to accept and validate the seven positions, but not accept the disruptive behavior 
associated with them.
The third is to select or design structures that help disruptive students return 
to responsible conduct. You will put some of these structures in place as preventive 
measures before classes begin; you will use others to help redirect misbehavior; and 
you will use still others to help students develop long-term responsibility.
Introducing Win-Win discipline
When you introduce Win-Win Discipline, begin by setting the tone for the class. 
Let the students know that the class will be built on the three pillars of Win-Win 
 Discipline—same side, collaborative solutions, and learned responsibility. You 
might say something like the following:
This is our class, and with all of us working together we will create a place where 
each person feels comfortable and all of us can enjoy the process of learning. As 
your teacher, I have a responsibility to create an environment where this can hap-
pen, but I need your help to make it work. I want each of you to realize you are an 
important member of this class, with important responsibilities, and that you can 
help make the class a pleasant place for all of us. One of your main responsibilities 
is to help create and maintain a positive learning atmosphere where everybody's 
needs are met. To accomplish this, we all must work together. I suggest that we 
begin by creating an agreement about how we will treat each other in this class.
237

Spencer Kagan on Working on the Same Side with Students
Next, consider creating class agreements as follows: Begin by constructing a 
chart with the headings Disruptive Behavior and Responsible Behavior. Under each 
heading write two subheadings, Say and Do. Ask the students to name some of 
the disruptive things people say and do when they want attention. Record their 
responses under Disruptive Behavior. Then ask the class to name some of the 
 responsible things people say and do for attention. Record their responses under 
Responsible Behavior. Continue this process for each of the seven positions.
When you have reasonable lists, ask students, “How do you feel about these 
lists? Would you be willing to adopt the responsible behaviors as our class agree-
ment? Can we agree to avoid the disruptive behaviors?” It is essential that students 
believe their opinions and cooperation are valued. Tell them,
You and I need to be on the same side and work together to create a class-
room we all enjoy and where everyone can learn. You will always be included 
in the decision-making process. You will be able to have your say. We will learn 
and practice skills that are important for being citizens in a democratic society. 
Choosing responsible behavior will be one of the most important things you 
will learn.
During the first weeks, use activities that strengthen the concept of the three 
pillars. This reassures students that discipline will not be done to them, but will 
happen with them. In collaboration with the class, you might discuss discipline 
structures and their purposes, develop logical consequences and follow-ups, and 
solicit student input on some curriculum decisions.
You can also show students how you will help them turn disruptive behavior 
into good learning situations, where reflection, follow-up, and long-term structures 
come into play. You can do these things in a series of class meetings. Kagan adds 
that very early in the school year, you should begin establishing alliances with care-
givers and interested members of the community.
reMInders and suggestIons
Review with your class the four types of disruptive behavior and the seven stu-
dent positions associated with them. Explain that (1) disruptive behavior (which 
is unacceptable) consists of inappropriate actions people take in trying to meet 
their needs; (2) when students disrupt, they are “coming from” a particular emo-
tional state that is natural and identifiable; and (3) for the various emotional states, 
there are procedures for helping students meet their needs and return to acceptable 
behavior.
Continuing to stress collaboration, ask students to think along with you about 
what could be done to help them behave more appropriately, should they misbe-
have. You might discuss an example such as the following:
During a cooperative group situation, Samuel, a new boy in class, disrupts the class 
by standing up and calling over to Duwahn in another group. Samuel may or may 
not know that this behavior is inappropriate, but his action violates one of the class 
rules that class members have agreed on. What should be done?
238

Spencer Kagan on Working on the Same Side with Students
In accordance with advice from Kagan, Kyle, and Scott (2007), you might de-
scribe the following approach and ask for your students' reactions to it:
■ Identify the category of disruption. Using Kagan's ABCD categories, we see 
Samuel's behavior is category B (breaking rules).
■ Look beyond the behavior to identify the position Samuel is coming from. 
(Let's suppose you determine that Samuel's position is “being uninformed.”)
■ Apply a structure for the moment of disruption that is consistent with  Samuel's 
position. You might say, “Samuel, because you are a new member of our class, 
you may not know, or may not remember, our rule against calling out in class. 
Do you remember that rule? No? Let's take just a moment to review it so you 
will remember it in the future.”
■ It is not likely you will need to say more, but if necessary you could use a 
follow-up structure to help Samuel make better decisions in the future. For 
example, you and Samuel might, in private, have a friendly same-side chat to 
help Samuel understand the rule against calling out and help him identify an 
alternative behavior that would be acceptable.
Ideally, implementation of Win-Win Discipline should begin before the 
school year starts, with advance preparation for procedures, routines, and materi-
als associated with each of the seven student positions. But teachers who want to 
try the approach after the year has begun will find they can put Win-Win Discipline 
in place at any time. You will need to teach the fundamental concepts and proce-
dures thoroughly, but once your students are comfortable with them, the program 
is relatively easy to maintain.
commentary from anonymous teacher 2
My first student-teaching assignment was with an eighth-grade class taught 
by a cool, calm, and collected master teacher. She made everything look 
so easy. I was young and very green and really thought if I were kind to the 
students they would behave nicely. As luck would have it, most of them did, 
but not Stevie and Nickie, twin sisters who wanted to rule the world, or at 
least the class. They did whatever they could to mess up my lessons and 
my composure, and they were very successful at both. My master teacher 
invited me over for dinner and gently let me know that my students didn't 
need another friend, they needed a Teacher, and it was up to me to be-
come one. I learned there must be a system in place to define the “society” 
of the classroom. I wish I had had the insight of Win-Win to help me and 
the students.
In staff lounges and workrooms, or anywhere teachers congregate, 
you will hear some lamenting, “In addition to teaching, we have to civilize 
them, too!” It is true; many students come to us not really knowing how 
to work respectfully with others or how to be responsible for their own be-
havior. What I like about Kagan's plan is it doesn't overlook the power that 
we teachers do have: the power to create interesting lessons; the power 
to organize meaningful cooperative activities; the power to be a dynamic 
239

Spencer Kagan on Working on the Same Side with Students
teacher. But in addition, he gives us “handles” to help us grasp how dis-
ruptions and emotions can get in the way of a peaceful and productive 
classroom. For me, personally, Win-Win provides a way that I can be more 
objective about misbehavior, more understanding of students and their 
emotions, and best of all, have access to a plan to help them. I really wish I 
could have a second chance to work with Stevie and Nickie. I know I could 
do better now.
ac tiv i ti e s
Self-Test: True/False
 1. By “structure,” Kagan means a series of steps de-
signed to help students experience success in a 
particular situation.
 2. Kagan would have you use structures, but not ac-
cept the student's inappropriate behavior or his or 
her internal “position.”
 3. Kagan identifies seven positions that disruptive 
students are said to be “coming from.”
 4. “Same side” refers to teachers and students work-
ing together, including how the class goes about 
correcting misbehavior.
 5. The four categories of student disruptions 
are defiance, dishonesty, lack of courtesy, and 
offensiveness.
 6. Structures, when used to redirect misbehavior, are 
organized to address particular combinations of 
disruptions and student positions.
 7. Kagan warns teachers against trying to be friends 
with students, as friendships damage the normal 
lines of authority in the classroom.
 8. Kagan advises teachers to keep caregivers and the 
community informed about discipline problems 
that are occurring in the class.
 9. The three pillars of Win-Win Discipline are 
same side, collaborative solutions, and learned 
responsibility.
 10. Kagan says teachers should validate (acknowledge 
as normal) students' positions of anger and desire 
to control.
Self-Test: Multiple Choice
 1. Kagan says students “come from”
(a) structures.
(b) positions.
(c) frames of reference.
(d) interpersonal events.
 2. At how many main points in time are responsive 
structures applied?
(a) 3
(b) 6
(c) 9
(d) 12
 3. “Impulse control” is an example of a
(a) reactive structure.
(b) long-term success structure.
(c) imposed structure.
(d) moment-of-disruption structure.
 4. Structures can most properly be thought of as
(a) student needs.
(b) teacher needs.
(c) involvement of caregivers.
(d) teacher plans of action.
 5. Which of the following is a “pillar” of Win-Win 
Discipline?
(a) rules specificity
(b) learned responsibility
(c) classroom meetings
(d) conflict resolution
240

Spencer Kagan on Working on the Same Side with Students
 6. Which of the following is not an ABCD of disrup-
tive behavior?
(a) aggression
(b) breaking rules
(c) confrontation
(d) disrespect
 7. What should teachers do first when addressing dis-
ruptive behavior?
(a) acknowledge
(b) identify
(c) prescribe
(d) apply
 8. When students disrupt, they are coming from an 
emotional state that is
(a) overwrought.
(b) contrived.
(c) natural.
(d) short-lived.
 9. When students disrupt, you should accept their
(a) positions.
(b) attitude.
(c) behaviors.
(d) structures.
 10. The ultimate goal of Win-Win Discipline is
(a) good citizenship.
(b) high achievement.
(c) class energy.
(d) responsible self-control.
Self-Test: Explain This
 1. What does Kagan identify as comprising the “three 
pillars” of Win-Win Discipline?
 2. What categories of disruptive behavior does Kagan 
identify?
 3. Explain what Kagan means by disruptions, posi-
tions, and structures.
 4. Explain the relation or interplay between disrup-
tive behavior, position, and structure.
 5. As Kagan explains it, what does “same side” mean, 
and how do you get there?
Additional Suggested Activities
 1. In your journal, enter ideas from Win-Win Disci-
pline that you might wish to include in your own 
system of discipline.
 2. Working with a partner, check yourselves to make 
sure you understand the following elements and 
ideas in Win-Win Discipline: ABCD of disruptive 
behavior; Big Three; class rules; student positions; 
structures; follow-up structures; long-term struc-
tures; the three pillars.
 3. Win-Win Discipline rests on three pillars—same 
side, collaborative solutions, and learned respon-
sibility. How would you go about communicating 
these key principles to students?
 4. To what extent do you feel you could put Win-Win 
Discipline into effect in your classroom? What por-
tions do you believe you could  implement  easily? 
What portions do you believe might  present 
difficulty?
con c e p t c a se s
case 1 Kristina Will not Work
Kristina, a student in Mr. Jake's class, is quite docile. She socializes little with other students 
and never disrupts lessons. However, despite Mr. Jake's best efforts, Kristina will not do her 
work. She rarely completes an assignment. She is simply there, putting forth no effort at 
all. What would Spencer Kagan suggest to help Kristina and Mr. Jake?
Kagan would advise Mr. Jake to do the following: Mr. Jake would identify Kristina's 
problematic behavior and ask behavior-specific questions. He also would identify and 
241

Spencer Kagan on Working on the Same Side with Students
help Kristina acknowledge her position. Mr. Jake might ask Kristina how she feels about 
the work, determining if it is too difficult for her (leading to avoidance of failure), or not 
interesting (leading to boredom). If the work is too difficult for Kristina, and her position 
is avoiding, or if she doesn't know how to do the work, he might say quietly, “I really want 
to help you be successful, Kristina. I see this work is not getting finished. None of us wants 
to tackle something we know will be too hard for us. The best thing to do if something is 
too hard is to break it into smaller pieces, mastering a part at a time. Another good strategy 
is to work on the difficult pieces with someone else. What suggestions do you have that 
will help you be successful?”
Together they come up with possible solutions and then, if they agree that Kristina 
could benefit by working with a partner on smaller pieces, Mr. Jake may ask, “Would you 
like to work on this section with Danielle before moving on?” Throughout the interaction, 
Mr. Jake is attempting to help Kristina find a nondisruptive way to meet her needs. But 
more important, Mr. Jake is helping Kristina internalize a process of validating her own 
needs and seeking responsible rather than disruptive ways to fulfill them. As follow-up, 
Mr. Jake might focus on her success by saying something like “Kristina, I knew you could 
do this if we tried making the pieces smaller.” His long-term solutions will include further 
encouragement and individual attention to Kristina's strengths.
case 2 sara Will not stop talking
Sara is a pleasant girl who participates in class activities and does most, though not all, of 
her assigned work. She cannot seem to refrain from talking to classmates, however. Her 
teacher, Mr. Gonzales, has to speak to her repeatedly during lessons, to the point that he 
often becomes exasperated and loses his temper. What suggestions would Spencer Kagan give 
Mr. Gonzales for dealing with Sara?
case 3 Joshua clowns and Intimidates
Joshua, larger and louder than his classmates, always wants to be the center of attention, 
which he accomplishes through a combination of clowning and intimidation. He makes 
wise remarks, talks back (smilingly) to the teacher, utters a variety of sound-effect noises 
such as automobile crashes and gunshots, and makes limitless sarcastic comments and put-
downs of his classmates. Other students will not stand up to him, apparently fearing his 
size and verbal aggression. His teacher, Miss Pearl, has come to her wit's end. Would Joshua's 
behavior be likely to improve if Win-Win Discipline were used in Miss Pearl's classroom? Explain.
case 4 tom Is hostile and defiant
Tom has appeared to be in his usual foul mood ever since arriving in class. On his way to 
sharpen his pencil, he bumps into Frank, who complains. Tom tells him loudly to shut 
up. Miss Baines, the teacher, says, “Tom, go back to your seat.” Tom wheels around, swears 
loudly, and says heatedly, “I'll go when I'm _____ good and ready!” How would Tom's 
 behavior be handled in a Win-Win classroom?
242

Spencer Kagan on Working on the Same Side with Students
you  a re  th e  te a c h e r
MIddle school World hIstory
Your third-period world history class is comprised of 
students whose achievement levels vary from high to 
well below average. You pace their work accordingly, 
ask them to work cooperatively, and make sure every-
one understands what they are supposed to do. For 
the most part, you enjoy the class, finding the students 
interesting and refreshing. Your lessons follow a con-
sistent pattern. First, you ask the students to read in 
groups from the textbook, then you call on students at 
random to answer selected questions about the mate-
rial. If a student who is called on is unable to answer a 
question, the group he or she represents loses a point.
If able to answer correctly, the group gains a point. 
For partially correct answers, the group neither receives 
nor loses a point. For the second part of the period, the 
class groups do something productive or creative con-
nected with the material they have read, such as mak-
ing posters, writing a story, doing a skit, or the like. As 
appropriate, these efforts are shared with members of 
the class.
a typIcal occurrence
You call on Hillary to answer a question. Although she 
has been participating, she shakes her head. This has hap-
pened several times before. Not wanting to hurt Hillary's 
feelings, you simply say, “That costs the group a point,” 
and you call on someone else. Unfortunately, Hillary's 
group gets upset at her. The other students make com-
ments under their breath. Later, Clarisse also refuses to 
answer. When you speak with her about it, she says, “You 
didn't make Hillary do it.”
You answer, “Look, we are talking about you, not 
Hillary.” However, you let the matter lie and say no 
more. Just then, Deonne comes into the class late, ap-
pearing very angry. He slams his pack down on his desk 
and sits without opening his textbook. Although you 
want to talk with Deonne, you don't know how to ap-
proach him at that time. Will is in the opposite mood.
Throughout the oral reading portion of the class, 
he continually giggles at every mispronounced word 
and at every reply students give to your questions. 
Will sits at the front of the class and turns around to 
laugh, seeing if he can get anyone else to laugh with 
him. He makes some oooh and aaaah sounds when 
Hillary and Clarisse decline to respond. Although 
most students either ignore him or give him disgusted 
looks, he keeps laughing. You finally ask him what is 
so funny.
He replies, “Nothing in particular,” and looks 
back at the class and laughs. At the end of the period, 
there is time for sharing three posters students have 
made. Will makes comments and giggles about each 
of them. Clarisse, who has not participated, says, “Will, 
how about shutting up!” As the students leave the 
room, you take Deonne aside. “Is something wrong, 
Deonne?” you ask. “No,” he replies. His jaw is clenched 
as he strides past you.
conceptualIzIng a strategy
If you followed Kagan's suggestions, what would you 
do with regard to the following?
■ Preventing the problems from occurring in the first 
place?
■ Putting an immediate end to the misbehavior?
■ Involving other or all students in addressing the 
situation?
■ Maintaining student dignity and good personal 
relations?
■ Using follow-up procedures to prevent the recur-
rence of the misbehavior?
■ Helping the students involved develop increased 
 responsibility and self-control?
243

Spencer Kagan on Working on the Same Side with Students
ABCD of disruptive behavior (Kagan): Aggression, break-
ing rules, confrontations, disengagement.
Big Three of discipline (Kagan): (1) Establish an interest-
ing curriculum. (2) Provide meaningful cooperative ac-
tivities. (3) Be an interesting teacher; adapt curriculum 
to student needs.
Class rules: Written statements that specify acceptable and 
unacceptable behavior in the classroom.
Follow-up structures (Kagan): A discipline tactic used to 
help students develop proper behavior over the long 
run; used when students need additional assistance in 
behaving responsibly.
Interventions (Kagan & others): What teachers do to deal 
with misbehavior at the moment of disruption, for 
follow-up, and for the long term.
Irresponsible behavior (Kagan & others): Synonymous 
with misbehavior.
Long-term structures (Kagan): Plans for helping students 
get along with others, become more self-directing, and 
control their behavior.
Structures (Kagan): Discipline approaches designed 
for use with particular combinations of disruptions 
and student needs; specific plans of action that 
teachers use to teach the curriculum and to address 
misbehavior.
Student positions (Kagan): Conglomerates of factors that 
leave students uninformed or dispose them to seek at-
tention, show anger, avoid failure, become bored, seek 
control, or be overly energetic.
Teacher–student same-side collaboration (Kagan): 
A  “we” approach that gives teachers and students a 
joint interest in maintaining responsible behavior.
Three pillars of Win-Win Discipline (Kagan): (1) Same 
side—students and teachers work together for benefit 
of students. (2) Collaborative solutions—teachers and 
students work together to solve discipline problems. 
(3) Learned responsibility—students develop desire to 
behave appropriately, practice self-management, and 
get along with others.
glo ssary
refere n c e s
Kagan, S., Kyle, P., & Scott, S. (2004/2007). Win-Win 
 Discipline. San Clemente, CA: Kagan Publishing.
244

Paula Cook on Helping Students Who 
Exhibit Neurological-Based Behavior
From Chapter 11 of Building Classroom Discipline, Eleventh Edition. C. M. Charles. Copyright © 2014 by  Pearson 
Education, Inc. All rights reserved.
245

Unfortunately, not all students can reliably control themselves. Some students— 
estimated at about 1 in 10—are at times notably erratic in what they say and 
do. This behavior that is not always under one's self-control is referred to as 
 neurological-based behavior (NBB). In most cases, the brain's informational pro-
cessing capability has been compromised. As you can imagine, NBB poses special 
challenges for both teachers and students.
Paula Cook on Helping  
Students Who Exhibit  
Neurological-Based Behavior
Paula Cook on Helping 
Students Who Exhibit 
Neurological-Based Behavior
What Is Neurological-Based Behavior, How 
Does It Impact Your Students and You, and 
How Can You Help Students Who Have It?
Who is Paula Cook?
The lead author of this chapter is Paula Cook, a specialist in teaching students who 
display NBB. Many of the students with whom she works have average or above-
average intelligence, but are challenged by behavioral manifestations occasioned 
by emotional or other psychiatric disorders. Dr. Cook's responsibilities have to do 
with curriculum modifications and adaptations, individualized educational plan-
ning, advocacy, behavior management, and social and life skills education. She also 
teaches at Red River Community College and the University of Manitoba. She has 
made numerous presentations at regional, national, and international conferences, 
and in 2003 received the Council for Exceptional Children's Outstanding Educator 
of the Year award.
246

Paula Cook on Helping Students Who Exhibit Neurological-Based Behavior
What is Cook's Model of disCiPline for students With nBB? 
The Common Goal of All Approaches to Discipline 
Responsible, Civil Classroom Behavior That 
Becomes Habitual and Lasts over Time.
Responsible means paying attention, making a strong effort, 
and doing what is proper without being told. 
Civil means respectful, polite, cordial, and well mannered.
Paula Cook’s Approach to Discipline
Cook’s Overarching Strategy
Provide conditions and support that allow 
each student to feel secure and have the 
best possible access to learning.
Cook’s Principal Tactics
Attempt to provide each and every student the 
best learning opportunities possible. Assess each 
student’s particular needs and provide the speciﬁ c 
support he or she requires. 
Work toward helping each student develop 
the self-control needed for successful 
participation in group settings.
Reduce or eliminate distractive conditions 
in the classroom environment.
Celebrate every student’s progress 
and never give up.
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
What Questions Will this ChaPter ansWer for Me?
■ What is neurological-based behavior (NBB), and how is it manifested?
■ What kinds of behavior might indicate that a student has NBB?
■ What two diagnoses within NBB are you almost certain to encounter?
■ What are the additional diagnoses within NBB that you are likely to encounter?
247

Paula Cook on Helping Students Who Exhibit Neurological-Based Behavior
■ How might you work more effectively with students with NBB?
■ What is the nature of rage, and how does one deal with it?
What is neurologiCal-Based Behavior (nBB)?
Neurological-based behavior refers to the erratic behavior that sometimes occurs 
when one's cerebral processes do not function in a “normal” manner (Kranowitz, 
2005). In school, almost all classes contain one or more students with NBB. Most 
teachers find NBB a special challenge because it is difficult to understand and does 
not respond reliably to ordinary discipline tactics.
scenario 1 tyler
Tyler began the morning by refusing to participate in opening activities. 
He chose instead to make beeping sounds. After the opening activities, 
the class was to read quietly on their own for 10 minutes, but Tyler decided 
to sing loudly. When asked to stop, he began to hoot. He was belliger-
ent and noisy for some time. He poked Jackie with a pencil, chewed the 
eraser off his pencil and swallowed it, and insisted on writing on his math 
sheet with a tiny piece of pencil lead moistened with spittle. He refused to 
comply with academic instructions until it was almost time for recess. Dur-
ing recess, Tyler pushed, poked, hit, and tried to choke other students. He 
laughed when they protested. He engaged in violent play fantasies and 
was extremely argumentative with the teachers on duty, swearing at them 
and insisting they could not make him do anything he didn't want to do. 
Finally, Tyler had to be led physically back to the classroom. He screamed 
that his rights were being violated and that he would sue the school and 
kill the teachers.
Tyler worked the rest of the morning alone in the resource room with 
the resource teacher. In the afternoon, he was well behaved, compliant, 
and willing and able to participate and learn.
Application: After you have read this chapter, you will be asked in the Activities sec-
tion to return to this scenario and, with a fellow teacher or classmate, discuss Tyler's 
behavior and reflect on how one might address it.
Students such as Tyler behave erratically or inconsistently for reasons that are 
mysterious to teachers, sometimes even to those who have been specially trained. 
The behavior in question is believed to result from a compromised ability to process 
information correctly, a condition that can be caused by chemical imbalances in the 
brain, congenital brain differences, brain injuries, or brain diseases (Cook, 2004a; 
Greene, 2001; Hall & Hall, 2003; Kranowitz, 1998; Papolos & Papolos, 2002). 
*Note: This chapter contains seven scenarios describing episodes of behavior of real  students 
with whom Dr. Cook has worked. The students' names have been changed to protect 
anonymity.
248

Paula Cook on Helping Students Who Exhibit Neurological-Based Behavior
Because neurological differences are not easily diagnosed, the affected students 
often do not receive the help they need for several years after their symptoms first 
appear.
Please remember that students with NBB are not abstractions, but real people 
struggling to deal with life. When ordinary discipline procedures do not help them 
behave productively in the classroom, it is not because the students are “bad” or 
“too far gone” or come from “horrible families.” Rather, they behave as they do 
because of the way their brains work, and their brains cannot always control their 
behavior in ways that serve them best.
indicators: What Would suggest  
that a student Might have nBB?
Three indicators—behavior difficulties, language difficulties, and academic difficul-
ties—can each signal the strong possibility that a student might be exhibiting NBB.
Behavior difficulties are frequently the first indication that something un-
usual is occurring in the student, especially if the behavior is atypical, inconsistent, 
compulsive, or immune to normal behavior management. Such behavior may re-
sult from a neurological event that is promoting confusion, uncertainty, fear, or 
frustration. Later in the chapter you will find suggestions to help you manage the 
behavior of students with NBB.
Language difficulties include problems in understanding, processing, and 
expressing information verbally. Classroom interactions operate on the assump-
tion that language is understood in more or less the same way by all students 
and teachers. But such is not the case for students with NBB, who often do not 
interpret, understand, process, respond to, or use language in a normal man-
ner (Cook, 2004a; Cook, Kellie, Jones, & Goossen, 2000; Greene, 2001; Hall & 
Hall, 2003).
Suggestions: If you notice students who seem to have difficulty understanding, 
or who are not complying with expectations or requests, try using fewer words and 
increase the wait time for compliance. Make your directions clear, concrete, and 
consistent. You may need to show directions physically as well as explain them 
verbally. Ask students to repeat the directions or show you they understand what 
they are supposed to do.
Academic difficulties vary among students with NBB. Some of those difficul-
ties are easily recognized and dealt with. Some are not. Memory is often compro-
mised in students with NBB, resulting in variable gaps in learning. Difficulties with 
fine and gross motor skills, comprehension, language, and mathematics are often 
evident.
Suggestions: If you have a student with NBB who has been approved for special 
services, take note of what the special education teachers do. You can adapt and use 
some of their strategies in your normal teaching. Doing so will benefit not only stu-
dents with NBB, but may benefit other students as well. One example involves pro-
viding differentiated instruction that is in keeping with Howard Gardner's (1999) 
theory of multiple intelligences, which involves teaching concepts in various ways. 
That approach provides support for students by helping with comprehension while 
pinpointing specific strengths and weaknesses.
249

Paula Cook on Helping Students Who Exhibit Neurological-Based Behavior
the tWo Most CoMMon diagnoses in nBB: What are they?
The two most prevalent diagnoses within NBB are learning disabilities (LD) and 
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Learning disabilities are associ-
ated with particular areas of the school curriculum, such as reading or mathemat-
ics. Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder is characterized by student restlessness 
and short attention span. Let's go into a bit more detail about these two frequently 
encountered diagnoses.
learning disabilities: how are they 
Manifested, and how Can i help?
Learning disabilities (LD) are neurobiological disorders that interfere with learn-
ing in specific subjects or topics. They are categorized by the academic areas in 
which difficulties are identified. Some of the common learning disabilities are 
dyslexia, which is difficulty in processing language; dyscalculia, difficulty with basic 
mathematics; dysgraphia, difficulty with handwriting and spelling; and  dyspraxia, 
 difficulty with fine motor skills (National Council for Learning Disabilities 
[NCLD], 2005).
Because LD is so often confused with other diagnoses, it is useful to note that 
learning disabilities are not the same as attention disorders, although the two may 
occur together. Nor are learning disabilities the same as mental retardation, au-
tism, auditory or visual impairment, physical disabilities, or emotional disorders. 
Learning disabilities are not caused by lack of educational opportunities, frequent 
changes of schools, poor school attendance, or lack of instruction in basic skills.
Learning disabilities are difficulties in learning in certain areas, especially read-
ing, writing, and mathematics. They appear to be inherited, and they affect girls 
and boys equally. Students never outgrow their particular LD, but with support and 
intervention, they can be successful in learning and life.
What are indicators of ld?
At various stages, individuals with average or above-average intelligence may dis-
play characteristics that indicate learning disabilities. Such indicators include the 
following (NCLD, 2005):
■ Inability to discriminate between/among letters, numerals, or sounds.
■ Difficulty sounding out words; reluctance to read aloud; avoidance of reading 
and/or writing tasks.
■ Poor grasp of abstract concepts; poor memory; difficulty telling time.
■ Confusion between right and left.
■ Distractibility, restlessness, impulsiveness; trouble following directions.
■ Saying one thing but meaning another; responding inappropriately.
■ Slow work pace; short attention span; difficulty listening and remembering.
■ Eye–hand coordination problems; poor organizational skills.
Specialized psychological and academic testing is needed to confirm a 
 suspected LD. In some countries, the law requires that the diagnosis be made by a 
250

Paula Cook on Helping Students Who Exhibit Neurological-Based Behavior
multidisciplinary group, including the teacher, student, other school staff, family 
members, and professionals such as psychologists, reading clinicians, and speech 
and language therapists. Based on their assessment and on the availability of re-
sources, special services may be provided to the student at school.
scenario 2 Justin
The class had just finished a discussion of a chapter in the book they were 
reading. Justin actively participated in the discussion, making correct and 
well-thought-out responses. Mr. Gatta, the teacher, then instructed the 
class to complete a chapter summary sheet at their desks. Justin needed 
to be told a second time to get started. Justin put his feet up on his desk 
and began to belch loudly. The students laughed. Mr. Gatta asked Justin to 
stop belching and take his feet off his desk, whereupon Justin put his feet 
down and wrapped his legs around the legs of his desk. He then leaned 
back and made himself fall backwards, pulling his desk on top of him.
When Mr. Gatta came to help disentangle Justin from the furniture, 
Justin grabbed the desk, wrapped his legs tighter around it, squealed 
loudly, and laughed uncontrollably.
Commentary: Justin shows great reluctance to write down answers, even 
though he can say them correctly. His behavior may be linked to a learning 
disability, and there may also be other neural issues involved.
What is dyslexia?
Dyslexia is the most widespread and commonly diagnosed of all learning disabili-
ties, affecting over 40 million American children and adults (Dolphin Education, 
2006). It is characterized by difficulties in word recognition, spelling, word decod-
ing, and occasionally the phonological (sound) component of language.
From a young age, students with dyslexia show deficits in coordination, attention, 
and reading, which often damage their self-concept and sense of competence. The 
other cognitive faculties of people who have dyslexia are believed to function properly.
Examinations of thousands of students with reading disabilities revealed that 
while none showed evidence of a brain or linguistic impairment, over 95% had 
clear-cut balance, coordination, and rhythmic difficulties that are indicators of an 
inner ear/cerebellar dysfunction (Levinson, 2000). Although dyslexia makes learn-
ing difficult, many people with dyslexia are very high achievers, as exemplified by 
Albert Einstein, Thomas Edison, and Winston Churchill.
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: how Can 
i help students Who have this diagnosis?
Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is the second most common 
 diagnosis in NBB. It affects about 10% of the school population (Kahn & Faraone, 
2006) and is characterized by short attention span, weak impulse control, and 
251

Paula Cook on Helping Students Who Exhibit Neurological-Based Behavior
hyperactivity, all of which inhibit learning and often promote misbehavior. ADHD 
can begin in infancy and extend into adulthood, with negative effects on the indi-
vidual's life at home, in school, and in the community.
The cause of ADHD is not known. Maternal alcohol consumption or drug use 
during pregnancy is often associated with ADHD, as are childhood maladies such 
as viral infections, meningitis, encephalitis, head injury, and epilepsy (Millichap, 
2008). The role of heredity is not as significant as once thought. More males than 
females have the condition. Among students with attention-deficit disorder (ADD), 
males typically have ADD with hyperactivity, whereas females typically have ADD 
without hyperactivity (Amen, 2001). ADHD often occurs in combination with 
other diagnoses.
Suggestions: You can do a number of things to promote success among students 
with ADHD, such as:
■ Maintain a highly structured classroom. Use a written schedule augmented 
with pictures to support the structure. Keep assignment folders and equipment 
in specific and consistent places with specific locations for all materials (pencil 
pouches, tabs in notebooks, etc).
■ Build small sequential steps into the classroom routine.
■ Examine the class environment when the student is on-task, and when the 
student is off-task. Look for differences that might help or hinder the student.
■ Keep at hand extra pencils, texts, and other materials for students to use when 
they cannot find their own.
■ Give written/pictorial directions whenever possible rather than auditory 
prompting.
■ Give fewer problems/questions on worksheets and consider using “window 
boxes,” which are pieces of paper with a hole cut in them. The hole exposes 
only the question the student is to work on, but covers the rest of the questions 
on the page.
■ Use a visual timer to help the student understand time constraints.
■ Limit distractions as much as possible.
■ Color code materials. Cover the textbook for one course in the same color as 
the notebook for that subject.
■ Be aware of where the student is seated. Sit in the child's desk and observe the 
environment. Understand that stimulation and variety in the classroom often 
adversely affect students with ADHD or ADD. You may also wish to seat the 
child at an individual desk rather than a table and have separate work areas 
for different activities, which seems to help students with ADHD work better.
■ Give advance warning of when a transition is going to take place (now we are 
completing the worksheet, next we will . . .) and the expectation for the transi-
tion (and you will need . . .). Visual timers are good for transitions.
■ Allow students to doodle or manipulate quiet fidget items, such as stress or 
foam balls, or small plastic items; this can improve their attention level. If 
students begin to tap their pencils on their desks, ask them to tap their thighs 
instead.
■ Tape a large piece of coarse sandpaper on the top inside of the student's desk, 
for the student to rub when he or she needs to pay attention.
252

Paula Cook on Helping Students Who Exhibit Neurological-Based Behavior
■ Decrease auditory and visual distractions during difficult or new tasks. Study 
carrels or corners away from the group can be beneficial.
■ Specifically say and display lists of materials needed. List steps necessary to 
complete each assignment.
■ Allow the student to get into a comfortable position while learning.
■ Have lists, calendars, charts, pictures, and finished products in the classroom 
for students to refer to.
■ Provide short movement breaks, such as allowing the student with ADHD to 
pass out papers, run errands, or go for a drink of water.
What other diagnoses in nBB aM i likely to enCounter?
It is very likely you will find among your students some who have other diagnoses 
in NBB. You can expect at one time or another to work with students who have sen-
sory integration dysfunction (SID), bipolar disorder, oppositional defiant disorder 
(ODD), autism spectrum disorder (ASD), fetal alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD), 
and brain injuries. These diagnoses, along with LD and ADHD, are considered to be 
mental health conditions (American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 
[AACAP], 2004a). Information is presented here to alert you to these diagnoses and 
their implications.
It is important to recognize that students with mental health disorders cannot 
overcome their difficulties through willpower. Their conditions are not related to 
their character or intelligence. Most of their disorders can be treated successfully 
with medication, but in some cases, the medication adversely affects attention, con-
centration, and stamina (National Institute of Mental Health, 2008). Psychosocial 
support, provided in part by schools, can also be helpful.
sensory integration dysfunction: how Can i 
help students Who have this diagnosis?
Sensory integration dysfunction (SID)—also called sensory processing 
 disorder—reflects abnormalities in organizing, interpreting, and responding to in-
formation taken in through the senses. Sensory integration occurs automatically to 
keep us informed, ready to act, and able to protect ourselves. At times and for some 
people, flaws in the process result in incorrect perception and interpretation of in-
formation. Impaired processing of information may lead in turn to inappropriate 
behavior and poor learning.
Most teachers know little about SID, even though it is suspected of being a ma-
jor cause of hyperactivity, inattention, fidgety movements, inability to calm down, 
impulsivity, lack of self-control, disorganization, language difficulties, and learn-
ing difficulties (Cook, 2008; Kranowitz, 1998; Kranowitz, Szkut, Balzer-Martin, 
Haber, & Sava, 2003). Some students' sensory processing systems seem to be easily 
overwhelmed by excess visual and auditory stimulation.
Suggestions: You can help those students by keeping the classroom neat and 
tidy, removing sources of loud or unpredictable noise, enlarging printed questions 
or directions, and standing in front of a solid white overhead screen when giving 
253

Paula Cook on Helping Students Who Exhibit Neurological-Based Behavior
instructions and directing lessons, all of which reduce distractions from extraneous 
sources. You should also give directions slowly and distinctly, check that students 
have understood correctly, and maintain a sense of calm.
scenario 3 Jimmy
Jimmy entered kindergarten in September. By January, his behavior was 
worse than when he began school. Every day he had a series of tantrums, 
usually beginning when he arrived at school. He sometimes complied with 
directions, but more often, especially during changes of activity, he might 
scream, cry, kick, flail his arms, fall to the floor, or run out of the classroom.
During his “episodes,” he had kicked and hit staff members and as-
saulted students who were in his way. Jimmy's home life was unremarkable. 
He had an older sibling, both parents, and lived in a quiet neighborhood. 
His family environment was loving and stable. His parents were very 
 concerned about his behavior. Jimmy did not have any diagnosed neuro-
logical conditions. His mother did not drink or use illicit substances during 
her pregnancy. The pregnancy and his birth were deemed typical.
Commentary: This child, with no diagnosis other than his behavior to sug-
gest neurological dysfunction, was having a terrible experience in school. 
His teacher ultimately changed the classroom environment to cut down 
sensory stimulation, after which Jimmy's behavior improved considerably.
Bipolar disorder: how Can i help students 
Who have this diagnosis?
Bipolar is an affective disorder characterized by severe mood swings that occur 
in cycles of mania and depression, or highs and lows. Individuals with bipolar 
disorder can change abruptly from irritable, angry, and easily annoyed, to silly, 
goofy, giddy, and disruptive, after which they return again to low-energy periods of 
boredom, depression, and social withdrawal (AACAP, 2004c). The abrupt swings 
of mood and energy, which in some individuals occur several times a day, are often 
accompanied by poor frustration tolerance, outbursts of temper, and oppositional 
defiant behavior. Students with bipolar disorder are also frequently diagnosed with 
sensory integration dysfunction (Papolos & Papolos, 2002).
The cause of bipolar disorder is not known. The disorder was once thought 
to be rare in children, but recent research shows it can begin very early in life and 
is much more common than previously believed. Proper drugs can stabilize mood 
swings, and cognitive therapy and counseling can often help. Indicators of bipolar 
disorder in school students include the following (Papolos & Papolos, 2002):
■ Episodes of hysterical laughing and infectious happiness for no evident  reason, 
followed by periods of lethargy.
■ Belligerence and argumentation, often followed by self-recrimination.
■ Jumping from topic to topic in rapid succession when speaking.
254

Paula Cook on Helping Students Who Exhibit Neurological-Based Behavior
oppositional defiant disorder: how Can i help 
students Who have this diagnosis?
You expect some of your students to talk back to you now and then, argue, and 
disregard your directives. You don't enjoy such behavior, but probably realize it is 
a normal occurrence in human development. However, an occasional student will 
behave in a manner so uncooperative and hostile that it not only drives you to dis-
traction but also damages the student's social, academic, and family life. That sort 
of behavior is characteristic of oppositional defiant disorder (ODD).
The American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry (2004b) lists the 
following as symptoms of ODD:
■ Frequent temper tantrums
■ Excessive arguing with adults
■ Active defiance and refusal to comply with adult requests and rules
■ Belligerent and sarcastic remarks, made when directly praised
■ Deliberate attempts to annoy or upset people
■ Blaming others for one's own mistakes or misbehavior
■ Being touchy or easily annoyed by others
■ Speaking hatefully when upset
■ Seeking revenge
The AACAP (2004b) reports that 5 to 15% of all school-age children have 
ODD. Its cause is not known.
Suggestions: If you have a student who displays the characteristics of ODD, you 
might consider using positive reinforcement when the student shows flexibility or co-
operation. Indirect or earshot praise sometimes works well, such as when the student 
“overhears” two adults talking positively about him or her (intending to be overheard).
It is also helpful to reduce the number of words you use when speaking to a stu-
dent with ODD (Hall & Hall, 2003). A suggested procedure is to say and show what 
you mean, just once, and then do not explain yourself further. Students will ask for 
more information if they need it, and then you can provide what they need. If you 
feel your responses are about to make the conflict worse, take a personal time-out. 
This allows you to calm down, and it also presents a good model for the student.
autism spectrum disorder: how Can i help 
students Who have this diagnosis?
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) includes various diagnoses of abnormal devel-
opment in verbal and nonverbal communication, along with impaired social 
development and restricted, repetitive, and stereotyped behaviors and interests 
(Faraone, 2003). It also includes delays in the development of socialization and 
communication skills and Asperger syndrome, which is a pattern of behavior 
among students of normal intelligence and language development who also exhibit 
autistic-like behaviors and marked deficiencies in social and communication skills.
At present, about 1 in every 110 children is diagnosed with autism. However, 
that proportion is increasing (Autism Speaks, 2010). It affects four times as many 
255

Paula Cook on Helping Students Who Exhibit Neurological-Based Behavior
males as females. Students with ASD may show extreme hyperactivity or extreme 
passivity in relating to people around them. In its milder form, autism resembles a 
learning disability. Indicators of ASD include the following:
■ Self-stimulation, spinning, rocking, and hand flapping
■ Obsessive compulsive behaviors such as lining objects up evenly
■ Repetitive odd play for extended periods of time
■ Insistence on routine and sameness
■ Difficulty dealing with interruption of routine schedule and change
■ Monotone voice and difficulty carrying on social conversations
■ Inflexibility of thought and language (e.g., one student with autism refused to 
wear his winter jacket during subzero weather in early December because he 
had learned winter did not officially begin until December 21)
Manifestations of autism vary enormously in severity. Sensory integration dys-
function is also common in students with ASD, and sensory overload can lead to 
behavior problems in school.
Suggestions: Modifying the physical environment can do much to improve be-
havior and academic achievement of students with ASD. Some people with autism 
never develop language and need full-time care, whereas others become fully func-
tioning, independent members of society, as exemplified by Temple Grandin, per-
haps the world's most accomplished and well-known adult with autism. Dr. Grandin 
has appeared on major television programs such as  Today, Larry King Live, 48 Hours, 
and 20/20, and has been featured in publications such as Time, People, Forbes, U.S. 
News and World Report, and the New York Times (see www.templegrandin.org).
scenario 4 tay
Tay is extremely noisy. Even during quiet work time, she taps, hums, or 
makes other noises. When the teacher asks her to stop, she denies doing 
anything. She talks very loudly. When classmates ask her to be quiet, she 
ignores them.
Tay wears three pairs of socks all the time and adjusts the cuffs on each 
pair a number of times a day. She cannot settle down and focus until her 
socks are just right. She will not change shoes for gym class. When the gym 
teacher tried to make her do so, Tay swore at her and ran out of the gym 
and away from school, crying hysterically. When dashing across the street, 
Tay ran into the side of a parked car, then fell to the road and sobbed until 
a teacher came to get her.
Commentary: Tay is diagnosed with ASD with extreme SID. Outside noise 
bothers her greatly, so she makes her own noise to drown it out. It is specu-
lated that she wears the three pairs of socks to put extra pressure on her 
feet, which would be an indicator of SID, as is her continual cuff adjust-
ment. Things that have been done to help her benefit more from school 
include (a) providing ear covers to block outside noise, (b) using a portable 
radio/CD player with headphones to drown out other noise, (c) giving her 
chewing gum or mints to help keep her mouth quiet, (d) overlooking her 
256

Paula Cook on Helping Students Who Exhibit Neurological-Based Behavior
sock rituals, which are not a major issue, and (e) compromising by allowing 
Tay to decide whether she will change shoes for gym class or move to an 
alternate activity arranged for her, which includes instruction in social skills 
in her individualized education program.
fetal alcohol spectrum disorder: how Can  
i help students Who have this diagnosis?
FASD is a group of neurobehavioral and developmental abnormalities that includes 
fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS), alcohol-related neurodevelopmental disorder (ARND), 
and partial fetal alcohol syndrome (pFAS). The spectrum affects about 1% of the 
population in the United States (Clark, Lutke, Minnes, & Ouellette-Kuntz, 2004).
The disorder results from the fetus being exposed to alcohol from the moth-
er's blood. Ingestion of even small amounts of alcohol by the mother, as little as 
1 ounce per week, has been linked to delinquent and aggressive behavior in the 
child. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) contend that alcohol 
consumption by pregnant mothers is a significant contributor to brain impairment 
and that no level of alcohol consumption during pregnancy is considered to be 
safe (CDC, 2004). This conclusion was challenged, however, by findings in a large 
study in the UK that showed no ill effects in offspring whose mothers were “light 
drinkers” during pregnancy (Brooks, 2010).
Most individuals with FAS and other diagnoses on the FASD continuum have 
normal intelligence (Streissguth, Barr, Kogan, & Bookstein, 1997). At the same time, 
many of them have compromised adaptive and social skills, including poor impulse 
control, poor judgment, tendency to miss social cues, lack of common sense, learn-
ing difficulties, and difficulty with the tasks of daily living. ADHD usually occurs in 
association with FASD, and behavior difficulties are common ( Kellerman, 2003).
scenario 5 sam
Sam, age 10, never sits still in class. He is always talking and calling out answers 
in class even though they are usually wrong. Yesterday he pushed a classmate 
when they were coming in from recess. The teacher spoke to him, reminded 
him of the rules, and told him he could not go out for recess that afternoon.
This morning, Sam was reminded to keep his hands to himself or he 
would lose recess again. Sam repeated word for word what he was told: “I will 
keep my hands to myself and if I don't I won't be able to go out for recess this 
afternoon.” Fifteen minutes later Sam pushed Jonathan. When the teacher 
spoke to him, Sam claimed he didn't do anything and it wasn't his fault.
Commentary: Sam has been diagnosed with FASD and ADHD. His re-
peating back the words and consequences indicates language-processing 
difficulties common to FASD. Like other students with the condition, he 
reacts automatically to situations without always remembering what he did. 
Calling out and inability to sit still indicate ADHD.
257

Paula Cook on Helping Students Who Exhibit Neurological-Based Behavior
Brain injuries: What are they?
Brain injuries, traumatic and nontraumatic, often inhibit the brain's ability to func-
tion in a normal manner. Traumatic injuries result from blows to the head incurred 
during events such as accidents, sporting events, or assaults. Nontraumatic injuries 
result from disrupted blood flow to the brain (as in strokes), or from tumors, infec-
tions, drug overdoses, and certain medical conditions (Brain Injury Society of Vir-
ginia, 2012.). The effects of severe injuries are readily apparent, but mild injuries may 
go unrecognized even when they have a significant effect on behavior. Because brain 
injuries affect behavior in so many different ways, students' resultant limitations 
must be diagnosed and special instruction devised to help with particular difficulties.
rage: how Can i recognize and respond to it?
You may never experience an episode of rage in your classroom, but the following 
information will help you if you do.
Rage is not normally listed as a type of neurological disorder, but rather is an 
extreme kind of behavior sometimes exhibited by students with NBB. Puzzling and 
frightening, it displays as an explosion of temper that occurs suddenly, with little 
warning, and may turn violent (Packer, 2005). The process is traumatic for every-
one and should be understood as a neurological event that involves behavior over 
which the student has little control.
Rage differs from tantrums, which are goal-directed with the purpose of getting 
something or getting somebody to do something. Rage is not goal-oriented. Rather, 
it is a release of built-up tension or frustration. (Tantrums sometimes evolve into 
rage.) Once a rage episode has begun, there is little one can do to stop it. It may only 
last for a few minutes, or may continue for hours. Although it usually has to run its 
course, it can be softened and controlled somewhat by teachers and other adults.
Four phases comprise the rage cycle: (1) triggering, (2) escalation, (3) rage, 
and (4) post-rage. These phases, their characteristics, and how you can help in each 
of them are described in the following observations and suggestions (Cook, 2008b; 
Echternach & Cook, 2004; Greene, 2001; Hill, 2005; Packer, 2005).
Phase 1: Triggering
Triggers are precipitating events that provoke or set in motion episodes of rage, 
apparently by initiating neurochemical changes in the brain that greatly heighten 
the  self-protective responses commonly called fight/flight/freeze reactions. 
In   classrooms, triggering conditions seem to be associated at times with work 
 transitions, sensory overload, being told “No,” fatigue, frustration, confusion, hun-
ger, anxiety, and mood swings. For children with ADHD, triggers tend to be related 
to sensory and/ or emotional overstimulation. For children with bipolar disorder, 
triggers are often related to having limits set on their behavior (Papolos & Papo-
los, 2002). In the triggering phase, students may appear angry, confused, frustrated, 
dazed, tense, or flushed, and they may swear and use other rude language.
Suggestions: When a student is in this phase:
■ Recognize that a rage episode has begun and you may not be able to prevent it.
■ Understand that this is a neurological event. The student's flight/fight/freeze 
responses are strongly activated.
258

Paula Cook on Helping Students Who Exhibit Neurological-Based Behavior
■ Understand that the rage is not intentional or personal toward you.
■ Stay calm. Use a quiet tone of voice. Do not become adversarial.
■ Use nonthreatening body language. Stand at an angle off-center to the student, 
at least a long stride away. Make sure the student can see your hands.
■ Use empathic verbal support (“It sounds like you're upset.” “That would upset 
me too.”).
■ Deflect control elsewhere (“The clock says it's time to clean up.” “The big rule 
book in the office says . . .”).
■ Calmly, quietly, and succinctly use logical persuasion to provide the student 
an alternative behavior.
Phase 2: Escalation
Following the triggering, the rage may escalate mildly or rapidly. In mild escalations, 
the student may begin to get angry, call names, swear, exhibit startled verbal or 
physical responses, talk rapidly, increase the volume and cadence of speech, and 
show tension in the arms, hands, and body. Rapid escalations are characterized by 
violent temper, hostility, aggressive comments (“Leave me alone!” “I'm going to kill 
you!”), profanity, flushed face, and clammy body. The student may show fists and 
throw objects or furniture.
Suggestions: When a student is in this phase:
■ Remain calm.
■ Ensure the safety of others by clearing them from the room or supporting 
them to ignore the escalation.
■ If the student threatens you, walk away.
■ Calmly direct the student to a safe place (e.g., Quiet Room or designated area) 
to allow the energy to dissipate.
■ Continue to use short and direct phrases, nonemotional language, and body 
language that is nonthreatening and nonconfrontational.
■ Praise the student as soon as he or she begins to respond to your direction.
■ Do not address the student's inappropriate language, threats, or other behav-
ior at this time. The student cannot process the information and may only 
become further inflamed.
Phase 3: Rage or Meltdown
Here, the student is fully caught up in the rage.
Suggestions: When a student is in this phase:
■ Allow the student space to go through the physical manifestations.
■ Do not restrain the student unless there is an immediate threat to physical safety.
■ Do not question, make sarcastic comments, or try to talk the student out of the 
rage.
■ Do not try to make the student understand instructions.
■ While the student is going through the cycle of reactions, support others in the 
room and help ensure that their interpretations of the rage event are correct.
Phase 4: Post-Rage or Post-Meltdown
After a rage event, the student may or may not remember the behavior or the trig-
gering causes. This is a low point for the student because he or she has expended 
259

Paula Cook on Helping Students Who Exhibit Neurological-Based Behavior
a great amount of energy and is left confused and often embarrassed. The student 
will now be tired, passive, headachy, and sometimes remorseful and apologetic. He 
or she may need sleep.
Suggestions: When a student is in this phase:
■ Reassure the student that he or she is all right now.
■ When the student is ready, help him or her put language to the event.
■ Help him or her plan what to do the next time a rage occurs—such as finding a 
sensory-friendly refuge (a safe place or room in which to rage), using words to 
get what he or she needs, and remaining in a safe place until able to calm down.
■ After the rage event and when the student is calm, take care of yourself. Relax, 
drink water, and remind yourself that it was not personal and that you did the 
best you could. Meanwhile, document your observations, hold debriefing con-
versations with a colleague, and listen to reflections made by anyone involved.
■ Note any evident triggers, sensory influences, or other environmental charac-
teristics that may have precipitated the rage.
MediCation: What do i need to knoW aBout MediCation for 
students With Behavioral issues?
The U.S. National Institute of Mental Health (2006) affirms that most childhood 
mental health problems are treatable with medication. However, because the use of 
medication is controversial, the decision to use it is ultimately made by the parents. 
If the parents give approval for medication at school, established policies stipulate 
where the medicine must be stored, who is to administer it, and what teachers and 
other educators are allowed to say about it. It is important that you familiarize your-
self with the medication policies at your school and your attendant responsibilities.
Monitoring the effects of medication is usually a shared responsibility among 
caregivers, school, and the medical practitioner, with school personnel asked to 
watch for any unusual behavior or symptoms during the school day. If teachers are 
asked to give reports of how the child behaved, they are to state them in the follow-
ing manner: “During the math lesson, Jason got up five times without permission. 
On one occasion he berated another student.” Teachers should not make emotion-
ally charged commentary such as, “Jason was badly out of control and seriously 
disrupted the class with his antics.” In other words, teachers should make sure they 
avoid  vocabulary that reflects their own emotional reactions to the student's behavior.
Managing the Behavior of students with 
nBB: What specifically Can i do?
scenario 6 Michael
Teacher sees Michael begin to scribble all over his math worksheet. Teacher 
calls out from across the room, “Stop that, you're making a mess.” Or says in an 
accusatory tone of voice, “And what do you think you are doing, young man?”
Those accusatory statements attract attention of all students in class 
and thereby set up a power struggle between Teacher and Michael. 
260

Paula Cook on Helping Students Who Exhibit Neurological-Based Behavior
 Michael begins to scream, “I hate this f----- s-----! I'm going to kill myself!” 
His screaming threatens the teacher and affects the functioning of the class.
Teacher responds, “Michael, you cannot swear in this classroom. As 
for killing yourself, don't be ridiculous.” Michael thinks Teacher has called 
him ridiculous, which further inflames him. Other students in the class are 
now alert and waiting to see what happens.
A more effective response would be for Teacher to walk calmly to Michael, bend 
down, and quietly ask, “Do you need some help?” When Teacher stoops down, she is 
not vulnerable to being kicked and is not physically intimidating to Michael. Teacher 
knows never to scold students for swearing at the time they swear. The time to deal 
with profanity is after the student has settled down, not in the middle of the incident.
Effective Teacher suggests to Michael that the two of them talk in the private 
area of the classroom. She says, “It is nobody else's business, so let's talk privately 
about this.” Teacher may say, pointing to Michael's scribbles, “Boy, Michael, I used to 
have a dress that looked like that.” The issue of profanity is then dealt with privately, 
and Michael apologizes later to the class for swearing. Teacher might further defuse 
the situation by asking Michael to go to the photocopy room to get more paper.
What are some specific suggestions 
for Preventing Misbehavior?
When working with students with NBB, do what you can to increase the likelihood 
of student success, such as:
■ Establish a positive and nurturing rapport with the students. Warmly greet 
them when they arrive at class. Show interest in them and talk about pop cul-
ture or something they are interested in.
■ Modify the classroom to make it sensory friendly. Sit in the student's seat and 
look at the room from the student's perspective. See if there are things that 
might be distracting or annoying. It is far more productive to change the class-
room than try to change the student.
■ Add structure to time periods that are ordinarily unstructured, such as recess 
and free time. Students with NBB often have difficulty with unstructured time.
■ Make appropriate use of humor, which is effective with all students.
■ Keep in mind that students with NBB are not predestined to fail. Look for their many 
qualities and strengths that can be nurtured and built into important life competencies.
■ All small improvements by students with NBB should be celebrated as impor-
tant steps to a better-quality life, now and in the future.
What are suggested Ways of redirecting Misbehavior?
When misbehavior does occur, keep your reactions as positive as possible. Here are 
some suggestions:
■ Be careful about eye contact. It can stimulate upper-cortex activity, which is 
good for academic thinking, but can at times trigger episodes of misbehavior. 
Eye contact combined with a stern tone of voice is often interpreted as a threat.
261

Paula Cook on Helping Students Who Exhibit Neurological-Based Behavior
■ Be careful how you use your voice. If you raise your voice, students with NBB 
will often raise their voices in return.
■ When giving students a choice of behaviors, provide two alternatives you can 
live with and let the students select the one they prefer.
■ Remain positive. Your positive attitude can greatly improve the quality of ser-
vice you provide to students with NBB and their families. Remember that stu-
dents experiencing difficulties in neurological processing are human beings 
first and foremost, and you have the opportunity to help them.
As to what you can say, specifically, to individual students who break class 
rules of conduct:
■ Tell them in nonemotional language that the rule was broken.
■ Using very few words, tell them what to do to fix the mistake. Stand close to 
shield them from the view of others.
■ Congratulate them when they begin to comply.
■ If they begin to argue, say, “Wrong tone of voice . . . you're not ready to fix 
your mistake . . . I'll wait." Then wait, not staring at them and not making eye 
contact. You may have to wait a few seconds or even a few minutes.
■ When they have calmed down, tell them what to do to begin to “fix the mis-
take.” Start the statement with them to ensure they know what to do, then let 
them finish it. Quietly congratulate them as soon as they begin the task.
■ End with congratulations for taking care of the problem so well.
scenario 7 abraham
Abraham, a 10-year-old student with severe behavior issues, was brought 
back from gym class. An educational assistant had Abraham by his wrist, 
escorting him to a private area in the back of the classroom as Abraham 
loudly spewed a tirade of profanities and death threats. To ensure every-
one's safety, we used the “separate and supervise” strategy to isolate 
Abraham from his peers. He was put in a back room off the side of the 
classroom where he continued to scream profanities and threats. As the 
other staff members helped the other students carry on the daily classroom 
routine, I walked toward the back area of the room where a staff member 
stood in front of the closed door. Abraham had a history of running away. 
I opened the door just a fraction and saw Abraham standing with a chair 
over his head in a threatening pose.
I quietly called in, “You sound angry at me, Abraham.” I was delib-
erately trying to deflect and divert his attention to me in an attempt to 
engage another part of his brain.
Abraham shrieked, “I'm not f---ing angry at you, I'm angry at Billy!”
“Excellent, Abraham! You put other words to this, way to go!” I said 
this in an encouraging, sincere, but soft tone. “Why are you angry at Billy?”
Abraham was still shouting and still had the chair over his head. 
 “Because Conrad is my friend!” he screamed.
“Oh, I'm glad Conrad is your friend, but what does Billy have to do 
with this?” I gently put my index finger to my lips in a shhhing motion.
262

Paula Cook on Helping Students Who Exhibit Neurological-Based Behavior
“Billy told Conrad to f--- off, and that's not nice,” Abraham replied 
indignantly, at a lower volume but still with the chair over his head.
“Great, Abraham, you put words to this! Hey, Abraham, let's add 
other words to this so you can respectfully tell Billy why you're upset. Billy 
doesn't even know you are mad at him, and he and Conrad are already 
eating lunch together. Put the chair down so I can come in.”
“NOOOOO!” Abraham screamed. “You'll try to put me in the Quiet 
Room if I put the chair down.”
I answered quietly, “Abraham, as long as you are safe, I'm safe, and 
the class is safe, you don't need to go to the Quiet Room. Put the chair 
down so we can plan to get out of here.”
Abraham put the chair down, but removed the detachable plastic 
seat, holding it ready to strike anyone who came close.
“Great, Abraham, you put down the chair, good for you! Now let me 
help you fix the chair where the seat has come off.” I slowly approached 
from his left, walking on an angle and off-center from him, so he could see 
me coming and not be startled by any sudden movements I made. I posi-
tioned myself between the chair and Abraham, with him on the inside of 
the room, and myself near the door. Although the screaming had subsided, 
I was still concerned about my safety.
Together, we snapped the seat back on the chair and Abraham quickly 
sat down. “Thanks, Abraham,” I said. “I always have trouble getting those 
blasted seats back on those chairs.”
Abraham was now calm. He had been able to articulate why he was 
upset, without using profanity, and he found a way to let Billy know he was 
upset and tell Conrad that he was his friend. Within 4 minutes, Abraham 
had “fixed things up,” made amends, and was with his peers having lunch. 
Abraham did not have any more big explosions after this. Perhaps he be-
gan to understand he had other options when he was confused or upset. 
This situation appeared to provide an invaluable learning experience.
Success! It does happen.
Commentary from anonymous teacher 1
When I first began teaching, I knew nothing about NBB. To my knowledge 
it was never mentioned in my teacher education program. I learned no 
special techniques or strategies for helping students with NBB. I learned 
from whomever I could and just did my best.
One of my students I remember well was a boy who had fallen from a 
balcony at age 2 and suffered a traumatic brain injury. He exhibited the signs 
of NBB I read about in this chapter. He was frequently off task, wouldn't 
stay in his seat, made noises, scribbled on his desk, and hit, slapped, and 
pushed kids on the playground. For some time, no form of discipline I tried 
helped change his behavior.
Finally, after much collaboration with the principal and the school psy-
chologist, I did the following: Each day, if my student failed twice to control 
263

Paula Cook on Helping Students Who Exhibit Neurological-Based Behavior
himself, I would send him to a special desk in the classroom separated 
from the others. There he would work until the completion of activities in 
a particular subject area. After that, he could return to the “group,” as we 
called it. The process would start all over at that point. This young man did 
not like the isolation from the group, and generally his disruptive behavior 
would stop. As the year progressed, I came to realize that oftentimes this 
boy could not fully control his behavior.
In this chapter, I found the scenarios especially helpful. They gave me 
a new perspective on the behavior I sometimes encountered. I think all pro-
spective teachers should be aware of NBB and recognize that the number 
of students with NBB is increasing. Such is certainly the case at my school. 
New teachers need to be able to recognize the conditions of NBB and have 
techniques in place to help those students with NBB.
Commentary from anonymous teacher 2
I must confess I was unaware of the term “neurological-based behav-
ior” before I read this chapter. I had received no pre-service training in 
 recognizing, identifying, understanding, or helping students with any of the 
diagnoses in NBB. I knew my subject matter and the basics of curriculum 
design but very little about working with the amazing variety of students 
I would encounter. I wasn't far into my first year when it became evident I 
needed help if I were going to survive.
I didn't like admitting my ignorance, but I had to go to colleagues 
for help. The special education teachers opened their trove of ideas, tech-
niques, and strategies to help me. My fellow teachers offered tips that had 
worked for them. Often I just asked the students directly, “What can I do 
to help you succeed?” I attended inservice sessions when appropriate and 
researched when necessary. I spoke with parents about my hopes for their 
child. I learned by experience, sometimes the hard way.
Now, many years later, I have had my share of successes in helping 
students and regret that I never could find the key for others. Although 
I have taught many students with ADD/ADHD, learning disabilities, and 
other diagnoses, I never had to deal with violent, threatening, profane, or 
raging students, although I know many teachers who have.
As we all know, overcoming strong challenges does not happen 
quickly or easily. We all want to prepare our students to live successful lives. 
I think I got better at it as I learned to do the following: (1) Retain patience 
to allow students to think, make mistakes, and be patient with themselves 
and others; (2) show persistence in going the distance with students and 
doing what it takes to help them keep trying and not give up; (3) keep a 
positive attitude, expect good things, maintain hope, and help students 
look on the bright side; and (4) search for strengths by helping students 
recognize that we all have our strengths and weaknesses and can find many 
strengths in ourselves and others.
264

Paula Cook on Helping Students Who Exhibit Neurological-Based Behavior
What you have learned in this ChaPter
You have accomplished a great deal in what must have seemed a blizzard of infor-
mation. You have learned the meaning of NBB and have an idea of how often you 
will encounter it. You recognize the two major diagnoses within NBB, along with 
some of the diagnoses that occur less frequently. You know the indicators of ADHD 
and learning disabilities, especially dyslexia. You know that many of these diagno-
ses are successfully treated with medication and you know how the medication is to 
be handled. You realize that NBB is not uncommon and that you will have students 
with various NBB diagnoses in your classes of “regular” students. You have learned 
that you can be successful in helping students with NBB even though the discipline 
tactics that work well with most students may not be so effective in their case. The 
keys are doing the best you can and never giving up.
ac t i vi ti e s
Self-Test: True/False
 1. NBB is a condition noted in students who are able 
to control their behavior but often choose not to 
do so.
 2. Students with NBB do not usually respond 
very well to higher levels of structure in the 
classroom.
 3. Learning disabilities are one of the most frequently 
encountered diagnoses within NBB.
 4. Students with various kinds of learning disabilities 
often have poor eye–hand coordination.
 5. Students with ADHD may at times have difficulty 
learning, but on the whole, they present few behav-
ior problems for teachers.
 6. Dyslexia is a condition that affects students' per-
formance in mathematics and handwriting.
 7. Some authorities say that pregnant women who 
drink even very small amounts of alcohol put their 
unborn children in danger of having fetal alcohol 
spectrum disorder (FASD).
 8. “Rage” is the technical name for what we normally 
call “temper tantrums.”
 9. Normally, schools cannot provide medication to 
help students with NBB unless the students' care-
givers agree to it.
 10. When teaching, it is not likely you will encounter 
students with NBB, but it is best to be prepared in 
case you do.
Self-Test: Multiple Choice
 1. In neurological-based behavior, students have no-
tably low levels of
(a) parental affection.
(b) teacher attention.
(c) self-control.
(d) amino acids.
 2. Which of the following is the most common diag-
nosis within NBB?
(a) learning disabilities
(b) ADHD
(c) autism
(d) bipolar disorder
 3. Dyslexia involves special difficulties students expe-
rience in
(a) reading.
(b) mathematics.
(c) memory.
(d) personal relationships.
 4. Classroom success for students with ADHD is 
 increased through use of
(a) self-direction.
(b) physical exercise.
(c) memory exercises.
(d) structure.
265

Paula Cook on Helping Students Who Exhibit Neurological-Based Behavior
 5. Students with sensory integration dysfunction 
(SID) are helped by
(a) reducing sensory input.
(b) increasing sensory input.
(c) visual and auditory checkups.
(d) reducing structure.
 6. Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD) is 
linked to
(a) fathers who drink.
(b) mothers who drink while pregnant.
(c) family history of alcoholism.
(d) family history of various addictions.
 7. Many students with NBB do not respond well to
(a) eye contact.
(b) quiet voice.
(c) medication.
(d) the physical presence of adults.
 8. The final decision concerning whether or not to 
use medication for students with NBB is made by
(a) teachers.
(b) trained nurses.
(c) mental health professionals.
(d) parents.
 9. When an episode of rage begins, you should
(a) let it run its cycle.
(b) stop its escalation.
(c) intervene by reasoning with the student.
(d) call the parent immediately.
 10. On average, what percentage of students is prob-
ably adversely affected by NBB?
(a) 2%
(b) 10%
(c) 20%
(d) 30%
Self-Test: Explain This
 1. What is “neurological-based behavior,” and why is 
it given a special name?
 2. What are the most common symptoms of ADHD, 
and how can teachers respond to them?
 3. What indicators would suggest that a student 
might have dyslexia?
 4. Why is the word “spectrum” used in some diag-
noses, such as fetal alcohol spectrum disorder and 
autism spectrum disorder?
 5. In general, what can you do to reduce misbehavior 
among students with NBB?
Additional Suggested Activities
 1. Working with a fellow student, if possible, explain 
what each of the following terms refers to: affec-
tive disorders, anxiety disorders, attention-deficit 
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), autism spectrum 
disorder, behavior difficulties, bipolar disorder, 
brain injuries, conduct disorder, dyslexia, fetal al-
cohol spectrum disorder (FASD), learning disabil-
ities (LD), neurological-based behavior (NBB), 
neurological differences, oppositional defiant dis-
order, rage, rage cycle, sensory integration dysfunc-
tion (SID), sensory processing disorder.
 2. For discussion: Teachers in regular classrooms are 
often evaluated on how well they “maintain a rich 
learning environment.” Yet an abundance of ma-
terials might adversely affect some students with 
neurological-based behavior. How might teachers 
organize a classroom environment that would be 
supportive of all students?
 3. With one or more classmates or fellow teachers, go 
back to Scenario 1 at the beginning of the chap-
ter. Discuss how you might help Tyler move past 
his inappropriate behavior. The commentary from 
Tay's teacher in Scenario 4 might help your orga-
nize your thoughts. Share your conclusions with 
peers.
266

Paula Cook on Helping Students Who Exhibit Neurological-Based Behavior
Academic difficulties: Problems with learning that may be 
associated with compromised memory, fine and gross 
motor skills, comprehension, and language or math-
ematics abilities.
ADHD: Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. The 
second most common diagnosis in NBB, character-
ized by short attention span, weak impulse control, 
restlessness.
Behavior difficulties: Generally, student behavior that 
breaks rules or disrupts learning.
Dyslexia: The most commonly diagnosed of all learning 
difficulties; characterized by difficulties in word recog-
nition, spelling, word decoding, and occasionally with 
the phonological (sound) component of language.
Language difficulties: Problems in understanding, pro-
cessing, and expressing information verbally.
Learning disabilities (LD): Unusual difficulties students 
exhibit in learning certain subjects in school. A mental 
health diagnosis, not simply a teacher observation.
Mental health conditions: Diagnoses in NBB, such as 
learning disabilities and attention-deficit hyperactivity 
disorder.
Neurological differences: Notable variations in student 
behavior, believed to be the result of differences in 
 cerebral functioning.
Rage: Extreme behavior, sometimes exhibited by students 
with NBB, manifested as an explosion of temper that 
occurs suddenly with no real warning and may turn 
violent.
Rage cycle (Cook): Progression of rage episode through 
four phases—triggering, escalation, rage (or  meltdown), 
and post-rage (or post-meltdown).
Sensory integration dysfunction (SID): Irregularities in 
the process we use to take in information from our 
senses, organize it, interpret it, and respond to it.
Sensory processing disorder: Same as sensory integration 
dysfunction.
glo ssa ry
ref e re n c e s
Amen, D. (2001). Healing ADD: The breakthrough program 
that allows you to see and heal the six types of attention 
deficit disorder. New York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons.
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. 
(2004a). Child psychiatry facts for families: Recom-
mendations, help and guidance from the AACAP. 
Retrieved from http://pediatrics.about.com/library/
bl_psych_policy_statements.htm
Autism speaks. (2010). Retrieved from http://www 
.autismspeaks.org/
Brain Injury Association of Virginia. 2012. Brain Injury 101 
http://www.biav.net/brain-injury-101.htm
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 
(2004). Alcohol consumption among women who 
are pregnant or who might become pregnant—United 
States, 2002. Retrieved from http://www.acbr.com/fas/
Clark, E., , Lutke, J., Minnes, P., & Ouellette-Kuntz, H. 
(2004). Secondary disabilities among adults with fetal 
alcohol spectrum disorder in British Columbia. Journal 
of FAS International, 2, 1–12.
Cook, P. (2008b). A layperson’s guide to what to do when 
someone begins to rage (2nd ed.) [Booklet]. Avail-
able from the author, Paula Cook. Internet contact: 
pcook59@shaw.ca
Cook, P., Kellie, R., Jones, K., & Goossen, L. (2000). Tough 
kids and substance abuse. Winnipeg, MB, Canada: Addic-
tions Foundation of Manitoba.
Dolphin Education. (2006). Dyslexia research: 4. The 
incidence of dyslexia. Retrieved from http://www 
.dolphinuk.co.uk/education/case_studies/dyslexia_ 
research.htm
Echternach, C., & Cook, P. (2004). The rage cycle [Paper]. 
Available from the author, Paula Cook. Internet con-
tact: pcook59@shaw.ca
Faraone, S. (2003). Straight talk about your child’s mental 
health. New York: The Guilford Press.
Gardner, H. (1999). Intelligence reframed: Multiple intel-
ligences for the 21st century. New York: Basic Books.
Greene, R. (2001). The explosive child. New York: Harper 
Collins.
267

Paula Cook on Helping Students Who Exhibit Neurological-Based Behavior
Hall, P., & Hall, N. (2003). Educating oppositional and de-
fiant children. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervi-
sion and Curriculum Development.
Hill, P. (2005). Pharmacological treatment of rage. 
 Retrieved from http://www.focusproject.org.uk/SITE/
UPLOAD/DOCUMENT/Hill
Khan S. & Faraone, S. 2006. The genetics of attention- 
deficit/hyperactivity disorder: A literature review of. 
2005. Current Psychiatry Reports, 2006 Oct; 8:393-397.
Kellerman, T. (2003). The FAS community resource center. 
Retrieved from http://www.come-over.to/FASCRC/
Kranowitz, C. (1998). The out-of-sync child. New York: 
 Skylight Press.
Kranowitz, C., Szkut, S., Balzer-Martin, L., Haber, E., & Sava, 
D. (2003). Answers to questions teachers ask about sensory 
integration. Las Vegas, NV: Sensory Resources LLC.
Levinson, H. (2000). The discovery of cerebellar-vestibular 
syndromes and therapies: A solution to the riddle—
dyslexia (2nd ed.). Lake Success, NY: Stonebridge Pub-
lishing, Ltd.
Millichap, G. (2008, February). Etiologic classification of 
attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Pediatrics, 121, 
e358–e365.
National Council for Learning Disabilities. (2005). The 
ABCs of learning disabilities. Retrieved from http://
www.ncld.org/
National Institute of Mental Health. (2006). Medications. 
Retrieved from http://www.nimh.nih.gov/publicat/
medicate.cfm#ptdep1
National Institute of Mental Health. (2008). Health infor-
mation quick links. www.nimh.nih.gov.
Packer, L. (2005). Overview of rage attacks. Retrieved from 
http://www.tourettesyndrome.net/rage_overview.htm
Papolos, D., & Papolos, J. (2002). The bipolar child.  
New York: Broadway Books.
Streissguth, A., Barr, H., Kogan, J., & Bookstein, F. (1997). 
Primary and secondary disabilities in fetal alcohol syn-
drome. In A. Streissguth & J. Kanter (Eds.), The challenge 
of fetal alcohol syndrome. Overcoming secondary disabilities 
(pp. 23–39). Seattle: University of Washington Press.
268

Index
Page references followed by "f" indicate illustrated
figures or photographs; followed by "t" indicates a
table.
A
Abilities, 29, 267
Abuse, 28, 267
alcohol, 267
child, 267
Internet, 267
signs of, 28
substance, 267
types of, 267
Academic achievement, 191, 223, 256
Academic difficulties, 249, 267
Academic performance, 178, 183, 186, 191
Academics, 28, 141, 164, 171
acceptance, 9, 66-67, 75, 78, 232
ACCESS, 39, 42, 128, 135, 236, 240, 247
Accountability:, 74
Achieve, 20, 29, 73, 81, 93, 95, 141-142, 206,
214-215, 223
Achievement, 8-9, 66, 126, 128, 130-131, 144, 177,
191, 212, 216-217, 220, 223, 241, 243, 256
academic, 144, 191, 223, 256
tests, 130, 144, 212
ACT, 5, 12-13, 28, 30, 33, 55, 57, 70, 83-84, 94-95,
141, 143, 177, 181, 189-191, 227, 234, 253
actions, 18, 28, 31, 34, 40, 42, 46, 48, 53, 57, 59, 75,
131, 187, 204, 212, 217, 227, 232-233, 238
Active listening, 135
Activities, 3-4, 6-8, 12-18, 23, 26-29, 33-34, 41-42, 45,
47-48, 54-55, 72, 74-76, 84, 89, 91-92,
95-98, 127, 132-133, 136, 143-146, 152-153,
156-157, 157, 160, 160-162, 165, 167,
169-170, 169, 172, 174, 178, 181-182, 186,
194-195, 200, 203, 205, 207, 215-219, 221,
230, 234-239, 241-242, 244, 248, 252, 264,
266
categorizing, 41
developmental, 8
follow-up, 75, 230, 234-235, 238-239, 241-242, 244
instructional, 16, 18, 26-28, 72, 92, 186
learning, 3-4, 6-8, 14-16, 18, 23, 26, 29, 33-34,
41-42, 48, 54-55, 72, 74-75, 89, 91-92,
95, 132-133, 136, 143-144, 146, 152-153,
156-157, 160-162, 165, 167, 169-170,
172, 174, 178, 181-182, 186, 195, 200,
203, 205, 215-218, 221, 234-238, 252,
264, 266
ongoing, 42
planning, 6-7, 23, 42, 45, 132, 136
space for, 45
Actors, 153
Adaptations, 246
Addition, 30, 33, 42, 59, 131, 141, 146, 150, 208,
239-240
Adequate Yearly Progress, 141
Adjustment, 256
Adler, Alfred, 63
Administration, 189
Administrators, 26, 29, 45, 66, 75, 126, 144, 150, 181,
189, 212, 217
educational, 29
of schools, 126
adolescence, 5, 186, 197
rules and, 5, 197
theories of, 197
Adolescents, 59, 83
Adulthood, 252
Adults, 4-5, 8-9, 67, 72, 78, 82, 94, 140, 160, 181,
191, 227, 236, 251, 255, 258, 266-267
Advanced placement, 98-99
advice, 27, 69, 80, 94, 136, 143, 186, 239
Advocacy, 246
Affect, 5, 8-9, 22-24, 53, 75, 137, 209, 250, 252, 258,
266
Affection, 4-5, 66, 75, 265
Affirmation, 66, 75, 194, 233
Age, 3-5, 22, 27, 251, 255, 257, 263
Age of consent, 27
Agents, 177
Aggression, 11, 15, 22, 98, 145, 165, 170, 196, 219,
225, 227-229, 241-242, 244
aggressive behavior, 257
Agreement, 18, 26, 40, 140, 212, 216, 232, 237-238
agreements, 30, 209-210, 216, 225, 227, 232, 234,
238
Alcohol, 252-253, 257, 265-268
Alcoholism, 266
Alcohol-related neurodevelopmental disorder, 257
Alert, 28, 61, 253, 261
Algebra, 171
Alliances, 235, 238
Alternative schools, 152
Alternatives, 174, 176, 193, 215, 224, 262
American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, 253, 255, 267
Amino acids, 265
Analysis, 143, 194
Anger, 28, 35, 68, 210, 228, 232, 234, 240, 244
management, 232, 244
anger management, 232
animals, 4, 205, 208
Animation, 184
Anonymity, 248
Anticipation, 6, 161
Antisocial behavior, 93
anxiety, 258, 266
Anxiety disorders, 266
Apathy, 11, 22, 204
Apologies, 230, 232
Application, 31, 33, 140, 217, 228, 248
Appraisal, 32, 74, 136, 218
Appreciation, 17-19, 38, 66, 75, 86, 91, 95, 156, 159,
233
Apprenticeships, 236
Approaches, 18, 33, 53-54, 80-81, 84, 89, 127, 151,
175-176, 178, 194, 202, 225, 244, 247
Appropriate language, 30
Area, 10, 28, 87, 133-135, 138, 168, 208, 259,
261-262, 264
Arguments, 40
Art, 4, 15, 57, 70, 138-139, 161-162, 179
music, 4, 162
Art center, 139
Articles, 128, 150, 224, 226
Arts, 72, 161
Asperger Syndrome, 255
Assertive discipline, 53, 64-65, 74, 181
Assessment, 30-31, 251
authentic, 31
community, 31
decision making, 31
family, 251
group, 251
HELPING, 251
methods, 31
methods of, 31
problem, 31
Assessments, 42
classroom, 42
ASSET, 29, 47, 62, 75
Assets, 186
Assigned reading, 98
assignment folders, 252
Assignments, 7, 13, 42, 69, 71, 85, 88, 95, 130, 145,
195
Assistance, 10, 34, 88, 207, 230, 244
Association, 6-7, 12, 30, 63, 76, 224, 257, 267-268
Association for Supervision and Curriculum
Development, 76, 268
assumptions, 69
atmosphere, 130, 186, 237
Attending, 27, 38, 61, 75, 88, 98
Attention, 4, 10-11, 13-14, 16-17, 19, 23, 27-30, 37,
39, 47-48, 53, 57, 59, 61-63, 65-66, 70-71,
75, 80, 84, 89, 91, 93, 98-99, 127, 132-134,
136-137, 141, 145, 151-153, 156, 158-159,
162, 166, 168, 170, 175, 181, 194-195,
201-202, 204-205, 219, 223, 225-228,
230-231, 233-235, 238, 242, 244, 247,
250-253, 260, 262, 265-268
and learning, 16, 19, 29-30, 39, 71, 132, 137, 152,
166, 175, 201, 253, 265
and reading, 251
from teachers, 4, 162
negative, 14, 19, 65, 89, 181, 252
positive, 14, 19, 29, 39, 47-48, 57, 65-66, 75, 91,
137, 145, 152, 181, 195, 201-202,
204-205, 219, 226, 230, 233-235, 262
student, 10, 17, 19, 23, 28, 39, 47-48, 53, 57,
61-63, 65-66, 80, 91, 93, 99, 132, 134,
136-137, 145, 152-153, 156, 158-159,
162, 166, 168, 194-195, 202, 204, 223,
225-228, 230-231, 233-235, 238, 244,
247, 250-253, 260, 262, 266-267
theories, 136
Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), 14,
250-251, 266
symptoms of, 266
Attitudes, 19, 26, 42, 52, 57, 71, 80, 86, 91, 93, 152,
179, 182, 192
behaviors and, 91
teacher, 19, 42, 52, 57, 71, 80, 86, 182, 192
Austria, 63
AUTHOR, 22, 27, 65, 83, 150, 186, 199, 246, 267
Authority, 4, 11, 28, 35-37, 41, 74, 76, 78, 80, 82-86,
89, 95-97, 159, 180, 188, 190, 197, 240
competent, 36
legal, 28
legitimate, 74, 82-83
Autism, 250, 253, 255-256, 265-267
Autism Speaks, 255, 267
autism spectrum disorder, 253, 255, 266
Availability, 251
Average, 141, 163, 220, 243, 246, 250, 266
Avoiding, 38, 90, 212, 226, 228, 242
Awards, 58, 66, 128, 161, 215
Awareness, 4, 61, 181, 205
self, 181
AYP, 141
AYP (adequate yearly progress), 141
B
Back, 4, 11-12, 19, 35-37, 40-41, 43, 47, 60, 69-70,
87, 89, 91, 94, 97-99, 135, 141-142,
145-146, 154, 157-159, 165, 170, 183,
195-196, 203-204, 210, 214-216, 219-220,
228, 230, 232, 242-243, 248, 251, 255, 257,
262-263, 266
Backup system, 172
Balance, 42, 86, 251
Baltimore, 138
Bargaining, 81, 86
BASIC, 6, 22, 24, 27, 56, 74, 77-99, 134, 158,
200-205, 217-219, 221, 250, 267
Basic skills, 250
Beginning teachers, 39, 141
Behavior, 2-17, 19-24, 26-30, 32-35, 37-38, 40-43,
45-48, 52-67, 69, 72-76, 78-99, 126-127,
130-132, 137-138, 140-141, 144-145,
150-156, 158-160, 162-163, 165-167,
169-172, 173-197, 200-204, 209-211,
213-218, 220-221, 223-242, 244, 245-268
adaptive, 257
aggressive, 4, 257, 259
awareness of, 4, 61, 181
challenging, 43, 96, 176, 185, 190, 237
communication and, 34, 53, 62-63, 236
269

dangerous, 69
desired, 45, 58-59, 75-76, 87, 179, 231, 235
disruptive, 2, 11, 17, 34, 48, 84, 180, 192, 223-225,
227-228, 230-233, 236-238, 240-242,
244, 254, 264
environment and, 92
hurtful, 16, 90
modification, 53, 58, 73-74
observation of, 215
off-task, 138, 252
oppositional and defiant, 268
repetitive, 7, 90, 255-256
replacement, 232
routines and, 137
simple, 41, 64, 79, 95, 126, 158, 166, 184-185, 187
social, 3, 5-6, 10, 20, 29, 32, 55, 62-63, 67, 74, 76,
81, 89-90, 93-94, 140, 175, 177-178,
180-181, 187, 189-190, 192-195, 197,
201, 218, 223, 246, 254-257
target, 95
triggers, 258, 260
violent, 43, 248, 258-259, 264, 267
Behavior change, 9
Behavior changes, 230
Behavior management, 42, 81, 99, 137, 246, 249
Behavior modification, 53, 58, 73-74
Behavior problems, 60, 83, 141, 152, 155, 203-204,
209, 213, 256, 265
Behaviors, 4, 7-8, 13-14, 19, 33, 45, 47, 59, 64, 81,
83, 86, 89, 91, 140, 156, 185, 188-189, 194,
197, 199, 203-204, 212, 215, 224, 238, 241,
255-256, 262
beliefs and, 7
describing, 212
desirable, 13, 156, 197
nonverbal, 47, 255
SHARE, 4, 64, 185, 215
verbal, 8, 83, 255
Beliefs, 7, 44, 197, 204, 216
control, 216
Belonging, 6, 12, 53, 63-64, 73-75, 200, 203, 205,
216, 228
Benefits, 16, 67, 181, 194
Best and Worst, 72
Bipolar disorder, 253-254, 258, 265-266
Biting, 229
Blame, 17, 37, 48, 57, 60, 80, 203, 211-212
Blaming, 36-37, 48, 59, 212, 214, 216-217, 219, 255
Body language, 37-38, 45, 48, 151, 154, 158-159,
165-169, 235, 259
Bonuses, 162
Books, 17, 28, 56, 58, 67, 70, 79, 133, 146, 174, 200,
207, 267-268
assignment, 133
picture, 200
Boundaries, 5, 34, 46, 48, 92, 155
Boys, 15, 99, 146, 180, 211, 227, 250
Brain, 4, 156, 176, 224, 246, 248, 251, 253, 257-258,
262-263, 266-267
research, 267
Brain development, 4
Brain injury, 258, 263, 267
Brazil, 207-208
Breakfast, 10
Brilliant, 39
Browser, 221
Bulletin boards, 168
Bullies, 15
Bullying, 11, 15, 20, 82, 85, 180, 194, 197
C
Calendars, 253
California, 128
Canada, 49, 79, 99, 267
Capacity, 5
Career, 38-39, 59, 61, 141
education, 59
Caregiver, 34, 189
Caregivers, 18, 28-29, 42, 44-45, 75, 82, 90, 97, 136,
144, 168, 174, 189, 192, 194, 214, 235-236,
238, 240, 260, 265
Caring, 11, 36, 42, 48, 61, 70, 133, 138, 156, 205, 212,
233
Caring relationships, 212
Cartoons, 185
Case studies, 185
CAST, 17
Categories, 10, 30, 46, 224-225, 227-228, 239-241
Categorizing, 41
Cause and effect, 4
Centers, 139, 236, 257, 267
art, 139
art center, 139
Centers for Disease Control, 257, 267
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 257, 267
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC),
257, 267
Certification, 141, 211
Change, 3-4, 7, 9, 32, 40, 46, 52, 72-74, 177-179, 181,
187, 189-191, 193, 204-205, 209-210, 254,
256-257, 261, 263
acceptance of, 9
essential, 32, 193
in schools, 72
Changes, 5, 23, 28, 32, 52, 61-62, 76, 83, 187, 204,
230, 250, 254, 258
economic, 23
Chaos, 132
Character, 13, 15, 20, 35, 48-49, 62, 75, 181, 223, 253
Character development, 181
Characters, 185
Charting, 25-49
Charts, 143, 185, 253
Chats, 43, 236
Cheating, 11
Checking for understanding, 191
Checklist, 136
Checklists, 165
Chicago, 63
Child care, 79
Child development, 136
Children, 3-4, 8, 18, 28, 67, 70, 76, 79, 81-82, 87, 92,
99, 138, 140, 160, 183, 246, 251, 254-255,
258, 265, 268
focus on, 70, 76
rights of, 87
self-evaluation, 140
with ADHD, 258, 265
with ODD, 255
Chips, 10
Choice, 20, 22, 46, 53-54, 58-59, 73-74, 79, 81, 83,
85-87, 90, 94, 96-97, 99, 144, 168, 175, 179,
182, 184-185, 187-188, 191-193, 195, 197,
199-221, 227-228, 230, 234, 240, 262, 265
Choice theory, 54, 58, 73-74, 200-201, 204, 209, 211,
216-218, 221
Churchill, Winston, 251
Circles, 58
Citizenship, 241
Clarifying, 33, 61, 96, 126, 139, 172
Class discussions, 88, 140, 162, 196
Class management, 144, 193
Class meetings, 67, 72, 238
Class rules, 10, 12, 27, 65, 78, 80, 85-86, 88, 96,
131-132, 152, 155, 162, 193, 197, 201, 210,
218, 226-227, 229, 236, 238, 241, 244, 262
Class Website, 236
Classification, 268
Classroom, 1-24, 25, 28, 32-35, 37, 42, 46-48, 51,
53-56, 58-62, 64-68, 72-73, 75-76, 77, 80,
83, 85-87, 89, 92, 95-98, 125, 127-142, 144,
149-154, 156-158, 160, 163-164, 166-167,
169, 171-172, 173-177, 181, 184, 186-187,
191-192, 194, 196-197, 199-205, 209-213,
215, 217-219, 221, 223, 225, 227-228, 231,
235-242, 244, 245, 247-249, 252-254, 258,
261-262, 264-266
arrangements, 5, 163
displays, 7, 9, 258
environment in, 2, 19
first day of school, 42, 128-130, 133, 136-138, 142,
144
language in, 249
organizing, 77, 80, 83, 85-87, 89, 92, 95-98, 132,
253
secondary classrooms, 152
talk in, 261
Classroom behavior, 3, 53, 66, 80, 85, 127, 151, 156,
175, 202, 211, 225, 247
Classroom climate, 205
Classroom discipline, 1-24, 25, 33-34, 46-48, 51, 54,
56, 58, 73, 77, 125, 149-150, 172, 173-174,
199, 223, 245
behavior modification, 58, 73
rewards, 46, 58, 174
Classroom environment, 66, 75, 128, 213, 228, 247,
254, 266
democratic, 75
interpersonal, 75
time, 66, 75, 128, 213, 228, 247
Classroom management, 24, 127-128, 131, 138, 141,
144, 150, 153, 176-177, 191, 199, 202,
217-218
Classroom organization, 166, 176
Classrooms, 2, 6, 11, 19, 23, 33-34, 53, 55-56, 58, 60,
63-68, 70-76, 86, 126-129, 133, 152, 168,
172, 178, 180, 201, 211, 215, 223, 258, 266
behavior, 2, 6, 11, 19, 23, 33-34, 53, 55-56, 58, 60,
63-67, 72-76, 86, 126-127, 152, 172, 178,
180, 201, 211, 215, 223, 258, 266
behavior in, 2, 11, 55, 58, 73-75, 180, 258
regular, 65, 266
special, 67, 86, 126, 215, 258, 266
Cleaning, 66, 70
Cleanup, 70
CLEAR, 27, 33-34, 54, 56, 64, 78, 83-84, 86, 89-90,
137, 158, 164-166, 205, 210-211, 249, 251
Clients, 199
Climate, 60, 62, 67, 137, 205, 215
Clinicians, 251
Clinton, Bill, 47
Cliques, 4
Closure, 75
Clothing, 10, 13, 137
Clusters, 182
Coaches, 158, 235
Coaching, 158
Code of ethics, 30
Codes, 34, 48
Coercion, 18-19, 24, 46-47, 175-176, 179, 184, 200,
202, 218, 221
Cognition, 190
Cognitive therapy, 254
COIN, 178
Collaboration, 32, 56, 135, 185, 197, 226, 228, 230,
232, 238, 244, 263
procedures for, 135, 238
school psychologist, 263
small groups, 185
students, 32, 56, 185, 197, 226, 228, 230, 232,
238, 244, 263
time for, 32
Collaborative learning, 31
color, 98, 252
Colors, 181
Com, 24, 49, 67-68, 79, 99, 128, 147, 150, 162, 174,
183, 189, 197, 211-212, 214, 224, 267
Commitment, 37, 92, 159, 188, 203
Committees, 66
Communication, 18-20, 30, 34-37, 46-48, 53, 61-63,
73-74, 168, 181, 236, 255
behavior and, 34
behavior as, 20, 53
boards, 168
good, 19, 35-37, 46-47, 62, 168, 181, 236, 255
language development, 255
parents, 34, 48, 168, 236
social development and, 255
verbal and nonverbal, 255
Communication skills, 34, 46, 255
Communications, 174, 182, 199
Community, 3, 5, 9, 20, 27, 31-32, 66, 71-72, 74-76,
89, 130, 196, 235-236, 238, 240, 246, 252,
268
groups, 3, 5, 9, 32, 72, 74-75
schools and, 71-72
Community in the classroom, 20
Community of learners, 72, 130
Compassion, 68, 72
Compensation, 92
Competence, 6, 12, 36, 44, 93, 184, 203, 211, 214,
251
felt, 12, 93
Competencies, 30
Competency, 195, 211
Competing, 185
Competition, 4, 7-8, 16, 55, 185
Compliance, 71, 74, 76, 78-80, 82-86, 89, 99, 130,
153, 158, 181, 190, 203, 249
Compliments, 144
Components, 44, 78-79, 204
Comprehension, 249, 267
Concept, 54, 76, 96, 164, 167, 180, 238, 251
Concepts, 4-5, 31, 33, 78, 147, 167, 171, 202, 218,
239, 249-250
introducing, 33
Conceptual vocabulary, 181
270

Conclusions, 23, 53, 56-57, 70, 97, 150, 200, 266
Concrete operations, 4
Conference presentations, 79
Conferences, 71, 137, 163, 246
parent, 137, 163
Conferring, 74
Confidence, 18, 66, 86, 131, 142, 231
Conflict, 5, 8-9, 15, 55, 68, 70, 187, 240, 255
resolution, 68, 240
Conflict resolution, 240
conflicts, 87, 89, 234
Conformity, 180, 197
Confrontation, 187-188, 228-229, 241
Confusion, 61, 132-133, 142, 249-250, 258
Connections, 31, 59, 66, 71-72, 75, 212, 236
Consent, 27
Consequence, 65, 92-94, 175, 177-179, 188, 191-192
Consequences, 13, 20, 59, 64-65, 69, 81-82, 84, 89,
92, 96, 130, 136-137, 145, 172, 177, 179,
191, 209, 217, 231-232, 238, 257
Consideration, 6, 8, 16, 27, 81-82, 182
Consistency, 137
Constructs, 6
Consultants, 49
Contact, 8, 15, 28, 37-38, 41, 48, 89, 154, 158-159,
163-165, 170, 172, 187, 208, 236, 261-262,
266-267
Content, 10, 30-31, 129, 138, 204
beliefs about, 204
expectations, 30
knowledge, 31
meaningful, 31
Content knowledge, 31
Context, 31, 59, 165
Contracts, 232
Control, 9, 13-15, 17, 20, 34, 36-37, 40, 48, 57, 59,
63-64, 67-69, 74-76, 78, 83-84, 99, 142, 146,
159, 176-177, 179-182, 184-186, 190-194,
199-200, 212-213, 216-217, 221, 226,
228-232, 234, 240-241, 243-244, 246-247,
249, 251, 253, 257-260, 263-265, 267
impulse control, 191, 232, 240, 251, 257, 267
self-control, 15, 17, 20, 57, 63, 67-69, 78, 84, 99,
146, 159, 176, 179, 181, 190, 193, 199,
228, 230-232, 234, 241, 243, 246-247,
253, 265
Control theory, 200, 221
Conversations, 183-184, 194, 256, 260
Convictions, 55, 203
cooperation, 20, 29, 32, 35-36, 47, 54, 62, 65-67, 75,
83, 85, 91, 95, 160, 176, 180, 196-197, 210,
212-213, 225, 227, 230, 236, 238, 255
Cooperative activities, 237, 239, 244
Cooperative groups, 72, 140
Cooperative learning, 72, 140, 146, 154, 205, 235
Coordination, 250-251, 265
Copyright, 1, 25, 51, 77, 125, 149, 173, 199, 223, 245
Corporal punishment, 19, 52
Costs, 220, 243
Council for Exceptional Children, 246
Counseling, 59, 63, 168, 254
personal, 59, 63
Courses, 79
Courtesy, 30, 81, 83, 88-89, 95, 144, 146, 191-192,
209, 211, 240
Covey, Stephen, 36, 47
Crafts, 89
Creating, 12, 66, 133, 143, 176, 185, 215, 237-238
Creativity, 31, 186, 197
Credentials, 131
Credit, 60, 70, 89, 91, 133, 136, 139, 203
Crises, 166
Crisis, 62
Criterion, 130
Critical thinking, 31
Criticism, 32, 34, 38, 40-41, 47, 65, 93, 186, 190
meeting, 186
Cues, 257
Cultural, 7-9, 23, 34, 208
Cultural values, 23
Culture, 261
Curiosity, 178, 185
Curriculum, 10, 18, 26, 31-32, 71, 76, 184, 199, 201,
203-205, 213-216, 218, 221, 226, 232, 235,
237-238, 244, 246, 250, 264, 268
adaptations, 246
aligned, 232
basic skills, 250
implementing, 215
kinds of, 10, 216
multiple intelligences, 235
options for, 214
Curriculum design, 264
Curriculum development, 76, 268
D
Daily living, 257
Data, 60
Dating, 27
Daydreaming, 10, 152, 160
Death, 262
Debates, 209
Decision making, 20, 31, 63, 80, 84, 181
ethical, 31
Decision-making, 234, 238
Decoding, 251, 267
Definition, 44, 98
Democracy, 53, 180, 197
Demographics, 7
demonstrations, 39
Dependence, 166
Dependency, 93, 164
Depression, 254
Depth, 55, 71, 188, 203, 205, 207
Depth of understanding, 205
Description, 79, 143, 197
Descriptions, 83, 150
Design, 2-24, 26-49, 52-76, 78-99, 126-147, 150-172,
174-197, 199-221, 237, 246-268
Designs, 31
Development, 3-4, 22, 31, 51-76, 79, 128, 130, 136,
174-175, 177-178, 180-181, 183, 187,
189-190, 192-195, 197, 223, 232, 255, 268
Developmental delay, 8
Devices, 66
Diagnosis, 197, 250-251, 253-255, 257, 265, 267
Dialogue, 32
Differences, 7-8, 31, 75, 140, 194, 212, 217, 248-249,
252, 266-267
Differentiated instruction, 249
Dignity, 6, 12, 20, 29-30, 35, 45, 54, 62-63, 67-68, 74,
99, 146, 171, 188, 196, 220, 243
Diligence, 27-28, 46, 48
Direct instruction, 84, 87, 154
Directions, 6, 15, 34, 45, 58, 61, 79-80, 83-84, 86,
93-96, 99, 131-132, 135, 151, 182, 234-235,
249-250, 252-254
Directives, 19, 97, 164, 255
Disabilities, 14, 250-251, 264-268
ADHD, 14, 250-251, 264-267
visual impairment, 250
Disability, 251, 256
Disaster, 66
Discipline, 1-24, 25, 27-29, 31-34, 37, 40, 43-49,
51-76, 77-99, 125-126, 128-129, 131, 138,
144, 146, 149-151, 155, 158-159, 167-169,
171-172, 173-176, 179, 181, 183, 187,
190-194, 197, 199, 202, 209, 211, 213, 215,
221, 223-229, 231-232, 234-242, 244, 245,
247-249, 263, 265
cooperative, 18, 20, 55, 65-66, 72, 74, 81, 91, 129,
144, 146, 235, 237-239, 244
Discipline issues, 202
Discipline problems, 67, 69, 138, 146, 211, 227, 240,
244
Discovery learning, 144
Discussion, 71, 98-99, 130, 183-184, 196, 207-209,
211, 215, 219, 251, 266
guided, 71
Discussions, 13, 59, 88, 98, 140, 156, 162, 183, 185,
189, 196, 231
Disengagement, 225, 227-229, 235, 244
Dismissal, 139
Dispositions, 3
Disruptions, 52, 75, 81, 150, 152, 158, 163, 175, 187,
189, 191-192, 196, 216, 228-230, 232-235,
240-241, 244
Distractibility, 250
Distracting, 45, 235, 261
Distraction, 255
Distractions, 5, 10, 252-254
Division, 158
Doctrine, 28
Doubt, 60, 214
Drama, 89, 162
Drawing, 31, 181
Drugs, 254
Dynamics, 53, 56-57, 72-75
Dyscalculia, 250
Dysgraphia, 250
Dyspraxia, 250
E
Eager to Learn, 3
Ear, 251, 256
inner, 251
Economic groups, 8-9, 23-24
Edison, Thomas, 251
Education, 1-2, 9, 11, 19, 25-27, 30, 49, 51, 55, 58-59,
64, 68, 71, 74, 77, 92, 125, 128-129, 133,
147, 149-150, 154, 162, 173-174, 182,
199-201, 203-204, 211, 217, 221, 223,
245-246, 249, 251, 257, 263-264, 267
at home, 9
exemplary, 58
for teachers, 2
right to, 64
Educational planning, 246
Educators, 6, 17-18, 22, 30, 32, 52-54, 59, 65, 67, 93,
150, 156, 161, 187, 199, 209, 211, 260
Effective teacher, 40, 55, 128, 138, 141, 261
Effective teaching, 32, 150
Effectiveness, 34-35, 154, 167, 176, 191, 218
Effort, 2-3, 11-12, 18, 27, 29, 33, 39, 46, 48, 60, 62,
74, 80, 82, 91, 93, 97, 127, 145, 151, 153,
161-162, 169, 175, 177-178, 181, 183-184,
186, 191-192, 195, 202, 204, 206-208, 210,
214, 216-218, 225, 241, 247
Ego, 41
Egocentric, 12, 14
Einstein, Albert, 251
Elaborating, 160
Elementary school, 162
Elementary schools, 72
Email, 90
Embarrassment, 231, 233
Emotion, 3, 9, 15, 56, 190, 210, 228
Emotional support, 186
Emotions, 6, 15, 36, 68, 75, 186, 197, 231, 234-235,
240
anger, 68, 234, 240
empathy, 97, 232-233
Empowerment, 175, 179, 185, 193, 197
goal, 175
Encouragement, 18, 41, 57, 67, 137, 184-185, 203,
216, 218, 235, 242
Encouragers, 179
Energy, 15, 168, 213, 234-235, 241, 254, 259-260
Engagement, 31, 213
in learning, 31
English, 10, 161
Standard, 10
Enrichment, 161
Enrichment activities, 161
Enthusiasm, 18, 38, 159, 194, 210, 218
Entrance exams, 206
Environment, 2, 16, 19-20, 23, 26, 29, 48, 66-67, 75,
81, 89, 92, 95, 128-130, 133, 136, 203,
205-206, 213, 218, 228, 237, 247, 252, 254,
256, 266
home, 89, 252, 254
Environment for learning, 26
Epilepsy, 252
Equal opportunity, 14
Equality, 7-8
opportunity and, 8
Equations, 171
Equipment, 99, 205, 252
Error, 142
Errors, 164
ESCAPE, 14
Ethics, 13, 30, 47, 181, 197
value, 13
Ethnic, 20, 23-24, 171, 207
Ethnic groups, 171
Evaluation, 130, 140, 182, 187, 192, 206, 208, 211,
221
Evaluations, 42
Events, 3, 14, 61, 182, 185, 215, 240, 258
Evidence, 2, 31, 60, 66, 207, 216, 251
Exceptional, 2, 246
Exclusion, 215
Exercise, 27-28, 64, 164, 179, 192, 234, 265
Exercises, 37, 159, 163, 265
Exhibits, 66
Expectations, 8, 13, 18, 20, 27, 29-30, 33-34, 42, 48,
56-57, 61, 65, 71, 74, 78-79, 87, 89-90, 93,
271

95, 99, 126, 131, 136-137, 142, 153, 155,
172, 177-179, 185, 201, 209, 232, 236, 249
realistic, 33
Experience, 6, 20, 29, 33, 38, 42, 48, 59, 67, 69-72,
87, 90, 92, 96, 154, 178, 183-184, 197, 200,
202-203, 205, 212, 214-215, 217, 227, 234,
240, 254, 258, 263-265
experiences, 6, 10, 30-31, 33, 72, 142
in school, 6, 10, 30, 33
Expert, 37, 152
Experts, 81, 92
Explanation, 33, 78, 86, 132, 144
Eye contact, 8, 15, 37-38, 41, 48, 89, 154, 158-159,
165, 170, 172, 187, 261-262, 266
eyes, 37, 42, 159, 161
F
facial expression, 34, 172, 187
Facilitating, 184
Facilities, 204
Factors, 5, 16, 48, 178, 244
Facts, 7, 40, 70, 205, 267
Failure, 8, 14, 18, 28, 48, 55, 58-60, 63, 71, 73, 75, 90,
93, 126, 131, 184, 200-201, 226, 228,
231-233, 242, 244
repeated, 75
Fairness, 72
Falls, 10
FAME, 58, 128
Families, 9-10, 31-32, 63, 89, 98, 184, 249, 262, 267
foster, 63, 184
needs, 31, 63
Family, 8, 10, 16, 22-24, 52, 60, 63, 65, 94, 135, 139,
251, 254-255, 266
Family counseling, 63
Family history, 266
Family members, 10, 60, 251
Family structure, 23
Fantasies, 248
Fathers, 266
fear, 14, 23, 65, 67, 81, 86, 93, 96, 132, 152, 178, 181,
233, 249
Fearfulness, 38, 159
Feedback, 18-19, 33, 42, 86, 215
and practice, 33
feelings, 5, 11, 18, 29, 35, 48, 62, 67, 176, 178-179,
184, 188, 204, 216, 220, 243
control of, 184
Females, 252, 256
Fetal alcohol syndrome, 257, 268
Fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS), 257
Fetus, 257
Field trips, 236
Fighting, 9-11, 131
File, 189
Film, 128
Findings, 57, 150, 257
fine motor skills, 250
fire, 143
First grade, 196
Flexibility, 255
flight, 138, 258
Flow, 41, 258
FOCUS, 14, 35, 59, 65, 70-71, 76, 90-91, 126, 131,
150, 165, 177-178, 204, 206, 214, 216, 224,
226, 242, 256
Folders, 139, 252
work, 139, 252
Food, 8, 10, 22, 24, 98, 133-134
Forgetting, 164
Forgiveness, 9
Forms, 188
Formula, 219
Forward, 61, 184, 195
Foundations, 52, 136
Fractions, 37, 159
Frames, 36, 46-47, 136, 240
Free time, 58, 138, 161, 261
Freedom, 20, 82, 86, 161, 200, 203, 205, 216-217,
221, 228
Frequency, 11
Friendliness, 42, 184
Friendships, 240
Frustration, 17, 75, 153, 203, 234, 249, 254, 258
Fun, 6, 16, 42, 161, 186, 200, 202-203, 205, 213,
216-217, 221, 228
Functioning, 24, 127, 129, 140, 180, 216, 256, 261,
267
Funding, 126
Furniture, 137, 166, 251, 259
G
Games, 4, 130, 161, 167, 176
with rules, 130
Gandhi, Mohandas, 47
Gardner, Howard, 249
Multiple Intelligences, 249
Gaze, 99, 169
Genetics, 20, 268
Geography, 43, 207
Germany, 208
Girls, 42, 250
Glasser, William, 6, 11, 24, 36, 46-47, 53-55, 58-59,
73, 199-221, 228
Goals, 31, 63-64, 70-71, 75, 87-88, 224, 231-232
chart, 70
Golden Rule, 213
Grades, 3-5, 13, 22, 38, 42-43, 66, 71, 87, 128, 139,
188, 206, 214-215
Grading, 42, 70, 144
level, 144
multiple, 144
Grandin, Temple, 256
Graphic organizers, 167
Graphics, 157
Grooming, 32
gross motor skills, 249, 267
Group alerting, 61, 75
Group dynamics, 53, 56-57, 72-75
Group size, 165
Group work, 16, 127, 135, 154
Groups, 3, 5, 7-9, 13-15, 23-24, 30, 32, 53, 56, 61, 67,
72-75, 79, 132, 140, 142-143, 146, 161, 165,
171, 185, 208-209, 211, 220, 237, 243
Growth, 31-32, 54, 192
Guessing, 4, 42, 60
Guessing games, 4
Guest speakers, 236
Guidance, 8, 18, 33, 42, 81, 129, 157-158, 161, 192,
200, 215, 267
respect, 8, 129
Guided discussion, 71
guided practice, 78, 167
Guidelines, 24, 27-28, 133, 155
Guides, 7, 157
Guilford Press, 267
Guilt, 4, 16, 35, 48, 62
H
Handling, 92, 156, 234
Handouts, 10
Handwriting, 250, 265
problems, 250, 265
Happiness, 182, 254
Harassment, 11
Head injury, 252
Health, 66, 253, 260, 266-268
Health care, 66
Health problems, 260
Helping, 13, 20, 39, 54-55, 57, 59, 63-65, 67-69, 73,
75-76, 78, 81, 85, 90, 92, 150, 155, 158,
168, 174, 181-182, 184, 186, 193, 197, 199,
204-205, 214, 223, 228, 232-233, 235-236,
238, 242-244, 245-268
helping others, 90, 233
Hierarchy, 6, 55, 65, 175, 177-178, 180-182, 187,
189-195, 197
History, 19, 43, 72, 75, 146, 196, 220, 224, 243, 262,
266
History of education, 19
Home, 3, 8-9, 28, 78, 89, 134, 139-140, 143, 153, 183,
236, 252, 254
Homework, 19, 71, 92, 95, 133, 135-136, 138, 143,
156, 182
sharing, 156
Honesty, 4-5, 186
Hope, 5-6, 12, 91, 99, 208, 264
Horse, 35
Human development, 255
Human relations, 5, 24, 75
Humiliation, 67, 234
Humor, 38, 57, 62, 159, 214, 261
Hyperactivity, 14, 250-253, 256, 266-268
I
IDEAL, 5, 68, 78, 165
Idealism, 5
Ideas, 6, 17, 23, 33, 47, 53, 55-56, 59-60, 63, 66, 71,
74, 82, 90, 97, 128, 137, 140-142, 151, 156,
166, 178, 185, 190, 194, 200, 209, 211,
214-215, 225, 236, 241, 264
identity, 9
ignorance, 264
Illinois, 63
Illustration, 83
Imagination, 218
I-messages, 35, 46, 48
Impairment, 250-251, 257
Implementation, 204, 218, 239
Importance, 3-4, 7, 16, 33, 41, 63, 83, 132, 162, 177,
183, 205, 207, 209, 212
Impulse control, 191, 232, 240, 251, 257, 267
Incentives, 159-162, 166-169, 172
Inclusion, 140
Income, 8, 10, 22, 24, 98, 184, 212
independent practice, 167
Independent work, 45, 61, 157, 163-164, 168-169
Individual differences, 31
Individualized Education Program, 257
Industry, 141
Influence, 2, 7, 17, 19, 22, 32-34, 36, 38-40, 45-48, 57,
59-61, 68, 73, 75-76, 99, 174-176, 179-180,
182, 185, 187, 191, 199-202, 204, 217-218,
221
Information, 6-7, 34, 43, 45-46, 60, 74, 137, 140, 142,
146, 152-153, 157, 170, 182, 186, 200,
203-208, 214, 216-218, 221, 226, 231, 235,
248-249, 253, 255, 258-259, 265, 267-268
Initiative, 55, 63, 180, 182-183, 197
Inquiry, 31
Inspiration, 62, 176, 181
Instruction, 11, 20, 26, 29, 31, 39, 45, 71-72, 84-85,
87, 89, 94, 130, 133, 150, 154, 156, 166,
172, 176, 203-204, 216, 221, 235, 249-250,
257-258
goal-directed, 258
individualized, 257
strategy, 85
tiered, 166
unit, 72
Instructional activities, 18, 26-27, 92, 160, 186
Instructional strategies, 31
Insubordination, 52
Integration, 253-254, 256, 266-268
Integrity, 68
Intellectual development, 73
intelligence, 55, 186, 197, 246, 250, 253, 255, 257,
267
Intensity, 94, 186
Interaction, 20, 31, 143, 164, 236, 242
Interactions, 6, 95, 179, 202, 249
Internet, 17, 140, 156, 221, 267
Interpersonal relations, 36
Interpretation, 27, 158, 253
Interpreting, 253
Intervention, 97, 137, 150, 193-194, 233, 250
Interventions, 232-235, 244
Interviewing, 72
activity, 72
Introduction, 207
Intuition, 4
Invitations, 236
Issues, 14, 24, 31, 49, 61, 75, 196, 202, 224, 251,
260, 262
controversial, 260
Italy, 208
Items, 4, 74, 140, 188, 252
J
Johns Hopkins University, 55
Joint, 46, 67, 228, 244
Journals, 17, 156, 172
Judges, 57
Judgment, 24, 75, 179, 232, 257
judgments, 75, 206, 221
Juncture, 187
Justice, 186, 197
K
Kansas, 138
Kicking, 229
Kindergarten, 133, 224, 254
Knowledge, 9, 26, 31-32, 39, 47, 57-58, 71-72, 86,
143, 153, 168, 185, 206, 214, 221, 263
of community, 72
272

of subject, 47, 143
topic, 206
Kohn, Alfie, 55, 70, 73
L
Language, 3-4, 9, 11, 17, 30, 35, 37-38, 45-46, 48,
72-73, 82, 90, 131, 151, 154, 158-159, 161,
165-169, 234-235, 249-251, 253, 255-260,
262, 267
body, 37-38, 45, 48, 151, 154, 158-159, 165-169,
235, 259
clear, 90, 158, 165-166, 249, 251
difference, 9
written, 167
Language arts, 72, 161
Language development, 255
procedure, 255
use, 255
Languages, 128
Law, 26-28, 49, 83, 86, 250
case, 86
Leaders, 73, 126, 134
Leadership, 20, 32, 37, 95, 159, 221
Leadership and collaboration, 32
Leads, 5, 54, 59, 81, 95, 179, 187, 190-191, 200, 234
Learners, 31-32, 42, 55, 70, 72, 129-130, 203
active, 31
Learning, 2-8, 10-11, 14-16, 18-21, 23-24, 26, 29-34,
39, 41-42, 48, 53-55, 57-58, 61-67, 69-75,
81-82, 87, 89, 91-92, 95, 126, 129-130,
132-133, 135-138, 140, 143-144, 146,
149-172, 174-175, 177-178, 181-182,
184-186, 189, 192, 195-197, 199-203, 205,
208-211, 213-218, 221, 224, 226-228,
234-238, 247, 249-253, 256-257, 263-268
attitude toward, 21, 171
connected, 66, 71
discovery, 144, 171, 217, 268
discovery learning, 144
distance, 130, 154, 264
enjoyable, 7, 30, 32, 42, 152, 155, 160, 186, 209,
215, 217
events, 3, 14, 61, 182, 185, 215
from mistakes, 64
in small groups, 74, 209
mastery, 31, 130
modalities, 42, 182
scenarios, 169, 264
strengths and weaknesses, 143, 249, 264
to learn, 2-4, 11, 29, 33, 41, 64, 70-71, 75, 91, 95,
129-130, 132, 155-156, 195, 202-203,
208, 214, 216-217, 227
Learning activities, 6-7, 29, 89, 156, 172, 221
Learning climate, 137
Learning communities, 70-71, 74-75
Learning disabilities, 14, 250-251, 264-268
learning disabilities (LD), 250, 266-267
Learning disability, 251, 256
Learning environment, 2, 16, 20, 23, 29, 81, 95,
129-130, 133, 136, 203, 266
Learning environments, 31
Learning experiences, 31
Learning goals, 31
Learning groups, 140, 146
Learning modalities, 42
Learning opportunities, 92, 247
Learning process, 64, 234-235
Learning teams, 205
Lecture, 71, 83, 130
Lesson planning, 42
Lesson plans, 85, 136
Lessons, 53, 56, 61, 71, 82, 89, 92, 95, 97-98, 131,
143-145, 151-153, 156, 167, 169-171, 176,
195, 204, 209, 215, 218-220, 229, 239,
241-243, 254
Letters, 171, 183, 236, 250
Level, 5, 9, 16, 18, 22, 41, 55, 73, 140, 143-144, 156,
174-175, 177, 180-184, 187-191, 193-195,
197, 209, 212-214, 218, 252, 257
Liability, 49
Library, 267
life skills, 230, 232, 246
Lifestyles, 9, 13
Lighting, 16
Limit setting, 166
Limitations, 140, 258
Limits, 8, 16, 33-34, 46, 48, 81, 83-86, 88-89, 96, 130,
155, 158, 172, 258
Lines, 4, 13, 34, 53, 90, 133, 208, 211, 240
Listening, 8, 36, 48, 67, 135, 169, 182, 185, 212-213,
217-218, 250
to understand, 36, 48
Literature, 72, 268
Literature review, 268
Logical consequences, 238
Long-term goals, 70, 231
Loss, 43, 156, 163, 234
Love, 5, 39, 70, 190, 200, 203, 216
Low-income families, 10, 184
M
Magazines, 65
Management, 24, 42, 49, 60, 73, 81, 87, 96, 99,
127-128, 130-131, 137-138, 141, 143-144,
150, 153, 160, 162, 165-166, 176-177, 181,
191, 193, 199, 201-202, 204, 206-207, 211,
217-218, 227, 232, 244, 246, 249
Mandates, 154
Mann, Horace, 128
Marketing, 141
plan, 141
Maslow, Abraham, 6
Mastery, 31, 130
Matching, 215
Materials, 26, 67, 95, 132, 136, 138, 150, 156, 161,
168, 174, 176, 204-205, 208, 232, 235, 239,
252-253, 266
Mathematics, 182, 249-250, 265, 267
matter, 4, 10, 17, 28-29, 39-40, 47, 70-71, 94, 141,
143-144, 171, 213, 219-221, 234, 237, 243,
264
Maturation, 3, 7, 20
McGregor, Douglas, 178
Mean, 13, 23, 33, 35-36, 39, 47, 78-79, 82, 87-88, 91,
94, 97-98, 132, 144, 151, 154, 158, 160,
169, 175, 186, 194, 201, 211, 218, 241, 255
Meaning, 6, 9, 15, 27-28, 34, 46, 54, 61-62, 66, 71,
83-84, 87-88, 153-155, 160, 165, 167, 169,
176, 203, 212, 214, 217, 224, 227, 236, 250,
265
Meaningful learning, 73
Meanings, 46
Measures, 131, 230, 237
Media, 128, 146, 156, 205
Medications, 268
Meetings, 18, 59, 67, 72, 165, 186, 197, 205, 210,
216, 218, 238, 240
class, 18, 67, 72, 165, 186, 197, 205, 210, 216,
218, 238, 240
Memory, 249-250, 265, 267
Mental health, 253, 260, 266-268
Mental health professionals, 266
Mental retardation, 250
Mentors, 5, 179, 236
Mercury, 98
Messages, 35, 46, 48, 62-63, 163, 166, 190
Mexico, 141
Middle school, 5, 22, 32, 128, 146, 220, 243
Misbehavior, 2-4, 10-12, 15-17, 19-24, 27, 33-35, 38,
41-42, 45-46, 48, 52-53, 55-57, 60-65,
68-69, 75, 79-80, 82, 84-85, 89-93, 96, 99,
127, 131, 146, 152, 155, 162-164, 166, 171,
176-177, 180, 187, 193-194, 196-197, 220,
225-228, 231-232, 237, 240, 243-244, 252,
255, 261, 266
defiance, 11, 152, 240, 255
Mode, 171, 184
Modeling, 20, 235
Models, 5, 17, 57, 82, 89, 131, 179, 185, 204
Modification, 53, 58, 73-74
Momentum, 61, 75
Money, 9
Monitoring, 20, 28, 99, 260
Monitors, 156
motion, 179, 258, 262
Motivating students, 150, 160, 193, 218
Motivation, 6, 10-11, 20, 24, 31, 34, 73, 81, 92-93,
129, 159-160, 174, 177-178, 180-183, 186,
189-192, 194, 197, 200, 202-203, 207, 209,
218, 231-232
achievement, 177, 191
and development, 31
extrinsic, 197
states, 160
Motivation to learn, 11
Motor skills, 249-250, 267
Movement, 16, 58, 61, 172, 253
Movies, 219
showing, 219
Multiple intelligences, 224, 235, 249, 267
Music, 3-4, 13, 43, 89, 162, 185, 208
listening to, 185
Mutual respect, 67
N
National Council for Learning Disabilities, 250, 268
National Education Association, 30
National Education Association (NEA), 30
National Institute of Mental Health, 253, 260, 268
Nature, 14, 21, 34, 52, 63, 82, 150, 156, 177, 180,
182, 187, 191-194, 207, 213, 224, 248
needs, 5-6, 8, 12-14, 20, 22, 24, 26, 31, 35, 44, 54,
62-63, 69, 87-88, 97, 131, 186, 188, 190,
197, 200, 202-205, 215-219, 221, 223-224,
227-229, 231-232, 237-238, 240, 242, 244,
247, 252, 260
Negative numbers, 5
Negligence, 27-28, 46, 48
Net, 128, 135, 140-141, 197, 267-268
Networking, 94
New Mexico, 141
New Orleans, 43
New York, 24, 49, 61, 76, 172, 197, 221, 256, 267-268
News, 65, 137, 256
Newsletters, 236
No Child Left Behind, 141
No Child Left Behind Act, 141
Noise, 9, 48, 253, 256
Norm, 8, 52, 130
Norm-referenced tests, 130
Norms, 4-5, 10, 57
Notebooks, 139, 252
Notes, 37, 44-45, 90, 137, 144, 167, 169, 189, 218,
229, 237
sticky, 167
Number relationships, 3-4
Numbers, 2, 4-5, 8, 139, 171
Nutritional needs, 8, 24
O
Object, 32
Objective, 20, 22, 57, 214, 240
Objectives, 19-20, 46, 71, 144
Observation, 215, 267
Observations, 154, 258, 260
Oklahoma, 141
Opinions, 8, 66, 72, 75, 85, 216, 238
Oppositional defiant disorder (ODD), 253, 255
Oral reading, 220, 243
Org, 30, 32, 71, 174, 256, 267-268
Organization, 19, 132, 166, 176
Organizers, 167
Organizing, 77-99, 132, 155, 193, 207, 216, 253
Orientation, 7, 232
Outcomes, 19, 68, 71, 86, 160, 186
Outlines, 174
Overstimulation, 258
P
Paradigm, 228
Paragraphs, 68, 83
Parent conferences, 137, 163
Parents, 2, 5, 16-17, 28, 32, 34, 42, 48, 52, 57, 65-66,
81, 94, 168, 183, 197, 211-212, 215, 236,
254, 260, 264, 266
Participants, 236
Participation, 61, 75, 91, 194, 247
Partnerships, 235
Passive aggression, 229
Passivity, 152-153, 167, 256
Path, 154, 186
Patience, 168, 264
Patterns, 6, 24, 30-31, 196
Pavlov, Ivan, 53
Paying attention, 27, 37, 80, 127, 141, 151, 159, 175,
202, 204, 225, 247
Pedagogy, 31
Peer pressure, 15, 73, 162, 179, 181
Peer support, 234
Pencils, 28, 133, 138, 146, 252
Perception, 36, 48, 67-68, 76, 253
Perceptions, 67, 75-76, 137, 186
perfectionism, 197
Performance, 10, 72, 83, 87, 130, 136, 140, 165, 172,
191, 193, 236, 265
Period, 94, 98, 132, 138, 142, 144, 146, 153-154,
273

162-163, 172, 200, 220, 243
Perseverance, 232
Persistence, 264
Personal relationships, 9, 265
Personality, 12, 14, 24, 47
Personality traits, 47
Personnel, 17, 23, 27, 48, 87, 145, 260
Perspective taking, 72, 75
Persuasion, 19, 46, 48, 52, 259
Pets, 41, 43, 219
loss of, 43
Phi Delta Kappan, 221
Philosophy, 44, 230
Photographs, 208
Physical contact, 28
Physical disabilities, 250
Physical education, 133, 162, 182
Physical environment, 23, 256
Physical proximity, 37-38, 158-159, 168-169, 172, 233
Physical safety, 259
Piaget, Jean, 3
Picture, 20, 52, 84, 93, 137, 157, 167, 181, 200, 230
Pictures, 176-177, 182, 200, 204, 209, 212, 215-216,
252-253
PILOT, 138
Placement, 98-99, 163
Planning, 6-7, 23, 31, 42-43, 45-46, 71, 88, 132, 136,
166, 189, 246
learning activities, 6-7
weekly, 42
plants, 4, 98, 205
care of, 205
Play, 3-4, 6, 12, 20, 34, 76, 85-87, 96, 140, 154, 157,
160-161, 167, 231, 238, 248, 256
absence of, 76
pretend, 85
Plays, 138, 143
Point of view, 40, 48, 72, 75
Pointing, 37, 159, 261
Policies, 28, 154, 260
Policy, 28, 136, 267
Population, 9, 207, 212, 251, 257
Portfolio, 139
Portfolios, 66, 139
Positive behavior, 41, 55, 64, 185
Positive change, 179
Positive Practice, 94
Positive reinforcement, 97, 144, 255
secondary, 144
positive relationships, 29, 66
Posters, 143, 220, 243
Posture and movement, 172
Potential, 3, 8, 90, 129, 136, 163, 232, 236
Poverty, 8-10, 22-24
power, 5-6, 12-13, 59, 62-63, 68, 75-76, 83, 86, 143,
181-182, 192, 199-221, 228, 234, 239, 260
and authority, 83, 86
coercive, 217
destructive, 12, 206
to influence, 68, 76, 202
Power struggles, 210, 234
PowerPoint, 143, 185
PowerPoint presentations, 143
Practice, 6, 10, 19, 28, 30-31, 33, 42-43, 53, 58, 68,
72, 78, 83-84, 86-89, 91, 94-95, 127, 130,
132-133, 135, 156, 159, 162, 165, 167, 174,
176-177, 183, 191, 193, 203, 209, 215, 218,
227, 229, 232, 234-235, 238, 244
acts, 84, 159
Praise, 29, 58, 62-64, 70, 74-76, 92-93, 97, 165, 184,
255, 259
Preferred activity time (PAT), 151, 160, 169
Pregnancy, 252, 254, 257
alcohol consumption, 252, 257
Preoperational stage, 3
Preschool, 22, 144
Presence, 28, 30, 37, 89, 166, 179, 266
Presentation, 32, 134, 143
prevention, 46, 90, 257, 267
Pride, 40, 43, 64, 66, 131, 142, 169, 179, 183, 232
Print, 42
Printed material, 67
Problem solving, 31, 202
Procedures, 15, 19-20, 33, 54, 61, 88-89, 96, 99,
126-129, 131-146, 153, 156, 166-168,
171-172, 174-177, 185, 187, 189-191, 193,
196, 203, 205, 216, 220, 224, 229, 232,
238-239, 243, 249
Processing, 246, 249-250, 253, 257, 262, 266-267
task, 262
Proclivity, 5
Product, 66
Products, 207, 253
Professional development, 79, 223
Professionalism, 29, 32, 46-47, 86
Professionals, 31-32, 163, 209, 251, 266
Programs, 70-71, 79, 84, 135, 150, 235, 256
Progress reports, 42
Project, 95, 97, 143, 159, 161
Projects, 42, 69-70, 143, 162
Prompts, 64, 157-159, 167, 172, 180, 187, 192
Property, 11, 15, 206, 227
Protecting, 81
Psychiatric disorders, 246
Psychiatrists, 52
Psychological safety, 184
Psychologists, 5-6, 52, 251
Psychology, 61, 223
Psychosocial, 253
Publications, 32, 57, 82, 256
Publishing, 2-24, 26-49, 52-76, 78-99, 126-147,
150-172, 174-197, 199-221, 223, 244,
246-268
Punishment, 5, 16, 18-19, 32, 52, 57-58, 63, 75, 83,
85, 90, 94, 96, 130, 177-178, 188, 191-192,
197, 202, 209, 215
corporal, 19, 52
Puzzles, 4
Q
Qualifications, 30
Quality, 2-3, 6, 19-20, 24, 30, 36, 45, 75, 87, 89, 95,
155, 197, 199-219, 221, 261-262
Quantities, 93
Quantity, 157
Questioning, 164, 171, 184
Questions, 13-14, 16, 21-22, 33-36, 38-39, 41, 44,
46-48, 62, 71, 76, 79, 86, 89, 97-98, 127,
130, 132, 135, 143-144, 150, 156, 163-165,
169, 174-175, 179, 182, 184-186, 188-194,
197, 201, 219-220, 224, 231, 241, 243, 247,
252-253, 268
easy, 143, 164, 186
encouraging, 36, 48, 192
formulating, 44
from students, 130, 184, 194
leads, 179, 190-191
on tests, 71
poor, 13, 16, 35, 47, 71, 132, 143-144, 253
probing, 185
true/false, 22, 46, 143, 193
what if, 231
R
Radio, 70-71, 256
Raising hands, 4
Range, 224
Rash, 186
Reaching, 61, 236
Reading, 7-8, 12, 38, 66, 70-71, 98, 133, 146, 156,
161, 165, 172, 182-183, 197, 220, 243,
250-251, 265
acceptable, 182, 197
aloud, 250
difficulties, 250-251, 265
to students, 98, 146, 165, 172, 182, 197
wide, 172
workshop, 38
Reading disabilities, 251
Reality therapy, 59-60, 73, 199, 211
Reasoning, 24, 266
Reassurance, 168
Receiving, 41, 63, 65
Recess, 10, 135, 142, 179, 248, 257, 261
Recognition, 8, 39, 55, 64, 75, 92-93, 141, 184, 215,
251, 267
Recommendations, 32, 267
Recording, 139, 152, 185
Redirection, 46
Redl, Fritz, 53, 56, 73
Reference, 36, 46-48, 98, 196, 207, 227, 240
Reference books, 207
Referral, 188-189, 197
Referrals, 43, 189
Reflecting, 60, 191
Regulations, 8
Reinforcement, 53, 57-58, 73-76, 97, 144, 162, 194,
255
Reinforcers, 58
Rejection, 23
RELATE, 9, 18, 27, 29, 34, 37, 43, 45, 54, 137, 153,
182, 184, 193, 201, 212, 224, 237
Relationship, 4-5, 65, 195, 211, 213, 219, 225
Relationships, 3-5, 9, 17, 20, 29, 36, 59, 66-67, 69,
75-76, 91, 136, 138, 176, 179, 182, 184,
188, 200, 203, 209, 211-213, 216, 218, 265
capacity for, 5
relaxation, 235
Remembering, 3, 62, 250, 257
Reminders, 160, 164, 166-167, 192, 238
Replacement behavior, 232
Reporting, 216
Reports, 42, 140-141, 179, 255, 260, 268
Representation, 167
Representations, 11
Research, 60, 73, 146, 152, 163, 166, 223, 254, 267
neurological, 254, 267
Resistance, 34-35, 43, 62, 179
Resolution, 68-69, 75, 240
Resources, 32, 49, 135, 171, 201, 207-208, 214, 251,
268
Respect, 2, 4-5, 8-10, 29-30, 54, 65, 67, 69-70, 72, 74,
79, 82-83, 86, 95, 99, 128-129, 134-135,
211, 227, 234
Responding, 34-35, 159, 167, 230, 232, 250, 253
Response, 40, 62, 172, 189-191, 193-194, 197, 261
Responses, 163, 182, 185, 194, 235, 237-238, 251,
255, 258-259
Retention, 70, 130
Revision, 40
Rewards, 46, 58, 70, 76, 92-93, 96, 136-137, 170,
174, 177-178, 182, 192, 197, 215
Rhythmic activities, 3
Rituals, 257
Role-playing, 16, 209, 236
Roles, 6, 27, 32, 34, 54, 57, 76, 96, 126-128, 141,
144, 185, 196, 235
Room arrangement, 136, 165
Routines, 6, 66, 84, 89, 126, 129, 132, 137, 144, 152,
154, 156, 165-166, 168, 172, 229, 232, 239
Rubric, 42-46, 212
Rubrics, 42, 46
Rule making, 210
Rules, 3-5, 9-10, 12-13, 16, 22, 24, 27, 34, 45-46, 52,
59, 63-65, 75, 78-83, 85-86, 88-92, 95-97,
130-132, 135-137, 139, 142, 144, 152,
154-156, 158, 162, 164-165, 168, 172,
175-177, 179, 185, 190, 193-194, 197, 201,
209-211, 213, 217-218, 225-230, 232, 236,
238-241, 244, 255, 257, 262, 267
Rush, 171
S
Safety, 6-7, 28, 46, 184, 205, 223, 228, 259, 262-263
plans, 7
precautions, 28
Samples, 182, 197
SAT, 153, 163, 263
Satiation, 61, 75
Satisfaction, 29, 33, 48, 71, 174, 178-179, 182, 186,
195, 206, 209
Scale, 150
Scapegoat, 57, 76
Schedules, 136-137
School, 3, 5-6, 8-11, 13-15, 17, 19-20, 22-24, 27-30,
32-34, 36, 39-43, 46-49, 53, 55, 57, 59-61,
63, 66, 68-70, 72-74, 78, 81-84, 87, 89-90,
92-93, 95-99, 126-131, 133-142, 144-146,
150, 155, 162-163, 171, 174-175, 179-180,
182-184, 186, 190, 196, 199-201, 203-205,
209, 211-215, 217, 220-221, 227-228, 236,
238-239, 243, 248, 250-252, 254-256, 260,
263-264, 267
School activities, 8, 182
School counselor, 28, 190
School day, 162, 260
School district, 27
School districts, 128
School policies, 28
School professionals, 32
School psychologist, 263
School success, 9, 89
School-age children, 255
Schooling, 52, 71, 152, 200, 204, 211
Schools, 6-7, 9, 17, 23, 26, 36, 52, 55-56, 58-59,
63-64, 71-73, 76, 80, 126, 128, 144, 152,
274

156, 163, 174, 179, 199-203, 205, 211-212,
215-217, 221, 250, 253, 265
in the United States, 26
Science, 4, 57, 128
Scores, 70-71
Script, 127, 130, 141-142, 144
Search, 264
Seating, 16, 69-70, 130, 137, 154-155, 164, 166-168,
172
assigned, 167-168
Seattle, 268
Secondary school, 22, 204
Secondary students, 162
Section, 23, 97, 136-137, 189, 242, 248
Security, 6, 12, 28, 46, 74, 91, 132, 137, 200
Self, 15, 17, 19-20, 22-23, 31, 40, 46-47, 52, 54, 57,
62-63, 67-69, 73-75, 78-79, 81-82, 84,
87-88, 93, 96-97, 99, 129, 140, 142-144,
146, 150, 159, 162, 168-169, 176, 178-182,
187-194, 197, 199, 203, 206-207, 214,
217-218, 221, 227-228, 230-234, 240-241,
243-244, 246-247, 251, 253-254, 256, 258,
265-266
Self-concept, 96, 251
Self-contained classes, 162
Self-control, 15, 17, 20, 57, 63, 67-69, 78, 84, 99, 146,
159, 176, 179, 181, 190, 193, 199, 228,
230-232, 234, 241, 243, 246-247, 253, 265
Self-direction, 179, 230-231, 234, 265
Self-discipline, 19, 62-63, 75, 79, 87-88, 150, 192
self-esteem, 79, 81, 93, 97, 129
self-evaluation, 140, 182, 187, 192, 206, 221
self-improvement, 46
Self-management, 181, 227, 244
Self-motivation, 231-232
Self-reflection, 188, 190
Selling, 55, 128
Sense of self, 40
senses, 37, 186, 253, 267
Sensitivity, 26
Sensory integration dysfunction, 253-254, 256,
266-267
Sentences, 10, 130, 137
Separation, 89, 181
Sequence, 231
Setting, 24, 30, 57, 86, 131, 155, 158, 166, 172, 194,
237
Sex, 5, 11
Shame, 93
Shared responsibility, 260
Sharing, 156, 180, 186, 195, 220, 243
Siblings, 41
Signals, 159, 233
Significance, 63, 67, 75-76
Signs, 28, 88, 263
of abuse, 28
Silent reading, 156
Singing, 66, 70
Size, 98, 145, 165, 170, 196, 219, 242
Skills, 3, 9, 26, 31, 34, 46, 58, 60-61, 67-68, 71, 75,
79, 81, 86-87, 89, 93, 140, 143, 150, 152,
165-166, 185, 192, 206, 214, 221, 223,
226-227, 230, 232-234, 238, 246, 249-250,
255, 257, 267
attending, 61, 75
fine motor, 250
practicing, 152, 227, 230
speaking, 140, 185, 255
Slang, 32
Sleep, 260
Slides, 143
Small groups, 14, 23, 74, 146, 165, 185, 209
SMART, 196
smiles, 38, 58, 99, 146, 159
Smoothness, 61, 76
Social interaction, 31
Social interest, 63, 76
Social networking, 94
Social responsibility, 181, 189
Social skills, 67, 81, 89, 93, 140, 223, 257
Socialization, 255
Solutions, 67, 69, 71, 75, 142, 154, 189, 191, 210,
224, 227, 233, 235, 237, 240-242, 244
Songs, 169
Sound, 33, 94, 98, 145, 162, 170, 178, 195, 219, 229,
242, 251, 262, 267
Sounding out, 250
Sounds, 161, 220, 243, 248, 250, 259
speech, 259
Space, 45, 132, 140, 259
Speaking, 2, 13, 17-18, 33, 35, 45, 84-85, 90, 135,
140, 162, 174, 179, 185, 208, 254-255
Special education, 249, 264
Special education teachers, 249, 264
Speech, 9, 30, 251, 259
speed, 5
Spelling, 182, 250-251, 267
Sports, 89
Staff, 26, 128, 166, 174, 211-212, 239, 251, 254, 262
Staff development, 128, 174
Stages, 22, 89, 130, 250
Standard English, 10
Standardized test scores, 70
Standards, 10, 13, 24, 30-32, 47-48, 57, 76, 83, 85,
89-91, 94, 140, 153, 155, 162, 165, 172,
177, 192, 209
States, 8, 22, 26, 56, 63, 160, 212, 223-224, 226, 228,
238, 257, 267
Sticky notes, 167
Stimulus, 57
Stop, 15, 34, 36, 41, 45, 61, 65, 83, 85, 98, 129, 145,
163, 169-170, 177, 187, 191, 195, 216, 219,
228, 230, 233, 242, 248, 251, 256, 258, 260,
264, 266
Stories, 3-4, 16, 185
interest in, 4, 16
Strategies, 19, 24, 31, 54, 68, 83, 199, 202, 217-218,
233-235, 249, 263-264
Stress, 18, 55, 137, 174-176, 178, 182, 186, 188-190,
193-194, 197, 238, 252
maternal, 252
Strokes, 258
Structure, 10, 15, 23, 39, 81-83, 85, 88, 95, 126, 129,
154, 165, 200, 226-228, 230, 233-234, 237,
239-241, 252, 261, 265-266
Student achievement, 128, 130, 144, 212, 216
Student behavior, 5-6, 8, 22, 34, 47-48, 53, 56-57,
60-61, 64, 73, 130, 132, 163, 167, 200, 225,
267
Student contract, 136
Student engagement, 213
Student input, 209, 216, 221, 238
Student involvement, 63, 157, 166, 227
Student motivation, 200, 209
Student performance, 130
Student progress, 66, 136
Student success, 8, 261
Student teachers, 165
Students, 2-24, 26-30, 32-48, 52-76, 78-99, 126-133,
136-146, 149-172, 174-197, 199-221,
223-244, 245-268
antisocial, 93
as people, 14, 234
calling on, 61
differences between, 194
embarrassing, 14
exceptional, 2, 246
in regular classrooms, 266
reluctant, 17, 217, 236
Students at risk, 184, 186
Studies, 38, 46, 150, 185, 267
D, 46, 267
G, 267
Style, 9, 48, 60-61, 71, 143, 169, 201, 205
Substance abuse, 267
Substitute teachers, 88-89
Success for All, 59
Successive approximation, 58
Suggestions, 9, 12-19, 23, 29, 33, 35, 38-39, 41, 55,
59-60, 62, 66, 68, 73, 90-91, 94-95, 98-99,
127-128, 139-146, 152, 154, 159, 162,
166-167, 169-171, 174, 176, 190, 194-196,
213, 215-216, 219-220, 228, 233, 236, 238,
242-243, 249, 252-253, 255-256, 258-261
Supervision, 27-28, 48, 76, 84, 89, 133, 197, 268
Support, 3, 5, 19-21, 26, 30-31, 39, 41, 45-46, 57-58,
67, 69, 75, 78, 88, 98, 140-142, 145-146,
170, 186, 211-212, 217-219, 234-236, 247,
249-250, 252-253, 259
Supporting, 34, 36, 48, 88, 212, 217-218, 259
Susceptible, 163, 182
Suspension, 52, 163
Swanson, 169
Switch, 235
Sympathy, 204
Synergy, 55
System, 43-44, 46, 58, 64, 73-74, 78-79, 88, 97, 144,
166, 169-170, 172, 181-183, 187, 189-194,
197, 218, 239, 241
Systems, 9, 24, 61, 80-81, 156, 160, 163-166, 169,
253
human, 24
stuck, 81, 163
T
Tables, 154
Tabs, 252
Tactics, 14, 19, 22, 32-33, 38, 44-46, 48, 53-54, 56,
58, 63, 73, 80, 85, 127, 150-152, 154-155,
164-166, 175, 182, 184-186, 202, 221,
224-225, 247-248, 265
Talking, 11-13, 22, 37-38, 45, 65, 85, 90, 98, 145,
152-153, 159, 163, 170, 177, 180, 191, 195,
213, 219-220, 229, 234, 242-243, 255, 257
Tantrums, 254-255, 258, 265
Tasks, 42, 66, 74, 87, 221, 250, 253, 257
Teacher, 3-5, 7-8, 10-11, 13-14, 17, 19-20, 23-24,
27-28, 30-32, 34-40, 42, 46-49, 52-66,
69-71, 74-76, 79-81, 84, 86-90, 94-99, 126,
128-129, 132-142, 145-146, 153, 156-157,
161-166, 168-172, 174, 176-177, 180-184,
187-196, 200, 202, 205-207, 209-210,
212-216, 218-221, 223-224, 226-234,
236-237, 239-240, 242-244, 248, 251, 254,
256-257, 260-261, 263-267
Teacher competencies, 30
Teacher education, 263
Teacher observation, 267
Teachers, 2-9, 11, 14-15, 17-20, 22-24, 26-27, 29,
32-39, 43, 46-49, 52-53, 55-76, 78-96, 99,
126, 128-131, 135-137, 140-144, 150-154,
156-165, 167-169, 172, 174-176, 178-182,
184-190, 193-194, 197, 199-201, 203-207,
209, 211-212, 215-218, 221, 223-236,
239-241, 244, 246, 248-249, 253, 258, 260,
264-266, 268
caring, 11, 36, 48, 61, 70, 156, 205, 212, 233
duties of, 29
educators, 6, 17-18, 22, 32, 52-53, 59, 65, 67, 93,
150, 156, 161, 187, 199, 209, 211, 260
head, 43, 99, 204, 223, 258
ill-prepared, 86
influence on, 38, 46, 48, 61
leadership roles, 32
substitute, 88-89, 135-136
Teaching, 2, 6, 8, 11, 17, 19-21, 24, 27, 29-30, 32-34,
37-40, 42, 44-48, 52, 54, 56-58, 60-64, 67,
70, 73-74, 78, 81-83, 86, 91-92, 96-97, 99,
126, 128-129, 131-133, 138, 141-144,
150-158, 160, 163, 165-170, 172, 174-178,
181, 184-187, 189, 191-193, 196, 199-205,
207, 209, 211-212, 214-215, 217-218, 221,
224, 228, 234-235, 237, 239, 246, 249, 263,
265
Teaching:, 63
Teaching practices, 154, 193
Teaching skills, 61
Teaching style, 60-61, 201, 205
Teams, 74, 205
Teasing, 11, 15, 89, 131, 237
Techniques, 17, 57, 73, 75, 81, 98, 150, 166, 184-185,
187, 214, 263-264
Technology, 135
Television, 9, 70-71, 256
temperature, 16
Terminology, 226
Test, 22-23, 46-47, 70-74, 96-97, 143-144, 168-169,
171, 193-194, 214, 217-218, 240-241,
265-266
Test scores, 70
Testimonials, 140
testing, 16, 39, 70, 73, 130, 143-144, 212, 250
field, 39
Tests, 7, 71, 92, 130, 144, 205, 207, 212, 214
Tests and testing, 144
Text, 2, 27, 83, 98
Textbooks, 133, 207, 214
The Parent, 266
theories, 136, 178, 197
Theory, 41, 44, 53-54, 58, 73-74, 81, 175, 178-179,
192-194, 197, 200-201, 204, 209, 211,
216-218, 221, 249
Theory of multiple intelligences, 249
Theory X, 175, 178, 192-194, 197
Theory Y, 175, 178-179, 192-194, 197
Therapy, 59-60, 73, 199, 211, 254
Think, 4-6, 8, 13-16, 18, 23-24, 27, 30, 32, 37-40, 43,
275

47, 56, 60, 66, 69, 71-72, 83-88, 90-91, 93,
97, 126, 131-132, 146, 155, 162-165, 168,
171, 179-182, 184, 186, 188, 190-191, 206,
208-210, 213, 215, 219, 223, 227-228,
230-231, 233-234, 238, 260, 264
Thinking, 4-5, 10, 22, 31, 41, 54, 70-71, 89, 143, 163,
169, 178-180, 182, 184, 187, 189, 191, 204,
216, 231-232, 236, 261
Thomas, 62, 251
Threats, 43, 178, 221, 259, 262
Threshold, 89
Time, 2, 4-7, 9, 11-12, 16, 19, 22, 29-30, 32, 34-38,
40-43, 48, 52, 54-55, 58-62, 64-66, 70-71,
75, 78-81, 83-91, 94-97, 99, 126-128,
130-133, 135-138, 144, 151-169, 172, 175,
177, 179, 183-188, 190-191, 196, 199-200,
202-203, 205, 207-211, 213-216, 220-221,
225-226, 228-231, 233-236, 239-240,
242-243, 247-253, 255-257, 259-261, 263
dead time, 130
engaged, 42, 84, 151-169, 172, 248
on task, 29, 38, 61, 81, 154, 158-159, 162, 165,
183
to think, 5-6, 38, 40, 66, 71, 83-84, 86, 179, 186,
190, 228, 230, 234
Title, 10, 64, 221
Token, 178
Tone, 34, 59, 61, 68, 86, 88, 94, 138, 142, 145, 158,
177, 182, 187, 219, 237, 259-262
Tone of voice, 34, 86, 88, 94, 158, 187, 219, 259-262
Tools, 31, 56, 135, 150, 155, 157-158, 166, 207
for teaching, 150, 155, 157-158, 166
Tools for Teaching, 150, 155, 157-158, 166
Topics, 7, 16-17, 38, 44-45, 55, 70-71, 161-162, 185,
196, 201, 203, 205, 207-208, 215, 221, 250
Total behavior, 204, 216
touch, 30
Touching, 11, 28
Toys, 66, 133
Training, 38, 78-79, 83-86, 89, 99, 154, 160, 162, 166,
168, 172, 221, 230, 264
Traits, 7, 20, 38, 47, 52, 159
Transformation, 52
Transitions, 152, 154, 252, 258
Transparencies, 185
Treatment, 6, 29, 91, 140, 268
support groups, 140
Truth, 4, 40, 95
Turns, 4, 9, 40, 67, 87, 181, 210, 220, 223, 243
Tutorials, 24, 164
Tutors, 236
U
Underachievement, 90
Understanding, 3-5, 9, 24, 26, 31, 53, 70-71, 90, 97,
142, 153, 163, 165, 180-181, 183, 187, 191,
193, 205, 214-215, 217, 240, 249, 264, 267
frames of, 240
United States, 8, 22, 26, 63, 257, 267
Units, 72
Unmet needs, 12
Upload, 268
V
Validity, 129
Values, 5, 7-9, 23-24, 178, 181, 197, 204
Vegetables, 160, 172
verbal communication, 34
Verbal learning, 8
Verbal skills, 46
Verse, 185
Victim, 188, 223
Video, 67, 79, 128, 150, 161, 165
Videos, 185, 208
violence, 81
Viral infections, 252
Visual impairment, 250
Visualizing, 181, 215
Vocabulary, 139, 161, 167, 181, 260
Voice, 8, 15, 34, 86, 88, 94, 134, 137, 158, 187, 210,
219, 256, 259-262, 266
voice tone, 187
Volume, 143, 259, 263
W
Wait time, 249
Walkways, 154
Walls, 208
wants, 6, 14, 22, 41, 68, 83, 87, 98, 145, 155, 167,
169-170, 190, 195, 199, 204, 219, 242
Washington, 268
Wattenberg, 53, 56-57, 72-76, 172
Wealth, 8, 207
Weaning, 5
Websites, 214, 236
Weight, 211
Well-being, 2, 64, 76
Whole, 4, 8, 13, 19, 72, 164, 166, 183, 186, 237, 265
Winfrey, Oprah, 47
Wisdom, 5, 68, 75, 78, 142
Withdrawal, 63, 254
Withitness, 61, 76
Women, 223, 265, 267
Word recognition, 251, 267
Words, 82, 86, 88, 139, 142-143, 158, 161, 169, 176,
189, 209, 249-250, 255, 257, 260, 262-263
Work, 2-3, 5-7, 9-14, 16-20, 27, 29, 33, 36-40, 43, 45,
48, 52, 54-56, 59, 61, 63-65, 67-72, 75, 79,
81, 83-99, 127, 129-130, 132-133, 135,
137-140, 142-146, 151, 153-157, 159-172,
174, 178-179, 183-185, 195, 199-216,
218-221, 224-225, 227, 229, 231-244,
247-250, 252-253, 256, 258, 264-265
Work habits, 89, 132, 138, 214
Workplace, 207
Worksheets, 71, 252
Writing, 7, 12, 59, 128, 139, 143, 156, 172, 174, 181,
188, 191, 209, 220, 236, 243, 248, 250
argumentative, 248
form of, 188
in journals, 156, 172
right, 7, 181, 188, 236, 250
to solve, 12
Y
Young children, 138
276

