Build Me A Cash Blog! 
 
 
 
 
 
- 1 - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disclaimer/Legal Notices 
 
 
The Publisher has strived to be as accurate and complete as possible in the 
creation of this report, notwithstanding the fact that he does not warrant or 
represent at any time that the contents within are accurate due to the rapidly 
changing nature of the Internet. 
 
The Publisher will not be responsible for any losses or damages of any kind 
incurred by the reader whether directly or indirectly arising from the use of the 
information found in this report. 
 
This report is not intended for use as a source of legal, business, accounting or 
financial advice. All readers are advised to seek services of competent 
professionals in legal, business, accounting, and finance field. 
 
No guarantees of income are made. Reader assumes responsibility for use of 
information contained herein. The author reserves the right to make changes 
without notice. The Publisher assumes no responsibility or liability whatsoever on 
the behalf of the reader of this report. 
 
 
 
“Build Me A Cash Blog!” 
Your Definitive Guide To Marketing Your Cash Blog For Profits 
 
 
By Davion Wong 
 
www.BuildMeACashBlog.com 
 
Copyright © All Rights Reserved Worldwide 
 

Build Me A Cash Blog! 
 
 
 
 
 
- 2 - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Build Me A Cash Blog is a world-wide protected publication of   
© Davion Wong and www.GenesisXCreations.com. 
 
Important Information 
 
This report is for your personal use only. You do NOT have the right to give 
away, sell or share any information in this report in any manner. Thank you. 
 
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 
 
No part of this course may be reproduced or transmitted in any form 
whatsoever, electronic, or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or 
by any informational storage or retrieval system without expressed written, 
dated and signed permission from the author. 
 
DISCLAIMER AND/OR LEGAL NOTICES 
 
The Publisher has strived to be as accurate and complete as possible in the 
creation of this report, notwithstanding the fact that he does not warrant or 
represent at any time that the contents within are accurate due to the rapidly 
changing nature of the Internet. 
 
The Publisher will not be responsible for any losses or damages of any kind 
incurred by the reader whether directly or indirectly arising from the use of the 
information found in this report. 
 
This report is not intended for use as a source of legal, business, accounting 
or financial advice. All readers are advised to seek services of competent 
professionals in legal, business, accounting, and finance field. 
 
No guarantees of income are made. Reader assumes responsibility for use of 
information contained herein. The author reserves the right to make changes 
without notice. The Publisher assumes no responsibility or liability whatsoever 
on the behalf of the reader of this report. 
 

Build Me A Cash Blog! 
 
 
 
 
 
- 3 - 
 
About Davion Wong 
 
 
Davion Wong has been marketing online since 2006.  
Having graduated as a student from the internet school of 
hard knocks, he has discovered what works and what 
does not in the online marketing world. Prior to his venture 
in internet marketing, he was a successful professional 
manager in the transportation industry. 
 
Having left the corporate world at the age of 31, he now 
makes it one of his life goals to mentor others for success 
online.  His motto is to help professionals like himself and 
just about anyone who wants to quit the rat race and run their own business 
online. 
 
As the owner of a huge network of niche sites and blogs, Davion has established 
himself as a successful niche blogger. He blogs regularly as a guest blogger on 
invitation by Reed Floren, a semi-retired and world-renowned internet marketing 
Guru and JV extraordinaire, at http://www.ReedFloren.com. 
 
He is also a well-known online author having written and published well over 
1000 articles at EzineArticles, a global online article directory.  Currently ranked 
Top 50 out of 122,287 expert authors worldwide, his writings are distributed 
globally and read by more than 1,200,000 readers. 
 
You can learn more about how Davion makes money and how you can do the 
same through his personal online marketing blog, http://www.DavionWong.com. 
 
Feel free to also visit other websites he own: 
 
1. http://www.GenesisXCreations.com 
2. http://www.Secrets-of-AffiliateMarketing.com 
3. http://www.ArticleCashRobots.com 
4. http://www.UltimateTagRanker.com 
 
 
To Your Online Success, 
 
 
 
 

Build Me A Cash Blog! 
 
 
 
 
 
- 4 - 
 
Table of Contents 
 
1.  Introduction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
2. Article Marketing & EzineArticles 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
3. Ranking And Backlinking Strategies 
 
 
 
 
9 
    3.1 Social Bookmarking  
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
    3.2 RSS Feed Submission 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
    3.3 Blog Directory Submissions 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
    3.4 Paid Links 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
 
4. Comment Posting 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
 
5. Forum Marketing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
6. Web 2.0 Marketing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16 
 
7. More Useful Tips 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18 
 
8. Recommended Resources 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 
 
9. Final Words 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Build Me A Cash Blog! 
 
 
 
 
 
- 5 - 
 
1. Introduction 
 
 
First of all, thank you for making the decision to purchase a blog package from 
us. We assure you that it is indeed a wise decision you have made in your 
internet marketing or money making venture online. 
 
While there are many good products in the market that teach you how to make 
money online, most hardly hold your hand and walk you through the entire 
process. Many folks are still new in the marketing game, and I am not going to 
assume that you know everything. In fact, to make money online, you really do 
not need to know it all. Applying simple steps consistently has often helped me to 
make more money. 
 
The blog packages we have provided for you are positioned to take advantage of 
all traffic sent to your blogs and that is to convert your visitor into a buyer. While 
there are no magical conversion pills in the market, we have learnt from our 
trials, both failures and successes that by applying certain principles on our 
blogs, we are able to improve the conversion rates significantly in general. 
However, I need to let you know that some products and niches will always 
convert better than others. It is part and parcel of life. 
 
In marketing, there are always 2 parts. One part is to present your product to 
your visitor and pre-sell him. The other part is to bring your visitor to your 
product. You now own a cash blog that does the first part, so half the battle is 
won! 
 
But what I can show you here is the second part – how to market your cash blog 
successfully. In this guide, you will learn the methods I use personally to drive 
massive amounts of traffic to my blogs. Are you ready to get started? 

Build Me A Cash Blog! 
 
 
 
 
 
- 6 - 
 
2. Article Marketing & EzineArticles 
 
 
Article marketing is a powerful workhorse that has worked for as long as the 
internet marketing world has existed. You may already know it. But if you are not 
using it to promote your websites, drive traffic, make sales and build lists, then 
you are missing out BIG TIME on lost opportunities! 
 
There are many marketing and traffic driving techniques, from safelist promotion, 
classified advertising, pay-per-click, banner advertising, Ezine advertising, forum 
marketing and so on. 
 
Some works great, others are worthless such as safelist promotion. Others like 
PPC cost just too much and is not a worthwhile option for newbie marketers who 
are starting out. 
 
Article marketing has a few advantages over many different effective traffic 
driving techniques, but most notably, traffic from articles can last a long time. I 
have articles written 2 years ago that are still giving me consistent traffic today! 
These are ranked in Google, Yahoo and MSN which gives me extremely targeted 
traffic! 
 
EzineArticles.com is a Page Rank (PR) 6 article directory with thousands of 
articles ranking well in Google for thousands and thousands of keywords. 
It is my top favorite article directory! I now have more than 1200 articles there 
and pulled in more than 1.2 million visitors over the past 2 years. 
 
I have written a detailed report called Article Cash Robots which I have 
included as a bonus report for you. Apply the techniques inside and it will 
help you to drive lots of targeted traffic to your cash blog! 

Build Me A Cash Blog! 
 
 
 
 
 
- 7 - 
 
In article marketing, keyword research plays a pivotal role. If you try to rank 
for a highly competitive keyword, you will most likely be slaughtered unless your 
content is really that good and you have a good number of backlinks to it.  
 
My advice is to hunt for longtail keywords (4 or 5 words) which do not have 
much competition. Apply this and it will help your articles rank well in Google. 
When you choose keywords to write about, look out also for synonyms. 
 
Be focused and committed to an article marketing plan. Don’t write 1 or 2 
articles and wait for sales. Some will even give up after 2 articles. It just doesn’t 
happen that way! Set a goal to complete 20 or 30 articles, each targeting a 
different longtail keyword. These articles will continue to send you free traffic 
overtime unlike paid traffic. Either write it yourself or hire a good writer to do so. 
You will learn about this in my bonus report. 
 
When you make your first sale with your cash blog, the feeling will be great! Trust 
me, I have been through that. So did some of my marketing students. 
 
Another tip I am sharing here is to distribute your articles to as many article 
directories as you can. If you can afford, use software and service like: 
 
Unique Article Wizard (UAW) – http://UniqueArticleWizard.Guru-Site.com 
 
Article Post Robot (ARP) – http://ArticlePostRobot.Guru-Site.com 
 
These 2 are my favorites. I have used countless of them like JetSubmitter, Article 
Marketer, etc. None of them can match these 2. 
 
By spreading your articles, you are basically pushing your content out to 
the search engines for more traffic and backlinks to rank your cash blog! 

Build Me A Cash Blog! 
 
 
 
 
 
- 8 - 
 
If you cannot afford to invest in tools right now, no problem. Submit your articles 
to EzineArticles as well as other top article directories that I often use. 
 
ArticlesBase.com 
GoArticles.com 
ArticleAlley.com 
IdeaMarketers.com 
 
These are all high PR article directories that can offer more traffic and quality 
backlinks to your articles than other article directories. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Build Me A Cash Blog! 
 
 
 
 
 
- 9 - 
 
3. Ranking And Backlinking Strategies 
 
This chapter is important so do read it thoroughly. You may have heard of how 
fickle-minded Google can be in changing its ranking algorithm. Well, that is true. 
But if you know a few basic principles which I am going to share with you here, 
you are a big leap ahead of many of other affiliates who do not know. 
 
Many affiliates, PPC believers have given up trying to rank their websites 
because they know that it is not a piece of cake. Well, PPC is also not a piece of 
cake and Google is known for their expensive slaps! 
 
In the world of SEO, while Google may change its algorithm, the fundamental of 
ranking a webpage remains constant – on-page and off-page optimization. 
Offer quality and relevant content based on a keyword and you do well in on-
page optimization. Off-page optimization depends on one sole factor – backlinks! 
 
SEO requires time to take effect and sometimes can take as long as weeks to 
months before you are able to rank your cash blogs. If your blog is based on a 
longtail with very low competition, it may not take long at all. You may realize that 
you rank in MSN much faster. 
 
Most people do not have the patience to build links and quickly give up. What 
they are doing here is really giving up an opportunity to rank in a few months 
down the road and enjoying the constant streams of targeted traffic.  
 
I have some blogs that rank very well in Google for high-traffic keywords as a 
result of months of backlinking. Yes, months and not days or weeks. But it is all 
worth it when the traffic converts into sales for me. So if you are game for it, you 
will learn some really effective techniques here. 

Build Me A Cash Blog! 
 
 
 
 
 
- 10 - 
 
3.1 Social Bookmarking 
  
Social bookmarking is very effective in building powerful high PR links to your 
cash blog. In your package, we have provided bookmarking of your cash blog to 
30 high PR social bookmarking sites. That is an instant 30 backlinks. 
 
You should consider social bookmarking at many more sites. After all, each 
bookmark is worth a link to your blog. And the more backlinks you gain, the 
better the chances of ranking for your target keyword. 
 
I normally social bookmark my blogs at 50 to 200 social bookmarking sites. 
There are software around to automate the process but most are rather buggy 
and I recommend you hiring someone to do it or doing it manually yourself. 
 
DigitalPoint Forum is a great place to look for folks to social bookmark for you. 
Look in the “Buy, Sell or Trade” section for people who are offering the service. 
 
However, do not be too quick in social bookmarking your cash blog. Having too 
many backlinks within a short span of time will get you in the bad books of 
Google. Rather, do so gradually, 20 to 30 per day. 
 
I wrote 2 articles on my blog to discuss the topic of social bookmarking. You will 
also find a list of social bookmarking sites and tools I use. Check out the posts. 
 
http://www.davionwong.com/benefits-of-social-bookmarking-more-traffic-sales-
subscribers 
 
http://www.davionwong.com/social-bookmarking-sites-biggest-list-of-200-sites-
you-can-social-bookmark-at 
 

Build Me A Cash Blog! 
 
 
 
 
 
- 11 - 
 
3.2 RSS Feed Submission 
 
Syndicating your RSS feed at feed directories can bring you some really targeted 
traffic. People may subscribe to your feed or even visit your cash blog when they 
find you in the feed directories. Another advantage of submitting to RSS feeds is 
of course, to acquire quality backlinks to your blog to help you in your ranking. 
 
In the blog package you purchased, we have already included submission of 
your cash blog to at least 30 RSS feed directories. Nevertheless, I would always 
advise folks to submit their blog feed to as many directories as they can find. 
 
Your blogger RSS feed looks like this http://yourblog.blogspot.com/rss.xml. 
 
Here are some useful resources for you to get started: 
 
http://www.masternewmedia.org/rss/top55/ 
 
http://www.dotsauce.com/2007/06/06/55-active-rss-directories-to-help-promote-
your-feeds/ 
 
3.3 Blog Directory Submissions 
 
Submitting your cash blog to blog directories can give you more backlinks. Some 
are high PR blog directories and naturally the PageRank juice your cash blog will 
receive will be higher. 
 
The following is a huge list of blog directories as well as RSS feed directories. 
 
http://www.toprankblog.com/rss-blog-directories/ 
 

Build Me A Cash Blog! 
 
 
 
 
 
- 12 - 
 
3.4 Paid Links 
 
Buying link placement on established websites is a very quick way to get 
targeted traffic. Imagine your blog is in the fat loss niche, there are millions of 
potential websites out there on this niche where you can place your link on, or 
rather buy a link placement. 
 
Basically, for a fee, the webmaster will add your link, ie link to your cash blog on 
his or her website. There are a few ways you can go about doing this. 
 
1. Buy links through paid services such as TextLinkBrokers and LinkAdage 
 
Personally, I do not buy links through these services though I have heard good 
testimonials about such services. I am sharing this as an option for you. 
 
2.  Buy links via direct contact with webmasters 
 
I normally contact webmasters in the same niche as my blog to negotiate for a 
paid link. Here is how you can do it, run Google searchs on your targeted 
keywords and niche, and copy the urls of the top 10 websites for each search. 
Next, you will contact each of the webmaster. Normally, you can negotiate a 3 
month, 6 month or 1 year term for link placement. 
 
Another way to do it its to make use of Alexa to find relevant websites with the 
most traffic. Contact the webmasters to buy a link placement. 
 
 
 
 

Build Me A Cash Blog! 
 
 
 
 
 
- 13 - 
 
3. Buy links via forums 
 
I frequently buy link placements at forums like DigitalPoint Forum. Look in the 
“Link Sales” corner under the “Buy, Sell or Trade” section, you can often find 
places where you can place a link for as little as $10/year. 
 
Ask them for their traffic statistics and if it is good, buy a link placement for a 
short period as a trial and then extend it if it proves profitable. 
 
4. Buy forum signature links 
 
Using this method, basically, you will look for forums in your niche. For example, 
your cash blog promotes Forex software, you will be looking for Forex forums. 
Sign up as a forum member and you will observe which members are active in 
their posting. Private message (PM) them to buy their signature links. 
 
There are 2 advantages here. Since they are active in posting, their signature 
links are also prominent and you should be able to get a good stream of traffic 
from these links to your cash blog. 
 
Another huge advantage is the building of more backlinks to your website.  
 
4. Banner advertising 
 
Go to forums like WarriorForum or DigitalPoint forum to hire a graphics designer 
to create a nice banner for you. The banner will be linked to your cash blog. If 
you do not want to spend the money, simply use the banners provided by the 
product owner. You can buy banner advertising at these forums as well. 
 

Build Me A Cash Blog! 
 
 
 
 
 
- 14 - 
 
4. Comment Posting 
 
Comment posting is a very powerful way to get a lot of traffic if you do it correctly. 
In some blogs that draw huge numbers of visitors, you stand to gain a lot if you 
make an intelligent and useful comment. You not only get indirect traffic 
from the blog readers, you also gain a valuable backlink. 
 
Assuming your cash blog is on “dog training guides” and you found a popular dog 
training blog, and wrote a really helpful comment, the blog readers will read your 
comment and visit your cash blog. They will then be presented with an offer 
which they have been pre-sold on. I remember that I once wrote a comment 
(took me 15 minutes) on a popular marketing blog and within 1 hour captured 20 
to 30 subscribers and sold a few copies of a product I was promoting. 
 
Here’s how you can do it step by step: 
 
1. Search Google for relevant blogs to comment on using the search query 
below. Using our dog training example, the query is: 
 
'Leave a Reply' 'Name (required)' 'Mail (will not be published) (required)' 
'Website' +dog training 
 
2.  Remember to include your target keyword within your Name (hyperlinked to 
your website) and place your cash blog url as the website. For example, my cash 
blog url is http://dogtrainingguides.blogspot.com, I will add this url into the 
website field and put my name as “John The “Dog Training Guide” Expert. 
 
For this technique to work, make it a habit to spend 1 hour commenting on 
blogs everyday or post comments on 5 to 10 blogs. 

Build Me A Cash Blog! 
 
 
 
 
 
- 15 - 
 
5. Forum Marketing 
 
Forum marketing is another powerful technique. I covered previously under 
Chapter 3, Section 3.4 – Paid Links about buying signature links from active 
members in the forum. If you are tight on the budget and cannot buy signature 
links from other active members in the related forums, you may consider doing 
some forum marketing yourself. 
 
Buying signature links is one secret trick many marketers use to get as 
much exposure as possible for their websites without doing much work. 
 
Create a very catchy signature text link to attract people to click on your 
signature link. Something like “How You Can Potty Train Your Puppy Within 5 
Days!” is effective. 
 
Similar to blog comment posting, you need to be active in the forums. Make it a 
point to make 5 to 10 posts daily at 10 forums in your niche. 
 
I have another tip which I am going to teach you here. Other than posting your 
comments/replies in other people’s threads, start your own thread. Funny, 
interesting or controversial topics can attract many comments which mean more 
eyeballs to your signature links. 
 
When creating your own thread, target your keywords in the thread title and 
your content. Do you know that by doing so, your thread may show up in 
Google for your target keyword? Ssh…this is a secret so make sure you keep it 
to yourself. 
 
 

Build Me A Cash Blog! 
 
 
 
 
 
- 16 - 
 
6. Web 2.0 Marketing 
 
Marketers love Web 2.0 marketing for a good reason. Google loves them and the 
people adore them. When we talk about Web 2.0 marketing, we are talking about 
the likes of Squidoo, Blogger, HubPages, Zimbio, Digg, Twitter etc. 
 
These websites are popular because they are community-driven meaning to say 
that the readers are the ones who decide what content is good and what is bad. 
If your content is good, you get votes and word-of-mouth advertising from friends 
who will share your content with others. 
 
Build Squidoo lens, HubPages, Zimbio and other blogger blogs to promote your 
cash blog. In the same way, target longtail keywords and rank for even low-traffic 
keywords. Because these pages can be created quickly, you are able to build up 
backlinks as well as rank these Web 2.0 pages in Google, bringing in more traffic 
to your cash blog which does the selling for you! 
 
Twitter is very hot now and I have personally used it to build a strong following of 
8300 followers within a short span of 1 month using different Twitter profiles. 
 
Here’s how you can build a strong following in Twitter. 
 
1.  Create a Twitter profile and place your cash blog url as your website.  
 
2. Use tools like TweetLater to automatically send a direct message to anyone 
who follows you. Set up your account and select “Auto Welcome”. Then add a 
message that may say, “Thanks for following! Check out my dog training blog at 
http://dogtrainingguides.blogspot.com”. 
 

Build Me A Cash Blog! 
 
 
 
 
 
- 17 - 
 
3. Follow those who are on the same topic as you. If you are promoting fat loss 
products, then look for folks who are interested in fat loss, maybe pregnant 
mothers, or even folks who are talking about dieting etc. Do not go crazy by 
following too many people. Why follow people? 
 
Out of every 10 people you follow, it is likely that at least 5 to 6 will follow you 
back! That is how you gain followers! 
 
Start slow first by adding 10 friends, and once you gain 20 to 30 friends, add 
another 20 to 30 friends. The rule of the thumb is the number of people you are 
following cannot be too different from your number of followers. 
 
Each time when someone follows you, he/she will receive your auto welcome 
message that asks them to check out your cash blog! See how it works? 
 
4. Post interesting comments regularly and your followers will continue to read 
your posts. After all, each post is only 140 characters long and it won’t take long. 
Send them to interesting resources such as articles, blogs, etc. You can even 
send them to your Web 2.0 pages like Squidoo lens, HubPages, etc each time 
you create one. See how it all links up? 
 
5. If you have the time, why not create a few profiles? That way, you can really 
create a huge number of followers and your traffic to your cash blog will increase! 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Build Me A Cash Blog! 
 
 
 
 
 
- 18 - 
 
7. More Useful Tips 
 
The cash blog we built for you is a review blog which is good enough on its own. 
However, if you really want to build it up to become a jumbo authority blog, you 
can. But it requires more work. Updating the blog regularly, ie daily or weekly 
with fresh new posts will build up the traffic to your cash blog. 
 
Since the blogger blog does not have a feature to lock the review post (which is 
key to selling your products) as the homepage, people may not see it. What you 
can do is add a link at the bottom of every blog post that leads them to the review 
post. You can say something like “For a detailed review of the top dog training 
guides, read this” and hyperlink that to your review post. 
 
Simple HTML 
 
Whenever you wish to hyperlink a portion of text to a destination url, the html 
code to do this looks like this: 
 
<a href=”http://www.this-is-the-destination-url.com” target=”_blank”>this is the 
text you wish to hyperlink and most of the time, we use our target keywords for 
ranking reasons</a> 
 
Looks simple enough? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Build Me A Cash Blog! 
 
 
 
 
 
- 19 - 
 
8. Recommended Resources 
 
 
Free Keyword Tools: 
 
Google Keyword Tool – https://adwords.google.com/select/KeywordToolExternal 
 
WordTracker – http://freekeywords.wordtracker.com 
 
 
Software To Find Top Converting Niches: 
 
Micro Niche Finder – http://MicroNicheFinder.Guru-Site.com 
 
 
Instant Article Research & Writing Software: 
 
Instant Article Wizard – http://InstantArticleWizard.Guru-Site.com 
 
Content Assistant – http://ContentAssistant.Guru-Site.com 
 
 
Automatic Article Submission Software: 
 
Unique Article Wizard – http://UniqueArticleWizard.Guru-Site.com 
 
Article Post Robot – http://ArticlePostRobot.Guru-Site.com 
 
 
Recommended Article Directories: 
 
EzineArticles – http://www.EzineArticles.com 
 
GoArticles – http://www.GoArticles.com 
 
ArticlesBase – http://www.ArticlesBase.com 
 
IdeaMarketers – http://www.IdeaMarketers.com 
 
 
 
 

Build Me A Cash Blog! 
 
 
 
 
 
- 20 - 
 
9. Final Words 
 
I have handed you a set of techniques that are effective and work for me and 
other marketers, making us thousands of dollars every month. Now it is entirely 
up to you to put action to it and make it work for you. 
 
In the internet marketing world, there are hardly any secrets. If there is a secret 
behind the success of a marketer, there is only one – putting feet to action! There 
really isn’t any magic pill to make money online. If you are looking for one, then I 
can guarantee that you will become very disappointed and disillusioned. 
 
There may be fads and crazes, but they come and go and most methods do not 
last long enough and can work now but not later. I try my best to present to you 
methods which have worked in the past and present, and I believe and hope will 
continue to work well in the future. 
 
Do not chase after the next “in” thing. Focus on what you know and apply them. 
Most of the guides you find online are helpful enough. If you will put just 30% of 
what you learn to good use, I am confident that you will do well!  
 
You now own a cash blog that is positioned to earn money for you. Now, the rest 
is up to you! 
 
 
Wishing you success, 
 
 
 

