B uilding a Dry Stone Wall  
 
 
 
OVERVIEW 
 
 
  
Introduction 
Building with stone is not only beautiful, but also durable. Unlike railroad ties or wooden fences, which may rot 
and must be replaced every 10-15 years, stone does not deteriorate. Stone walls also offer a charm that no 
other material can equal, and are especially beautiful as part of flowerbeds and perennial gardens.  
A "dry" stonewall means one without mortar holding the stones together. Because the individual stones are 
able to shift slightly in response to frost heave, there's no need to have a foundation below the frost line. Even 
so, building with stone requires a substantial commitment of time and effort. Yet the results are so satisfying 
it's easy for the project to become a minor "obsession." The following steps will help you create a freestanding 
wall or a retaining wall that will beautify your property for as long as you own it.  
  
 
  
 
  For a 20 foot wall section 
  • Beginner - 8 to 10 hours 
  • Intermediate - 7 to 9 hours 
  • Advanced - 5 to 8 hours 
  
Since building a stonewall involves repetitive lifting, you should wear a back-support belt. 
  
Do not use all the largest stones in lower courses and smaller stones on top. Mix the 
sizes of stone throughout the wall. Always save a layer of larger stones to use as a "cap stone" or topmost 
course.  
  
Take extra care to level the foundation for the wall from side-to-side. This will help stabilize 
the wall for the long term.  
  
Limit the height of a freestanding wall to less than three feet. Higher freestanding walls will 
lean and fall apart more easily over time.  
  
When building a retaining wall, set each higher course of stone back about 1/2-in., creating 
a continuous back-leaning slope or face. If you make the wall perfectly vertical, the pressure of the earth 
behind it will eventually push it forward and cause it to fall apart.  
  
Use handfuls of crushed screenings to help level and stabilize "tipsy" or uneven stones as 
you build the wall.  
  
To size and shape pieces of flat stone, use a 3-lb. hammer and stone chisel to create a line 
where you want the stone to break. Hammering too hard will cause the stone to break unpredictably; it's 
better to hit the chisel with moderate force and go over the line of breakage several times until it parts 

evenly. Dressed stone can also be cut with a circular saw and carbide blade. To break large fieldstones, use a 
sledgehammer.  
  
Plan openings for walkways and gates in your wall before you begin work.  
  
  
 
 
STEPS 
 
1.  
Stake out the inside line for the wall to follow with wooden stakes and 
string. Your eye may suggest changes in position or proportion once you 
see the staked-out area. 
2.  
To calculate how much stone you'll need, make a drawing of the project 
and measure the total length of the proposed wall; plus the width if it's a 
freestanding wall. Stone is purchased by the ton, and each type of stone 
will provide a different running length of wall per ton. With measurements 
in hand, your stoneyard can tell you how many tons you'll need for your 
project.  
3.  
There are literally hundreds of different colors and varieties of stone, 
including sandstone, limestone, granite, mica schist, quartz, slate and so 
on. But there are three basic shapes: a). Field stone is roundish"bowling-
ball" stones b) "Stacking" stone is irregularly shaped but relatively flat c) 
Dressed stone is carefully cut to be uniform and completely flat You'll 
choose the particular variety and shape based on the look you want, and 
the price. Dressed stone is more expensive than the other two, and gives 
your wall a more formal appearance. The stoneyard will deliver your 
choice on wooden pallets a few days after you order it. 
4.  
Dig a shallow foundation trench, about 8 inches deep. The trench should 
be 2-3 inches wider than the base of your proposed wall. If you have 
access to a rear-tine tiller, it will be easier to loosen the soil. Build a stair-
step on any steep slope if the slope is more than 10 degrees. Dig a "stair-
step" trench for the wall so each section rests on a flat, level foundation. 
The ground under the wall can slide away on a slope, especially in spring 
when the surface thaws while it is still frozen underground.  

5.  
Fill the trench with crushed screenings to the original ground level to 
create a stable foundation for the wall. Carefully level the screenings with 
the carpenter's level; a length of board the width of your trench is helpful 
to spread the screenings. The screenings will compress and harden over 
time. 
6.  
Transport a good selection of stones to where you want to build, using a 
wheelbarrow or garden cart. This is heavy work, but it's important to have
a variety of sizes and shapes to work with if you're not using dressed 
stone.  
7.  
Begin to place stones to form your wall. Fit the stones closely together, 
something like a large jigsaw puzzle. A little shaping with the chisel and 
hammer can help. It's best to lay one course at a time. Vary the size of 
stones as you progress; follow a large stone with several smaller ones. 
Use larger pieces at an end of the wall for increased stability. Use crushed 
screenings to level and support uneven stones. 
8.  
Two things help make a stonewall strong. The first is the number of 
stones that run the full width of the wall. Place stones of the right size 
across the width periodically as you stack each course. (Dressed stone 
walls are usually only one stone wide; so all the stones will run the full 
width of the wall.)  
9.  
The second rule for strength is "One over two, two over one." In other 
words, when you have two stones butted together in a course, place one 
stone over the seam in the next course. Likewise, where you have a long 
stone in one course, in the next course place a seam between two stones 
over that length. 

10.  Take special care at corners and ends to see that seams never line up 
from one course to the next. Use larger stones for a corner, since this is 
an "end" in two directions, and alternate which direction of the wall 
contains the end-most stone as you stack courses. 
11.  With fieldstones, place each course in the spaces between stones from the
course below. Place fieldstones with the flat side down. As an experienced 
Vermonter once observed, "Even a round stone has a flat side if you look 
at it long enough."  
12.  Hold aside a selection of larger stones to use as the top course, or "cap 
stone" of the wall. The extra weight helps stabilize the wall.  
  
 
 
SHOP LIST 
 
 
Materials List  
Crushed limestone screenings (sometimes called "stone dust" or "fines")  
Stone for building  
   
Tools List  
Paper and pencil  
Wooden stakes  
String 
Long-handled shovel 
Garden spade  
Rear-tine tiller (optional)  
Wheelbarrow or garden cart  
Carpenter's level  
Length of board  
Stone chisel  
3-lb. hammer  
Sledgehammer  
L eather work gloves  
   
 

