Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
 Building Successful Online Communities 
www.Ebook777.com


 Building Successful Online Communities 
 Evidence-Based Social Design 
 Robert E. Kraut and Paul Resnick 
 with Sara Kiesler, Moira Burke, Yan Chen, Niki Kittur, Joseph Konstan, 
Yuqing Ren, and John Riedl 
 The MIT Press 
 Cambridge, Massachusetts 
 London, England 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
 ©  2011  Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
 All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form by any electronic or 
mechanical means (including photocopying, recording, or information storage and retrieval) 
without permission in writing from the publisher. 
 For information about special quantity discounts, please email special_sales@mitpress.mit.edu 
 This book was set in Stone Sans and Stone Serif by Toppan Best-set Premedia Limited. Printed 
and bound in the United States of America. 
 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
 Kraut, Robert E. 
 Building successful online communities : Evidence-Based Social Design / Robert E. Kraut and 
Paul Resnick with Sara Kiesler ... [et al.]. 
  p.  cm. 
 Includes bibliographical references and index. 
 ISBN 978-0-262-01657-5 (hardcover : alk. paper) 
 1. Online social networks — Planning.   2.  Computer networks — Social aspects — Planning.   
3. Internet — Social aspects.   4. Social psychology.   I. Resnick, Paul.   II. Kiesler, Sara, 1940 –  
III. Title. 
 HM742.K73   2012 
 302.30285 — dc22 
 2011010842 
 10   9  8  7   6  5  4   3  2  1 
www.Ebook777.com

 “ There is nothing so practical as a good theory. ” 
 “ If you want truly to understand something, try to change it. ” 
 — Kurt Lewin 


 Contents 
 Acknowledgments   ix
 1  Introduction   1
 Paul Resnick and Robert E. Kraut 
 2  Encouraging Contribution to Online Communities   21
 Robert E. Kraut and Paul Resnick 
 3  Encouraging Commitment in Online Communities   77
 Yuqing Ren, Robert E. Kraut, Sara Kiesler, and Paul Resnick 
 4  Regulating Behavior in Online Communities   125
 Sara Kiesler, Robert E. Kraut, Paul Resnick, and Aniket Kittur 
 5  The Challenges of Dealing with Newcomers   179
 Robert E. Kraut, Moira Burke, John Riedl, and Paul Resnick 
 6  Starting New Online Communities   231
 Paul Resnick, Joseph Konstan, Yan Chen, and Robert E. Kraut 
 Contributors   281
 Index   283


Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
 Acknowledgments 
 This book grew out of the CommunityLab research project, a five-year grant from the 
National Science Foundation, involving seven professors and myriad graduate stu-
dents from Carnegie-Mellon University, the University of Michigan, and the Univer-
sity of Minnesota. We conducted experiments testing alternative ways to elicit 
participation in online communities, and we published those results, replete with 
careful statistical analyses, in journals and conference proceedings. More broadly, we 
spoke at research-oriented venues, arguing that insights from social science theories 
could directly inform online community design and management, if only we took 
seriously the task of mining that theory. 
 By 2006, we thought that message should reach a broader audience, including 
practitioners and students. There was an emerging cadre of practitioners whose primary 
professional identity was as online community designers and managers. They worked 
as consultants or ran big online communities like ePinions or the Microsoft Developer 
Network. In addition, many more people were becoming  “ accidental community 
managers, ” managing the installation of enterprise social-computing platforms within 
their companies or creating communities of practice curating knowledge on particular 
topics or launching health-support communities. And professors were starting to teach 
courses at both undergraduate and graduate levels that devoted all or part of a semester 
to questions of how best to organize online interactions.  
 Two consultants, Amy Jo Kim and Derek Powazek, had written excellent books filled 
with examples and guidelines of what to do and what not to do. Jenny Preece, one 
of the pioneers of research on online communities, had written a nice textbook that 
summarized much of the research relevant to online communities, organized around 
the themes of usability and sociability. However, these texts were showing their age 
in a fast-moving field (they were all written well before the rise of Wikipedia or Face-
book), and none of the existing books articulated our vision of generating specific 
www.Ebook777.com

x 
Acknowledgments
design guidance from fundamental theories in the social sciences about individual 
and collective behavior. 
 Thus, the idea for this book was born. Everyone in the CommunityLab project 
thought it was a good idea, but no one wanted to take it on as sole author. So we 
parceled out the task of writing to subgroups. Eventually, two of us stepped forward 
to rewrite all the chapters, to give the book a consistent voice and structure. 
 This book would not have been possible without our collaborators Moira Burke, 
Yan Chen, Sara Kiesler, Aniket Kittur, Joseph Konstan, Yuqing Ren, and John Riedl. 
Not only are they coauthors on many of the book ’ s chapters, but discussion with 
them as we planned individual research projects and the book itself improved our 
thinking and shaped every facet of the book. Loren Terveen was also an important 
contributor to the CommunityLab project and to the conceptualization of this book. 
The advisory board for the project, including Lee Sproull, Jenny Preece, and Jack 
Carroll also provided valuable input during that phase. In addition, we have been 
blessed with a wonderful group of doctoral and master ’ s degree students. Working 
with them has been both intellectually exciting and fun. We acknowledge especially 
the contributions of Turadg Aleahmad, Kira Alexander, Gerard Beenen, Bo Reum Choi, 
Dan Cosley, Sara Drenner, Dan Frankowski, Derek Hansen, Franklin M. Harper, Youn-ah 
Kang, Shyong K.  “ Tony ” Lam, Cliff Lampe, Sherry Li, John Lin, Kim Ling, Pam 
Ludford, Kathryn McCurdy, Sean Munson, Nathan Oostendorp, Bryan Pendleton, Al 
Mamunur Rashid, Shilad Sen, Xiaoqing Wang, and Haiyi Zhu. David S á nchez Bote 
from Mondragon University kept the flame alive and gathered many examples of 
reward mechanisms in use in online communities during his sabbatical stay at the 
University of Michigan. 
 We thank Mark Ackerman, Brian Butler, Jim Cashel, Joe Cothrel, Judith Donath, 
Randy Farmer, Lisa Joyce, Karrie Karahalios, John Levine, Andrew Monk, and Sean 
O ’ Driscoll for useful comments and suggestions at various stages. The book also ben-
efits from feedback we received from students in our courses and participants in the 
presentations we have offered at Northwestern University, Cornell University, Micro-
soft, University of Canterbury, the Communities and Technologies conference, the 
Academy of Management conference, ForumOne ’ s Online Communities Summit, and 
the International Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, and from feedback we 
have received, via their instructors, from students in courses at the University of 
Maryland and the University of Illinois. 
 Our work has been supported by several grants from the National Science 
Foundation, including IIS-0325049/Designing On-Line Communities to Enhance 
Participation, IIS-0729286/Solving Critical Problems in Online Groups, and 

Acknowledgments 
xi
IIS-0808711/Designing Online Volunteer Communities. One goal of this book is to 
repay this research largess by making what we have learned available to a wider 
audience. 
 We also thank Douglas Sery and Mel Goldsipe at the MIT Press for editing and 
shepherding this book through the publication process. 
 We especially thank Brandy Renduels for her help in copyediting the manuscript 
draft and general wrangling. 
 
 Robert E. Kraut, Pittsbugh, PA 
 Paul Resnick, Ann Arbor, MI 
 March 2011 


 1 
  Introduction 
 Paul Resnick and Robert E. Kraut 
 What does social science tell us about how to make thriving online communities? 
Quite a lot, it turns out — but only if we listen very closely and, at times, employ a 
translator. Economics and various branches of psychology offer theories of individual 
motivation and of human behavior in social situations. The theories generalize from 
observations of naturally occurring behavior, from controlled experiments, and from 
abstract mathematical models. Properly interpreted, they can inform choices about 
how to get a community started, integrate newcomers, encourage commitment, regu-
late behavior when there are conflicts, motivate contributions, and coordinate those 
contributions to maximize benefits for the community. This book makes it easier for 
us to hear what social science has to tell us. It amplifies relevant theories and experi-
mental evidence and then translates them into specific claims about the likely impact 
of particular design choices for online communities. 
 1  The Promise of Online Communities 
 By  “ online communities ” we mean any virtual space where people come together with 
others to converse, exchange information or other resources, learn, play, or just be 
with each other. The term applies to many social configurations, from small close-knit 
groups to sites with millions of participants. Online communities may be supported 
by a wide variety of technology platforms, from email lists to forums, blogs, wikis, 
and networking sites. The common feature is ongoing interactions among people over 
time, with some of the interactions being technology mediated. 
 Online communities are among the most popular destinations on the Internet. The 
venerable Usenet had more than 160,000 active newsgroups in 2006 and Yahoo! 
( http://www.yahoo.com ) alone claims to host more than a million online groups. 
Ravelry ( http://www.ravelry.com ), a hobby community for people who knit and 

2 
Paul Resnick and Robert E. Kraut
crochet, claimed more than 1.2 million members as of March 2011. The product 
support community for Linksys, a division of Cisco that provides consumer and small-
office networking technologies, handles more than 100,000 user sessions per day 
( Lithium Technologies 2009 ). More than 35,000 people made five or more edits on 
Wikipedia ( http://en.wikipedia.org ), an open source encyclopedia, during the month 
of February 2011 (Wikimedia 2011b). Facebook ( http://www.facebook.com ), an online 
social networking site, celebrated 500 million members in July 2010 (Zuckerberg 
2010). 
 Online communities serve the same range of purposes that offline groups, net-
works, and communities serve. They provide their members with opportunities for 
information sharing and learning, for companionship and social support, and for 
entertainment. Online communities can also produce benefits for nonmembers —
 either public goods that benefit society as a whole, such as open source software, 
product reviews, and encyclopedia pages; or private goods, such as suggestions for 
product improvements or new product designs that benefit the organization that 
convened the community. 
 The promise of online communities is that they break the barriers of time, space, 
and scale that limit offline interactions. People with unusual medical conditions can 
get social support from others who share their condition but live far away, and they 
can do so whenever they need it rather than only at a weekly or monthly scheduled 
meeting. On Ravelry, knitters can share patterns with thousands more people than 
they could stitch with in person. 
 2  Critical Design Challenges 
 Although as a class these online communities are very successful, the success of par-
ticular communities varies widely. Some communities struggle to become successful, 
and others fail. For every Facebook, with its millions of current users, there is a Friend-
ster ( http://www.friendster.com ) that was once successful but can no longer compete 
and scores of smaller social networking sites that never got enough members to 
be viable. Of 2,872 Usenet groups with  “ support ” in their name, some — like 
alt.support.diet.low-carb, alt.support.depression, and alt.support.diabetes — are suc-
cessful, with more than 5,000 people posting per year, but half had fewer than thirty 
posters during 2004 and a quarter had fewer than six ( Kraut, 2011a) . Smokefree.gov 
( http://www.smokefree.gov ), an online tobacco-cessation program, attempted to add 
an online community for some of its users but was unable to garner enough activity 
in the community during the trial period to assess whether such a community, if it 

Chapter 1: Introduction 
3
were active, would help members to quit smoking ( Stoddard, Augustson, and Moser 
2008 ). Although the English-language version of Wikipedia had more than 3.6 million 
articles in February 2011, the Korean version had fewer than 160,000 articles (Wiki-
media 2011a). Across the more than 9,000 public information-sharing wikis, using the 
same Mediawiki software that Wikipedia uses, the median number of editors who have 
ever contributed is only seven ( Kittur and Kraut 2011 ). 
 To become and remain successful, online communities must meet a number of 
challenges that are common to many groups and organizations, offline as well as 
online. The book is organized around these challenges, as described in the rest of this 
introduction. 
 Starting a New Community 
 Many online communities are successful because they have a rich inventory of content 
that attracts new members. In a conversational community, hosted at a cancer support 
group, the content might be the messages exchanged by cancer survivors and their 
caregivers. In an open source software (OSS) development community hosted at 
SourceForge ( http://sourceforge.net ), it might be a working base of computer code that 
provides raw material for developers to improve. On the popular entertainment site 
YouTube ( http://youtube.com ), the content consists of video clips that participants 
post. When creating an online community from scratch, designers and managers are 
faced with a critical mass problem: the fledgling site doesn ’ t yet have enough content 
to attract users and there are thus too few users to create the content that might attract 
others. 
 Attracting and Socializing New Members 
 Even established online communities must attract a stream of new members to replace 
others who leave. For some online communities, a major component of this challenge 
is to identify and encourage potential members who have the characteristics, skills, 
and motivation to contribute. Thus, open-source development projects are looking for 
potential members who can build software. In contrast, many Facebook groups or 
email-based groups hosted by Yahoo! and Google ( http://www.google.com ) are more 
open and willing to accept almost anyone. Even while seeking and welcoming 
members, many communities also try to screen out inappropriate members. Thus, for 
example, health-support groups often restrict membership to people who have a par-
ticular illness or care for someone who does. Regardless of their selectivity, online 
groups have special problems because newcomers, who are potentially choosing from 
among other similar communities to join, frequently have insufficient information to 

4 
Paul Resnick and Robert E. Kraut
make their choices and almost always have less commitment to a community than 
more established members have. These factors mean that their initial observations and 
interactions are likely to strongly influence whether they stick around long enough 
to learn whether the site provides a good match to their needs. In addition, because 
they have not yet learned the appropriate ways to behave in the community, their 
actions may disrupt the activity of existing members. 
 Encouraging Commitment 
 Commitment represents members ’ feelings of attachment or connection to the group, 
organization, or community. Commitment underlies members ’ willingness to stay in 
the community and contribute to it. Both offline and online, people who are more 
committed to an organization tend to be more satisfied, are less likely to look for 
alternatives, are less likely to leave, and tend to perform better and contribute more 
( Mathieu and Zajac 1990 ). All organizations must manage the challenge of creating 
commitment, but because the forces keeping someone in an online group are weaker 
than those operating in a conventional organization, challenges of commitment are 
more difficult. For example, in most conventional software companies, employees 
have an employment contract. If they decide to leave, they lose salary, seniority, and 
job status. In contrast, most developers in open-source software projects participate 
voluntarily, with no employment contract encouraging them to stay and contribute. 
The physical location of a conventional organization also places constraints on 
members ’ willingness to go elsewhere. If someone wants to leave a job, church, or 
club, for example, only a relatively small number of alternatives are nearby and con-
venient to join. In contrast, if someone wants to leave a particular online community, 
he or she could join any other comparable community online with no constraints 
imposed by geographic proximity. 
 Encouraging Contribution 
 To be successful, online communities need the people who participate in them to 
contribute the resources on which the group ’ s existence is built. The types of resource 
contributions needed differ widely across different types of groups, from the conversa-
tions in many online health- and technical-support groups to the code in open-source 
development projects and the music and video in media-sharing sites. Typically, 
online communities exhibit a power-law distribution of contribution, with a small 
minority contributing most of the content. For example, in the Freenet development 
project, only 30 people of the 369 who participated in the discussion lists ever wrote 
any code. Although inequality of contribution is not necessarily a problem, under-

Chapter 1: Introduction 
5
contribution is. For example, most Usenet support groups, as mentioned earlier, were 
relatively inactive. Even apparently highly successful online communities suffer from 
problems of undercontribution. Roughly two-thirds of the articles in the English 
version of Wikipedia have been classified during quality-assessment drives as  “ stubs, ” 
articles with only a few sentences of content that are too short to provide encyclopedic 
coverage of a topic (Wikipedia 2010). 
 Regulating Behavior 
 The people who participate in online groups often have different and sometimes 
competing interests. Most large online discussion groups — especially those that deal 
with controversial topics — attract trolls, people who post controversial, inflammatory, 
irrelevant, or off-topic messages to provoke other users into an emotional response 
( Schwartz 2008 ). Commercial spammers would like to drive traffic to their external 
websites. In more mundane conflicts of interest, some participants in a hobby site 
may prefer that the discussion stay focused on the hobby, but others may want to 
engage in more personal conversation with other members they have become friends 
with. When there are conflicting interests in a group, there must be mechanisms to 
help participants regulate behavior. The challenges here are to deter inappropriate 
behavior by group members, prevent trolls and other outside attackers, and limit the 
damage that is caused when inappropriate behavior occurs. 
 Although these challenges confront almost all groups and organizations, online 
communities may have more difficulty overcoming them than conventional groups 
and organizations because of three characteristics that are typical of online communi-
ties but unusual in conventional groups and organizations. The first is anonymity. 
Old-timers may be less able to vet anonymous newcomers, and newcomers may feel 
less inhibited by social accountability. The second is ease of entry and exit, which can 
lead to high turnover and thus inhibit interpersonal ties or commitment to the group 
and affect how sanctions and other deterrence strategies work in regulating behavior. 
The third is textual communication, which may be prone to misinterpretation because 
it lacks some of the fluidity and nonverbal cues of face-to-face interaction. 
 On the other hand, online communities have resources for meeting these chal-
lenges that are not available to offline groups. First, the communications — and indeed 
almost all of the behavior exhibited by participants in an online community — are in 
digital form and can be archived. Second, online communities can benefit from com-
putation. For example, computers can summarize traces of past behavior as quantifi-
able and viewable reputations, as eBay ( http://www.ebay.com ) does with its feedback 
profiles. Computers can execute search and matching algorithms to introduce people 

6 
Paul Resnick and Robert E. Kraut
and content to each other and can notify people when events of interest occur. And 
computers can enforce access controls so that different people are permitted to see or 
do different things. 
 3  Levers of Change: Sociotechnical Systems Design 
 Students in our classes sometimes challenge the notion that online communities can 
be designed. A product designer can specify functional and aesthetic features in order 
to create a desired user experience, but an online community is not so easily con-
trolled. Even if a designer wants an online community to be larger, or more active, or 
more friendly in tone, he or she may not be able to make that happen. People are the 
key actors in online communities, and they cannot be shaped or programmed in the 
way physical materials or software can. 
 The first central argument of this book is that despite the limited direct control of 
individual people ’ s actions, online communities can be designed and managed to 
achieve the goals that their owners, managers, or members desire. Designers are far 
from powerless. Throughout this book, we identify a wide variety of levers of change, 
features of online communities that can be deliberately and strategically chosen. Some 
of these levers involve technical configuration, such as whether a chat feature is 
enabled or whether special privileges are required to start new conversation threads. 
Other levers involve social configurations, such as how much externally provided 
content to include and whether leaders and administrators ignore, cajole, or ban 
people who disrupt the community. 
 We classify the levers of change into eight broad categories, described as follows. 
We will often call these levers of change  “ design alternatives ” or  “ design options ” to 
highlight the idea that their configurations can result from deliberate choices that 
managers, designers, or members make. 
 The first category of design alternatives involves the community structure. The size 
of the community can make a difference, as can the degree of homogeneity of member 
interests, whether there is a subgroup structure, and whether membership is recruited 
through existing social ties. 
 The second category of design alternatives involves the content, tasks, and activities 
in the community. There can be opportunities for self-disclosure (e.g., in user profiles). 
Content can be imported from outside or professionally generated, in addition to that 
which is generated by members. Welcoming activities and safe spaces for exploration 
can be offered to newcomers. Tasks can be independent or interdependent and can 
be embedded in immersive or social experiences. 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Chapter 1: Introduction 
7
 Communities often have more content and opportunities than any one person will 
want to take advantage of. The third category of design alternatives deals with ways 
to select, sort, and highlight things so that people can find the ones that are best for 
them. These alternatives include dividing the community into separate spaces, high-
lighting good content, removing inappropriate content, and friend feeds or even 
full-blown recommendation systems that show different slices of the content to dif-
ferent people. 
 The fourth category of design levers involves external communication. Content 
can be imported from or exported to other communities. Identities and profiles can 
be shared or hidden. Facilities can be provided to allow people to invite friends or 
forward content to them. 
 The fifth category involves feedback, rewards, and sanctions. Feedback tells people 
how others have reacted to their participation in the community. Such feedback can 
be informal or structured in the form of ratings or a button to click to indicate the 
liking of something. Rewards and sanctions give or remove something that people 
value in response to the actions they take. They can be intangible, in the form of 
approval or disapproval or status in the community. But they can also take the more 
tangible form of additional privileges in the community or even money or prizes. 
 Table 1.1 
 Types of design alternatives and the chapters in which their implications are analyzed 
 Type 
 Chapter 2: 
Contribution 
 Chapter 3: 
Commitment 
 Chapter 4: 
Regulation 
 Chapter 5: 
Newcomers 
 Chapter 6: 
Startup 
 Community 
structure 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 Content, tasks, 
and activities 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 Selection, 
sorting, 
highlighting 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 External 
communication 
 x 
 x 
 Feedback and 
rewards 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 Roles, rules, 
policies, and 
procedures 
 x 
 x 
 Access controls 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 Presentation 
and framing 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 x 
www.Ebook777.com

8 
Paul Resnick and Robert E. Kraut
 Sixth, communities can articulate different roles, such as welcomers for newcomers 
or dispute handlers. They can also have rules and guidelines about how people 
should behave, which can have a big impact on the nature of interactions in the com-
munity. Finally, they can establish procedures for decision making and conflict 
resolution. 
 Seventh, there are access controls, which place limits on who can join the com-
munity and what actions they can take. For example, credentials may be checked to 
allow only qualified people to join, or completion of a CAPTCHA ( C ompletely  A uto-
mated  P ublic  T uring test to tell  C omputers and  H umans  A part) such as transcribing 
distorted text may be required to prevent computer programs from creating accounts. 
Moderation privileges may be extended only to members in designated roles. Alterna-
tively, people may need to pay, using some internal currency, to perform certain 
actions. 
 Finally, in every chapter, we find that simple communication choices — ways of 
framing what the community is and what happens there  1  — can have a big impact on 
how the community functions. For example, a community can highlight bad behavior 
and how it is punished or can try to hide that it ever happens. A community can 
present itself as similar to others or highlight characteristics that distinguish it from 
others. It can prime norms of reciprocity. It can choose a tagline that emphasizes dif-
ferent aspects of the community. These and many other communication and framing 
choices can affect all five of the challenges, from getting a new community started 
through regulating behavior in an established community. 
 Note that with a few exceptions, we consider only design alternatives that 
vary how people perceive a community and what they give to or get from it. There 
are a variety of other alternatives in the realm of interaction design that are 
beyond the scope of this book. For example, though we discuss the impact of 
including photos of people and associating the photos with the content they contrib-
ute, this book is silent about the size, placement, or other aesthetics of the photos. 
And though we discuss the time cost for people of browsing through a collection 
of mostly irrelevant items, we do not analyze the various techniques that could 
be used to reduce those browsing costs, such as showing collapsed summaries with 
the full contents prefetched so that they can be displayed without delay if a user hovers 
or clicks on an item summary. Interaction design choices can have a profound effect 
on the user experience of an online community and can nudge people toward certain 
behaviors just as well as the design levers we focus on. The subtleties of interaction 
design, however, are beyond the scope of our expertise and beyond the scope of 
this book. 

Chapter 1: Introduction 
9
 4  The Morality of Design 
 Even if convinced of the feasibility of designing online communities, some of our 
students question its morality. The terms  “ social engineering ” and  “ paternalism ” have 
acquired negative connotations in American political discourse. Generally, people 
dislike the idea of being manipulated, even if it ’ s for their own good. Viewed in that 
light, designing the interaction environment of an online community in order to 
elicit individual behavior that benefits the community as a whole seems morally 
repugnant. 
 Weighed against this value of freedom from manipulation, however, there is also 
a moral imperative to create online communities that work well. People gain immense 
value from the education, social support, and entertainment that online communities 
provide to their members and from the information products that they produce 
for society. If different design alternatives can make the communities more attractive 
for their members or more productive, then forgoing those benefits may be a signifi-
cant cost. 
 Moreover, decisions will be made anyway — through inaction if not through action —
 about all the design alternatives considered in this book. Any such choices, no matter 
how they are made, will inevitably influence members and prospective members to 
behave in certain ways. There is no default, morally neutral online-community design 
that has no manipulative effect on members.  2  
 We argue that the primary moral arguments are thus not about whether to make 
explicit design choices in order to achieve community goals but about which com-
munity goals are the right ones. Making an online community function better may 
not always be a worthy goal. In some cases, an online community that functions well 
may produce negative effects for its members (for example, a community that encour-
ages and supports its members to continue their bulimia) or for society as a whole (for 
example, a terrorist cell). In other cases, it is not so clear what it means for an online 
community to function better. Most goals, if achieved, involve improving the com-
munity in the eyes of some people and making it worse in the eyes of some others. 
For example, trolls gain enjoyment from disrupting some communities. A design that 
effectively deters trolling benefits most of the community members but makes things 
worse for the trolls. 
 In the remainder of this book, we leave moral judgments — about which goals 
are worth designing for — to our readers. Our focus is on identifying the likely effects 
of particular design alternatives in meeting the fundamental design challenges of 
online communities. We sometimes adopt shorthand like  “ good behavior ” and  “ bad 

10 
Paul Resnick and Robert E. Kraut
behavior, ” but these should be taken as good or bad relative to the goals of the 
designer, whomever that may be. 
 5  The Promise of Mining Social Science 
 How can an online-community designer build up intuitions about the likely impacts 
of alternative design choices? Previous practitioner-authors have offered many helpful 
insights based on design decisions that were made when building online communities 
that they advised or observed (e.g.,  Kim 2000 ;  Powazek 2002 ;  O ’ Keefe 2008 ). Wenger, 
White, and Smith (2009) provide several useful frameworks for thinking about online-
community design decisions, based on conceptualizing them as communities of prac-
tice.  Preece ( 2000 ) summarized terminology and findings of research related to 
interpersonal communication and networks and groups that may provide useful back-
ground knowledge for a designer. 
 The second central argument of this book is that social science findings can and 
should inform more directly the choices that online community designers make. There 
is a rich research literature in psychology, economics, and the other social sciences 
about the individual motivations and conditions under which individuals, groups, and 
organizations are successful. Although most of this research has developed in the 
context of offline interactions, some has now been replicated in online social settings. 
 Social science research can inform design in several interrelated ways. First, it can 
be used to identify problems or challenges that will be faced by most online com-
munities. For example, the theory of network externalities in economics, which we 
discuss in chapter 6, and the empirical research from which it grew, explore the impact 
of how the attraction of many groups for potential members grows with the number 
of people who already participate. This relationship between the attractiveness of a 
community and its size raises problems for new communities because during their 
start-up phases, they do not have enough members to provide the resources that will 
attract other members and allow growth. As another example, the theories of public 
goods from economics and of social loafing from psychology predict that when indi-
vidual contributions are needed to produce outcomes that benefit everyone equally, 
voluntary contributions will be at suboptimal levels. The information contributions 
that people make to online communities often have this public goods character, 
and encouraging contributions is thus an important challenge for many online 
communities. 
 Second, social science theories provide ideas for solutions to the problems. Thus, 
if, as theories of network externalities predict, new online communities struggle 

Chapter 1: Introduction 
11
because they initially have too few members and too little content to attract and retain 
members, creating compatibility between communities can overcome this problem 
(Shapiro and Varian 1999). This is the solution adopted by the makers of Scrabulous, 
who introduced their game in Facebook, which already had a large number of members 
available as potential players. As another example, theories of collective effort identify 
several potential solutions to communities facing problems of undercontribution. 
Because feeling that one ’ s contribution will be redundant is one reason that people 
undercontribute, a solution is to make potential contributors believe that their con-
tributions are important. Designers have a number of ways to make potential contribu-
tors feel that a contribution will matter, such as partitioning the group so that each 
contributor is a member of a smaller subgroup or reminding potential contributors 
about the uniqueness of their contributions. 
 Finally, and perhaps most important, the social science research base provides pre-
dictions about likely consequences of various design decisions. For example, theories 
about interpersonal bond formation yield a prediction that target members will 
become more committed to a community to the extent that they have repeated inter-
actions with other members and to the extent that those other members are similar 
to them. As another example, theories about goal setting and monitoring yield a 
prediction that contribution goals will be more effective at eliciting member contribu-
tions the more challenging they are. We refer to predictions of this sort as  “ design 
claims ” and describe the structure and limits of such claims in more detail in the next 
section. 
 One strand of theory we draw on starts from a premise of individuals making 
choices that increase their own utility, that is, the difference between their benefits 
and costs. Thus, many design choices are geared to reducing costs, increasing benefits, 
or changing individuals ’ ability to assess the costs and benefits. Game theoretic models 
enable analysis of interdependent choices and predictions about equilibrium out-
comes. For example, in a situation in which many people would want to join an online 
community only if others also joined, there are two equilibrium outcomes: one in 
which everyone joins and one in which none do. In such situations, one task of the 
designer is to shape people ’ s expectations about what others are likely to do. Models 
of incomplete information permit reasoning about situations in which there is uncer-
tainty. For example, such models can help to understand whether a seller ’ s previous 
feedback on eBay can be expected to serve as a reliable signal about his or her 
trustworthiness. 
 We also draw on a variety of other theories from the fields of social psychology 
and organizational behavior that predict individual behavior in group and 

12 
Paul Resnick and Robert E. Kraut
organizational settings. We use the plural  “ theories ” advisedly: there is no unified 
theory in modern social psychology with pretensions of explaining all of social behav-
ior. Rather, the intellectual style has been to build and test a large number of midlevel 
theories, each attempting to account for an interesting social phenomenon in a 
limited domain. For example, we draw on theories of goal setting, social comparison, 
persuasion, conformity, and interpersonal bond and group identity formation. Despite 
the lack of a single overarching theoretical framework analogous to that of evolution 
in biology or utility maximization in microeconomics, these midlevel theories provide 
a rich and empirically verified understanding of some of the central phenomena of 
behavior in social settings. 
 Although social science theory is helpful in identifying problems that online 
communities face, suggesting potential solutions to them, and articulating claims 
about the likely impacts of design choices, it has its limits. First, the theories are 
incomplete; they offer no guidance on some important design choices. Second, they 
may be incorrect; like all scientific theories, they are subject to revision based on 
new data from new experiments. Third, creativity and care are required to map 
general theories to the particular context of online communities; here, we hope 
that this book makes a contribution by translating social science findings into useful 
design claims. 
 6  Design Claims 
 We use the device of design claims to translate theory to design alternatives that 
achieve community goals. Design claims follow a positivist scientific paradigm, seeking 
to state general claims — that under certain observable conditions certain outcomes 
can be expected. In our case, the conditions that are of particular interest are design 
alternatives and the outcomes are desirable features of an online community, which 
we refer to as  “ design goals. ” For example, we state the following design claim in the 
chapter on motivating contributions:  Small tangible rewards are likely to reduce contribu-
tions for intrinsically interesting tasks . Here, the design alternative is promising small 
tangible rewards and the design goal is maximizing the efforts that members contrib-
ute to tasks that benefit the community. We restrict the scope of applicability of design 
claims by specifying a restricted set of context conditions for their applicability. Thus, 
the claim applies only to intrinsically interesting tasks, not to boring tasks. The context 
conditions will specify properties of the community (e.g., size, purpose), properties of 
members (e.g., newcomer or long-time member, gender or other demographic char-
acteristics), or properties of tasks (e.g., challenging, interesting). 

Chapter 1: Introduction 
13
 Many of our design claims are comparative. For example, the chapter on contribu-
tions also includes this design claim:  Nontransparent eligibility criteria and unpredictable 
schedules lead to less  “ gaming of the system ” than do predictable rewards . Here there are 
two design alternatives: predictable rewards versus rewards with nontransparent eligi-
bility criteria and unpredictable schedules. The claim is that one is better than the 
other at achieving the goal of people not doing useless or destructive actions just to 
get the rewards (gaming the system). 
 Thus, we have two logical structures for design claims (  see table 1.2 ). 
 Whenever we state design claims, we offer evidence in support of them. In some 
cases, the evidence comes from social science theories or findings that have been 
articulated for more general settings beyond online communities. Usually, these theo-
ries have been tested abstractly in laboratory settings. In other cases, the evidence 
comes from experiments specific to the online community setting. Evidence may also 
come from observational studies of particular online communities. Observational data 
may be quantitative (e.g., counts of how many posts were made) or qualitative (e.g., 
analysis of their content, or subjective reports from interviewing participants). In some 
cases, observational studies will be used merely to offer an example consistent with 
the design claim (i.e., here is a site that used alternative X and it achieved goal Y). 
This, of course, is relatively weak evidence, as the only information it provides about 
whether X had anything to do with the achievement of Y comes from the subjective 
reports of the designers or participants. 
 Our project of collecting and organizing design claims is akin to efforts to codify 
what are called  “ pattern languages ” ( Alexander, Ishikawa, and Silverstein 1977 ;  Rising 
2001 ). Crumlish and Malone (2009) nicely present a collection of useful design pat-
terns that have been used in online communities. There are a couple of differences in 
our approach, however, from most work on design patterns. First, although we are 
sometimes inspired by a bottom-up approach of noticing commonly occurring fea-
tures of online communities, more often we start from a design goal and some relevant 
theories and try to systematically explore the space of possible design choices that 
 Table 1.2 
 The logical structure of design claims 
 Type 
 Logical structure 
 Noncomparative 
 Alternative X helps/hinders achievement of goal Y 
under conditions Z 
 Comparative 
 Alternative X1 is more effective than X2 at achieving 
goal Y under conditions Z 

14 
Paul Resnick and Robert E. Kraut
could help achieve the goal. In some cases, we identify choices that  should help achieve 
the goal, but have not yet, to our knowledge, been tried in existing communities. 
Second, although approaches to pattern languages vary, usually the design alternative 
itself is the central element, presented with ancillary information about when it might 
be best to use it, what it can be expected to accomplish, and hints and cautions about 
implementing it. By contrast, as we discuss shortly, we have organized our exposition 
around goals and challenges, presenting together all the design alternatives that have 
an impact on that goal. Third, we have chosen the term  “ claim ” rather than  “ pattern ” 
to emphasize that we are laying out causal claims in which design X leads to outcome 
Y rather than merely observing that X occurs frequently in practice. The preface to  A 
Pattern Language: Towns, Buildings, and Construction indicates that  Alexander  ( 1977 ) 
intended patterns to convey causal claims — indeed, that they should convey necessary 
as well as sufficient conditions (if you want to achieve an outcome Y, then X is neces-
sary). Not all of the actual design patterns, however, in Alexander ’ s work or among 
others adopting the pattern language approach, seem to make such causal claims. 
 It is worth noting that both design alternatives and design goals can be expressed 
at varying levels of abstraction. For example, a design alternative at a high level of 
abstraction might be to provide tangible rewards for activity. At a much more specific 
level of abstraction, two design alternatives might be to provide a user with a $5 gift 
certificate or to make a $5 donation to a charity that the user chooses. Throughout 
the book, our design claims are made at whatever level of abstraction is most appro-
priate. It is also worth noting that what is expressed as a design alternative at a high 
level of abstraction may be expressed as a goal at a more specific layer of abstraction. 
For example, at a high level, we might say that the design alternative of making people 
feel unique helps achieve the goal of motivating effort. A more specific design claim 
might state that reminding people of unusual actions they have taken helps achieve 
the goal of making people feel unique. 
 It is also worth noting that a design alternative X may be compound, combining 
simpler alternatives. For example, a design claim might state that having a forum 
and a separate email list will make it harder for either of them to get to a critical 
mass of usage. Or a design claim might state that for technical support communities, 
an email list and wiki used together are more effective than either one on its own 
( Hansen 2007 ). 
 The design claims are not prescriptive rules that a designer can or should follow 
blindly, for two reasons. First, the predictive claims state only that a design alternative 
X helps or hinders achievement of a goal Y, not that it will always achieve or prevent 
the achievement of the goal. A claim that  small tangible rewards are likely to reduce 

Chapter 1: Introduction 
15
contributions for intrinsically interesting tasks is a claim about the effect on average. In 
a particular situation, a designer will need to judge how intrinsically interesting a task 
is, whether a reward is likely to be perceived as small or large, and whether there are 
any extenuating circumstances. 
 Second, multiple design claims may suggest implications of a single design choice 
for more than one design goal, and the designer may have to trade off achieving one 
goal against interfering with another. For example, in an open source project, the 
design alternative of giving lots of people commit privileges (so they can easily add 
their contributions to the group ’ s code base) would be likely to increase the number 
of contributors but decrease the amount of effort by each person and may also increase 
the number of bugs in the code. A designer will need to judge whether that trade-off 
is worthwhile in the particular situation. 
 Third, the theories from which our design claims derive, and thus our design claims 
as well, usually state the effects of manipulations holding everything else constant. 
On the other hand, whether designing from scratch or changing an existing system, 
designers typically make a number of choices at the same time. For example, at the 
same time that a community introduces a point system to track and acknowledge 
member contributions, it may also change its tagline and frequently asked questions 
(FAQ) section to suggest a more collaborative, less competitive atmosphere. Design 
claims offer guidance on the likely impact of either of these changes separately, not 
their joint impact. A designer will need to rely on intuition to judge whether a set of 
design choices are complementary or whether they interfere with each other. 
 7  Organization of the Book 
 We have organized the book around the high-level design challenges described in 
section 3. Thus, design claims related to a particular goal are presented together, even 
though they may involve quite different design elements. This organizational scheme 
serves several purposes. First, for a student or practitioner new to online community 
design, it highlights the challenges that typically arise in online communities so that 
some thought can be given to them before they arise. Second, it offers a systematic 
way to consider and compare alternative approaches to handling those challenges. 
For example, a designer who begins with a particular design element — perhaps because 
a boss has encountered the feature in another community and asks him or her to 
investigate its use — will naturally be led also to consider alternative ways to achieve 
the goals that design element normally promotes because they are presented near each 
other in the book. 

16 
Paul Resnick and Robert E. Kraut
 We try to salvage some of the benefits that could be gained from alternative orga-
nizational schemes through cross-indexing. Design claims related to achieving the 
same design goal appear linearly near each other in the same chapter. When a particu-
lar design element or theory used in one design claim also appears in other sections 
or other chapters, we indicate that. Each chapter concludes with a summary of all the 
design levers considered in the chapter, grouped by the eight categories, to provide 
an alternative index into the contents of the chapter. 
 Chapters 2 through 6 discuss the high-level design challenges: 
 •  Chapter 2: Encouraging contributions to online communities 
 •  Chapter 3: Encouraging commitment to online communities 
 •  Chapter 4: Regulating behavior in online communities 
 •  Chapter 5: Dealing with newcomers 
 •  Chapter 6: Starting a community 
 The chapter ordering reflects our pedagogical experience of presenting this material 
in workshops and courses. While community startup clearly precedes the other issues 
chronologically for any community, the material in that chapter focuses on the special 
problems of the startup phase, beyond those that face communities on an ongoing 
basis. It is hard to separate out and focus on those special problems before developing 
a clear idea about how the community might operate on a steady-state basis. Similarly, 
while people must first be newcomers before they can be long-time members of a 
community, we have found that it is easier for audiences to set aside the challenges 
of how new people will be recruited and initiated until after thinking through how 
veterans will interact. Readers are, of course, free to sample the chapters in any order. 
Although there are many cross-references, the chapter can be read independently, in 
any order. 
 No book is ever complete. There are always more topics at the periphery that could 
be included. Our book says much about beginnings — new communities and the entry 
of new members to existing communities. By contrast, it says little about endings. A 
future book could usefully examine when and how to gracefully handle individual 
departures and how to gracefully close a community that no longer serves a clear 
purpose. The book also says little about the challenge of keeping an online community 
fresh over time. As with other organizational forms, if they last a long time, there is 
a danger that the world will pass them by. Designers and managers can make choices 
that enhance a community ’ s ability to monitor changes in the larger environment 
and to innovate in its practices in response to those changes. A future edition of this 
book could usefully include a chapter on organizing online communities in a way 

Chapter 1: Introduction 
17
that encourages innovation. Finally, while this book discusses how to motivate effort-
ful contributions, it says little about how to coordinate those efforts, a topic that is 
beginning to get a lot of research attention, including by some of the coauthors of 
chapters in this book. A future edition could include a chapter on coordinating effort. 
 Despite these limitations, we think that this book will provide useful guidance to 
practitioners as well as an introduction to online communities suitable for advanced 
undergraduates and professional master ’ s degree students. Through specific design 
claims, backed up with supporting examples, the book provides a wealth of design 
guidance. By organizing the exposition around fundamental design challenges, 
however, we encourage practitioners to consider alternative solutions to challenges 
they face, rather than simply adopting a feature that they have seen in other sites. 
Moreover, by grounding the design claims in theory as well as empirical examples, 
readers will be better able to reason about whether a particular technique is likely to 
work in particular online communities. 
 We hope to evolve the set of design claims and their justifications over time. Please 
send us your examples, both those that support our design claims and those that do 
not. Or post a public comment on our website, SuccessfulOnlineCommunities.com: 
join the online community of online community students, practitioners, and 
researchers! 
 Notes 
 1.  In the field of behavioral economics,  “ decision frame ” refers to the decision maker ’ s concep-
tion of the acts, outcomes, and contingencies associated with a particular choice.  Tversky and 
Kahneman  ( 1981 ) use the term more broadly, beyond the context of specific choices or 
decisions. 
 2.  We are indebted to  Thaler and Sunstein (2008) , who nicely articulated a similar argument in 
the context of choice environments, such as the selection of healthy or unhealthy foods from a 
cafeteria or whether to set aside money from each paycheck to invest for retirement. They argued 
that any choice environment will predictably nudge people toward making one choice or another 
and that there is no way to pick a default, morally neutral choice environment. Either the apples 
or the chocolate bars can be at eye level in the cafeteria checkout line, and whichever one is 
there will be consumed more often than it otherwise would. 
 References 
 Alexander ,  C. ,  S.  Ishikawa , and  M.  Silverstein .  1977 .   A Pattern Language: Towns, Buildings, Construc-
tion .  New York :  Oxford University Press . 

18 
Paul Resnick and Robert E. Kraut
 Crumlish ,  Christian , and  Erin   Malone .  2009 .   Designing Social Interfaces .  Sebastopol, CA : 
 O ’ Reilly .  
 Hansen ,  Derek L.  2007 .   Knowledge Sharing, Maintenance, and Use in Online Support Communities . 
 PhD diss., University of Michigan . 
 Kim ,  Amy Jo .  2000 .   Community Building on the Web: Secret Strategies for Successful Online Communi-
ties .  Berkeley :  Peachpit Press .  
  Kittur ,  A. , and  R. E.   Kraut .  2011 . Unpublished data. 
  Kraut ,  R. E.   2011 . Unpublished data. 
 Lithium Technologies .  2009 . The Linksys ROI Story: Support Community Delivers Significant 
Savings from Call Deflection.  http://www.lithium.com/pdfs/casestudies/Linksys-ROI-Case-
Study.pdf . 
 Mathieu ,  J. E. , and  D. M.   Zajac .  1990 .  A Review and Meta-Analysis of the Antecedents, 
Correlates, and Consequences of Organizational Commitment.   Psychological Bulletin  108  ( 2 ): 
 171  – 194 . 
 O ’ Keefe ,  Patrick .  2008 .   Managing Online Forums: Everything You Need to Know to Create and Run 
Successful Community Discussion Boards .  New York :  AMACOM Books .  
 Powazek ,  D. M.   2002 .  Design for Community: The Art of Connecting Real People in Virtual Places . 
 Indianapolis :  Pearson Technology . 
 Preece ,  Jenny .  2000 .   Online Communities: Designing Usability and Supporting Sociability .  New York : 
 John Wiley  &  Sons .  
 Rising ,  Linda .  2001 .  Design Patterns in Communications Software .  Cambridge :  Cambride University 
Press . 
 Schwartz ,  M.  2008 . The Trolls among Us.  New York Times .  http://www.nytimes.com/2008/08/03/
magazine/03trolls-t.html?_r=2 & oref=slo . 
 Shapiro ,  Carl , and  Hal R.   Varian .  1999 .  Information Rules: A Strategic Guide to the Network Economy . 
 Cambridge, MA :  Harvard Business School Press .  
 Stoddard ,  J. L. ,  E. M.   Augustson , and  R. P.   Moser .  2008 .  Effect of Adding a Virtual Community 
(Bulletin Board) to Smokefree.gov: Randomized Controlled Trial.   Journal of Medical Internet 
Research  10  ( 5 ):  e53 .  
 Thaler ,  Richard H. , and  Cass R.   Sunstein .  2008 .   Nudge: Improving Decisions about Health, Wealth, 
and Happiness .  New Haven, NH :  Yale University Press . 
 Tversky ,  Amos , and  Daniel   Kahneman .  1981 .  The Framing of Decisions and the Psychology of 
Choice.   Science 211 (4481): 453  – 458 .  
 Wenger ,  Etienne ,  Nancy  White , and  John D.   Smith .  2009 .   Digital Habitats: Stewarding Technology 
for Communities .  Portland, OR :  CPSquare .  

Chapter 1: Introduction 
19
 Wikimedia .  2011a . Wikipedia Statistics: Article Count (Official).  http://stats.wikimedia.org/EN/
TablesArticlesTotal.htm . 
 Wikimedia .  2011b . Wikipedia Statistics: Active Wikipedians.  http://stats.wikimedia.org/EN/
TablesWikipediansEditsGt5.htm . 
 Wikipedia .  2010 . Wikipedia: Version 1.0 Editorial Team/Index.  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Wikipedia:Version_1.0_Editorial_Team/Index . 
 Zuckerberg , 
 Mark . 
 2010 . 
500 
Million 
Stories. 
 http://blog.facebook.com/blog.php?post
=409753352130 . 


 2 
  Encouraging Contribution to Online Communities 
 Robert E. Kraut and Paul Resnick 
 1  Problems of Contribution 
 Many hands make light work, according to the proverb. But only if all those hands 
actually do some work. To be successful, online communities need the people who 
participate in them to contribute the resources on which the group ’ s existence is built. 
The types of resource contributions needed differ widely across different types of 
groups. Volunteers in NASA ’ s Clickworker community ( http://beamartian.jpl.nasa.gov ), 
for example, help space scientists analyze data by clicking on Mars photographs to 
trace the outline of craters. In social media communities, like YouTube, where users 
upload videos, or Gnutella, where participants share their music collections, the con-
tributed resources are the digital artifacts that users share with each other. In com-
munities such as Wikipedia or the Apache OSS project, which produce a product for 
external consumption, contributions consist of the direct production work that creates 
the artifacts (e.g., editing articles or source code), the coordination work done behind 
the scenes to plan the artifacts and the production process, and the managerial and 
administrative work that sustains the community as a whole. In many discussion 
communities, it is the conversations that participants exchange with each other that 
provide benefits to others in the community. In a technical support group, for example, 
participants provide answers to others ’ questions; in health support groups, they also 
provide emotional support and tell personal stories that engage the interests of others. 
 In almost every online community, even successful ones, important contributions 
are not being made. The introductory chapter mentioned that about two-thirds of 
articles on Wikipedia are marked as stubs, which have  “ very little meaningful content ” 
and  “ may be little more than a dictionary definition ” (Wikipedia 2011c). Even among 
articles marked by editors as relevant to a popular topic like aviation, there are more 
than 17,000 marked as stubs and 12,000 labeled as start, described as providing  “ some 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
22 
Robert E. Kraut and Paul Resnick
meaningful content, but the majority of readers will need more, ” with less than 5,000 
articles total in the five higher-quality levels (Wikipedia 2010). 
 Similarly, consider GNOME, the open-source graphical user interface for Unix-like 
operating systems. As of December 2010, the 15 most important modules in this open 
source desktop project had a total of 13,067 open bugs (see   table 2.1 ). Of these, the 
developers working on the project classified 9.4 percent of them as either critical or 
major.  
 Sometimes the contribution gap occurs because there is simply too much work to 
do with the number of hands available. This seems to be the case with the backlog 
for fixing bug requests in the GNOME project and with stubs in Wikipedia. Sometimes, 
however, hands are available but idle. One reason is that people don ’ t know what to 
do. It may be possible to increase contributions just by directing people to useful tasks. 
Because not everyone can do the same things, section 2 of this chapter explores the 
coordination effects of requests that ask people to do specific tasks. 
 Sometimes the needs are clear but volunteers don ’ t find the tasks appealing. For 
example, most writers of software code don ’ t have the same enthusiasm for writing 
documentation or translating it into a wide range of languages. Similarly, the core 
developers may not want to create drivers for specialized peripherals unless they 
 Table 2.1 
 Open GNOME bugs (as of December 6, 2010) 
 Top 15 GNOME Modules 
 Product 
 Open bugs 
 Opened in last 7 days 
 Closed in last 7 days 
 gtk+ 
 2,395 
 22 
 – 14 
 Evolution 
 2,193 
 25 
 – 45 
 nautilus 
 1,286 
 22 
 – 30 
 doxygen 
 943 
 6 
 – 1 
 rhythmbox 
 796 
 15 
 – 11 
 glib 
 703 
 24 
 – 12 
 gnome-panel 
 687 
 10 
 – 3 
 banshee 
 664 
 26 
 – 30 
 GStreamer 
 659 
 31 
 – 53 
 epiphany 
 568 
 7 
 – 4 
 GnuCash 
 511 
 9 
 – 18 
 metacity 
 460 
 0 
 0 
 gnome-shell 
 426 
 30 
 – 39 
 f-spot 
 409 
 2 
 0 
 gvfs 
 367 
 2 
 – 1 
www.Ebook777.com

Chapter 2: Encouraging Contribution to Online Communities 
23
happen to be using those devices. In addition, volunteer developers often find provid-
ing user support less attractive than creating new software or even fixing bugs. One 
of the reasons that high-technology companies like IBM, Sun, Nokia, and Red Hat 
have paid employees working on volunteer-initiated, open source software develop-
ment projects is that the volunteer workforce didn ’ t spontaneously do some of the 
work needed to make the software successful or to adapt it to commercial uses. 
 The remainder of the chapter explores ways to increase people ’ s motivation. We 
use theories from psychology and economics to identify techniques that can increase 
resource contributions from members and to identify common ways to go wrong. 
 Figure 2.1  summarizes the causal pathways that theory and empirical evidence suggest 
lead to increased motivation to contribute, labeled by the sections in this chapter 
where they are discussed. Many of the pathways derive from an expected utility frame-
work that is common in both economics and psychology. For example, classic 
expectancy-value models in organizational behavior hold that people will work hard 
if they think that doing so will lead to outcomes they value ( Vroom 1995 ;  Vroom, 
Porter, and Lawler 2005 ). Motivation is a multiplicative function of  expectancy (i.e., 
their beliefs about the probability that their action will lead to the outcome) and  value 
(i.e., the value of the outcome or satisfaction they will receive if they achieve the 
outcome). Where utility is derived from outcomes of the actions, psychological theo-
ries often posit a two-stage process in which individual effort has some impact on 
performance, and performance has some impact on outcomes. For example, in a 
running race, increased effort in the form of training might lead to completing the 
Individual
effort  
Individual
performance  
Individual
outcome  
Individual
motivation
Individual
utility
Group
performance  
Group
outcome  
6 
6 
3, 4 
4 
5 
3 
 Figure 2.1 
 Motivators of individual effort and the sections of the chapter where they are explored. 

24 
Robert E. Kraut and Paul Resnick
race faster (performance), which might lead to winning the race and collecting a 
trophy (outcome). In the online community setting, exerting effort may lead to the 
creation of a new video (performance) that, upon upload, may lead to positive com-
ments or status in the community (outcomes). 
 Satisfaction or utility need not come only from external outcomes such as comments 
from other people. It may also come directly from the actions that people pursue or 
the performance level they achieve. Since at least the time of Aristotle ( Aristotle 330 
BCE ), philosophers and psychologists have distinguished between intrinsic motives, 
in which the performance of some activity is an end in its own right, and extrinsic 
motives, in which the activity is a means to achieve some other outcome. For example, 
some people may slay monsters in the multiplayer online game World of Warcraft for 
intrinsic motives (i.e., because they enjoy the task itself or the camaraderie that devel-
ops among players who work together to fight difficult monsters), and others may do 
so for extrinsic motives (i.e., because they enjoy the status that comes from achieving 
a high level in the game). Some people edit many articles in Wikipedia because of the 
intrinsic pleasure they derive from writing about topics they care about ( Burke and 
Kraut 2008 ). Sections 3 and 4 in this chapter explore intrinsic motivations that are 
tied to effort or performance rather than extrinsic motivations tied to outcomes. 
 Section 3 continues the exploration of requests, begun in section 2 with a focus on 
their coordination effects, but focuses on a variety of persuasive techniques that may 
motivate people to comply with the requests. For example, people may be more moti-
vated to complete tasks when asked by friends or people with high status. Because 
people seem to respond to many persuasive techniques by following heuristics rather 
than carefully assessing the utility they might gain, we can think of these techniques 
as creating direct links from individual performance (task completion) to motivation. 
People are also motivated to achieve challenging goals because it enhances self-
efficacy. Thus, we can think of persuasive techniques that establish goals and provide 
feedback as enhancing a direct link between task performance and utility and as not 
requiring the mediation of externally visible outcomes. 
 Section 4 describes other ways to enhance intrinsic motivators, in particular, things 
that make tasks fun or interesting irrespective of the outcomes of that effort. For 
example, effort on the task may be more rewarding if it is undertaken as part of a social 
experience, if it is immersive, or if it affords a sense of control and mastery. Providing 
feedback about performance is one of the central design levers explored in this section. 
 Section 5 explores the design space of external rewards that can be offered for 
individual performance as a way to increase the expected utility of individual effort 
and thus enhance extrinsic motivations. Performance can lead to status rewards, 

Chapter 2: Encouraging Contribution to Online Communities 
25
privileges within the community, or more tangible rewards such as money or prizes. 
For example, building up a public reputation is not the primary motivator for most 
contributors to open source projects, but it is one of the factors that makes a difference 
for many ( Roberts, Hann, and Slaughter 2006 ). Similarly, some Wikipedia participants 
are motivated to edit in part because they hope to get promoted to an administrator 
role ( Burke and Kraut 2008 ). 
 Section 6 addresses ways to increase the expectancy value from group effort 
and outcomes. In online communities, many of the benefits created by a member ’ s 
contributions are realized by other members, or even by the general public, and coor-
dinated contributions of many people may be required to produce an outcome that 
is valued by all of them. We draw heavily from Karau and Williams ’ s  collective effort 
model ( Karau and Williams 1993 ). The group context may affect  expectancies , beliefs 
about the marginal impact of the user ’ s behavior on group performance. Thus, for 
example, professors may decline to correct errors in Wikipedia articles on which they 
have expertise because they believe that many other contributors could easily do 
the work (i.e., they have a low expectation that their edits would improve the article 
over what it would be without their contribution). The group context may also influ-
ence the value an individual will receive from the outcome of the effort, should the 
effort succeed in producing the group outcome. First, people may vary in how much 
they value the group outcome. For example, members of WikiProjects (groups of 
people who curate collections of articles on defined topics) may vary in how much 
they like the group and thus in the degree that they gain satisfaction when the group 
achieves some goal such as increasing the number of high quality articles in its 
domain. This liking of the group affects participants ’ willingness to contribute effort 
to group goals. Second, people may not value group success because they may not get 
a fair share of credit for it. Thus, for example, professors may decline to correct errors 
in Wikipedia articles on which they have expertise because they get fewer reputation 
benefits from editing Wikipedia articles than from writing short notes in a professional 
journal. 
 2  Ask and Ye Shall Receive 
 It is axiomatic that people won ’ t be able to contribute what a community needs unless 
they are aware of those needs and have the skills and resources to contribute them. 
For this reason, many production-oriented online communities publicize lists of 
needed contributions. As discussed previously, the GNOME open source development 
project has many open bugs. To let the developers know what work the project needs, 

26 
Robert E. Kraut and Paul Resnick
the project maintains reports like the one in   table 2.1  that count the bugs in each of 
the modules and classify them by severity and priority. Interested developers can drill 
down to access prioritized lists of specific bug reports. 
 Similarly, the community portal in Wikipedia contains numerous lists of actions 
that people can take to improve the encyclopedia (Wikipedia 2011b). These provide 
links to specific pages requiring specific kinds of attention, such as fact checking, 
providing citations for quotes, contributing photographs or drawings, filling in useful 
content on stubs,  “ wikifying ” (i.e., improving the formatting), and giving feedback to 
editors explicitly seeking feedback about their editing. 
 Broadcasting a description of the work may by itself elicit contributions from the 
volunteers who frequent an online community, assuming that appropriate community 
members who have the motivation, knowledge, or skill and available time notice and 
respond to the request. In many discussion sites, for example, community members 
see requests for information or other support as a part of monitoring the message 
boards for other purposes. In the Apache server community, system administrators 
who run Apache servers often monitor discussion posts because the posts can provide 
background information about problems and solutions relevant to the administrators ’ 
paid jobs. If they see requests that they can handle without much effort while moni-
toring the sites, they answer them because the costs of monitoring and responding 
are low ( Lakhani and von Hippel, 2003 ). 
 Design Claim 1  Making the list of needed contributions easily visible increases the 
likelihood that the community will provide them. 
 Some communities provide tools that reduce the burden on volunteers for monitor-
ing the tasks that they are both motivated and competent to do. The  “ watchlist ” in 
Wikipedia is such a monitoring tool; it allows a registered editor to be alerted whenever 
anyone changes or comments on a set of pages that the editor has designated. In other 
online communities, it is often possible for a community member to monitor certain 
types of content using a combination of simple filters and email, RSS feeds, or similar 
alerting mechanisms. The Bugzilla software, used as a bug tracking system for many 
open source development projects, offers advanced search and alerting features that 
allow developers to  “ get an email about any change made in Bugzilla, and which 
notifications you get on . . . bugs is fully controlled by your personal user preferences ” 
(Bugzilla 2011). Similarly, Facebook provides awareness features that show members 
changes in information generated by other people in their social networks and allows 
them to be notified of these changes by electronic mail, if they are not frequent 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Chapter 2: Encouraging Contribution to Online Communities 
27
visitors. These awareness features in turn lead to increased communication among 
Facebook friends. A number of products exist to make programming an RSS filter 
easier by helping people match changed content with keywords they care about , such 
as Feed Rinse ( http://www.feedrinse.com ) and FilterMyRSS ( http://filtermyrss.com ). 
However, even with these tools, programming filters is effortful and may require 
skill and foresight, which deters most community members from using these features. 
The more automatic these tools are, and the easier to use, the more effective they 
will be. 
 Design Claim 2  Providing easy-to-use tools for finding and tracking work that needs 
to be done increases the amount that gets done. 
 If designers have information about community participants ’  interests and behav-
ior, this information can be used to direct them to appropriate tasks in the site. 
Research on offline volunteerism shows that when potential volunteers are recruited 
through appeals that match their motivations, the appeals are more persuasive and 
lead to stronger intentions to volunteer. For example, appeals that focus on the career 
benefits of volunteering are most persuasive to those who volunteer for careerist 
reasons ( Clary et al. 1998 ). This principle of creating requests that match the interests 
of potential contributors works in online settings as well. For example, consider the 
case of a designer trying to increase conversation on a movie discussion forum. Asking 
people to respond to posts mentioning movies they had rated in the movie review 
portion of the site increased their likelihood of reading and responding to those posts, 
compared to asking them to reply to random posts ( Harper et al. 2007 ). Cosley and 
colleagues developed such an application, called SuggestBot, for Wikipedia ( Cosley, 
Frankowski, Terveen, and Riedl 2007 ). Wikipedia editors were four times more likely 
to complete a backlogged task if SuggestBot directed them toward work that matched 
their interests and competence as determined from their prior editing in Wikipedia, 
instead of directing them to a random page. Although Cosley was able to direct Wiki-
pedians to particular articles, it might be possible to use similar techniques to identify 
roles for which members of the community are well suited. For example, machine 
learning techniques can identify people who are suited to be administrators in Wiki-
pedia ( Collier et al. 2008 ), and one could use these techniques to recruit volunteers 
to become administrators. 
 Design Claim 3  Compared to asking people at random, asking people to perform tasks 
that interest them and that they are able to perform increases contributions. 
www.Ebook777.com

28 
Robert E. Kraut and Paul Resnick
 3  Structuring Requests to Enhance Motivation 
 How one asks for contributions makes a difference. When trying to elicit information 
or some other contribution in an online community, for example, asking a specific 
question rather than making a statement or asking an open-ended question increases 
the likelihood of getting a response by 50 percent ( Burke, Kraut, and Joyce 2010 ). More 
than half a century of research on attitude change and persuasion provides some 
guidance about how to make requests work. Although we do not review all the 
conclusions from that literature here, we identify some important lessons. Cialdini 
and Goldstein provide useful reviews of the literature ( Cialdini 2001 ;  Cialdini and 
Goldstein 2004 ). 
 In many cases, it is better to identify particular people and personally ask them to 
contribute. For example, as shown in   figure 2.2 , in an online chat room requests 
for help are answered up to 50 percent faster when a recipient is addressed by name 
than when the request is broadcast to everyone present in the chat room, and the 
speedup increases with the number of people present ( Markey 2000 ). The recommen-
dation to ask a particular person is consistent with decades of research on conformity 
( Milgram 1963 ),  “ get out the vote ” campaigns ( Green and Gerber 2008 ), and helping 
in emergencies ( Darley and Latan é 1968 ). For example, research on get-out-the-vote 
70
65
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
19
18
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
10
Group size
No name specified
Name specified
Response time (seconds)
 Figure 2.2 
 Group size and directing the request to a particular person ( Markey 2000 ). 

Chapter 2: Encouraging Contribution to Online Communities 
29
campaigns shows that door-to-door canvassing and phone calls in which the canvasser 
makes a request to a particular voter are much more cost effective in increasing the 
total vote than are campaigns using email or paper leafleting, even though email and 
leafleting can target a wide audience at low cost. Research on bystander interventions 
in emergencies shows that bystanders are much more likely to help if they are singled 
out and given a specific request than if the help request is broadcast to a group as a 
whole. More generally,  Latan é ’ s social impact model of persuasion ( 1981 ) holds that 
the power of a persuasive attempt increases with the number and immediacy of the 
people making the attempt and decreases with the number of people whom the per-
suaders are attempting to influence simultaneously. 
 Design Claim 4  Compared to broadcasting requirements for contribution to all com-
munity members, asking specific people to make contributions increases the likeli-
hood that they will do so. 
 Researchers who have examined persuasive communication note two separate pro-
cesses in responding to a persuasion attempt ( Chaiken, Liberman, and Eagly 1989 ). 
People sometimes systematically process messages that concern issues that they care 
strongly about, evaluating the evidence mostly in a rational way. Such deep processing 
is likely to occur, for example, when people are making an expensive purchase, such 
as a car, or deciding on a potentially dangerous medical procedure. For these types of 
decisions, they might run though an informal cost-benefit analysis, comparing the 
cost of performing an action against the benefits they will receive. In processing mes-
sages about these types of decisions, they will be strongly influenced by the quality 
of evidence and the reasoning presented. For example, they might analyze how a 
purchase or medical decision will influence outcomes they value. However, for persua-
sion attempts surrounding many routine decisions that people do not care strongly 
about, they use more superficial or heuristic processing. When deciding whether to 
jaywalk at the intersection, what to eat for lunch, or whether to answer a question in 
an online group, they are less likely to do a rational analysis of the decision and the 
information presented to them, and are more likely to be influenced by superficial 
cues and to use rules of thumb to help them make their decisions. For example, when 
choosing what to order in a fast-food restaurant, they are unlikely to conduct an 
analysis of salt and fat contained in an entr é e, even though this information is avail-
able to them ( Krukowski et al. 2006 ). On the other hand, they are likely be influenced 
by irrelevant factors such as the choice they made in this type of restaurant in the 
past, the order made by the person ahead of them in line, the combinations that the 

30 
Robert E. Kraut and Paul Resnick
chain has preorganized for them, or advertising showing the choices made by good-
looking consumers. These cues play into heuristics that often lead to a satisfactory 
decision while minimizing decision costs. It is as if the consumer is reasoning,  “ If I 
liked it in the past, I will probably like it now ” or  “ If others like it, it is probably good 
for me, too. ” 
 Many of the requests members receive in online communities involve actions and 
decisions that they don ’ t care strongly about and are therefore unlikely to evoke deep 
processing. This will be especially true for newcomers in an online community who 
haven ’ t yet become committed to it and don ’ t necessarily yet care about its welfare. 
Therefore, when asking for small contributions, requests without elaborate justifica-
tion may be successful for the casual visitor to a site. Wikipedia, for example, asks for 
financial contributions with the simple phrase  “ You can support Wikipedia by making 
a tax-deductible donation ” on its home page without elaborate rationale for why the 
donation is needed or how the money would be used to benefit either Wikipedia or 
the reader. 
 Elaborating these simple requests with messages that emphasize the benefits that 
people will receive is unlikely to help much. Prior experimental research shows that 
although a short rationale may help increase compliance with the request, the quality 
of the rationale doesn ’ t matter for small requests, because they are likely to evoke 
heuristic processing, but that the quality does matter for large contributions, which 
are likely to evoke deep processing ( Langer, Blank, and Chanowitz 1978 ). Providing a 
rationale may even hurt. For example, an experiment by Ling and colleagues showed 
that sending an email message emphasizing the benefits to the recipient or the com-
munity of making contributions in the MovieLens movie recommendation site actu-
ally decreased contributions ( Ling et al. 2005 ). Participants may have seen these 
messages as manipulative and acted opposite to their recommendations simply to 
preserve their autonomy. 
 Design Claim 5  Simple requests lead to more compliance than do lengthy and 
complex ones for decisions about which members do not care strongly. 
 The depth of processing theory indicates that the more people care about the decision 
domain, the more they will be willing to go through an informal cost-benefit analysis 
when making a decision. Managers of online communities can use preexisting differ-
ences among visitors to their site to differentiate more involved people from less 
involved ones and develop different appeals for those with high and low involvement. 
For example, they can use participation logs to provide some estimate of involvement 

Chapter 2: Encouraging Contribution to Online Communities 
31
and then display different requests to those who are long-term, actively involved 
members versus those who are first-time or casual visitors. 
 Design Claim 6  Messages stressing the benefits of contribution have a larger effect on 
people who care about the domain of the contribution. 
 Alternatively, managers can use the nature of the request itself to increase people ’ s 
involvement in decision making. In general, messages with strong fear appeal are 
compelling ( Witte and Allen 2000 ). In addition, because such messages cause people 
to take the decision process more seriously, they cause them to be especially sensitive 
to the evidence and rationale for the decision. Public broadcasting stations routinely 
resort to these types of fear appeals, warning that the station might be shut down 
without sufficient member support. One public radio station in Pittsburgh had its 
most successful fund raising campaign in history, raising more than half a million 
dollars in ten days when it announced that its license was for sale, raising fears of its 
commercialization. One can imagine that an appeal that emphasized that Wikipedia 
would need to shut down if it did not raise additional money would be effective at 
increasing contributions among committed Wikipedians, for whom the message 
conveys a strong threat against an institution they value, even though the same 
message might have no effect or even turn off casual visitors to the site. 
 Design Claim 7  Fear campaigns lead members to increase contributions in response 
to persuasive appeals. 
 Design Claim 8  Fear campaigns cause people to evaluate the quality of persuasive 
appeals. 
 When creating persuasive messages to appeal to casual visitors, it makes sense to rely 
on heuristics that influence people who will not think deeply about the decision or 
the persuasive appeal. Among the heuristics that Cialdini and Goldstein identify, we 
concentrate here on authority, liking, social proof, commitment, and reciprocity as 
ones that are especially applicable to online communities ( Cialdini 2001; Cialdini and 
Goldstein 2004) . 
 People are persuaded by others with status and authority. As  Milgram (1963)  
showed in his famous obedience experiment, people will agree to requests from an 
authority figure even if they think they are killing someone by doing so. These author-
ity and status effects occur even if the source of the status and authority is irrelevant 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
32 
Robert E. Kraut and Paul Resnick
to the persuasion attempt. Although expertise — a legitimate source of authority —
 increases persuasion and compliance with requests ( Wilson and Sherrell 1993 ), non-
relevant sources of authority do so as well. For example, pedestrians are more than 
three times more likely to jaywalk behind a man dressed in a business suit than one 
dressed in workers ’ clothes ( Lefkowitz, Blake, and Mouton 1955 ). Online, when stu-
dents were asked to comply with a request to fill out a questionnaire, they were 50 
percent more likely to do so if the request came from a professor than from another 
student, even if the requester was not from their university ( Guadagno and Cialdini 
2005 ). In Wikipedia, pronouncements and recommendations from Jimmy Wales, one 
of the cofounders, have much more weight than those from other editors. For example, 
his quote that becoming a system operator or administrator in Wikipedia is  “ not a big 
deal ” is still quoted as part of the rationale in elections to administratorship or in 
policies, seven years after he made it (Wikipedia 2011a). Although not all requests in 
online communities need to come from the founder, contribution requests that come 
from others with formal roles (e.g., administrators in Wikipedia) or from frequent 
posters are more likely to be acted upon than unidentified requests or requests from 
people with little visibility in the site. 
 Design Claim 9  Requests from high-status people in the community lead to more 
contribution than anonymous requests or requests from low-status members. 
 As Dale  Carnegie  argued in his self-help classic  How to Win Friends and Influence People 
( 1936 ), getting people to like you increases your ability to persuade them, sell to them, 
and get them to comply with your requests. This principle works online. In a phishing 
attack, perpetrators try to get victims to reveal confidential information by sending 
them email as if it came from a legitimate site. People are 4.5 times more likely to fall 
for a phishing attack when the email appears to come from one of their friends (whose 
name was extracted from the victim ’ s online social network) than when it comes from 
a stranger ( Jagatic et al. 2007 ). 
 Design Claim 10  People are more likely to comply with requests the more they like 
the requester. 
 Psychologists have long studied the factors that lead to liking ( Berscheid and 
Reis 1998 ) and have shown that most of the factors that lead one person to like 
another also increase their ability to persuade each other. For example, we tend to like 
others if they are more similar to us on any number of dimensions, from social class 
www.Ebook777.com

Chapter 2: Encouraging Contribution to Online Communities 
33
to attitudes, behavioral mimicry, and physical appearance ( Byrne 1997 ), and these 
factors all influence persuasion as well. In some clever experiments, Bailenson and 
colleagues morphed photographs of research participants with those of political can-
didates, as illustrated in   figure 2.3 . Voters are more willing to vote for candidates the 
more they liked the subject with whom the politician ’ s photo was morphed ( Bailenson 
et al. 2009 ). The effect was stronger for less partisan participants and for unfamiliar 
candidates. In another experiment, research participants conversed with a digital 
avatar delivering a persuasive message that college students must always carry their 
identity cards as a security measure ( Bailenson et al. 2009 ). Participants were more 
persuaded by the avatar when it mimicked their head movements. The online retailer 
Threadless ( http://www.threadless.com ) uses this similarity effect when it posts pic-
tures of customers, not professional models, wearing its customer-designed T-shirts 
(see   figure 2.4 ). 
 We also like others who are more physically attractive or have other desirable traits 
( Eagly et al. 1991 ). The physical attractiveness increases persuasion and compliance 
( Eagly and Chaiken 1975 ). It is for this reason that so many advertisements in print, 
television, and the web use images of attractive people to sell their products ( Baker 
and Churchill 1977 ). There are many other sources of appeal besides physical attrac-
tiveness and similarity. For example, we also tend to like people we have often seen 
in the past. All of these sources of liking could be used to increase compliance to 
requests in online communities. 
 Design Claim 11  People will be more likely to comply with requests if they come from 
others who are familiar to them, similar to them, are attractive, are of high status, or 
have other noticeable socially desirable characteristics. 
 Figure 2.3 
 Facial similarity leads to political influence ( Bailenson et al., 2009 ). 

34 
Robert E. Kraut and Paul Resnick
 Figure 2.4 
 Customers as models in Threadless ( http://www.threadless.com ). 

Chapter 2: Encouraging Contribution to Online Communities 
35
 Designers can also use the group context to directly increase peoples ’ perceptions of the 
value of an activity through various conformity and compliance techniques ( Cialdini 
2001 ). One of the most powerful techniques to change attitudes is what Cialdini terms 
 “ social proof, ” whereby people come to believe that an action or outcome is valuable 
when they are led to believe that other people are performing the actions or espousing 
a belief. For example, hotel patrons are more likely to reuse their towels when their 
hotel bathroom includes a sign saying  “ Join your fellow guests in helping to save the 
environment. Almost 75 percent of guests . . . [use] their towels more than once ” than 
when the sign used the standard environmental pitch  “ Help save the environment . . . 
show your respect for nature, ” and the effect was even stronger when guests were told 
that 75 percent of  those who had previously stayed in their room had reused a towel. 
 Indeed, social proof partially accounts for the preferential attachment that charac-
terizes so much of the online world ( Barab á si and Albert 1999 ), where more people 
connect to sites, objects, and other people who already have many people connected 
to them.  Salganik, Dodds, and Watts (2006)  demonstrated this effect experimentally 
when they created several different markets for music downloads, each with the same 
music but different consumers. Versions of the market that showed the numbers of 
people who previously downloaded each song exhibited much more inequality in 
music popularity than did versions where the previous downloads were hidden, and 
this social influence effect was strongest when the songs were displayed in a list with 
the most popular songs on top. In addition, the experiment showed that this social 
influence led to unpredictability about popularity, with the songs that were down-
loaded first getting a boost, even holding constant their overall quality. Social proof is 
one reason that a small number of the articles in Wikipedia have a disproportionate 
number of people editing them ( Capocci et al. 2006 ) and why a small number of people 
have very large social networks on social networking sites ( Backstrom et al. 2006 ). 
 Although social proof and preferential attachment often lead to an oversupply of 
some contributions and an undersupply of others, these principles can be leveraged 
to convince people to contribute in cases where they otherwise would not. For 
example, the homepage of Games with a Purpose ( http://gwap.com ) shows the top 
10 for the day ’ s point scorers. A precursor site for one of the games announced  “ 10 
million labels collected ” and showed the number of people currently logged in (von 
Ahn et al. 2004). In either case, evidence of others ’  participation is used as social proof 
to convince latecomers to play the games. 
 Design Claim 12  People are more likely to comply with a request when they see that 
other people have also complied. 

36 
Robert E. Kraut and Paul Resnick
 Decades of research in psychology and organizational behavior indicate that goals and 
goal setting strongly motivate people. Goals are objects or conditions that one seeks 
to obtain ( Locke and Kristof 1996 ). They can be long-term (e.g., create the world ’ s best 
web server) or short-term (e.g., fix all bugs by the February software release), vague 
(e.g.,  “ work on the article today ” ) or specific (e.g.,  “ write 500 words ” ), and easy (e.g., 
 “ fix ten typos ” ) or challenging (e.g.,  “ restructure the argument ” ). Hundreds of studies 
have shown that people work harder when they adopt concrete goals as an objective 
than when they have no goal or only vague goals. Specific, challenging, and immedi-
ate goals stimulate higher achievement than do easy goals, vague  “ do your best ” goals, 
or long-term goals with few milestones. 
 High-challenge goals energize performance in four ways. First, these external goals 
lead people to set higher personal goals, in turn increasing their effort. Second, goals 
cause people to persist at tasks longer than they would otherwise. Third, goals cause 
people to pay attention to and expend their effort toward thoughts and behavior that 
are relevant to the achievement of the goals and away from irrelevant or distracting 
ones. Fourth, achieving an assigned goal leads to task satisfaction, which enhances 
both self-efficacy (i.e., belief in one ’ s own ability to complete a task;  Bandura 1993 ) 
and commitment to future goals, resulting in an upward performance spiral. Both 
personal goals (e.g., to run an eight-minute mile) and organizational goals (e.g., Presi-
dent Kennedy ’ s goal for NASA to send people to the moon) can increase motivation 
and performance. 
 Goal setting can be used strategically to increase contributions. For example, the 
membership campaigns conducted by public radio and television stations effectively 
create concrete and challenging goals. Not only do these stations identify major goals 
for their listeners ( “ We need $250,000 during the fall pledge campaign to keep this 
station on the air ” ), but they also create a cascade of subgoals, such as meeting a chal-
lenge grant of raising $500 in the next hour, to motivate listeners. Fund raisers are 
explicit when describing to potential sponsors their goal-setting strategies:  “ Challenge 
grants are a great way to support [the station]. When you designate your [gift] . . . to 
be used as an on-air challenge, then other listeners are inspired to help us make the 
goal of the challenge ” (KJZZ 2011). 
 Beenen and colleagues (2004)  demonstrated experimentally the power of goals in 
the MovieLens community ( http://www.movielens.org ). MovieLens is a movie recom-
mendation site whose members evaluate movies; on the basis of their evaluations, 
they and other members receive recommendations. Members rated more movies when 
they were sent an email asking them to rate a specific number of movies in the next 
week than when the message asked them to  “ do your best ” (DYB) to rate more movies. 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Chapter 2: Encouraging Contribution to Online Communities 
37
For example, when asked to rate sixteen, thirty-two, or sixty-four movies, they pro-
vided more than thirteen on average; when asked to rate as many as they could, they 
provided only five (see   figure 2.5 ). Both theory and experiments suggest that — within 
reason — the more challenging goals are, the more effort they motivate. However, when 
goals are so challenging as to be obviously out of reach, they undermine commitment 
to the goal and may even be demotivating ( Locke, Latham, and Erez 1988 ). Although 
it ’ s possible that asking members to rate a thousand movies in the next week would 
have yielded fewer ratings, a request for sixty-four did not produce a statistically sig-
nificant drop-off in contributions as compared to a request for thirty-two. 
 Although many people use self-imposed goals as a source of self-regulation, research 
has shown that the goals people develop for themselves are not necessarily more 
powerful than goals assigned to them by an outside agent ( Locke and Latham 1991 ). 
As long as people think the goals are important and have committed themselves to 
the goals, whether the goals were self-generated or imposed by an outsider has little 
impact on the effectiveness at shaping behavior.  
 Design Claim 13  Providing members with specific and highly challenging goals, 
whether self-set or system-suggested, increases contribution. 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
16 
18 
Do your best
8 
16 
32 
64 
Goals
Number of movies rated 
 Figure 2.5 
 Ratings per person in the week following a request to rate as many movies as possible or to rate 
a specific quantity ( Beenen et al. 2004 ). 
www.Ebook777.com

38 
Robert E. Kraut and Paul Resnick
 Some online communities routinely make effective use of group goal setting. For 
example, editors in Wikipedia use the challenge of applying for Featured Article status, 
under which the article they are tending is eligible to appear on Wikipedia ’ s front 
page, as a self-management technique, thus motivating themselves to do the necessary 
work to improve their article enough to clear this hurdle.   Figure 2.6  shows the number 
of edits on article pages and the talk pages associated with articles in the months sur-
rounding their move to Featured Article status. On average, the amount of work the 
editors contribute in the month prior to the featured article decision is two to four 
times as much as they were doing in prior months and over three times as much as 
they do after the status shift ( Kittur 2011 ). 
 WikiProjects, where groups of editors in Wikipedia organize to improve articles in 
a defined domain area, use goals organized into what they call  “ Collaborations of the 
Week. ” These encourage project members to work on specific high-priority articles. 
The project chooses one or two articles under its purview and advertises that editors 
should improve them during a defined time period (typically a week). These collabora-
tions of the week are highly successful. They cause project members in particular to 
triple the work they do on the designated articles during the collaboration period (see 
 figure 2.7 ). The motivational effects of these goals also spill over, causing project 
members to do more project-related work generally, editing articles beyond those listed 
Page (avg) 
Talk (avg)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
–24
–20
–16
–12
–8
–4
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
Average edits 
Months since featured 
Featured articles 
 Figure 2.6 
 Wikipedia edits before and after reaching featured status ( Kittur 2011 ). 

Chapter 2: Encouraging Contribution to Online Communities 
39
 Figure 2.7 
 Revisions made to articles by project members and nonmembers before, during, and after a Col-
laboration of the Week ( Zhu, Kraut, and Kittur In press ). 
Nonmember
Member
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Average revised counts
on collaborated articles
Pre-collaboration
Post-collaboration
Collaboration
in the collaboration of the week. In particular, people who have participated in col-
laborations of the week then go on to engage in what organizational scholars call 
 “ organizational citizenship behavior, ” those behaviors vital to group functioning that 
aren ’ t explicit parts of people ’ s job descriptions. For example, in Wikipedia, in contrast 
with tasks like editing the main body of the articles, citizenship behaviors include 
fighting vandalism, maintenance work, and clean-up work. ( Wilson, Straus, and 
McEvily 2006 ). 
 GNOME uses six-month release cycles to coordinate work (The GNOME Project 
2011). Each date is fixed, and the release planning document lists a set of new features 
and bug fixes. Besides coordinating the work, the release schedule helps to motivate 
developers. As in the case of Wikipedia, a large fraction of all work is done in the 
month before release or the code freeze preceding the release. 
 As  Ducheneaut and colleagues (2007)  note, World of Warcraft has an interesting 
twist on the imposition of goals. As players  “ level up ” in the game (i.e., gain more 
experience points by completing game-specific tasks), they are given more talents, 
skills, and resources that allow them to complete increasingly more difficult tasks. 
The goal structure is arranged so that players gain substantial new talents and skills 
every tenth level. The amount of time players commit to the game is partially driven 
by the goals represented by these periodic increments in talents and skills. As shown 
in  figure 2.8 , the time players spend in the game increases with their level; high-level 

40 
Robert E. Kraut and Paul Resnick
players spend more time than lower-level ones. However, the opportunity to receive 
qualitative increases in talents, skills, and resources at each tenth level serves as a goal 
for players, and they increase their playing just before every tenth level to achieve the 
goal and then decrease their time in the game afterward. We return to this discussion 
of instituting goals through the use of incentives and reinforcements in section 5. 
 Design Claim 14  Coupling goals with specific deadlines leads to increases in contribu-
tion as the deadlines approach. 
 Goals are more effective when accompanied by frequent feedback about progress. The 
feedback helps to remind people about the goals and evokes a  “ high performance cycle ” 
in which success enhances self-efficacy (belief in one ’ s ability to accomplish goals), 
which in turn enhances commitment to goals ( Locke and Latham 2002 ). Thus, for 
example, fund-raising campaigns commonly display a thermometer to show progress 
toward a collective goal. Some online communities display progress toward assigned 
goals, such as completing all elements of their user profiles. Performance feedback, 
which is not necessarily tied to goal completion, is considered more generally in section 
4, and public display of feedback is considered as a reward in section 5. 
 Design Claim 15  Goals have greater effects when people receive frequent feedback 
about their performance with respect to the goals. 
1500
1250
1000
750
500
250
1
5
9
13
17
21
25
29
33
61
37
41
45
49
53
57
Playing time (in minutes)
Character level
 Figure 2.8 
 Weekly minutes playing World of Warcraft, by level ( Ducheneaut et al. 2007 ). 

Chapter 2: Encouraging Contribution to Online Communities 
41
 4  Enhancing Intrinsic Motivations 
 Many members of online communities are motivated because either effort toward the 
task or successful completion of the task is intrinsically rewarding, independent of 
other downstream consequences of performing the task. It is intrinsically rewarding 
to communicate with others in a health support group, solve programming challenges 
in an open source community, or kill monsters in an online game. 
 Intrinsically motivated actions are ones that directly fulfill some basic desire. For 
example,  White (1959)  identified a basic motivation for competence or mastery that 
he claimed to be at the root of the intrinsic motivation for curiosity, autonomy, and 
play. Others emphasize hedonic pleasure as the primary motive (e.g.,  Kahneman, 
Diener, and Schwartz 1999 ). 
 Others, such as  Reiss (2004) , see the basic drives as more diverse. He identified 
sixteen of them (as shown in   table 2.2 ). Thus, satisfying a drive for social contact 
brings fun, for curiosity brings wonder, and for status brings self-confidence. He holds 
that people behave as if they are trying to maximize these sixteen types of joys. 
 Table 2.2 
 Reiss ’ s sixteen motives ( 2004 ) 
 Motive name 
 Motive 
 Intrinsic feeling 
 Power 
 Desire to influence (including leadership; 
 related to mastery) 
 Efficacy 
 Curiosity 
 Desire for knowledge 
 Wonder 
 Independence 
 Desire to be autonomous 
 Freedom 
 Status 
 Desire for social standing (including attention) 
 Self-importance 
 Social contact 
 Desire for peer companionship (including play) 
 Fun 
 Vengeance 
 Desire to get even (competition and wining) 
 Vindication 
 Honor 
 Desire to obey a traditional moral code 
 Loyalty 
 Idealism 
 Desire to improve society (including altruism, 
justice) 
 Compassion 
 Physical exercise 
 Desire to exercise muscles 
 Vitality 
 Romance 
 Desire for sex (including courting) 
 Lust 
 Family 
 Desire to raise own children 
 Love 
 Order 
 Desire to organize (including ritual) 
 Stability 
 Eating 
 Desire to eat 
 Satiation (lack of 
hunger) 
 Acceptance 
 Desire for approval 
 Self-confidence 
 Tranquility 
 Desire to avoid anxiety, fear 
 Safe, relaxed 
 Saving 
 Desire to collect, value of frugality 
 Ownership 

42 
Robert E. Kraut and Paul Resnick
Although he holds that these basic motives are universal, different people value the 
different joys at different levels. For example, intellectuals may especially value the 
joy of wonder derived from curiosity, athletes may especially value the vitality that 
comes from physical exercise, and extroverts especially value the fun that comes from 
social contact. 
 Regardless of whether one believes that there are very few primary motives such as 
mastery or pleasure or a more diverse set, designers should create the tasks they ask 
people to do in a way that engages these motives and thereby heightens potential 
contributors ’ intrinsic motivation. Here we focus on the ways in which one can design 
tasks to fulfill four types of motivations: social contact, optimal challenge, mastery, 
and competition. However, designers should be able to link tasks to other important 
motivations as well, including romance, idealism, and family, for example. 
 Social contact is a powerful motivator. Studies that correlate the tasks people are 
engaged in with their moods show that for most people, being engaged socially is 
associated with positive moods. For example, a national sample shows that the most 
positive moods of the day occur when teens are talking and doing activities with their 
best friends, and the lowest moods of the day occur when they are alone ( Csikszent-
mihalyi and Hunter 2003 ). Studies of the general public find similar results, with the 
greatest happiness occurring when people are interacting with others ( Kubey and 
Csikszentmihalyi 1990 ). It is the intrinsic interest that so many people have in social 
interaction that makes discussion in many online forums so appealing and that aug-
ments the game play in multiplayer games. 
 It is possible to make otherwise-tedious tasks more engaging by combining them 
with social interaction. Traditional American quilting bees, husking bees (see   figure 
2.9 ), and barn raisings rely on this principle. In online question-answering sites —
 whether implemented as question-answering services such as Yahoo! Answers ( http://
answers.yahoo.com ), or as Internet forums such as those devoted to health problems 
or technical support — questions are frequently posted to instigate personal conversa-
tions that extend well beyond factual information exchange ( Harper, Moy, and 
Konstan 2009 ). These social components increase people ’ s willingness to contribute.  
 Many open-source software development projects surround their development 
activities with various types of social interaction. Consider GNOME: in addition to 
mailing lists and developer and user forums for the subprojects encompassed by the 
GNOME umbrella, GNOME also has local developer/user groups because, as their 
website says,  “ These groups provide a forum for people with an interest in GNOME and 
opportunities to network, learn GNOME, get more involved with the GNOME project 
and community, help each other,  and socialize ” (emphasis added). The GNOME founda-
tion also supports several conferences a year — to bring developers together. The confer-

Chapter 2: Encouraging Contribution to Online Communities 
43
ences combine technical talks about GNOME subprojects — intense coding sessions, 
very similar to husking bees, at which developers work simultaneously on the software —
 and after-hours dining, conversation, and drinks sessions. One conference announced 
a slogan of  “ Meet, Plan, Party, ” highlighting the interplay between the work-oriented 
and social features of these conferences (GUADEC 2007). 
 Design Claim 16  Combining contribution with social contact with other contributors 
causes members to contribute more. 
 Academics who study human play and other positive experiences, as well as game 
and other interactions designers who build positive interactive experiences, have devel-
oped theories and principles to describe some of the features that make activities fun 
( Blythe, Overbeeke, and Monk 2003 ). One of the best known is  Csikszentmihalyi  ’ s 
theory of  flow . Flow is  “ the holistic sensation that people feel when they act with total 
 Figure 2.9 
 Cozard, Nebraska: corn husking bee, 1943. 
 Source :  http://news.webshots.com/photo/1035397830001186366wNqISF . Photo courtesy of 
Richard V. Smith. 

44 
Robert E. Kraut and Paul Resnick
involvement ” ( Csikszentmihalyi 1997 , 36). It is akin to  Reiss  vitality motive mentioned 
earlier ( 2004 ). Csikszentmihalyi identifies the following characteristics of situations 
that are likely to lead to the flow state ( Csikszentmihalyi and Rathunde 1993 ). First, the 
challenges raised by the activities that players are engaged in should match or slightly 
exceed their skills. As a consequence, the enjoyment they receive from a situation 
depends not only on situational characteristics but also on their current skill level. In 
solving a crossword puzzle, for example, ones that are too easy will be boring and ones 
that are too hard will be frustrating, but some puzzles will be enjoyably challenging. 
The most enjoyable situations are ones in which people feel barely in control. Of 
course, what is challenging is likely to change as players ’ skill increases. A second 
feature of flow-inducing situations is that they have clear goals and feedback. Competi-
tion with an appropriate competitor is a simple way of ensuring that an activity has the 
appropriate challenges, complexity, and feedback to be enjoyable, but it is not the only 
way. People are happier, more satisfied, more creative, more attentive, and more satis-
fied when performing tasks in which the challenges match their skills than when 
engaged in similar activities in which the challenges and skills aren ’ t well matched. 
 Game designers have created a similar set of principles for making computer games 
enjoyable.   Table 2.3  is an analysis mapping the principles of flow to the heuristics 
game designers use to make games engaging ( Sweetser and Wyeth 2005 ). Although 
these principles were developed to describe the design of online games, similar prin-
ciples could be used in the process of making important contributions to online com-
munities more enjoyable and game-like. Consider, for example, the techniques that 
 von Ahn and Dabbish (2008)  used to design the website Games with a Purpose. On 
the site, in the ESP Game a player collaborates with a partner, under a time limit, to 
guess the partner ’ s names for pictures (see   figure 2.10 ). As with many games, each 
round has a clear goal — naming the picture — and a player gets immediate feedback 
when a partner picks the same name for a picture. Pictures differ in difficulty, and 
 “ easy names ” (i.e., one that others pairs have picked multiple times) are placed on a 
list of taboo words. Although players are randomly matched with other players and 
are given a random sample of pictures from the inventory, they have some degree of 
control, because they can cancel a trial and request a new picture at any time. The 
game is quite engaging, as evidenced by the amount of voluntary play it has received, 
but perhaps the game could have been made even more engaging if it had followed 
more of the design principles in   table 2.3 . For example, as the game accumulated 
information about a player ’ s skill level, it could have given him or her progressively 
more challenging pictures to name, for example, by selecting from among pictures 
with more words on the taboo list. Although opportunities for more extensive social 

Chapter 2: Encouraging Contribution to Online Communities 
45
 Table 2.3 
 Mapping flow to principles of game design (adapted from  Sweetser and Wyeth 2005 ) 
 Flow criteria 
 Principles of game design 
 Concentration 
 Games should 
require 
concentration, and 
the player should be 
able to concentrate 
on the game 
 Provide a lot of stimuli from different sources that are worth 
attending to  
 Quickly grab the players ’ attention and maintain their focus 
throughout the game 
 Do not burden players with unimportant tasks 
 Have a high workload, while still being appropriate for the players ’ 
perceptual, cognitive, and memory limits 
 Do not distract players from tasks that they want or need to 
concentrate on 
 Challenge 
 Games should be 
sufficiently 
challenging and 
match the player ’ s 
skill level 
 Increase level of challenge as players increase their skill levels 
 Provide new challenges at an appropriate pace 
 Skills 
 Games must support 
player skill 
development and 
mastery 
 Allow players to start playing the game without reading the manual 
 Make learning the game be part of the fun 
 Include online help so players don ’ t need to exit the game 
 Teach the game through tutorials or initial levels that feel like playing 
the game 
 Increase players ’ skills at an appropriate pace as they progress through 
the game 
 Reward players appropriately for effort and skill development 
 Have interfaces and mechanics that are easy to learn and use 
 Control 
 Players should feel a 
sense of control over 
their actions in the 
game 
 Support players ’ sense of control over their characters or units and 
their movements and interactions in the game world 
 Support players ’ sense of control over the game interface and input 
devices 
 Support players ’ sense of control over the game shell (starting, 
stopping, saving, etc.) 
 Prevent players ’ from making errors that are detrimental to the game 
and support recovering from errors 
 Support players ’ sense of control and impact onto the game world 
(their actions matter and they are shaping the game world) 
 Support players ’ sense of control over the actions that they take and 
the strategies that they use, and that they are free to play the game 
the way that they want (not simply discovering actions and strategies 
planned by the game developers) 

46 
Robert E. Kraut and Paul Resnick
 Clear Goals 
 Games should 
provide the player 
with clear goals at 
appropriate times 
 Present overriding goals early and clearly 
 Present intermediate goals clearly and at appropriate times 
 Feedback 
 Players must receive 
appropriate feedback 
at appropriate times 
 Provide players feedback on progress toward goals 
 Provide players immediate feedback on their actions 
 Provide players with ability to always know their status or score 
 Immersion 
Players should 
experience deep but 
effortless 
involvement in the 
game
 Make players less aware of their surroundings 
 Make players less self-aware and less worried about everyday life or self 
 Make players experience an altered sense of time 
 Make players feel emotionally involved in the game 
 Make players feel viscerally involved in the game 
 Social Interaction 
 Games should 
support and create 
opportunities for 
social interaction 
 Support competition and cooperation between players 
 Support social interaction between players (chat, etc.) 
 Support social communities inside and outside the game 
 Figure 2.10 
 ESP Game ( http://web.archive.org/web/20050120023005/http://www.espgame.org ). 
Table 2.3
(continued)
Flow criteria
Principles of game design

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Chapter 2: Encouraging Contribution to Online Communities 
47
interaction would make the game more fun, this richer social interaction would defeat 
the purpose of this game by allowing players to collude on naming pictures. 
 Design Claim 17  Immersive experiences with clear goals, feedback, and challenges 
that exercise people ’ s skills to their limits but still leave them in control are intrinsi-
cally motivating. 
 Feedback about one ’ s performance — especially positive feedback — can be quite motivat-
ing. Performance feedback — whether positive or negative — can be motivating because 
of people ’ s desire for self-improvement, that is, to learn and gain competence. Positive 
feedback may be especially motivating because of people ’ s desire for self-enhancement, 
in other words, to feel good about themselves and maintain positive self-esteem. 
 Such feedback can be verbal, in the form of comments from other people. This 
feedback may be part of the explanation for why people are more likely to continue 
participating in discussion groups when their initial posts get responses from others, 
which we discuss in chapter 5. Feedback can also be nonverbal, in the form of 
quantitative performance measures. For example, at the site 43Things ( http://www
.43things.com ), where members post personal goals that they are trying to achieve, 
other users can click on a  “ cheer ” button to praise someone else ’ s goal. In systems like 
Slashdot ( http://slashdot.org , a technical news and discussion site), where members 
moderate others ’ comments, achieving a score of 5 on a comment is a form of positive 
feedback. As shown in   figure 2.11 , the site ccMixter ( http://ccmixter.org ) provides 
several forms of positive feedback to authors who post audio clips, including a tally 
of how many people have recommended it or added it to a playlist and links to 
reviews. Sites with mechanisms for participants to give each other systematic, quan-
titative feedback also generate more ad hoc verbal feedback. The systematic feedback 
also seems to reduce turnover in these sites, at least for people who ask questions 
( Moon and Sproull 2008 ). In the online community context, performance feedback is 
often given publicly: the praise or gratitude is displayed not only to the recipient, but 
to everyone, and is sometimes used as the basis for awarding privileges in the site. In 
that case, it can create a more external reward, which is discussed in section 5. 
 Design Claim 18  Performance feedback — especially positive feedback — can enhance 
motivation to perform tasks. 
 Design Claim 19  Site designs that encourage systematic, quantitative feedback gener-
ate more verbal feedback as well. 
www.Ebook777.com

48 
Robert E. Kraut and Paul Resnick
 Figure 2.11 
 Information displayed on the site ccMixter ( http://www.ccmixter.org ) about an audio clip posted 
by a member. Feedback about who has recommended the clip and the first lines of recent reviews 
commenting on the clip are prominently displayed. 
 However, as  Henderlong and Lepper  note in their review of the effects of praise on 
children ’ s intrinsic motivation ( 2002 ), praise enhances intrinsic motivation when it 
enhances children ’ s sense of competence and autonomy. If the conditions for enhanc-
ing competence and autonomy are not right, praise may have no effects on intrinsic 
motivation or may even undermine it. First, the receivers must think the praise or 
other feedback is sincere. If not, they will not interpret it as a reliable signal about 
competence and may perceive it as controlling. 
 False praise is frequent enough in real-world settings, where, for example, teachers 
might praise to manipulate, motivate, or protect a particular student. In online set-
tings, praise might be judged as insincere or not credible if it is automatically given 
by a bot (a computer program) or calculated based on an unrealistic or inaccurate 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Chapter 2: Encouraging Contribution to Online Communities 
49
formula. Praise or other feedback is likely to be seen as most credible if it is specific 
and transparent and reflects the judgment of the entire community. Thus, receiving 
a score of 5 on a comment posted to Slashdot should be credible because it is based 
on the assessments of many independent readers; receiving a barnstar in Wikipedia is 
less credible because it is based on the judgment of only a single editor. In Wikipedia, 
barnstars received for well-defined activities, such as the Graphic Designer ’ s Barnstar 
awarded to those who work tirelessly to provide Wikipedia with free graphic files, are 
more likely to be seen as credible than those that reward a diffuse pattern of behavior, 
such as the Random Acts of Kindness Barnstar, awarded for  “ going the extra mile to 
be nice, without being asked ” or even the Original Barnstar for  “ particularly fine 
contributions to Wikipedia. ” 
 Design Claim 20  Performance feedback enhances motivation only when it is consid-
ered to be sincere. 
 Performance feedback that is comparative in nature can be especially motivating. 
Some people enjoy the thrill of competition and the feeling of beating a competitor. 
Even those who are not naturally competitive may gain a sense of competence from 
knowing that their performance was better than that of other people, especially if 
the other people are known to have tried hard. Many online communities maintain 
scores or levels for members, based on their cumulative activity, and display the scores 
prominently enough that members are naturally drawn to compare their own scores 
or levels with others. World of Warcraft provides a good example because players are 
always exposed to their current level, as well as to the levels of other players, as labels 
attached to their avatars. Sometimes explicit comparisons are made, especially in the 
form of  “ leaderboards ” or top-ten lists. For example, the Hall of Fame at Slashdot 
shows the ten most active authors and submitters; Threadless shows the ten who have 
earned most points for submitting designs, referring customers, submitting photos, or 
performing other actions that the site owners value. 
 Comparative performance feedback, however, can also decrease motivation, for 
several reasons. First, if people feel ambivalent about their participation in the com-
munity or about the desirability of performing the tasks, comparisons showing that 
they have done more than others may demotivate them. For example, some users of 
an online gaming site might play less if reminded about how many hours they had 
 “ wasted ” on the site. Second, people who are informed that their contributions are 
unusually high may feel that they have  “ done enough. ” For example, in a field experi-
ment, users of the MovieLens site were told how the number of movies they had rated 
www.Ebook777.com

50 
Robert E. Kraut and Paul Resnick
compared to the median of all users. Those who were below or near the median rated 
more movies in the subsequent time period than a control group did. However, those 
who were well above the median did not increase their contributions ( Chen et al. 
2010 ). 
 Third, if others ’ performance is seen as unattainably high, people may be discour-
aged from even trying. This is especially problematic when leaderboards elevate the 
top ten or twenty-five participants in populations of tens of thousands. Although the 
leaderboards may be motivating for the participants already on the list or within strik-
ing distance, they may be demotivating for the vast majority of members who perceive 
that they have no chance of making the list. One solution to this problem is to make 
comparisons based only on recent activity, such as the previous week. Another pos-
sibility is to tailor them to the individual, identifying some dimension on which the 
individual stands at the most motivating level. Amateur sports competitions use this 
technique when they have separate categories for seniors, for example. An extreme 
example comes from a location-based game for iPhone: outWord. It provides feedback 
that a user has the highest score within a certain area (see   figure 12 ). The user is always 
the best, but the size of the area increases as the user plays more. 
 Design Claim 21  Comparative performance feedback can enhance motivation, as long 
as high performance is viewed as desirable and potentially obtainable. 
 Finally, publicly displayed performance feedback — especially leaderboards — can create 
a competitive, game-like atmosphere, which may demotivate participation and con-
tribution, especially for noncompetitive participants and especially in communities 
in which a supportive atmosphere is desirable. For example, when teaching a course 
on online communities, one of the authors frequently requires students to engage in 
online discussion of course materials and provides students with the ability to  “ vote 
up ” the comments of their peers that they like. In the initial design of the course, 
those votes were accumulated into a leaderboard showing the top vote getters for the 
previous week and cumulatively. However, after a few weeks, a competitive atmo-
sphere emerged that led some students to stop participating. In later versions of the 
course, the leaderboard was turned on for only a week or two, just to let students 
experience its impacts. 
 Design Claim 22  Performance feedback — especially comparative performance 
feedback — can create a game-like atmosphere that may have undesirable consequences 
in some communities. 

Chapter 2: Encouraging Contribution to Online Communities 
51
 5  Enhancing Extrinsic Motivations 
 In contrast to intrinsic motivations, rewards are extrinsic motivators. There are plenty 
of reward programs in online communities that appear to have the desired effects. For 
example, Sermo ( http://www.sermo.com ), an online community for doctors, intro-
duced a reward of an iPod for any member who brought in at least ten new members. 
In the first few months of the program, although eleven members referred exactly ten 
 Figure 2.12 
 outWord is an outdoor spelling game that compares a player ’ s scores with other players within 
a variable radius that grows as scores do. 

52 
Robert E. Kraut and Paul Resnick
new members, only four referred exactly nine, and three referred exactly eight, sug-
gesting that the iPod had a motivating effect — at least for those who were close to 
achieving the reward. But reward programs don ’ t always work, and sometimes they 
have undesirable side effects, so even if a community can afford to give out expensive 
rewards, that may not always be the most effective strategy. To guide choices, we start 
by examining the types of rewards and why they work. 
 Recipients may value reputation or status markers because these rewards can change 
how other people interact with them. Many online communities maintain reputation 
information based on the history of someone ’ s participation in a community and 
display it next to the person ’ s username wherever it appears in the online community ’ s 
content or in the user ’ s profile page. For example, at Cisco ’ s tech support forums 
( http://homecommunity.cisco.com ), poster IDs are shown with labels like  “ newbie, ” 
 “ regular visitor, ”  “ senior contributor, ” or  “ expert. ” Presumably, experts are treated with 
more respect and deference. 
 Privileges can also act as rewards. In many online communities, not all the activi-
ties in the community are open to everyone. Initially, newcomers may be allowed to 
read but not to post, or their posts may have to be moderated before becoming publicly 
visible. Eventually, they may earn the privilege of posting without moderation. On 
Slashdot, users can earn the privilege of moderating others ’ comments and of posting 
comments that start with a score of 2 rather than 1. Other online communities require 
members to earn the privilege of uploading a personal photo to their profile. Members 
may see privileges as desirable either because they directly value the activity granted 
to them or because they value it indirectly, for what it symbolizes. For example, privi-
leges can serve as status symbol or a validation of a recipient ’ s competence or sense 
of belonging. 
 Last but not least, online communities can provide tangible rewards. Money is the 
purest form of tangible reward — it can be spent on anything that the recipient chooses. 
Amazon ’ s Mechanical Turk ( https://www.mturk.com ), where people are paid small 
amounts of money to complete small tasks, uses financial rewards to motivate contri-
bution. It is a marketplace for work, where those with tasks to be done list them to 
be completed by Turkers (as members of the Mechanical Turk community are known). 
Each task has a piece rate wage associated with it. For example, Turkers might be asked 
to fill out a short survey for ten cents or describe an image for eight cents. On May 
20, 2010, Amazon had more than a hundred thousand tasks posted on Mechanical 
Turk. Often, however, rather than cash, tangible rewards are given in the form of 
specific prizes, such as an iPod, or points that can be redeemed for a limited set of 
prizes, or charitable donations to causes that the recipients support. 

Chapter 2: Encouraging Contribution to Online Communities 
53
 Design Claim 23  Rewards — whether in the form of status, privileges, or material 
benefits — motivate contributions. 
 Rewards may be contingent on the quality of the contributions that are made 
( performance-contingent rewards ) or may be contingent solely on effort ( task-contingent 
rewards ). In many online community settings, once people choose to engage in small, 
discrete tasks, they will perform them to the best of their ability, regardless of the 
reward level, even if the reward is not performance-contingent. For example, two sepa-
rate field experiments conducted by different authors on the now-defunct question-
answering site Google Answers found that questions accompanied by larger payments 
were more likely to be answered, but among questions that were answered under either 
payment system there was no difference in answer quality ( Jeon, Kim, and Chen 2010 ). 
Similarly, on Amazon Mechanical Turk, higher prices for tasks increased the quantity 
of tasks completed but not the quality of work that people did ( Mason and Watts 2009 ). 
 Design Claim 24  With task-contingent rewards for small, discrete tasks, larger rewards 
motivate people to take on tasks but do not produce higher effort on accepted tasks. 
 Perverse Incentives: Gaming the System 
 Although external rewards can encourage contributions, two caveats are in order. The 
first caveat is that rewards sometimes create the wrong incentives. When the rewarded 
activities are imperfect proxies for the behaviors that the community really wants to 
encourage, rewards may induce  “ gaming the system, ” in which members take actions 
that are rewarded but are not actually valuable. If the action to be rewarded is inviting 
new members, an attacker may invite new members who have no interest in the com-
munity or even invent fictitious entities to invite and then collect the reward for 
inviting them. If the action to be rewarded is posting comments or reviews, the 
attacker can post blank messages, nonsense messages, or copies of text provided by 
other people. If the action to be rewarded is to rate or vote, an attacker can choose 
randomly rather than providing a considered opinion. What ’ s worse, bots can be 
written to carry out these unhelpful but rewarded actions on a large scale. If that 
happens, the net effect of the rewards may be detrimental to the online community 
even if the rewards motivate useful contributions from most members. 
 Design Claim 25  Rewards cause some people to  “ game the system, ” undertaking 
counterfeit actions that will be rewarded but that do not actually contribute to the 
community. 

54 
Robert E. Kraut and Paul Resnick
 Rewards that are contingent solely on task completion, rather than on quality, are 
especially vulnerable to the counterfeit action of low effort. On Amazon ’ s Mechanical 
Turk, researchers have found it necessary to include some validation that checks 
whether tasks are being completed too quickly and compares results among several 
people doing the same task to avoid getting contaminated results from people trying 
to collect the money without seriously attempting the tasks ( Kittur, Chi, and Suh 
2008 ). 
 Another example comes from Sermo, the online community for doctors. The 
primary interaction is sharing case consults, each with a mini-poll asking what other 
physicians thought of the case as well as an opportunity for free-response comments. 
The business model for the site, however, is to provide information from doctors to 
other interested parties such as insurance companies and hedge funds. In order to 
encourage physicians to respond to polls on the site, some of which come from outside 
parties, physicians were offered monetary payments for responding to those polls. The 
rewards seemed to influence a few doctors to game the system in the first few months 
that it was in operation. For example, a few doctors voted on nearly every item in the 
system, spending only a couple of seconds on each item, and voting disproportion-
ately for the first option in each poll. The site has since reduced its emphasis on 
monetary rewards and taken countermeasures to discourage such gaming. 
 Rewards for engaging in internal site moderation can create the same perverse 
incentives. For example, Slashdot awards  “ karma points ” to members for various 
activities, including voting on the quality of others ’ comments. A similar  “ experience 
points ” system exists at the Everything2 site ( http://everything2.com ), an edited web 
publication where members write essays about almost anything, with experience 
points gained for using one ’ s available votes. This system naturally leads to  “ vote 
dumping, ” wherein people vote without thinking very deeply about what they ’ re 
voting on or whether they ’ re voting up or down. Although such behavior was a nega-
tive contribution to the community it still gains points. On Everything2, there ’ s even 
a post — lovingly updated for several years — with suggestions of ideas for where to 
dump one ’ s votes ( Footprints 2005 ). 
 Similar problems can occur in online communities that provide privileges, status 
cues, or other rewards based on the number of posts made. In an effort to increase 
post counts, some users contribute many short and not very informative posts. If only 
status is at stake, the danger may be small because people may gain official status 
from having a high post count but members who regularly interact with them will 
remember them as making low-quality contributions. When the stakes are higher, 
however, this effect can be a problem. For example, the product review site Epinions 

Chapter 2: Encouraging Contribution to Online Communities 
55
( http://www.epinions.com ) paid royalties to people who post reviews. Initially, this 
was paid based on the number of readers of each review, which was affected more by 
the popularity of the product than the quality of the review.  
 Design Claim 26  Rewards that are task-contingent but not performance-contingent 
lead to members gaming the system by performing the tasks with low effort. 
 If counterfeits can be detected, rewards for counterfeit actions can be withheld. The 
reward for a real action can then be set sufficiently high to counteract the difference 
in cost between the high-effort real action and the low-effort counterfeit action. Thus, 
for example, rather than rewarding people for any post they make, rewards may be 
offered only for posts that others read, made many replies to, or rated highly. Over 
time, ePinions shifted to a reward based on the extent to which the information was 
used by consumers as part of buying decisions, a reward that is arguably more 
performance-contingent. Rewards for bringing in new members can be contingent on 
the new people sticking around for some time or making contributions themselves. 
Slashdot introduced a system called  “ meta-moderation ” that eliminates the incentive 
for vote dumping: each moderation vote is examined by five other users, selected at 
random, who opine on whether the moderation was fair. Members whose votes are 
often marked as unfair lose karma points and may even lose the privilege of moderat-
ing. (Of course, if meta-moderation gains karma, then the same problem of vote 
dumping may occur there.) 
 Unfortunately, because many genuine contributions involve providing information 
in the form of messages, ratings, tags, and so on, it is often not possible to tell with 
certainty whether a contribution is genuine or counterfeit, even in hindsight. For 
example, a movie rating that disagrees with everyone else ’ s may be a counterfeit, i.e., 
may be selected at random in order to receive a reward merely for rating, or may reflect 
a genuine — though unpopular — opinion about the movie. Thus, a rating that disagrees 
with the consensus may be a good candidate to be a counterfeit, but refusing to reward 
all such ratings reduces the rewards that are made to genuine ratings as well. 
 As long as there is a performance metric that tends to be higher, on average, when 
people exert higher effort on the task, scores can be assigned in a way that eliminates 
incentives for gaming. Consider, for example, a simplified situation in which there 
are only two possible performance outcomes: Good and Bad. Suppose that exerting 
high effort leads to a Good performance measurement 80 percent of the time and that 
low effort leads to a Good performance measurement only 10 percent of the time. If 
a reward of 10 is given for a Good and 0 for a Bad evaluation, the expected reward 

56 
Robert E. Kraut and Paul Resnick
for high effort is 8, and the expected reward for a counterfeit, low-effort action is 1. 
Thus, even though there is some reward for a low effort, there is additional expected 
reward from effort. If the cost of effort is more than 7, the reward can be scaled in 
order to make the additional expected reward large enough to create an incentive 
for high effort. Thus, even though there may be benefits from low-effort contributions, 
the benefits from high-effort contributions are enough better to make that preferable. 
If we wish to make the expected reward for the counterfeit action 0, we can simply 
subtract an appropriate amount from everyone ’ s reward. Doing so creates the risk, 
however, that a genuine action will get a negative reward 20 percent of the time, which 
may not be desirable or feasible. This technique can, in principle, be extended to 
situations in which there is no objective way to evaluate task performance but 
performance can be compared among a set of contributors ( Miller, Resnick, and Zeck-
hauser 2005 ). 
 Design Claim 27  Performance-contingent rewards can be set in a way that prevents 
gaming; this is true even if performance evaluation is imperfect, as long as it is some-
what informative. 
 Although performance-contingent payments may be designed to prevent gaming in 
principle, in practice it may be difficult to calibrate rewards to produce the precise 
expected payoffs and to convince the participants that gaming is not in their interest. 
Thus, other simpler approaches to rewarding while discouraging gaming are often 
appropriate. 
 People are unlikely to experience positive utility from privately delivered praise and 
thank-yous for counterfeit actions. For example, if someone enters a rating selected 
at random or a comment with no new information in it, even if praise or thanks are 
received, the recipient is unlikely to gain utility from it, knowing that the contribution 
was really a counterfeit. Knowing that praise and gratitude are undeserved destroys 
their utility. The key insight here is that the same verbal feedback may have different 
utility to people depending on whether they undertook genuine or counterfeit actions. 
 The same logic can be applied to differentiate between status and privileges on one 
hand and tangible rewards on the other. Status and privileges within the community 
may induce less gaming than rewards that are valuable outside the community because 
status and privileges within the community may not be very valuable to people who 
do not make genuine contributions to the community. In some communities, however, 
such as Slashdot, even status and privileges within the community were sufficient 
rewards to engage many people in gaming the system. 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Chapter 2: Encouraging Contribution to Online Communities 
57
 Design Claim 28  Status and privileges are less likely to lead people who are not 
invested in a community to game the system than are tangible rewards. 
 An alternative approach tries to limit gaming by making it harder for the attacker to 
find counterfeit actions, rather than by eliminating incentives for an attacker to 
choose the counterfeit actions. Imagine that an attacker is trying to get rewards by 
performing low-cost actions that do not actually contribute to the community. If the 
eligibility criteria are transparent, it will be easy for the attacker to find actions that 
will be eligible. Moreover, if the schedule is predictable, the attacker will get immediate 
feedback about whether a particular action was successful in meeting the eligibility 
criteria and can thus learn quickly which actions to keep doing. By contrast, if the 
criteria are not transparent and the schedule is unpredictable, it will be harder for an 
attacker to find a set of rewarded actions that he or she can undertake at low cost. 
Moreover, in a dynamic cat-and-mouse game in which the attackers keep finding new 
attacks and the system designers keep adjusting the eligibility criteria in an attempt 
to disrupt the attacks, it will take attackers longer to adjust to the countermeasures. 
Nontransparency and unpredictability do not eliminate the possibility of gaming. But 
they do make gaming harder, and that difficulty may be sufficient in many practical 
situations, especially if the rewards are of only moderate value. 
 One online community that has adopted this approach is Slashdot. We have already 
discussed the problem of vote dumping, which Slashdot tried to counteract by evaluat-
ing the quality of votes through meta-moderation. Karma points are also awarded for 
a variety of other actions, including posting comments that are voted up by other 
people. Though this might seem to be a performance-contingent reward, there are 
well-known tricks for posting comments that will be well-received, even though they 
contribute little to the conversation, such as reposting popular comments from previ-
ous conversations or reciting inside jokes. Such activities earned their own colloquial 
name  “ karma whoring. ” The site administrators then made the criteria less transpar-
ent. Although most of the source code that runs the Slashdot site is made freely avail-
able, some key elements that determined point allocations were kept hidden so that 
karma whores would not be able to inspect the exact rules or know about changes to 
them. Finally, they made the feedback about karma scores imprecise: instead of dis-
playing an exact numeric score, each user ’ s karma level is now displayed using very 
coarse-grained categories ( “ none, ”  “ positive, ”  “ good, ” or  “ excellent ” ), so that it is very 
difficult to track the effect on one ’ s numeric score of a particular action. 
 Google has adopted a similar strategy of nontransparency with its algorithm for 
ranking web pages. Google assigns a numeric score to every web page that it indexes. 
www.Ebook777.com

58 
Robert E. Kraut and Paul Resnick
Pages with higher scores are shown higher in search results. The initial algorithm, 
PageRank, was published as an academic publication. Generally, pages get higher 
scores (or PageRanks) if they are linked to by other sites with high scores. Because 
many sites would like to appear higher in search results, there is a large incentive to 
game the system: indeed, the whole field of search engine optimization (SEO) market-
ing emerged to help website operators increase their PageRank. Academic researchers 
have demonstrated that it is impossible to make any algorithm like PageRank com-
pletely immune to gaming and still have some other desirable properties in assigning 
scores to naturally occurring pages ( Altman and Tennenholtz 2008 ). It is possible, 
however, to make it quite difficult. Google has made revisions to the initial PageRank 
algorithm but has not publicly revealed what they are. Moreover, the exact PageRank 
for a web page is not publicly available — only an integer score in the range 1 – 10. 
Together, these elements of nontransparency make it difficult to develop and test 
strategies for gaming PageRank. Most SEO marketing firms now focus on helping their 
clients make pages that will legitimately earn high PageRanks (e.g., by posting content 
that is of genuine interest) rather than on gaming the Google algorithm. 
 Design Claim 29  Nontransparent eligibility criteria and unpredictable reward sched-
ules lead to less gaming of the system than do predictable rewards. 
 Trade-offs between Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation 
 The second caveat concerning external rewards is that although they can increase 
extrinsic motivation, they may not leave all other costs and benefits unchanged. Both 
psychologists and economists have argued that one should be careful about providing 
rewards and other extrinsic motivators for activities that people find intrinsically 
interesting, because doing so undermines their intrinsic interest in the task. Conceptu-
ally, intrinsically motivated activities are ones people are willing to do for their own 
sake, without an external incentive. Psychologists use the term  “ intrinsically moti-
vated activities ” narrowly to refer to activities that commonsense or empirical data 
show are fun, interesting, or challenging. Economists use a broader definition ( Frey 
and Jegen 2001 ) referring to activities that people perform without external incentives, 
regardless of whether they are fun. For example, economists include as intrinsic moti-
vations an altruistic concern for others ’ welfare, such as parents ’  personal bonds with 
daycare teachers that cause them to retrieve their children on time, a desire to comply 
with social norms, or the  “ civic virtue ” that causes some people to pay their taxes 
without compulsion or fear that their tax evasion will be uncovered ( Gneezy and 
Rustichini 2000a ;  Meyerson, Weick, and Kramer 1996 ,  2006 ). 

Chapter 2: Encouraging Contribution to Online Communities 
59
 Several meta-analytic reviews (i.e., quantitative reviews) of the experimental litera-
ture show that providing rewards for performing behaviors can have a small but reli-
able and substantively significant effect of undermining the performers ’ intrinsic 
motivation ( Cameron, Banko, and Pierce 2001 ;  Deci, Koestner, and Ryan 1999 ). In 
laboratory experiments, for example, children are less likely to play with art materials 
that they enjoy if they were first rewarded for playing with them and then the rewards 
were removed ( Lepper and Greene 1975 ).  
 Although the theory is still incomplete, tangible incentives seem to undermine 
intrinsic motivation in part because they undercut people ’ s feelings of autonomy and 
competence ( Deci, Koestner, and Ryan 1999 ). In particular, cognitive evaluation theory 
( Deci and Ryan 1985 ) and the larger self-determination theory (SDT) of which it is a part 
hold that people will be more intrinsically interested in tasks under environmental con-
ditions that cause them to feel competent and autonomous when acting. When people 
perceive rewards as controllers of their behavior, rewards typically decrease their intrin-
sic motivation in the task. This principle is consistent with the empirical findings that 
task-contingent tangible rewards depress intrinsic motivation. These are exactly the 
types of rewards that people will perceive as likely to control their behaviors. On the 
other hand, when people see the rewards as positive feedback that they are competent, 
then the rewards should enhance intrinsic motivation rather than undermine it. This 
principle is consistent with empirical findings that both verbal rewards (e.g.,  “ You are 
doing fine ” ) and tangible rewards received for exceeding others ’ performance enhance 
intrinsic motivation, because both give people feedback about how well they are doing. 
 Figure 2.13  from  Cameron et al. ’ s (2001)  meta-analysis provides a summary of the 
experimental evidence from many studies; the findings are largely consistent with the 
CET theory ( Cameron, et al. 2001 ). First, rewards undermine motivation only when 
the activities were intrinsically motivating to start with. In contrast, when the activi-
ties are initially dull, uninteresting, or aversive, extrinsic rewards seem to enhance 
intrinsic motivation. 
 The form of tangible rewards may also affect whether they crowd out intrinsic 
motivations. Monetary rewards frame an interaction as purely a transaction, inviting 
recipients to assess whether the payment is sufficient compensation for the action. 
On the other hand, prizes may be viewed as bonus thank-you gifts acknowledging the 
work and thus supplement rather than supplant any intrinsic motivations recipients 
might have had. For example, participants in lab experiments work harder for a 50-cent 
candy bar, which they perceive as a gift, than for 50 cents in cash, which they perceive 
as insufficient payment for the work they are doing ( Martins, Gilson, and Maynard 
2004 ). Similarly, rewards in the form of donations to the recipients ’ chosen charity 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
60 
Robert E. Kraut and Paul Resnick
may also avoid framing the interaction as a transaction. In a field experiment, women 
were less likely to donate blood when offered a small payment for their contribution, 
but allowing the subjects to redirect the payment to a charity eliminated the crowding 
out effect ( Mellstr ö m and Johannesson 2008 ). Prizes and status rewards may also have 
an added benefit if they serve as a public signal of a recipient ’ s affiliation or generosity. 
For example, a mug with an NPR logo may be worth more to an NPR contributor than 
the cost of providing that mug: a Wikipedia T-shirt may be more valuable as a prize 
for Wikipedia editors than would a cash prize equal to the cost of the T-shirt. 
 Design Claim 30  Adding a task-contingent reward (for doing or finishing a task, 
regardless of performance) to an already interesting task causes people to be less inter-
ested in the task. The effect is larger for monetary rewards than for prizes, status 
rewards, and charitable donations. 
All reward
Low-interest
tasks
(+)
High-interest
tasks
Verbal
(+)
Tangible
Expected
Unexpected
(0)
Task
noncontingent
(0)
For doing
well
(–)
For doing
task
(–)
For each
unit solved
(–)
For surpassing
a score
(0)
For exceeding
others
(+)
Less than
maximum reward
(–)
Maximum reward
(0)
For finishing
task
(0)
 Figure 2.13 
 Summary of the meta-analysis showing when rewards undermine free-choice intrinsic motiva-
tion. 0 = no reliable effect; − = statistically significant negative effect of reward; + = statistically 
significant positive effect of reward. 
 Source : From  Cameron et al. 2001 . 
www.Ebook777.com

Chapter 2: Encouraging Contribution to Online Communities 
61
 Psychologists who have studied the trade-offs between rewards and intrinsic motiva-
tion believe that the preservation of intrinsic motivation for learning is an important 
goal in its own right. Because many of them are concerned with educational applica-
tions of rewards, they want to know whether students will read, write stories, draw, 
track down information on the Internet, or do other fun, educational activities in 
settings in which they are no longer rewarded for them. 
 However, designers and managers of online communities are less likely to care 
about intrinsic motivations per se and more likely to care about the combined effect 
on an ongoing basis of rewards and intrinsic motivation on community members ’ 
contributions. They want to know, for example, whether people will write and 
comment more on Slashdot when doing so earns them karma points. Will they con-
tribute more T-shirt designs to Threadless if they are paid for good designs? Will they 
edit more articles in Wikipedia if doing so earns them barnstars or a promotion to 
administrator status? The designers and managers don ’ t care if the contributions are 
the result of intrinsic or extrinsic motivations. 
 Because both extrinsic and intrinsic motivations can lead people to perform activi-
ties, the effects of a reward are likely to depend on how it simultaneously influences 
extrinsic and intrinsic motivations. In particular, rewards that reduce intrinsic motiva-
tion more than they increase extrinsic motivation are likely to have the overall effect 
of reducing the probability that people will perform the activity. However, even if a 
reward decreases intrinsic motivation, if it increases extrinsic motivation more, it will 
have its desired design effect of increasing the probability that people will perform 
the action. The net effects of a reward will depend upon how it simultaneously influ-
ences these two types of motivations. If designers offer a tangible incentive for a 
contribution, like the money that Threadless contributors can earn for their T-shirt 
designs, the incentive is likely to increase their extrinsic motivations. It will also 
invoke the perception that people contribute  in order to earn prizes and thus reduce 
people ’ s intrinsic motivation to draw and submit design. If the incentive is too small, 
then the increase in extrinsic motivation will not compensate for the reduction in 
intrinsic motivation. 
 This reasoning is consistent with a series of observations and experiments among 
economists that show that small rewards reduce the probability of people performing 
an activity compared to either no reward or a large reward. For example, in Switzer-
land, about 20 percent of political volunteers reported receiving some financial rewards 
for their work ( Frey and Goette 1999 ). Those who received monthly fees less than 
US$35 worked for fewer hours (12 hours per month) compared to people who received 
no fees (14 hours per month) and to those who received fees greater than US$50 (21 

62 
Robert E. Kraut and Paul Resnick
hours per month), even when controlling for hours worked per week in regular jobs 
and for gender. Two experiments by  Gneezy and Rustichini (2000b)  show similar 
results using more controlled methods. College students who were given 60 New 
Israeli Shekels (NIS) to participate in an experiment answering IQ test – type questions 
answered fewer of them when they were given an additional 0.1 NIS for each answer 
than when they were given no additional money or either 1 or 3 NIS per answer 
( Gneezy and Rustichini 2000b ). In a related experiment, schoolchildren collected one-
third less money for a charity when they were told that the experimenters would pay 
them a fee of 1 percent of the money they collected than when they were not told 
they would receive fees (36 percent reduction) or were told that they would get a fee 
of 10 percent of the collection (30 percent reduction). 
 How small must the incentive be before it fails to compensate for a reduction in 
intrinsic motivation? As  Gneezy and Rustichini  state,  “ the exact determination of this 
quantity in experimental or real-life situations is likely to be difficult and subtle ” 
( Gneezy and Rustichini 2000b , 806). The incentives that Threadless offers its members 
as a challenge to submit winning T-shirt designs on a theme is probably sufficient: 
travel, accommodations, and three-day tickets for two to a music festival, along with 
a $500 gift certificate, $2,000 in cash, and a  “ commemorative swag bag ” for the loot. 
Had it offered only the swag bag without the free trip, the incentive might have 
invoked the work-for-reward schema while providing insufficient reward. In other 
settings, the trade-offs are less clear. If the barnstars in Wikipedia evoke the work-for-
reward schema, it is not clear without deep immersion in Wikipedia culture how the 
relative value of one type of barnstar compares to other types of barnstars and to the 
fun of editing. 
 Design Claim 31  Small tangible rewards are likely to reduce contributions for intrinsi-
cally interesting tasks; larger rewards are likely to increase contributions. 
 6  Enhancing the Expectancy Value of Group Outcomes 
 The previous two sections considered ways to increase the intrinsic and extrinsic 
benefits that accrue directly to the individual; in this section, we consider the indirect 
benefits that accrue to an individual through the impact of individual effort on a col-
lective outcome. The collective effort model, described in the introduction to this 
chapter and illustrated in   figure 2.1 , predicts that people will contribute more in a 
group setting when they value group outcomes more and when they expect their own 
effort to have a greater influence on the group ’ s performance and hence on outcomes. 

Chapter 2: Encouraging Contribution to Online Communities 
63
We consider design alternatives that can influence both expectations about impact on 
group outcomes and valuations of group outcomes.  
 Empirical research shows less social loafing in group settings when people like the 
group more ( Karau and Williams 1993 ). Chapter 3 explores in detail how to enhance 
individual liking for and commitment to an online community, both by building 
bonds with particular members and by increasing their attachment to the group as 
whole. Here we simply note that any design alternatives that increase liking of or 
commitment to the group should also increase willingness to contribute.  
 Design Claim 32  Commitment to an online community group increases willingness 
to contribute to it. 
 According to the collective effort model, people will contribute more to a group if 
they think their contributions make a difference to the group ’ s performance. One 
way to influence beliefs about the efficacy of individual effort on group performance 
is to reduce or cap the size of the group ( Latane and Nida 1981 ). Markey and 
colleagues, for example, showed that people participating in online chat groups were 
less likely to answer questions posed by newcomers when more people were present 
( Markey, Wells, and Markey 2002 ). Clearly, there are trade-offs in online communities 
between having large numbers of participants, each of whom can provide content 
or make some other type of contribution, and capping their size, so that each 
participant contributes more and likes the communities better (see chapter 3). As 
 Kim (2000 , chapter 9) suggests, creating subcommunities by partitioning a larger 
one into interest groups or separate forums addresses this dilemma. Thus, both Face-
book and LinkedIn get the best of both worlds by exploiting a huge membership 
base subdivided into subcommunities based on the college from which members 
graduated, their prior employers, issues around which they rally, or their personal 
social networks. 
 Design Claim 33  People will be more willing to contribute in an online group when 
the group is small rather than large. 
 In addition to capping the size of online groups, one can also enhance the expectancy 
link in the collective effort model by directly informing people about the uniqueness 
of their contributions. According to the collective effort model, if people believe 
that their contributions are redundant with those that others in the group can 
provide, then there is little reason to contribute because their contributions have 

64 
Robert E. Kraut and Paul Resnick
little likelihood of influencing group outcomes. Conversely, if they think they are 
unique, they should be more motivated to contribute because their contributions 
are likely to influence the group.  Ling and colleagues (2005)  have shown experimen-
tally that this is the case in online communities. For example, in one experiment 
using the MovieLens movie-recommendation site as a testbed, they showed that 
people who had seen art-cinema movies — which few MovieLens members rate — and 
who were reminded of their unique movie tastes rated 40 percent more of such movies 
than a matched sample who had seen similar movies but were reminded of their 
common movie tastes. That is, they were more likely to contribute ratings when 
reminded that they had previously rated  Das Boot , a 1981 Oscar nominee but 
not currently popular, than if they were reminded that they had rated  Titanic , the 
1997 Hollywood blockbuster. In a related experiment,  Ludford and colleagues (2004)  
showed that members posted almost twice the number of messages to a movie 
discussion group and rated more than twice the number of movies when they were 
reminded of how their movie ratings differed from others in a discussion group vis-
 à -vis a discussion topic as compared with participants who did not receive this 
comparison. 
 The uniqueness principle could have broad utility in improving contributions 
to online communities. In many online communities, some tasks have many people 
contributing; a much larger number have very few people contributing. For example, 
in Wikipedia, both the number of edits and number of editors contributing to an 
article represent an inverse power law: 5 percent of articles in Wikipedia have more 
than fifty different editors involved over a three-month period, and more than 50 
percent of the articles have fewer than ten ( Kittur et al. 2008 ). Similarly, there are many 
more copies available of pop songs in peer-to-peer file sharing sites than of jazz 
or emerging artists ( Asvanund et al. 2004 ). Therefore, according to the collective effort 
model, one can increase people ’ s likelihood of editing in Wikipedia or contributing 
a song in a music sharing site by pointing them to the articles that few others have 
edited or the songs that few others have contributed, assuming that one can identify 
people who can indeed make those contributions. Another way to operationalize the 
uniqueness principle is to constitute teams in task-based communities, such as open-
source-software development communities, so that each member of a work team has 
unique skills. 
 Design Claim 34  People will be more willing to contribute in an online group when 
they think that they are unique and that others in the group cannot make contribu-
tions similar to theirs. 

Chapter 2: Encouraging Contribution to Online Communities 
65
 Previously, we claimed that people will be more likely to comply with a request when 
they see that others have also complied. One reason is that seeing others ’ behavior 
activates the social proof heuristic ( Cialdini 2001 ). There are other reasons, however, 
why showing that others are contributing can increase contributions, beyond the 
social proof that contributing is appropriate. One is that people do not want to con-
tribute to a lost cause; evidence that others are also contributing increases potential 
contributors ’ perception that valuable group outcomes will be achieved. For example, 
many fund-raising campaigns are announced to the public only after half of the funds 
have already been collected in a quiet period. This way, people who are asked to con-
tribute later will think that the fundraising goal is likely to be reached. Similarly, 
people do not want to be taken advantage of by contributing while others shirk. Also, 
people ’ s sense of fairness sometimes creates an obligation to contribute when they see 
that others have done so, as described in chapter 3. Finally, seeing that others have 
contributed may establish a descriptive norm that people naturally conform to, as will 
be discussed in greater detail in chapter 4. 
 In many cases, there is a tension between showing that other people are contribut-
ing and creating a sense that each individual is needed. One way to resolve that 
tension is to show complementary contributions rather than substitutes. Thus, in an 
open source community, the software developers could be shown demonstrations of 
how much effort the documentation writers have expended and vice versa. Another 
way to resolve the tension is by informing people of others ’ commitments to con-
tribute that are contingent on their own contributions. For example, challenge grants 
are commitments by large donors that are contingent on other donors also contribut-
ing. They provide social proof of the value of contributing while increasing the 
importance of the additional contributions rather than substituting for them. Simi-
larly, the site PledgeBank ( http://www.pledgebank.com ) relies extensively on pledges 
of contingent contributions, as illustrated in   figure 2.14 . 
 Figure 2.14 
 Sample contingent commitments on PledgeBank ( http://www.pledgebank.com ). 

66 
Robert E. Kraut and Paul Resnick
 Design claim 35  People will be more willing to contribute in an online community 
if they see that others are making complementary or contingent contributions than 
if they see others making substitute contributions. 
 7  Conclusion and Implications for Contest Design 
 Online community designers and managers should consider many options for encour-
aging needed contributions of effort and other resources to their communities. One 
approach is to make requests. Another is to increase individuals ’  expected utility of 
contributing by enhancing the intrinsic interest of the tasks, by providing extrinsic 
rewards, or by increasing the expected benefits that will accrue through the individ-
ual ’ s contribution to group outcomes. A third approach, taken up in chapter 4, is based 
on establishing social norms of contributing effort and other resources; it is more often 
used as a way to limit bad behavior than as a way to encourage valuable contributions. 
For each of our approaches, we have mined prior research in economics and psychol-
ogy to formulate design claims, and each of the design claims was illustrated with one 
or more examples from online community settings. 
 Often, seemingly simple high-level design decisions require a large number of more 
detailed design decisions, and these may have a variety of impacts on the community ’ s 
ability to elicit needed work contributions from members. To illustrate, consider con-
tests, whose configurations have implications for many of the motivational pathways 
discussed in this chapter. 
 Contests have attracted a lot of attention recently in the online world. For example, 
online movie-rental company Netflix ( http://www.netflix.com ) offered (and eventu-
ally awarded) a $1,000,000 prize for any team that could improve the accuracy of 
predictions about how much consumers would enjoy particular movies based on their 
prior movie ratings. Statistical software development company MathWorks ( http://
www.mathworks.com ) holds contests to solve difficult programming challenges 
( MathWorks 2010 ). The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) held a 
$40,000 online contest to spot ten red balloons it had positioned across the United 
States ( Markoff 2009 ). 
 Online communities also often conduct contests. For example, Threadless is 
organized around a continuous contest to have submitted T-shirt designs selected 
for printing and sale. Winners are selected in part based on votes and reviews from 
other members. InnoCentive ( http://www.innocentive.com ) is a company that con-
nects Seekers — companies, academic institutions, and government and nonprofit 
organizations — with Solvers — engineers, scientists, and business people — to solve 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Chapter 2: Encouraging Contribution to Online Communities 
67
tough problems posed by the Seekers. Seeker organizations post their challenges on 
the InnoCentive website and offer registered Solvers significant financial awards for 
the best solutions.   Figure 2.15  shows a sample of some challenge contests. 
 A contest is a request for a particular kind of contribution. Thus, the first require-
ment for contest designers is that they think carefully about what tasks they wish to 
base contests on. Contests that are specific and challenging and that provide interme-
diate feedback on performance will engage goal-setting motivations well. For example, 
the Netflix prize had a clear performance target (10 percent improvement in predic-
tions) and clear feedback (an automated site that graded one submission per day). 
Contests that involve public commentary about work in progress can add the social 
interaction motivator. A contest also provides comparative feedback: there are winners 
and losers, so care needs to be taken to avoid demotivating all of the losers. Moreover, 
contests should be avoided in settings in which a competitive atmosphere would 
poison the community. The rewards of the contest are likely to induce people to  “ game 
the contest. ” For example, if community votes determine winners, there may be efforts 
to  “ stuff the ballot box ” with shill votes. Countermeasures may be needed to prevent 
 Figure 2.15 
 Sample of InnoCentive challenges ( http://www.innocentive.com ). 
www.Ebook777.com

68 
Robert E. Kraut and Paul Resnick
such gaming. A contest may undermine intrinsic motivations to perform tasks: some 
people may be more attracted to tasks that they or others will attribute to purer 
motives rather than trying to win the contest. Finally, contests with entries by groups 
rather than individuals, thus involving group outcomes, will involve choices about 
how to make people feel like their contributions are essential to the group outcome. 
 8  Summary of Design Alternatives 
 Thus far, we have explored the challenge of encouraging contributions largely through 
the lens of different motivators, identifying design alternatives that might activate 
each motivator. We conclude by inverting that focus. We reflect on the design space 
of alternatives and the ways to make an impact through different regions of that space, 
as summarized in   table 2.4 . 
 The first thing we note is the power of the tools that select, sort, and filter the 
content in the online community. These tools can help draw people ’ s attention to 
tasks that are important and that the people are capable of doing. The selective pre-
sentation of tasks can create implicit requests for action, and the better targeted those 
implicit requests are, the more effective they will be. 
 Next, there are many ways that designers can set the frame through which people 
will view both implicit and explicit requests, following principles of persuasion. The 
requests can appear to come from high-status people or people that the recipient likes 
or is similar to. They can be lengthy and appeal to reasoned cost-benefit analysis, such 
as dangers to the community, the inability of anyone else to substitute for the indi-
vidual ’ s unique contributions, or the presence of others ’ complementary contribu-
tions. The requests can also be brief and rely on a context that conveys social proof 
that contributing to the community is something that everyone does. Deadlines create 
a frame of urgency and difficult tasks may challenge people to meet goals in order to 
maintain self-efficacy. 
 Third, feedback on and record keeping of contributions that people make can be a 
powerful motivator. Individual feedback, even if provided privately, can act as an 
informational reward, especially when combined with some kind of goal-setting 
process. Comparative feedback can evoke social comparisons and a competitive drive 
for self-enhancement. Making the contribution records public can turn them into a 
status reward. Performance tracking can also be the basis for privileges or more tangible 
rewards. 
 There are two design levers involving the user experience of contributory tasks. 
Designers can motivate contributions by embedding the contributory acts in a social 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Chapter 2: Encouraging Contribution to Online Communities 
69
experience. They can also make the individual experience more immersive. Either lever 
will make the tasks more intrinsically rewarding. 
 The community size is a final design lever. On one hand, a larger community 
reduces the marginal impact of any one member ’ s actions and thus reduces motiva-
tions to contribute. On the other hand, larger groups may be able to accomplish more 
and thus generate more commitment and motivation to contribute. 
 Table 2.4 
 Summary of design alternatives relevant to contribution, ordered by type 
 Type 
 Design alternative 
 Design claim  
 Selection, sorting, 
highlighting 
 Easily visible list of needed contributions 
 1 
 Easy-to-use tools for finding and tracking work that 
needs to be done 
 2 
 Target requests to people ’ s interests and capabilities 
 3 
 Framing 
 Broadcast requests versus requests to specific people 
 4 
 Simple requests versus lengthy, complex requests 
 5 
 Requests that stress the benefits of contribution 
 6 
 Requests that make fear appeals 
 7, 8 
 Requests issued by high-status people 
 9 
 Requests from people who are attractive, have high 
status, or the requestor likes, is familiar with, or is 
similar to 
 10, 11 
 Showing that other people are contributing 
 12 
 Specific and highly challenging requests 
 13 
 Requests with deadlines 
 14 
 Showing the uniqueness of potential contributions 
 34 
 Showing that others have made complementary or 
contingent contributions 
 35 
 Feedback and 
rewards 
 Performance feedback 
 15, 17, 18, 19, 20 
 Status, privileges, and tangible rewards 
 23, 25, 28, 30, 31  
 Comparative performance feedback 
 21, 22 
 Task-contingent rewards 
 24, 26, 30 
 Performance-contingent rewards 
 27 
 Nontransparent eligibility criteria 
 29 
 Content, tasks, 
and activities 
 Combining contribution with social contact with 
other contributors 
 16 
 Immersive experiences 
 17 
 Community 
structure 
 Group/community size 
 33 
www.Ebook777.com

70 
Robert E. Kraut and Paul Resnick
 There are thus many ways to elicit contributions. A few involve changes in the 
composition or activity of the group. Many involve the addition of record-keeping 
systems that reflect the contributions of members back to themselves or others. Such 
record-keeping systems can also be the basis for awarding privileges or more tangible 
rewards. It is easy to overlook the simplest methods, however. Just asking — either 
implicitly through selective presentation of tasks or explicitly through requests that 
are designed around principles of persuasion — may be one of the most effective ways 
to get things done. 
   References 
 Altman ,  A. , and  M.  Tennenholtz .  2008 .  Axiomatic Foundations for Ranking Systems.   Journal of 
Artificial Intelligence Research  31 ( 1 ):  473  – 495 . 
 Aristotle . [ 330 BCE ]  1953 .   The Nicomachean Ethics .  New York :  Penguin . 
 Asvanund ,  A. ,  K.  Clay ,  R.  Krishnan , and  M. D.   Smith .  2004 .  An Empirical Analysis of Network 
Externalities in Peer-to-Peer Music-Sharing Networks.   Information Systems Research  15 ( 2 ): 
 155  – 174 . 
 Backstrom ,  L. ,  D.  Huttenlocher ,  J.   Kleinberg , and  X.  Lan .  2006 . Group Formation in Large 
Social Networks: Membership, Growth, and Evolution.  Proceedings of the 12th ACM SIGKDD 
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , 44 – 54. Philadelphia: ACM 
Press.  
 Bailenson ,  J. N. ,  S.  Iyengar ,  N.  Yee , and  N. A.   Collins .  2008 .  Facial Similarity between Voters and 
Candidates Causes Influence .   Public Opinion Quarterly  72  ( 5 ): 935 – 961.  
 Baker ,  M. J. , and  G. A.   Churchill .  1977 .  The Impact of Physically Attractive Models on Advertising 
Evaluations.   Journal of Marketing Research  14  ( 4 ):  538 – 555 . 
 Bandura ,  A.   1993 .  Perceived Self-Efficacy in Cognitive Development and Functioning.    Educational 
Psychologist  28 ( 2 ):  117  – 148 . 
 Barab á si ,  A. L. , and  R.  Albert .  1999 .  Emergence of Scaling in Random Networks.   Science  286  
( 5439 ):  509 .  
 Beenen ,  Gerard ,  Kimberly   Ling ,  Xiaoqing   Wang ,  Klarissa  Chang ,  Dan  Frankowski ,  Paul   Resnick , 
and  Robert E.   Kraut .  2004 . Using Social Psychology to Motivate Contributions to Online Com-
munities. In  CSCW  ’ 04: Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work , 
212 – 221. New York: ACM Press.  
 Berscheid ,  Ellen , and  Harry T.   Reis .  1998 .  Attraction and Close Relationships . In   The Handbook 
of Social Psychology ,  vol. 2 , ed.  Daniel T.   Gilbert,   Susan T.  Fiske , and  Gardner   Lindzey ,  193  – 281 . 
 New York:  McGraw-Hill . 

Chapter 2: Encouraging Contribution to Online Communities 
71
 Blythe ,  M. A. ,  K.  Overbeeke , and  A. F.   Monk .  2003 .   Funology: From Usability to Enjoyment .  Kluwer 
Academic Pub . 
 Bugzilla .  2011 . Features.  http://www.bugzilla.org/features/#searchpage .  
 Burke ,  Moira , and  Robert E.   Kraut .  2008 .  “ Mopping Up: Modeling Wikipedia Promotion Pro-
cesses. ” In  CSCW 2008: Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work . 
New York: ACM Press.  
 Burke ,  Moira ,  Robert E.   Kraut , and  E.   Joyce .  2010 .  Membership Claims and Requests: Some New-
comer Socialization Strategies in Online Communities.   Small Group Research  4 ( 1 ):  4  – 40 . 
 Byrne ,  Donn .  1997 .  An Overview (and Underview) of Research and Theory within the Attraction 
Paradigm.   Journal of Social and Personal Relationships  14 ( 3 ):  417  – 431 . 
  Cameron ,  J. ,  K. M.   Banko , and  W. D.  Pierce .  2001 .  Pervasive Negative Effects of Rewards on 
Intrinsic Motivation: The Myth Continues.   Behavior Analyst  24  ( 1 ):  1  – 44 . 
 Capocci ,  A. ,  V. D. P.   Servedio ,  F.   Colaiori ,  L. S.   Buriol ,  D.   Donato ,  S.   Leonardi , and  G. 
 Caldarelli .  2006 .  Preferential Attachment in the Growth of Social Networks: The Internet 
Encyclopedia Wikipedia.   Physical Review E: Statistical, Nonlinear, and Soft Matter Physics  74  ( 3 ): 
 36116 . 
 Carnegie ,  D.  1936 .   How to Win Friends and Influence People .  New York :  Simon and Schuster .  
 Chaiken ,  S. ,  A.  Liberman , and  A. H.   Eagly .  1989 .  Heuristic and Systematic Information Processing 
within and Beyond the Persuasion Context . In   Unintended Thought  , ed.  James S.   Uleman and  John 
A.  Bargh ,  212  – 252 .  New York :  Guilford Press . 
 Chen ,  Y. ,  F. M.  Harper ,  J.   Konstan , and  S. X.   Li .  2010 .  Social Comparisons and Contributions to 
Online Communities: A Field Experiment on Movielens.    American Economic Review 100 (4): 
1358 – 1398.  
 Cialdini ,  R. B. , and  N. J.   Goldstein .  2004 .  Social Influence: Compliance and Conformity.   Annual 
Review of Psychology  55  ( 1 ):  591  – 621 . 
 Cialdini ,  Robert B.   2001 .   Influence: Science and Practice .  4th ed.   New York:  Allyn and Bacon .  
 Clary ,  E. G. ,  M.  Snyder ,  R. D.   Ridge ,  J.   Copeland ,  A. A.   Stukas ,  J.   Haugen , and  P.   Miene .  1998 . 
 Understanding and Assessing the Motivations of Volunteers: A Functional Approach.   Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology  74 : 1516  – 1530 . 
 Collier ,  Ben ,  Moira  Burke ,  Niki  Kittur , and  Robert E.  Kraut .  2008 . Retrospective Versus Prospective 
Evidence for Promotion: The Case of Wikipedia. Paper presented at the 2008 Annual Meeting of 
the Academy of Management, Anaheim, California.  
 Cosley ,  Dan ,  Dan   Frankowski ,  Loren   Terveen , and  John  Riedl .  2007 . SuggestBot: Using Intelligent 
Task Routing to Help People Find Work in Wikipedia. ” In  Proceedings of the 12th ACM International 
Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces . New York: ACM Press.  

72 
Robert E. Kraut and Paul Resnick
 Csikszentmihalyi ,  Mihaly .  1997 .   Finding Flow: The Psychology of Engagement with Everyday Life . 
 The Masterminds Series .  New York :  Basic Books .  
 Csikszentmihalyi ,  M. , and  J.   Hunter .  2003 .  Happiness in Everyday Life: The Uses of Experience 
Sampling.   Journal of Happiness Studies  4  ( 2 ):  185  – 199 . 
 Csikszentmihalyi ,  Mihaly , and  Kevin   Rathunde .  1993 .  The Measurement of Flow in Everyday 
Life: Toward a Theory of Emergent Motivation . In   Nebraska Symposium on Motivation, 1992: 
Developmental Perspectives on Motivation , ed.  Janis E.   Jacobs ,  57 – 97 .  Lincoln, NE :  University of 
Nebraska Press . 
 Darley ,  John M. , and  Bibb  Latan é .  1968 .  Bystander Intervention in Emergencies: Diffusion of 
Responsibility .  Journal of Personality  &  Social Psychology  8 ( 4 ):  377  – 383 . 
 Deci ,  Edward L. ,  Richard   Koestner , and  Richard M.   Ryan .  1999 .  A Meta-Analytic Review of Experi-
ments Examining the Effects of Extrinsic Rewards on Intrinsic Motivation.   Psychological Bulletin 
 125  ( 6 ):  627  – 668 .  
 Deci ,  E. L. , and  R. M.   Ryan .  1985 .  Intrinsic Motivation and Self-Determination in Human Behavior . 
New York:  Plenum Press .  
 Ducheneaut ,  Nicolas ,  Nicholas   Yee ,  Eric  Nickell , and  Robert J.   Moore .  2007 . The Life and Death 
of Online Gaming Communities: A Look at Guilds in World of Warcraft. In  CHI  ’ 07: Proceedings 
of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , San Jose, California.  
 Eagly ,  A. H. ,  R. D.   Ashmore ,  M. G.   Makhijni , and  L. C.   Longo .  1991 .  What Is Beautiful Is Good, 
But . . . : A Meta-Analytic Review of Research on the Physical Attractiveness Stereotype.    Psycho-
logical Bulletin  110  ( 1 ):  109  – 128 . 
 Eagly ,  A. H. , and  S.  Chaiken .  1975 .  An Attribution Analysis of the Effect of Communicator Char-
acteristics on Opinion Change: The Case of Communicator Attractiveness.   Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology  32 ( 1 ):  136  – 144 . 
 Footprints .  2005 . What to Do If You ’ ve Got Too Many Votes on Your Hands. Everything2.  http://
everything2.com/title/What+to+do+if+you%2527ve+got+too+many+votes+on+your+hands . 
  Frey ,  B. S. , and  L.  Goette .  1999 .  Does Pay Motivate Volunteers? Working paper. Institute for Empiri-
cal Research in Economics, University of Zurich.  
 Frey ,  B. S. , and  R.  Jegen .  2001 .  Motivation Crowding Theory.   Journal of Economic Surveys  15  ( 5 ): 
 589  – 611 .  
 Gneezy ,  U. , and  A.   Rustichini .  2000a .  A Fine Is a Price.   Journal of Legal Studies  29 : 1 – 18 . 
 Gneezy ,  U. , and  A.  Rustichini .  2000b .  Pay Enough or Don ’ t Pay at All.    Quarterly Journal of Econom-
ics  115  ( 3 ):  791  – 810 . 
 GNOME Project .  2011 . Release Planning. GNOME.org.  http://live.gnome.org/ReleasePlanning . 
 Green ,  D. P. , and  A. S.   Gerber .  2008 .   Get out the Vote: How to Increase Voter Turnout . Washington, 
DC:  Brookings Institute Press .  

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Chapter 2: Encouraging Contribution to Online Communities 
73
 Guadagno ,  R. , and  R.   Cialdini .  2005 .  Online Persuasion and Compliance: Social Influence on 
the Internet and Beyond . In   The Social Net: Understanding Human Behavior in Cyberspace , ed. Yair 
Maichai-Hamburger,  91 – 114 .  New York :  Oxford University Press . 
 Harper ,  Franklin ,  Dan  Frankowski ,  Sara   Drenner ,  Yuqing   Ren ,  Sara   Kiesler ,  Loren  Terveen ,  Robert 
E.   Kraut ,  et al .  2007 . Talk amongst Yourselves: Inviting Users to Participate in Online Conversa-
tions. In  IUI 2007: Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces ,  62 – 71 . New York: 
ACM Press.  
 Harper ,  F. M. ,  D.  Moy , and  J. A.   Konstan .  2009 . Facts or Friends?: Distinguishing Informational 
and Conversational Questions in Social Q & A Sites. In  CHI  ’ 09: Proceedings of ACM Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems . New York: ACM Press.  
 Henderlong ,  J. , and  M. R.   Lepper .  2002 .  The Effects of Praise on Children ’ s Intrinsic Motivation: 
A Review and Synthesis.    Psychological Bulletin  128 ( 5 ):  774  – 795 . 
 Jagatic ,  T. N. ,  N. A.   Johnson ,  M.  Jakobsson , and  F.  Menczer .  2007 .  Social Phishing.   Communica-
tions of the ACM  50  ( 10 ):  94  – 100 .  
 Jeon ,  G. Y. J. ,  Y. M.   Kim , and  Y.  Chen .  2010 . Re-Examining Price as a Predictor of Answer Quality 
in an Online Q & A Site. In  CHI 2010: Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Com-
puting Systems , 325 – 328. New York: ACM Press.  
 Kahneman ,  Daniel ,  Ed  Diener , and  Norbert  Schwarz , eds.  1999 .   Well-Being: The Foundations of 
Hedonic Psychology .  New York :  Russell Sage Foundation . 
 Karau ,  S. , and  K.   Williams .  1993 .  Social Loafing: A Meta-Analytic Review and Theoretical Integra-
tion.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology  65 ( 4 ):  681  – 706 . 
 Kim ,  Amy Jo .  2000 .  Community Building on the Web: Secret Strategies for Successful Online Communi-
ties .  Berkeley, CA :  Peachpit Press . 
  Kittur ,  A.   2011 . Unpublished data. 
 Kittur ,  A. ,  E.  Chi ,  B. A.   Pendleton ,  B.  Suh , and  T.   Mytkowicz .  2008 . Power of the Few vs. Wisdom 
of the Crowd: Wikipedia and the Rise of the Bourgeoisie. In  CHI  ’ 08: Proceeding of the ACM Con-
ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . New York: ACM Press.  
 Kittur ,  A. ,  E. H.  Chi , and  B.  Suh .  2008 . Crowdsourcing User Studies with Mechanical Turk. In 
 CHI  ’ 08: Proceeding of ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 453 – 456. New York: 
ACM Press.  
 KJZZ .  2011 . Challenge Grants.  http://kjzz.org/support/challengegrants .  
 Krukowski ,  R. A. ,  J.   Harvey-Berino ,  J.   Kolodinsky ,  R. T.   Narsana , and  T. P.  DeSisto .  2006 .  Consum-
ers May Not Use or Understand Calorie Labeling in Restaurants.   Journal of the American Dietetic 
Association  106  ( 6 ):  917 – 920 . 
 Kubey ,  Robert , and  Mihaly  Csikszentmihalyi .  1990 .   Television and the Quality of Life: How Viewing 
Shapes Everyday Experience, Communication .  Hillsdale, NJ:  Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . 
www.Ebook777.com

74 
Robert E. Kraut and Paul Resnick
 Lakhani ,  Karim R. , and  Eric  von Hippel .  2003 .  How Open Source Software Works:  “ Free ” User-
to-User Assistance.   Research Policy  32 ( 6 ):  923  – 943 .  
 Langer ,  Ellen J. ,  Arthur   Blank , and  Benzion   Chanowitz .  1978 .   “ The Mindlessness of Ostensibly 
Thoughtful Action: The Role of  “ Placebic ” Information in Interpersonal Interaction.   Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology  36  ( 6 ):  635  – 642 .  
 Latane ,  B.   1981 .  The Psychology of Social Impact.   American Psychologist  36 :  343  – 356 .  
 Latane ,  Bibb , and  Steve   Nida .  1981 .  Ten Years of Research on Group Size and Helping.   Psychologi-
cal Bulletin  89 ( 2 ):  308  – 324 . 
 Lefkowitz ,  M. ,  R. R.   Blake , and  J. S.   Mouton .  1955 .  Status Factors in Pedestrian Violation of Traffic 
Signals.    Journal of Abnormal Psychology  51  ( 3 ):  704 – 706 .  
 Lepper ,  M. R. , and  D.  Greene .  1975 .  Turning Play into Work: Effects of Adult Surveillance and 
Extrinsic Rewards on Children ’ s Intrinsic Motivation.   Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
 31  ( 3 ):  479  – 486 .  
 Ling ,  Kimberly ,  Gerard  Beenen ,  Pamela J.   Ludford ,  Xiaoqing   Wang ,  Klarissa  Chang ,  Xin  Li , 
 Dan  Cosley ,  et al .  2005 .  Using Social Psychology to Motivate Contributions to Online Communi-
ties .   Journal of Computer Mediated Communication  10  ( 4 ). 
 Latham ,  G. P. , and  E. A.   Locke .  1991 .  Self-Regulation through Goal Setting .   Organizational Behavior 
and Human Decision Processes  50 ( 2 ): 212 – 247.  
 Locke ,  E. A. , and  G. P.   Latham .  2002 .  Building a Practically Useful Theory of Goal Setting and 
Task Motivation: A 35-Year Odyssey.   American Psychologist  57  ( 9 ):  705  – 717 .  
 Locke ,  E. A. ,  G. P.   Latham , and  M.  Erez .  1988 .  The Determinants of Goal Commitment .   Academy 
of Management Review  13 ( 1 ): 23 – 39. 
 Locke ,  Edwin A. , and  Amy L.  Kristof .  1996 .  Volitional Choices in the Goal Achievement Process . 
In   The Psychology of Action: Linking Cognition and Motivation to Behavior , ed.  Peter M.   Gollwitzer  
and  John A.   Bargh ,  365  – 384 .  New York :  Guilford Press . 
 Ludford ,  P. J. ,  D.  Cosley ,  D.  Frankowski , and  L.  Terveen .  2004 .  Think Different: Increasing Online 
Community Participation Using Uniqueness and Group Dissimilarity . In   CHI  ’ 04: Proceedings of 
Human Factors in Computing Systems  , 631 – 638.  New York :  ACM Press .  
 Markey ,  P. M.  2000 .  Bystander Intervention in Computer Mediated Communication.   Computers 
in Human Behavior  16  ( 2 ):  183  – 188 .  
 Markey ,  Patrick M. ,  Shannon M.   Wells , and  Charlotte N.   Markey .  2002 .  Social and Personality 
Psychology in the Culture of Cyberspace . In   Advances in Psychology Research  , vol. 9, ed.  Serge P.  
 Shohov ,  94  – 113 .  Hauppauge, NY :  USishers, Inc.  
 Markoff ,  John .  2009 . Looking for Balloons and Insights to Online Behavior.  New York Times , 
December 1, D2. 

Chapter 2: Encouraging Contribution to Online Communities 
75
 Martins ,  L. L. ,  L. L.   Gilson , and  M. T.  Maynard .  2004 .  Virtual Teams: What Do We Know and 
Where Do We Go from Here?   Journal of Management  30  ( 6 ):  805  – 835 .  
 Mason ,  W. , and  D. J.   Watts .  2009 . Financial Incentives and the Performance of Crowds. In  KDD-
HCOMP  ’ 09: Human Computation Workshop , ed.  Paul  Bennett ,  Raman  Chandrasekar ,  Max  Chicker-
ing ,  Panos  Ipeirotis ,  Edith  Law ,  Anton  Mityagin ,  Foster  Provost and  Luis  von  Ahn ,  77 – 85 .  New 
York :  ACM Press . 
 MathWorks .  2010 . MathWorks Announces Winner of MATLAB Central Online Programming 
Contest. MathWorks.  http://www.mathworks.com/company/pressroom/articles/article42050.
html . 
 Mellstr ö m ,  C. , and  M.  Johannesson .  2008 .  Crowding Out in Blood Donation: Was Titmuss Right?  
 Journal of the European Economic Association  6 :845 – 863.  
 Meyerson ,  D. ,  K. E.   Weick , and  R. M.   Kramer .  1996 .  Swift Trust and Temporary Teams . In   Trust 
in Organizations: Frontiers of Theory and Research  , eds. Roderick M. Kramer and Tom R. Tyler, 
166 – 195.  Thousand Oaks, CA :  Sage .  
 Meyerson ,  D. ,  K. E.   Weick , and  R. M.   Kramer .  2006 .  Swift Trust and Temporary Groups . In   Orga-
nizational Trust: A Reader , ed.  Roderick M.   Kramer ,  415  – 444 .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press . 
 Milgram ,  S.   1963 . Behavioral Study of Obedience .   Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology  67  
( 4 ):  371  – 378 .  
 Miller ,  N. ,  P.  Resnick , and  R.   Zeckhauser .  2005 .  Eliciting Honest Feedback: The Peer Prediction 
Method.   Management Science  51  ( 9 ):  1359  – 1373 . 
 Moon ,  J. Y. , and  L. S.   Sproull .  2008 .  The Role of Feedback in Managing the Internet-Based Vol-
unteer Work Force.   Information Systems Research  19  ( 4 ):  494  – 515 .  
 Reiss ,  S.  2004 .  Multifaceted Nature of Intrinsic Motivation: The Theory of 16 Basic Desires.   Review 
of General Psychology  8 : 179  – 193 .  
 Resnick ,  P. ,  R.   Zeckhauser ,  J.   Swanson , and  K.  Lockwood .  2006 .  The Value of Reputation on eBay: 
A Controlled Experiment.    Experimental Economics  9 ( 2 ):  79  – 101 .  
 Roberts ,  Jeffrey A. ,  Il-Horn   Hann , and  Sandra A.   Slaughter .  2006 .  Understanding the Motivations, 
Participation, and Performance of Open Source Software Developers: A Longitudinal Study of the 
Apache Projects.    Management Science  52  ( 7 ):  984  – 999 . 
 Salganik ,  M. J. ,  P. S.   Dodds , and  D. J.   Watts .  2006 .  Experimental Study of Inequality and Unpre-
dictability in an Artificial Cultural Market.   Science  311  ( 5762 ):  854  – 856 .  
 Sweetser ,  P. , and  P.  Wyeth .  2005 .  Gameflow: A Model for Evaluating Player Enjoyment in Games.  
 Computers in Entertainment  3 ( 3 ):  1 – 24 . 
 von Ahn ,  Luis  et al.   2004 . ESP Game.  http://web.archive.org/web/20050120023005/http://
www.espgame.org . 

76 
Robert E. Kraut and Paul Resnick
 von Ahn ,  Luis  and  Laura  Dabbish .  2008 . Designing Games with a Purpose.  Communications of 
the ACM 51 (8): 58 – 67.  
 Vroom ,  V. ,  L.  Porter , and  E.   Lawler .  2005 .  Expectancy Theories . In   Organizational Behavior 1: 
Essential Theories of Motivation and Leadership  , ed.  John B.  Miner ,  94  – 113 .  Armonk, NY :  ME Sharpe .  
 Vroom ,  V. H.   1995 .  Work and Motivation .  San Francisco :  Jossey-Bass .  
 White ,  Robert W.   1959 .  Motivation Reconsidered: The Concept of Competence .   Psychological 
Review  66  ( 5 ): 297 – 333.  
 Wikipedia .  2010 . Category: Aviation articles by quality.  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Category:Aviation_articles_by_quality .  
 Wikipedia . 
 2011a . 
Wikipedia: 
Administrators. 
 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:
Administrators . 
 Wikipedia .  2011b . Wikipedia: Community portal.  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:
Community_portal#Todo . 
 Wikipedia .  2011c . Wikipedia: Version 1.0 Editorial Team/Assessment.  http://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Wikipedia:Version_1.0_Editorial_Team/Assessment#Grades . 
 Wilson ,  E. J. , and  D. L.  Sherrell .  1993 .  Source Effects in Communication and Persuasion Research: 
A Meta-Analysis of Effect Size.    Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science  21 ( 2 ):  101  – 112 . 
 Wilson ,  J. M. ,  S. G.   Straus , and  B.   McEvily .  2006 .  All in Due Time: The Development of Trust in 
Computer-Mediated and Face-to-Face Teams.   Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 
 99  ( 1 ):  16  – 33 .  
 Witte ,  K. , and  M.  Allen .  2000 .  A Meta-Analysis of Fear Appeals: Implications for Effective Public 
Health Campaigns.   Health Education  & Behavior  27 ( 5 ):  591 . 
  Zhu ,  H. ,  R. E.   Kraut , and  A.  Kittur .  In press . Organizing without Formal Organization: Group 
Identification, Goal Setting, and Social Modeling in Directing Online Production. In  CSCW 2012: 
Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work. New York: ACM Press. 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
 3  Encouraging Commitment in Online Communities 
 Yuqing Ren, Robert E. Kraut, Sara Kiesler, and Paul Resnick 
 Community designers can draw from theories of commitment to make design deci-
sions that influence whether and how people will become committed to a community. 
Commitment is harder to achieve than a flow (or trickle) of visitors, but for most 
online communities, commitment is crucial. Committed members work harder, say 
more, do more, and stick with a community after it becomes established. They care 
enough to help with community activities and to sustain the group through problems. 
Committed members are those most likely to provide the content that others value, 
such as answers to people ’ s questions in technical and health support groups ( Blanchard 
and Markus 2004 ;  Fisher et al. 2006 ;  Rodgers and Chen 2005 ), code in open source 
projects ( Mockus et al. 2002 ), and edits in Wikipedia ( Kittur et al. 2007 ). They are 
more likely to exercise voice, demanding change and improvement when dissatisfied, 
than to exit ( Hirschman 1970 ). 
 Indeed, commitment is a building block for solving challenges described in the 
remaining chapters of this book. Commitment to the community makes people care 
enough to respond to and to enforce norms of appropriate behavior ( Smith, McLaugh-
lin, and Osborne 1997 ); thus, commitment is a building block for regulation, as dis-
cussed in chapter 4. Commitment to the community makes people motivated to exert 
effort behind the scenes to keep the online community going ( Butler et al. 2007 ), and 
commitment is thus a building block for motivating contributions, as discussed in 
chapter 2. And commitment to a new community leads people to overlook growing 
pains or outside alternatives during a community startup phase, as discussed in 
chapter 6. 
 Social scientists have devoted years of research to discovering the difference between 
commitment and flight. Commitment to a group, organization, or community can 
be based on feelings of closeness to other individuals in the group, feelings of strong 
identification with the group or its main interest, feelings of obligation to the 
www.Ebook777.com

78 
Yuqing Ren, Robert E. Kraut, Sara Kiesler, and Paul Resnick
community, or even the costs or risks of leaving the community ( Festinger, Schachter, 
and Back 1950 ;  Allen and Meyer 1990 ;  Prentice, Miller, and Lightdale 1994 ). Our 
knowledge about why and how people become committed to communities has its 
roots in a post – World War II theory of groups,  field theory . Field theory was invented 
by Kurt Lewin, a psychologist who emigrated to the United States when the Nazis 
took over Germany. Lewin was fascinated by group dynamics. He wondered what 
caused people to follow a leader, form cohesive units, and develop loyalty as members 
of a group. Lewin rejected the idea that people ’ s loyalty to a group is based only in 
their individual personality or personal history. He observed that in the right environ-
ment, a group could attract very strong group feelings from all sorts of people. Field 
theory looked to the forces in people ’ s environment (or  field ) that attracted them to 
a group and kept them loyal ( Lewin 1951 ). 
 Lewin and his graduate students — including Leon Festinger, Bernice Lott, and 
Roger Barker — devised ingenious laboratory experiments on group dynamics as well 
as methods for measuring people ’ s behavior in naturally formed groups. They 
discovered many patterns that occurred over and over again, such as the  principle 
of proximity , that is, the way in which simply living or working near people initiates 
a sense of identity and group feelings with those nearby. They discovered various 
ways that a group ’ s autocratic or democratic management changed the group ’ s dynam-
ics. Lewin ’ s passion for empiricism and insights into how people experienced the 
group environment were major influences on the science of commitment that exists 
today. 
 Hundreds of studies later, theories of group psychology distinguish among three 
types of commitment that we can apply to online communities: (1) affective commit-
ment, based on feelings of closeness and attachment to a group or members of the 
group, (2) normative commitment, based on feelings of rightness or felt obligation to 
the group, and (3) need-based or continuance commitment, based on an incentive 
structure in the group and alternatives available to members from outside that increase 
the net costs of leaving the group ( Allen and Meyer 1996 ;  Meyer and Allen 1991 ; 
 Meyer, Stanley, Herscovitch, and Topolnytsky 2002 ). These forces combine to deter-
mine an individual ’ s decision to continue membership in a group. According to this 
perspective, a committed person has one or more of three subjective experiences in 
the group: wanting to continue as a member of the group ( affective commitment ), 
feeling he or she ought to continue ( normative commitment ), and feeling that he or she 
must continue — or at least is better off in the group than out of it ( need-based commit-
ment ). The rest of this chapter discusses how online community design influences each 
of these experiences. 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Chapter 3: Encouraging Commitment in Online Communities 
79
 1  Affective Commitment: Wanting to Stay 
 Social psychologists who study groups distinguish between two bases for the affective 
commitment that people have toward groups. Identity-based affective commitment is 
a feeling of being part of the community and helping to fulfill its mission. In contrast, 
bond-based affective commitment is feeling close to individual members of the group. 
The person who feels attached to the community as a whole will want to be part of 
the community and to further its purpose. The person who feels attached to specific 
people in the group may be more committed to these close individuals than to the 
group as a whole. Of course, people can feel both types of attachment in the same 
community, but these feelings stem from different causes, so for purposes of design, 
we need to distinguish between identity-based commitment and bonds-based com-
mitment. Even though both identity-based commitment and bond-based commit-
ment lead people to feel loyalty to their community, stay with it longer, and contribute 
more to it, we highlight the distinction between the two commitments here because 
these types of commitment have some distinct causes and consequences and implica-
tions for how designers can encourage and exploit the two types of commitment ( Ren, 
Kraut, and Kiesler 2007 ). 
 The distinction between identity-based commitment and bonds-based commit-
ment can be traced to  Festinger, Schachter, and Back  ’ s ( 1950 ) theory of group cohe-
siveness. They identified two ways in which commitment to a group is formed: 
through the attractiveness of the group or through the attractiveness of individual 
group members. Commitment because of the attractiveness of the group as a whole 
became the focus of social identity theory ( Hogg and Abrams 1988 ). This theory 
emphasizes how sharing a common social category with others — such as gender, race, 
geographic location, nationality, hobby, or political party — causes people to categorize 
themselves as a rightful member of a group and to identify with it. Thus, a woman 
in the information technology industry in Pittsburgh might feel connected to an 
online community for women in computer science such as Systers ( http://anitaborg.org/
initiatives/systers ), the Pittsburgh Steelers football team ( http://www.steelersfever.com ), 
or the Facebook ( http://www.facebook.com ) alumni group for her alma mater. Having 
members with identity-based commitment has many interesting effects on an online 
community. For example, when members feel strong identity-based commitment, 
they may stick with the group even if their friends leave. 
 Interpersonal-based commitment is the type that forms when members of a com-
munity become psychologically close to some others in the community and feel bonds 
of mutual liking. This form of commitment is based upon idiosyncratic preferences 
www.Ebook777.com

80 
Yuqing Ren, Robert E. Kraut, Sara Kiesler, and Paul Resnick
and is firmly dependent on close personal interaction ( Lott and Lott 1965 ). Friendship 
groups are vulnerable to member turnover because friends can leave as a clique (e.g., 
 Krackhardt and Porter 1986 ). 
 The differences in attitudes of those who feel identity-based commitment versus 
bonds-based commitment have been demonstrated in empirical studies.  Prentice, 
Miller, and Lightdale  ( 1994 ) classified topic-based university student groups such as 
art groups, school newspapers, and sports teams as common identity groups. These 
are groups to which students belong more because of the activities they do than 
because of individual friendship. The researchers differentiated these groups from 
friendship-based, common bond groups such as fraternities and eating clubs. Members 
of the common identity groups reported feeling more attached to their group as a 
whole than to their fellow group members, whereas members of the common bond 
groups reported feeling attached both to the group as a whole and to group members. 
The authors argued that  “ the two perspectives might . . . be viewed as describing two 
separable processes in the development and maintenance of groups, either of which 
might dominate under a given set of circumstances ” ( Prentice, Miller, and Lightdale 
1994 , 490). 
 The distinction between identity-based and bonds-based attachment also has been 
made in studies of online communities (e.g.,  Postmes, Spears, and Lea 2000 ;  Sassenberg 
and Postmes 2002 ;  Utz 2003 ;  Utz and   Sassenberg 2002 ). In general, common identity 
in the online context implies that members feel a commitment to the online com-
munity ’ s purpose or topic. The following message sent to a new member of the email 
list colon@listserv.acor.org, a cancer support group, illustrates this identity-based 
attachment:  “ Welcome to the list nobody wants to join. While it really stinks to have 
to be here, you ’ ll find a wealth of experience. You ’ ll find many excellent suggestions 
and tips prior to surgery in the archives ” (Jan. 11, 2003). A common bond in the 
online context, in contrast, implies that members feel socially or emotionally attached 
to particular members of the online community. The following quote from a thank-
you note from one member of the cancer support group to another illustrates the 
closeness of the bond developed between the two:  “ Thanks for your kind words  – YOU 
are an inspiration to me . . . ! I still remember that you were the first to respond to 
my first post on this list, more than 4+ years ago. ” 
 Encouraging Identity-Based Commitment 
 Social identity theory states that identification with a social group or category is a 
very powerful force that can keep people in a group. Identity-based commitment 
occurs when people feel connected to the group as a whole or its purposes, incorporat-

Chapter 3: Encouraging Commitment in Online Communities 
81
ing aspects of the group into their personal sense of identity or the way they think 
about themselves. For instance, people can become strongly committed to the Sierra 
Club, the National Rifle Association, a movie discussion group, a software develop-
ment project, or a blog community without knowing others in these organizations. 
 When people identify with a community or group as a whole, they tend to perceive 
other members in the group as interchangeable ( Turner 1985 ). One consequence is 
that their commitment to the group is stable in the face of turnover in membership, 
at least in comparison to bond-based attachment ( Abrams, Ando, and Hinkle 1998 ). 
 Design Claim 1  Instilling identity-based attachment leads people to continue their 
participation in the group in the face of membership turnover. 
 Postmes, Spears, and Lea (2002)  compared the influence of group norms in common-
identity versus common-bond online groups. They found that attitudes were more 
similar in common-identity groups than in common-bond groups.  Sassenberg (2002)  
found similar results using a behavioral measure of compliance to group norms. 
Research so far indicates that online community members who feel identity-based 
attachment to the community will be more likely to conform with group norms than 
those who feel bonds-based attachment to the community. As discussed in chapter 4, 
group norms are especially valuable in regulating misbehavior. 
 Design Claim 2  Identity-based commitment makes people more compliant with 
norms than does bonds-based commitment. 
 Similarity can create identity-based attachment. (It can also lead to bonds-based 
attachment, as described in the next section.) Similar member background such as 
profession, school, locality, race, ethnicity, occupation, and age — especially when 
these attributes are shared among people who are otherwise strangers — may lead to 
common category membership. Further, people tend to dislike groups whose members 
are heterogeneous, and these groups experience high turnover, especially when con-
flict arises ( Williams and O ’ Reily 1998 ). Similarity of background or expertise leads to 
common identity most when the similarity is relevant to the group ’ s context and 
functioning ( Cartwright 1968 ). Recruiting similar people into a community or cluster-
ing existing members so that similar people can form subgroups will increase identity-
based commitment to a community. ACOR, the Association of Cancer Online Resources 
( http://www.acor.org ), a support community for patients with cancer and their care-
givers, offers support through more than 150 distinct mailing lists for people suffering 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
82 
Yuqing Ren, Robert E. Kraut, Sara Kiesler, and Paul Resnick
with different types of cancer. In contrast, the support groups at the Cancer Support 
Community are heterogeneous in terms of diagnosis ( Cancer Support Community 
2010 ). The research literature indicates that because of its specificity, the ACOR 
approach will be more successful in developing identity-based commitment. Com-
munities can let individuals select into homogeneous subgroups, as ACOR does, or 
can use statistical techniques to assign people with similar attributes together. For 
example, Harper and his colleagues developed efficient algorithms to subdivide a larger 
community into approximately equally sized clusters of participants who are similar 
to each other ( Harper, Sen, and Frankowski 2007 ). 
 Design Claim 3  Recruiting or clustering those who are similar to each other into 
homogeneous groups fosters identity-based commitment to a community. 
 Community designers can encourage people to identify with an online community 
or with subgroups within it by highlighting members ’ common social characteristics 
and by drawing boundaries around this category. In traditional groups, people catego-
rize themselves on criteria such as gender, home town, religion, job, academic major, 
leisure interests, organizational membership, or political values that they care about 
deeply. However, a social category does not have to be meaningful in the larger popu-
lation or even important to the individual to induce identification with a group.  Tajfel 
et al. (1971)  demonstrated that randomly labeling a group with an arbitrary label 
( “ overestimators ” or  “ underestimators ” ) could activate common identity in research 
groups, even if people did not know others in their group. This phenomenon has 
been replicated many times in laboratory experiments and online. One can induce 
social identity by categorizing people with fictional personality traits ( Amichai-
Hamburger 2005 ), team uniforms ( Dabbish and Kraut 2008 ;  Worchel et al. 1998 ), or 
arbitrary group names ( Michinov, Michinov, and Toczek-Capelle 2004 ;  Ren et al. 
Under review ).  
 Design Claim 4  Providing a collection of individuals with a name or other indicator 
that they are members of a common group increases their identity-based commitment 
to the community. 
 In most online communities, people have come to the group based on their shared 
interests in a particular domain (e.g., Perl programming), topic (e.g., autism, grey-
hound rescue, the Steelers), or common cause (e.g., building a free online encyclope-
dia). People are attracted to the community to the extent that they identify with the 
www.Ebook777.com

Chapter 3: Encouraging Commitment in Online Communities 
83
domain, topics, or causes on which the community is based and find them meaning-
ful. They value their membership because affiliation with the community enables 
them to affiliate with the topic or cause, access and share useful information, or con-
tribute toward a meaningful cause. 
 In chapter 6, we argue for the importance of a clearly articulated scope with a 
clever name and tagline because it helps to define a community ’ s niche and differenti-
ate it from competitors. In chapter 5, we argue that a clearly articulated scope helps 
potential new members assess whether they fit well. Here, we point out a third benefit 
of a clear scope, especially one that is articulated through a distinctive name: it induces 
identity-based attachment. Good examples are Wikipedia ( http://www.wikipedia.org ), 
 “ the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit ” ; Dogster ( http://www.dogster.com ), 
 “ for the love of dog ” ; or Hattrick ( http://www.hattrick.org ), a multiplayer fantasy 
European football (i.e., soccer) site whose motto is  “ Everybody deserves their own 
football team. ” 
 Design Claim 5  A name and tagline that articulate the shared interests of a commu-
nity ’ s members increases the members ’  identity-based commitment to the 
community. 
 However, as the community grows, members may start to cluster into natural sub-
groups. Subgroup identity can be as powerful as whole-community identity in eliciting 
commitment in its own right and can enhance commitment to the whole community 
( Zaccaro and Dobbins 1989 ). To further this process, designers can actively promote 
or create subgroups.  Kittur and Kraut (2008)  found that when Wikipedia editors joined 
a named subproject within the larger encyclopedia, they increased their overall editing 
in the encyclopedia and directed more of their editing to work that was within the 
scope of the project they joined. In an experiment in an online setting,  Beenen and 
colleagues (2004)  increased contributions to an online movie site by telling people 
that they were members of the fictitious  “ Explorers ’ group ” and then assigning the 
Explorers a group goal. In actuality, the Explorers were a group in name only: 
 “ members ” never found out who the other members were or communicated with 
them. Yet people assigned to the Explorers and given a group goal logged in 10 percent 
more and contributed 65 percent more movie ratings than those who were given a 
commensurate individual goal but not assigned to a group. 
 Design Claim 6  Creating named groups within a larger online community increases 
members ’ commitment to the subgroups. 

84 
Yuqing Ren, Robert E. Kraut, Sara Kiesler, and Paul Resnick
 In most cases, identity-based attachment to subgroups complements rather than sup-
plants commitment to the community as a whole. Ren and colleagues (Under review) 
created subgroups among people with similar movie tastes within a movie community, 
giving them arbitrary names like the Eagles or Gorillas. Creating these subgroups 
increased members ’ self-reported commitment to the overall community and increased 
their frequency of visiting the site over a six-month period by 44 percent compared 
to other participants who were not assigned to subgroups. 
 Sometimes, however, the subgroup identity can be stronger than the group 
identity, and when there is a conflict between the two, the subgroup identity may 
prevail. Guilds are the named and persistent teams that players in many massively 
multiplayer online role-playing games join to accomplish difficult tasks and to engage 
in social interaction. Amy Jo  Kim chronicles the  “ Group That Got Away, ” a guild in 
Meridian 59 ( http://www.meridian59.com ) that left en mass to play another game 
( 2000 , 319). 
 Design Claim 7  Creating named groups within a larger online community increases 
members ’ commitment to the community as a whole, as long as the subgroup identity 
is not in conflict with the larger community identity. 
 A common fate, goal, purpose, or task can enhance identity-based commitment ( Sherif 
et al. 1961 ). Common fate is the perception that all community members either 
benefit from the same reward or suffer the same costs ( Michinov, Michinov, and 
Toczek-Capelle 2004 ;  Worchel, et al. 1998 ). For example, if a community is in danger 
of closing because its servers cost too much to run or it is in danger of being over-
whelmed by spam messages, everyone will be affected. A common goal in a commu-
nity is a goal that the group as a whole can attain, such as a high score, ratings, or 
some tangible outcome. When a guild in a multiplayer game goes on a quest, the 
players will either all succeed or all fail together. Guilds in online game environments 
often identify their group goals in their profiles. The guild Lords of Eternity in World 
of Warcraft declares,  “ Our goal is to defeat current raid content and work towards the 
heroic hard modes and meta-achievements as efficiently as quickly as possible. We 
strive for five-night progress on a three-night schedule. ” Like many guilds, Lords of 
Eternity tallies its achievements and progress toward its goals on the guild website. 
Another example of common goals can be seen in political subgroups on Facebook, 
whose members share the mission of getting their candidate elected. During the 2008 
presidential campaign, the John McCain Facebook Challenge group expressed a 
mission was to  “ Get every Republican on Facebook to go to John McCain ’ s Facebook 

Chapter 3: Encouraging Commitment in Online Communities 
85
page . . . and become a supporter, ” and the largest Facebook group for Barack Obama 
put a goal right into its title:  “ One Million Strong for Barack. ” 
 Advocacy communities and production-oriented communities such as open source 
software or open content repositories often articulate a common purpose that gener-
ates identity-based commitment, even when the purpose is not translated into quan-
tifiable goals against which progress can be tracked.  Bryant, Forte, and Bruckman 
(2005)  describe how the common goal of developing the world ’ s best encyclopedia 
led readers of Wikipedia to become  “ Wikipedians, ” active contributors committed to 
the community. As three Wikipedia participants remarked: 
 “ I really got inspired by the idea [of the Wikipedia]. I ’ d say a lot of what hooked me was the 
community aspect and knowing that I was contributing something that was going to be around 
for a while. ” 
 “ I believe in the integrity of the project. I want to see it succeed, especially the articles people 
will look up. “ 
 “ It has a dedicated task and it ’ s producing a product . . . at least with the Wikipedia [versus 
Usenet and the like] you can convince yourself you ’ re doing something to benefit mankind. ” 
 Design Claim 8   Making community fate, goals, or purpose explicit increases 
members ’ identity-based commitment to the community. 
 A joint task is one that involves inputs from all members. Groups whose members are 
cooperatively interdependent because they have a joint task tend to be more cohesive 
and committed to the group ( Gaertner et al. 2000 ;  Worchel et al. 1998 ). Indeed, assign-
ing people a difficult, interdependent task is a powerful way to overcome even strongly 
felt animosity among subgroups within a community ( Sherif et al. 1961 ). Interdepen-
dence through a joint task fosters not only identification with the community as a 
whole, but also normative commitment. Members come to feel that the group depends 
on them and will actually use and benefit from their work. Many online communities 
try to foster the perception of task interdependence. Guilds in massively multiplayer 
games that take on difficult tasks, like receiving good loot from killing powerful mon-
sters, are creating identity-based commitment. WikiProjects do the same thing when 
they attempt to improve one of their articles to  “ featured ” class so that it appears on 
the Wikipedia home page. 
 Design Claim 9  Providing community members with interdependent tasks increases 
their identity-based commitment to the community and reduces conflict among 
subgroups. 

86 
Yuqing Ren, Robert E. Kraut, Sara Kiesler, and Paul Resnick
 Ingroups imply outgroups. By definition, being in a group means that there are one 
or more contrasting groups that one is not in. People who define and categorize 
themselves as members of a group often compare themselves with those in other 
groups ( Hogg and Terry 2000 ). Making these contrasts explicit can intensify people ’ s 
identification and commitment. In experiments, researchers have divided participants 
into two or more groups to highlight group boundaries, which intensified participants ’ 
identification with their own group ( Postmes et al. 2001 ;  Rogers and Lea 2005 ; 
 Worchel et al. 1998 ). The outgroup did not have to be physically or even virtually 
present to elicit intergroup comparisons and ingroup commitment ( Utz 2003 ;  Yuki 
et al. 2005 ). 
 In online communities, designers can encourage members to attend to group 
boundaries and their identification with the group by increasing members ’ awareness 
of a different outgroup. Blizzard, the developer and operator of World of Warcraft, 
built comparisons at the core of their game by requiring that each player become a 
member of one of two opposing factions, the Alliance or the Horde (see   figure 3.1 ). 
Also, guild-level rankings in World of Warcraft and other group-oriented online games 
increase identification by highlighting the presence and threat of an outgroup. 
More informally, posters on the Apache FAQ page ( http://www.apache.org ) compare 
the speed, performance, and market share of the Apache server with those of other 
commercial servers, fostering the common identity of those who work on Apache 
software. The Wikipedia project site uses a similar technique by highlighting 
competition with other encyclopedias. The Wikipedia entry on Wikipedia itself con-
tains may references to the  Encyclopedia Britannica , and a 2006 version of the article 
noted that Jimmy Wales, the founder of the project,  “ intends for Wikipedia ultimately 
to achieve a  ‘ Britannica or better ’ level of quality and be published in print ” (Wikipedia 
2006). 
 Figure 3.1 
 The Horde and the Alliance in World of Warcraft. 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Chapter 3: Encouraging Commitment in Online Communities 
87
 Design Claim 10  Highlighting an outgroup (and competing with it) increases members ’ 
identity-based commitment. 
 The power of an outgroup to intensify group commitment is enhanced when people 
already feel connected to the group and perceive their group to be threatened ( Hutchi-
son et al. 2006 ). The surge of American patriotism after the September 11, 2001, ter-
rorist attacks on the World Trade Center and Pentagon illustrate this point. Some 
citizens reacted with anger, and some with sadness, but both groups increased their 
commitment to the United States. Research suggests that failure or threat is especially 
likely to strengthen commitment to a community when it comes from external sources 
or can be overcome with collective effort from group members ( Lott and Lott 1965 ), 
which is why many political leaders prefer to blame other countries for problems in 
their own. 
 Community designers must be careful when highlighting a threat to a group 
because the effects of threat can backfire. In general, research shows that people prefer 
to stay with a group that is successful or has high status ( Hinds et al. 2000 ). Moreover, 
core and peripheral members may respond to failure and threats differently — core 
members may strengthen their attachment to justify the additional effort they exert 
to overcome the difficulty, whereas peripheral members are more likely to leave the 
group when it is an option ( Festinger et al. 1956 ). When leaving is not an option, in 
the face of threat, both core and peripheral members identify more strongly with the 
group ( Ouwerkerk, de Gilder, and de Vries 2000 ;  Ethier and Deaux 1994 ). 
 Design Claim 11  Emphasizing a threat to the group, especially from an external 
source, increases the identity-based commitment among core members but may 
undermine the commitment of more peripheral members. 
 Generally, anonymity of individual group members fosters community identity and 
strong group norms because it deemphasizes individual distinctions. By contrast, 
making personal identity salient or individual members identifiable decreases identity-
based attachment, although it may increase bond-based attachment ( Postmes et al. 
2005 ;  Postmes et al. 2001 ;  Sassenberg 2002 ;  Sassenberg et al. 2003 ;  Sassenberg and 
Postmes 2002 ). 
 Design Claim 12   Making group members anonymous will foster identity-based 
commitment. 
www.Ebook777.com

88 
Yuqing Ren, Robert E. Kraut, Sara Kiesler, and Paul Resnick
 Bonds-Based Commitment 
 People also become committed to a group by developing connections to the people 
who constitute it. In this case, their commitment is not necessarily to the group as a 
whole but to the other members they know and like.  Gross and Martin (1952 , 553 –
 554), in their discussion of bonds-based commitment, talked about group cohesiveness 
as  “ the resistance of a group to disruptive forces ” and stated that such cohesiveness 
is associated with the strength of the relational bonds among group members (see also 
 Lott and Lott 1965 ). 
 In order to build bonds-based commitment, online community designers can either 
try to recruit members who are already friends, or build new friendships.  Backstrom 
and colleagues (2006)  showed that the likelihood that a person would join a group in 
the social networking and blogging site LiveJournal ( http://www.livejournal.com ) 
increased with the number of current members of that group they were linked to (see 
 figure 3.2 ).  Leskovec and colleagues (2010)  showed empirical support for this predic-
tion in both Epinions ( http://www.epinions.com ) and Wikipedia. People who like the 
same things tend to form direct links between each other, although balance theory is 
not the only explanation for this result ( Leskovec, Huttenlocher, and Kleinberg 2010 ). 
0.025
0.02
0.015
0.01
0.005
0
0
5
10
15
20
25
k
Probability
30
35
40
50
45
 Figure 3.2 
 The probability  p of joining a LiveJournal ( http://www.livejournal.com ) community as a function 
of the number of friends  k already in the community. 
 Source : From  Backstrom et al. 2006 . 

Chapter 3: Encouraging Commitment in Online Communities 
89
Many online communities recruit among friends, for example, by mining current 
members ’ email lists. Facebook suggests  “ friending ” people with common network 
ties. Doing so not only increases the likelihood that a newcomer will join a community 
because it is frequented by friends, but it also increases the mutual bonds among 
community members. 
 Design Claim 13  Recruiting participants who have existing social ties to be members 
of the community increases their bonds-based commitment to the community. 
 The next best thing to building a site with people who have existing friendships 
may be to encourage friends of friends to join. Research on psychological balance 
demonstrates that people who are both friends of a friend are likely to know and 
like each other and their friendship to a common partner is likely to lead to 
their becoming friends as well ( Curry and Emerson 1970 ;  Heider 1958 ).  The 
logic behind these findings  guides many social network sites. For example, 
LinkedIn ( http://www.linkedin.com ) provides tools for people to see friends of their 
friends (see   figure 3.3 ); Facebook also encourages peoples to connect with friends ’  
friends. 
 Design Claim 14  Facilitating interaction with  “ friends of friends ” can enhance bonds-
based commitment. 
 Figure 3.3 
 LinkedIn ’ s tools for seeing friends of friends ( http://www.linkedin.com ). 

90 
Yuqing Ren, Robert E. Kraut, Sara Kiesler, and Paul Resnick
 Another technique to foster bond-based attachment is to build features into the com-
munity that build and maintain new friendships among participants. Although psy-
chologists have extensive theories about the factors that lead to interpersonal attachment 
(see  Berscheid and Reis 1998  for a review), here we concentrate on factors that can be 
influenced by community designers and that have robust effects on interpersonal 
attraction: repeated exposure, similarity, social interaction, and self-disclosure. 
 Milgram ’ s discussion of the familiar stranger ( 1977 ) suggests that merely seeing 
other people in an online group repeatedly, even without communicating with them, 
may be a precursor to forming a personal attachment to them. When applied to the 
challenge of increasing bond-based attachment to an online group, the implication is 
that designers should make the identity and behavior of the participants in the group 
known to each other. Seeing pictures of other people or even their avatars increases 
attraction, especially when people are just getting to know each other ( Walther, Slo-
vacek, and Tidwell 2001 ;  Yee, Bailenson, and Rickertsen 2007 )). Providing a stream of 
fresh information about the others enhances this familiarity effect. 
 Facebook does an excellent job of leveraging these principles. The home pages of 
many groups feature photos of a selected set of members, recent discussion posts, and 
photos, videos, and links shared by members. Even applications on social networking 
sites are often surrounded by pictures of users and fans. These images increase the 
likelihood that people will form an attachment to another member, even if they 
originally joined just to play a single-person game. (See   figure 3.4 , showing the use of 
pictures of people to build attachment to the single-player game Bejeweled.) 
 Figure 3.4 
 Use of friends ’ pictures to increase commitment to the Bejeweled game. 
 Source : From  http://www.popcap.com . 

Chapter 3: Encouraging Commitment in Online Communities 
91
 Figure 3.5 
 Facebook news feed ( http://www.facebook.com ). 
 Facebook incorporates the familiarity principle into its core features, such as its 
 “ what ’ s on your mind ” newsfeed features (see   figure 3.5 ). The typical homepage on 
Facebook shows frequently updated information and a constant stream of comments, 
videos, and activities of friends, continually reminding users of their friends ’ existence. 
Through these techniques, Facebook helps to build and maintain the bonds among 
friends and through this route keeps users attached to Facebook itself. 
 Design Claim 15  Displaying photos and information about individual members and 
their recent activities promotes bonds-based commitment 
 Social interaction is the primary basis for building and maintaining social bonds. The 
experience and familiarity we gain through social interaction with others increases 
our liking for them ( Homans 1958 ). Conversing with people and doing things with 

92 
Yuqing Ren, Robert E. Kraut, Sara Kiesler, and Paul Resnick
them provides opportunities for people to get better acquainted and to build trust. As 
the frequency of interaction increases, their liking for one another also increases 
( Festinger, Schachter, and Back 1950 ;  Newcomb 1961 ). Some studies have discovered 
an approximately linear relationship between liking of group members in small groups 
and frequency of interaction with them ( Lott and Lott 1965 ). 
 In online communities, members ’ frequency of interaction with others is a major 
determinant of the extent to which they build relationships with one another 
( McKenna, Green, and Gleason 2002 ). More exchanges among community members —
 through private messages, for example — provide opportunities for members to create 
liking and trust.  Utz ’ s  (2003)  study of MUD (Multi-User Dungeon game) players 
showed that the longer their involvement in the MUD and the more real-world 
contact they had with other members, the more of a bond they felt with other players. 
Interpersonal connections become even stronger if members have a sense of virtual 
copresence or a subjective feeling of being together with others ( Slater et al. 2000 ). 
 Design Claim 16  Providing opportunities for members to engage in personal conver-
sation increases bonds-based commitment in online communities. 
 In offline environments, physical proximity causes clustering of interpersonal interac-
tions. That is, people nearby are likely to interact often. For example, students tend 
to form closer friendships with those they sit next to in class ( Back, Schmukle, and 
Egloff 2008 ;  Sykes, Larntz, and Fox 1976 ) and are more likely to marry people who 
live in the same neighborhood or go to the same school ( Bossard 1932 ). Proximity is 
a reliable predictor of interaction, interpersonal attraction, and close bonds in many 
natural settings, such as boarding schools, college classes, large corporations, and 
housing projects ( Newcomb 1961 ). 
 Online, there is no physical proximity to enforce clustering. Thus, it would be pos-
sible, in principle, for interaction pairings to be generated uniformly. Without suffi-
cient repeat exposure, people would be less likely to form interpersonal bonds. Thus, 
designers need to create other mechanisms that generate clustering of interpersonal 
interactions. 
 One way to create clustering is to create within the larger online community  neigh-
borhoods , in which a subset of the population can congregate. Online role-playing 
games such as World of Warcraft use the consistency of the server on which an 
individual subscriber plays the game as a device to ensure that the subscriber repeat-
edly runs into others assigned to the same server. In addition, these games 
typically have special communication features that alert players when other members 

Chapter 3: Encouraging Commitment in Online Communities 
93
of their guilds are online and that allow them to broadcast communication 
exclusively to guildmates wherever they are in the sprawling virtual words they 
inhabit. The  “ rooms ” in a traditional MUD serve a similar function to increase repeated 
interaction among a subset of users. So, too, do separate topical threads or rooms in 
forum-based communities and tag-based groups in the photo-sharing site Flickr ( http://
www.flicker.com ). 
 Content feeds based on already articulated relationships also serve to generate 
repeated exposure and thus bonds-based attachment. For example, following people 
on Twitter ( http://www.twitter.com ; see   figure 3.6 ), friending them on Facebook, or 
subscribing to RSS feeds of their blogs leads to repeated exposure to their posts. 
Content feeds, however, can strengthen only ties that are already strong enough to 
have been explicitly articulated. 
 More sophisticated technical mechanisms are also possible that need not rely on 
spatial metaphors, bounded groups, or previously articulated links. For example, soft-
ware could automatically monitor which people someone has interacted with previ-
ously and highlight or sort new content in a way that makes people more aware of 
content from those with whom they had previous interacted. Although such mecha-
nisms have been proposed ( Resnick et al. 2005 ) and implemented in research 
 Figure 3.6 
 Following people on Twitter ( http://twitter.com ). 

94 
Yuqing Ren, Robert E. Kraut, Sara Kiesler, and Paul Resnick
prototype systems (Ren et al. In press), we are not aware of any commercial online 
communities that have deployed them. 
 Design Claim 17  Places, spaces, groups, friend feeds, and other mechanisms that 
increase the likelihood that people will encounter the same people they have previ-
ously encountered increase bonds-based commitment. 
 Self-disclosure — the exchange of personally revealing information — is both a cause 
and a consequence of interpersonal attraction. People not only like others about 
whom they know more, but also like others to whom they reveal more ( Collins and 
Miller 1994 ). Accordingly, members of online communities are more likely to form 
relationships if they have opportunities to self-disclose and learn personal details 
about each other. Opportunities for self-disclosure shift attention from the group as a 
whole to individual members ( Postmes, Spears, and Lea 2002 ;  Sassenberg and Postmes 
2002 ). 
 Personal information not only increases people ’ s liking for each other, but also their 
likelihood of interacting. It increases their ability to choose people they will trust and 
like. Knowing information about potential communication partners opens up topics 
of conversation. Knowing others ’ home towns and current residences enables members 
to identify those who live in the same region. They can then become real-life contacts. 
Likewise, the inclusion of contact information such as phone numbers, email addresses, 
and instant messaging (IM) accounts enable members to connect and interact through 
other channels. 
 In online communities, any communication channel permits self-disclosure, but 
more structured technical and social features can encourage it. The most common 
feature is a user profile with personal information such as photos, background, experi-
ence, and interests, which helps members know more about the people in the group. 
Many discussion-based communities include a forum or thread dedicated to 
self-introductions.  
 In a field experiment with a movie discussion community, we found that members 
with access to individual profiles with information about others ’  history, location, and 
movie preferences visited the site more frequently than those that did not have access 
to individual profiles (Ren et al. Under review). For individual profiles to lead to com-
mitment, however, designers need to be thoughtful about what fields to include and 
what information to encourage. For example, at professional social networking sites 
like LinkedIn, it is more meaningful to include fields related to people ’ s professional 
experiences such as education and work experiences, whereas at a movie discussion 

Chapter 3: Encouraging Commitment in Online Communities 
95
site, it is more meaningful to include fields related to people ’ s movie tastes. The health 
support group Breastcancer.org ( http://www.breastcancer.org ) encourages participants 
to enter information about their diagnosis and medication in their profiles, and this 
information is revealed in automatically generated signature lines added to their dis-
cussion posts. 
 There is evidence that personal information such as pictures promotes interpersonal 
bonds among people who have not yet interacted ( Walther, Slovacek, and Tidwell 
2001 ). Compared to strangers, people who were able to see another ’ s online Facebook 
profile before conversing caused the conversation partners to like them more by engag-
ing in more effective small talk and self-presentation ( Hancock, Toma, and Fenner 
2008 ). 
 Design Claim 18  Providing user profile pages and flexibility in personalizing them 
increases self-disclosure and interpersonal liking and thus bonds-based commitment. 
 Somewhat paradoxically, revelation of personal information may actually increase if 
the most personal information — one ’ s true identity — is hidden. For example, in the 
fitness and weight-loss community SparkPeople ( http://www.sparkpeople.com ), many 
people use pseudonyms rather than their real names, but reveal quite detailed infor-
mation, including daily weigh-ins. In their blogs, they also reveal their struggles and 
difficulties as well as triumphs. In interviews, people who used Facebook and Spark-
People said that they felt much more comfortable revealing detailed personal informa-
tion on SparkPeople, where that information could not be associated with real-life 
identities or easily found by their real-life friends ( Newman et al. 2011 ). 
 Design Claim 19  Allowing participation under a pseudonym will increase self-
disclosure and interpersonal liking and thus bond-based commitment in communities 
where sensitive information is shared. 
 One surprising finding from the psychological research is that people like others to 
whom they disclose personal information ( Collins and Miller 1994 ). In offline con-
versation, people can identify people in the conversation with them and therefore 
know to whom they have revealed information about themselves. This awareness of 
the audience isn ’ t necessarily the case online, especially when people are posting their 
communication publicly in blogs, discussion forums, and the like. Because the effect 
of disclosure may be stronger when people know whom they have disclosed to, 
an automatic report about who has read one ’ s profile or a social convention of 

96 
Yuqing Ren, Robert E. Kraut, Sara Kiesler, and Paul Resnick
leaving a  “ guest book ” entry or comment could enhance feelings of closeness from 
self-disclosures. 
 Although personal profiles permit people to learn about others, they do not facilitate 
self-disclosure as a communicative act — a decision to reveal particular information to 
particular others in particular circumstances. It is likely that the decision to reveal 
oneself to others is what makes one like them and not just their possession of the infor-
mation. Moreover, the act of sharing generates a reciprocal obligation to self-disclose 
that may not be triggered by simply seeing information in someone ’ s user profile. 
 Some online community moderators have a deft touch for asking questions that 
lead members to self-disclosure. For example, in a forum for people participating in a 
pedometer-based walking program, a moderator posted a question about fitting in 
exercise during a sister ’ s graduation weekend. Perhaps because it was self-revelatory, 
it led to self-revelatory responses from other group members ( Resnick, Janney, Buis, 
and Richardson 2010 ). Other, more structured ice-breaker activities and games are 
possible. For example, in our research group, we once added an ice-breaker game to 
our online profile pages. Each person posted three interesting personal stories, only 
two of which were true, and everyone had to vote on which was the tall tale (see 
 figure 3.7 ). People revealed personal stories that had not come up in our usual interac-
tions. One intriguing option that we have not yet seen would be to have people 
interactively choose profile fields to reveal to particular others. This approach might 
be especially effective in an online dating site, for which each act of disclosure would 
signal a continuing interest based on the interactions up to that point. 
 Design Claim 20  Active self-disclosure with visible responses leads to more bonds-
based commitment than does passive disclosure. 
 Figure 3.7 
 An online ice breaker. 
 Source : Paul Resnick. 

Chapter 3: Encouraging Commitment in Online Communities 
97
 Just as people like groups whose focus seems similar to their own interests and 
goals, they also like other people who are similar to them in preferences, attitudes, 
and values, and they are likely to work or interact with similar others. In his pioneer-
ing longitudinal study of college students,  Newcomb (1961)  found that high 
interpersonal attraction developed among those who initially had attitudes in 
common. Experimenters frequently manipulate similarity in dyads to increase 
their liking of each other (e.g.,  Byrne 1997 ). Typically, participants completed a 
personality and friendship questionnaire and were told that they were assigned to 
a group whose members probably would become close friends ( Hogg and Turner 
1985 ;  Postmes et al. 2001 ). When similarity was presented as the sharing of unique 
personal attributes between the self and other members (e.g., unique movie tastes 
or personal preferences for celebrities), it triggered bonds-based attachment with 
other group members who could not necessarily be replaced with any other 
group member ( Hogg 1992 , 100).   Figure 3.8  shows a  “ compatibility ” report compar-
ing the movie tastes of two members of the MovieLens site ( http://movielens
.umn.edu ). 
 Design Claim 21  Highlighting interpersonal similarity fosters closeness among indi-
vidual members and bonds-based commitment. 
 Reducing Repelling Forces that Undercut Personal Commitment 
 People feel more committed to smaller groups than to larger ones ( Carron and Spink 
1995 ). One reason is that interpersonal bonds are difficult to maintain with a larger 
number of individuals. When people relate to others, they devote time and attention 
to them. Thus, people are able to maintain only a limited number of strong ties with 
others. The anthropologist Robin  Dunbar (1993)  proposed that humans evolved 
having a cognitive limit on the number of individuals with whom they could maintain 
close, stable relationships. According to Dunbar, this limit is approximately 150 
people. (Of course, this number varies across different people. Extraverts know more 
people than do introverts, and they spend more time communicating with others, 
seeking out relationships, and engaging in social events.) Even though social network-
ing sites have greatly expanded social circles and reduced the cost of maintaining weak 
ties ( Granovetter 1973 ), these sites do not necessarily increase the number of close 
ties people have. As of March 2011 the average active Facebook user maintained ties 
to 130 friends on the site ( Facebook 2011 ). 
 Another reason for the preference for smaller groups is that when many people are 
communicating, each pair may not have enough repeated interactions for bonds to 

98 
Yuqing Ren, Robert E. Kraut, Sara Kiesler, and Paul Resnick
form unless, as indicated previously, some mechanism is in place to cluster people. 
For example, the Internet Movie Database site ( http://www.imdb.com ) hosts messages 
from thousands of people. Posts arrive in such quantity that a new post remains on 
the front page for less than twenty minutes. Under these conditions, it will be difficult 
for pairs of people to come across each other frequently enough to form bonds. In 
one analysis of a large sample of Usenet newsgroups, the more messages posted in a 
group during a month, the smaller the proportion was of posters who returned in the 
subsequent month ( Jones, Ravid, and Rafaeli 2002 ). Similar phenomena occurred in 
synchronous communication channels, such as Internet Relay Chat ( Raban, Moldovan 
and Jones 2010 ). Although email-based LISTSERV communities attracted more new 
 Figure 3.8 
 Compatibility report for MovieLens ( http://movielens.umn.edu ). 
 Source : Ren et al. In press. 

Chapter 3: Encouraging Commitment in Online Communities 
99
members per month if they were larger, those with more traffic had higher turnover 
rates ( Butler 2001 ). 
 Larger community size and communication volume do not limit identity-based 
commitment in the same way. Identity-based commitment does not depend on 
repeated communication or on personal ties with specific other members. In principle, 
with identity-based commitment, other individual members are interchangeable rep-
resentatives of the community. This reasoning is consistent with a field experiment 
in a movie discussion community in which the use of algorithms to repeatedly expose 
individuals to movie groups led to a significant increase in member commitment to 
these groups, whereas the same algorithm to repeatedly expose individuals to familiar 
others did not have such an effect ( Ren et al. Under review ). 
 Design Claim 22  Large communities with a large volume of communication 
reduce bonds-based commitment unless some means of clustering communications 
is used. 
 Most people feel psychologically safer when a community ’ s membership is more 
homogeneous than when there is a diversity of member backgrounds and views. 
Membership diversity can lead people to feel that there is less coherence of community 
purpose than they would like and a fracturing of community communications. The 
growth of a community can lead to more diversity of membership than the commu-
nity had in the past, if only because new cohorts are younger and have different 
concerns than older members have. Such diversity of membership attributes can 
threaten people ’ s sense of common social identity and lead to turnover in groups 
( Williams and O ’ Reilly 1998 ). New cohorts are likely to differ from old-timers not just 
in their personal attributes, but also in attitude and motivation. For example, when 
Systers — a LISTSERV for mostly university-based female computer scientists — started 
recruiting many younger women, the newcomers were more likely to be employed by 
industry and to be interested in success in that nonacademic domain. Many older 
Systers left, and a new effort had to be mounted to keep the community going 
( Jeffries, Kiesler, Goetz, and Sproull 2000 ;  Spertus, Jeffries, and Sie 2001 ). 
 Design Claim 23  Diversity of members ’ interest in an online community can drive 
away members, especially those with identity-based commitment. 
 A special problem of diversity among member interests is the management of off-topic 
conversations, that is, conversations that are irrelevant to the main purpose of a 

100 
Yuqing Ren, Robert E. Kraut, Sara Kiesler, and Paul Resnick
community, such as political comments or revelations about personal experiences in 
a movie discussion group. 
 Community designers must decide whether to try to keep discussion on topic or 
to let it stray. (Chapter 4, on regulating behavior, discusses ways to keep discussion 
on topic, if that is desired.) Many topical discussion communities discourage off-topic 
communication. For example, the introductory message to the JoBlo Movie Network 
( http://www.joblo.com ) emphatically states,  “ Our board is for MOVIE TALK only. If 
you bring personal issues up on our board, you will be banned. If you discuss your 
ex-girlfriend, you will be banned. If you announce your comings and goings or gossip 
about so-and-so, you will be banned. . . . This is . . . not a place for you to discuss 
your personal life or boo-hoo about how your lover just broke up with you ” ( JoBlo 
Movie Network 2005 ). On the other hand, on the AOL message board X-Fileaholics, 
whose nominal topic was discussion of the TV show  The X-Files , it was normal for 
members to discuss everything but the show, including favorite music, other television 
shows or movies, humorous polls, unpleasant events, and recent achievements. New-
comers, in an official welcome message posted within the joining thread, are encour-
aged to  “ act demented [because] it runs in the family ” ( Honeycutt 2005 ). One study 
found that 36 percent of Q & A threads on Yahoo! Answers were  “ conversational ” rather 
than  “ informational ” ( Harper, Moy, and Konstan 2009 ). 
 A community ’ s policy to either constrain or open up content has trade-offs 
that designers need to address. Off-topic conversation, by distracting from the 
unifying feature around which people identify, reduces identity-based commitment. 
But it can help a subset of individuals discover additional common interests 
beyond those defining the community and allows them to share personal information, 
thus enhancing interpersonal bonds. The kind of self-disclosing conversation that 
we previously argued builds bonds is off-topic. An empirical investigation confirmed 
that restricting conversation to specific domains makes a site less appealing to 
people who want to know individuals better, whereas a policy of encouraging 
off-topic conversation can undercut identity-based attachment (Postmes, Spears, and 
Lea 2002 ). 
 Design Claim 24   Off-topic communication reduces identity-based commitment and 
increases bonds-based commitment to an online community. 
 Sometimes a community that forms for one purpose will temporarily shift its focus 
due to special circumstances. For example, following the Pacific Tsunami in December 
2004, a knitting hobbyist who went by the screen name of Yarn Harlot started publi-

Chapter 3: Encouraging Commitment in Online Communities 
101
cizing a Knitters Without Borders challenge in knitting groups she participated in. She 
has tracked more than $1 million in donations to the organization Doctors Without 
Borders ( Yarn Harlot 2010 ). Around the time of an election, some groups that normally 
do not discuss politics take up this topic. 
 We have coined the phrase  “ going off-topic together ” to describe situations where 
something that would normally be considered off-topic (such as fundraising or poli-
tics) becomes on-topic — at least temporarily. Going off-topic together can build both 
bonds-based and identity-based attachment. Bonds can form because people see 
another side of each other that was not revealed in previous interactions. Whereas 
previously identification with the group was primarily through identification with the 
topic, going off-topic together creates an opportunity to identify with the group of 
people separately from the topic. Although we use the term  “ online community ” 
broadly in this book, in classes we find that some students prefer to reserve that term 
for groups with affective ties and multiplex relationships that are akin to close-knit 
geographic neighborhoods. Given that distinction, going off-topic together is one 
marker for when a group has truly become a community. 
 Design Claim 25  Going off-topic together can increase both bonds-based commit-
ment and identity-based commitment. 
 A flexible approach to off-topic conversation could serve both needs for identity and 
bonds-based commitment. A computer simulation model by Ren and Kraut (Under 
review) suggests that personalized filtering, in which people in a community are 
exposed only to communications that match their interests, will lead to greater com-
mitment than regimes that do not moderate communications at all or moderate it so 
that off-topic messages are removed for all community members. According to the 
simulation, these positive effects of personalization seem to be strongest in larger 
groups or groups encompassing a diversity of topics and support both identity-based 
and bond-based attachment. 
 A number of approaches can be used to personalize the content of a site. The sim-
plest is to provide separate areas for on-topic and off-topic conversation. Many topic-
based communities, such as the movie web forum Rotten Tomatoes ( http://
www.rottentomatoes.com/vine ) and the CNET site for equipment reviews ( http://
reviews.cnet.com ), provide separate off-topic discussion boards. The Off Topic Discus-
sion forum on the Rotten Tomatoes site and the off-topic Speakeasy forum on the 
CNET site are highly popular. Having separate areas for off-topic conversation has the 
drawback of segregating it, so that it is seen only by those who explicitly decide to 

102 
Yuqing Ren, Robert E. Kraut, Sara Kiesler, and Paul Resnick
view it. People may need to already have bonds-based connections with others in 
order to want to visit the place where bonds can form. 
 Online communities can also identify off-topic content without segregating it by, 
for example, using tags. When traffic expanded in the online soap opera newsgroup 
rec.arts.tv.soap, people started complaining about messages that were unrelated to 
soap operas. Some members proposed marking messages that were not directly related 
to soap operas by  “ TAN ” (for tangent) in the subject line so that members who were 
not interested could easily ignore them while preserving them in the group for those 
who were interested ( Baym 1999 ). Information retrieval techniques ( Foltz and Dumais 
1992 ;  Landauer, Foltz, and Laham 1998 ) can be used to estimate how similar a focal 
message is to other messages recently posted on a forum, and readers can decide to 
view messages of varying relevance. An administrator of an identity-based site could 
set a threshold to visually differentiate the off-topic content or make it more difficult 
for newcomers to see. 
 Design Claim 26  Personalized filters, which differentially expose members to com-
munications that match their personal interests, reduce the negative effects that off-
topic communication has on identity-based commitment. 
 2  Normative Commitment 
 Normative commitment is a feeling that one has obligations to the community, to be 
loyal and act on its behalf. Many factors can contribute to creating normative com-
mitment to a community. Here we consider three: commitment to the cause, others ’ 
normative commitment, and reciprocity. 
 One reason people feel a normative commitment to an online community is 
because they have a preexisting commitment to the purpose that the community 
serves. This feeling may be a stronger resource for generating commitment in advocacy 
communities and production communities than in hobbyist communities. In open 
source software (OSS) development projects, having common values about the impor-
tance of sharing and helping each other predicts group members ’ commitment to the 
group, which in turn predicts the effort they contribute ( Stewart and Gosain 2006 ). 
But even in hobbyist and support-oriented communities, people may feel a strong 
commitment to advancing the hobby or helping people suffering from a particular 
health condition or life circumstance. To translate normative commitment to a com-
munity ’ s purpose into commitment to the community itself, the community will need 
to keep its purpose salient throughout its activities and show that it is having some 

Chapter 3: Encouraging Commitment in Online Communities 
103
success in achieving its purpose. For example, open source communities would want 
to highlight statistics and stories about the usefulness of the software and the impor-
tance of the next version ’ s planned improvements. 
 Design Claim 27  Highlighting a community ’ s purpose and successes at achieving that 
purpose can translate members ’ commitment to the purpose into normative commit-
ment to the community. 
 Another reason people accept a normative obligation is if there is a shared norm about 
that obligation. For people who are unsure whether something is a shared norm, social 
proof that others believe it is can help resolve the uncertainty. In other chapters, we 
point out the power of social proof about the value of joining a community and about 
norms of good behavior. Here, we argue that demonstrations that others feel a norma-
tive obligation to the community are a powerful way to spread that feeling of obliga-
tion. Narrative testimonials are powerful ways for a community to indicate the 
obligations that members have toward the group. Raymond points out the moral 
obligation of participants in OSS development projects to help each other:  “ To behave 
like a hacker, you have to believe that the thinking time of other hackers is precious —
 so much so that it ’ s almost a moral duty for you to share information, solve problems 
and then give the solutions away just so other hackers can solve new problems 
instead of having to perpetually re-address old ones ” ( Raymond 2003 ). These types of 
testimonials, whether offered by community leaders or regular members during the 
regular course of conversation, are likely to make explicit obligations towards the 
community. 
 Design Claim 28  Testimonials about people ’ s normative commitment to the com-
munity increase others ’  normative commitment. 
 A third generator of normative commitment is the widely shared norm of reciprocity. 
Reciprocity is one of the strongest and most universal of human norms ( Gouldner 
1960 ). People think that those who have given should get something back and that 
those who have received should give something back. Researchers have distinguished 
between direct reciprocity, in which people feel obliged to help particular others who 
have helped them, and indirect or generalized reciprocity, in which people feel obliged 
to  “ pay it forward ” to somebody, even if it ’ s not the specific person who helped them 
(e.g.,  Nowak and Sigmund 2005 ;  Yamagishi and Kiyonari 2000 ). These feelings of 
obligation are one reason that cancer survivors or caregivers in online support groups 

104 
Yuqing Ren, Robert E. Kraut, Sara Kiesler, and Paul Resnick
continue to participate, offering advice to others, even after their own cancer is in 
remission or after the person they had cared for has died. Researchers have argued 
that this indirect reciprocity is critical to the development of human groups and 
society more generally and that people will forego their own economically rational 
self-interest to punish those who don ’ t reciprocate ( Fehr and G ä chter 2000 ). 
 Designers can prime the norm itself, making it more salient, by using language 
such as  “ reciprocity, ”  “ obligation, ”  “ giving back, ”  “ paying it forward, ” or terms that 
otherwise activate altruistic motivations. Psychologists have found that priming —
 even unrelated to the specific context of action — can have surprisingly strong effects 
on people ’ s actions in laboratory settings. For example, compared with subjects in a 
word recognition experiment who saw neutral words, those who saw words with a 
positive religious tone (e.g., heaven, faith) were willing to distribute twice as many 
pamphlets to help a charity ( Pichon, Boccato, and Saroglou 2007 ). 
 Design Claim 29  Priming norms of reciprocity by highlighting concepts that get 
people to think of their normative obligations increases normative commitment to 
an online community. 
 More directly, designers can highlight what individual members have received from 
a community. An experiment on MovieLens movie recommendation site gave people 
feedback about their  “ net benefit ” score, estimated from their previous activity. Sub-
jects told that they had above-average net benefit scores were more likely to select 
additional activities that benefited the community rather than benefiting themselves 
( Chen, Harper, Konstan, and Li 2010 ). Similarly, rather than providing a strict account-
ing, designers can highlight more general benefits that members receive. For example, 
when soliciting support for Wikipedia in 2010, Wikipedia founder Jimmy Wales 
emphasized generalized reciprocity when he said that  “ It stopped being just a website 
a long time ago. For many of us, most of us, Wikipedia has become an indispensable 
part of our daily lives ” ( Wikimedia Foundation 2010 ). 
 Design Claim 30   Showing people what they have received from the community 
increases their normative commitment to it. 
 Perhaps even more powerfully, designers can also invoke a direct reciprocity norm. 
For example, the open source project Drupal has a bottleneck on incorporating 
new code contributions: members are contributing code faster than it is getting 
reviewed. This bottleneck is frustrating to the coders whose patches are left in limbo, 

Chapter 3: Encouraging Commitment in Online Communities 
105
and it is inefficient for the project. We are working with the community to design a 
feature that will highlight code patches awaiting review that were written by people 
who have previously reviewed your code. We expect that people will feel an obligation 
to help others who have helped them and will thus spend more time reviewing 
their code. 
 Design Claim 31  Highlighting opportunities to return favors to specific others 
increases normative commitment to the community. 
 3  Needs-Based Commitment 
 Needs-based (or  continuance )  commitment refers to attachment to an online community 
that depends on the net benefits that people experience from the community. Accord-
ing to needs-based models of social cohesion, people stay in a group only as long as 
they perceive the group and other members as being attractive and instrumental in 
fulfilling their personal goals ( Homans 1961 ). When net benefits are positive, members 
predict that they get sufficient rewards to warrant the time, effort, and frustration they 
spend on the community. When benefits are low and the costs of leaving the com-
munity are low, commitment will also be low. Although most research suggests that 
the direct benefits people personally receive from the community are not the only 
source of commitment, most members do care about these benefits. These benefits 
include information, social support, companionship, and reputation, among others 
( Ridings and Gefen 2004 ). The importance of these benefits vary across both different 
types of communities and different individuals. For example,  Ridings and Gefen 
(2004)  asked almost four hundred participants in twenty-seven online discussion 
groups why they joined. As seen in   figure 3.9 , members of most types of communities 
valued getting information. However, health and wellness groups were relatively less 
interested in information and more interested in social support, and those in many 
hobby groups were disproportionately interested in companionship. In a discussion 
group for legal professionals, many members ’  commitment levels derived from percep-
tions that participation in the group would lead to enhanced reputation ( Wasko and 
Faraj 2005 ). In many gaming communities, such as World of Warcraft, members ’  com-
mitment derives from the challenge and fun the game provides as well as the oppor-
tunities to hang out online with friends ( Ducheneaut and Moore 2004 ;  Ducheneaut 
et al. 2006a, 2006b ). Owners and moderators of voluntary discussion groups tend to 
be less motivated by getting information and more by interest in friendships and 
other social benefits ( Butler et al. 2007 ). As we discuss in more detail in chapter 5, 

106 
Yuqing Ren, Robert E. Kraut, Sara Kiesler, and Paul Resnick
participants who do not perceive the community as providing the benefits they desire 
are especially likely to leave. 
 Designing experiences that meet members ’  needs requires knowing what these 
needs are. If you don ’ t know what members want, then it is hard to satisfy them. 
Sometimes the members ’ motivations are not obvious, even to insiders. For example, 
even though most developers who participate in OSS development projects do so 
for instrumental reasons (e.g., to get better code or a better job) or for identity-based 
ones (e.g., to feel part of a social movement that they consider ideologically impor-
tant), some also want to develop friendship with other developers they meet online. 
To satisfy this need, some open source development projects host  “ code fests ” at which 
developers can meet each other and form relationships. For example, the GNOME 
software project — a graphic desktop for the Linux operating system — hosts the GNOME 
Users ’ and Developers ’ European Conference, whose motto is  “ Meet, Plan, Party! ” (see 
 figure 3.10 ). 
 Some research has developed validated survey instruments and other techniques 
to assess the motivations of volunteers in conventional organizations, such as altru-
ism, career, or social contact ( Clary et al. 1998 ). Matching recruiting materials and 
experiences with the reasons that particular people volunteer increases their willing-
ness to join, their satisfaction, and their willingness to continue in the organization 
(e.g.,  Crain, Omoto, and Snyder 1998 ;  Williamson, Snyder, and Omoto 2000 ). These 
general survey instruments can be adapted to use in assessing motivations in online 
 Figure 3.9 
 Reasons for joining different types of discussion groups. 
 Source : From  Ridings and Gefen 2004 . 
Motivational category
Community type
Overall percentage
Total N (reasons)
Fun
Companionship
Professional
Health
Hobby
Sports
Pets
Other interests
Social
support
Info.
exchange
53%
38%
52%
58%
48%
53%
50%
257
11%
17%
29%
18%
36%
26%
24%
124
22%
38%
2%
4%
3%
0%
11%
56
10%
4%
9%
11%
9%
9%
9%
45

Chapter 3: Encouraging Commitment in Online Communities 
107
communities. In addition, others have developed survey instruments to assess motiva-
tions for participating in online communities, such as open source development 
projects ( Ghosh 2005 ) and Wikipedia ( Nov 2007 ). By understanding the profile of 
motivations of participants in an online community, designers are better able to craft 
experiences that match these motivations. 
 Design Claim 32  Providing participants with experiences that meet their motivations 
for participating in the community increases their needs-based commitment to the 
community. 
 As with interpersonal relationships, the net benefit that people need to achieve to 
decide to stay in a community depends upon the alternatives that are available 
( Thibaut and Kelley 1986 ). Simply put, people will be satisfied with fewer benefits and 
will tolerate more some of the unpleasantness associated with any group membership 
when they have fewer alternatives available. For example, employees are less likely to 
quit their company when there are fewer equivalent jobs available (e.g.,  Hulin, 
Roznowski, and Hachiya 1985 ). In the online world, people stay in Usenet groups 
longer if there are fewer Usenet groups in the same ecological niche or serving similar 
content ( Wang 2007 ). The implication is that to build needs-based commitment, an 
online community must meet the needs of its members more when it has many com-
petitors than when it has few. Although community designers cannot control the 
 Figure 3.10 
 Logo for the GNOME Users ’ and Developers ’ European Conference ( http://guadec
.expectnation.com ). 

108 
Yuqing Ren, Robert E. Kraut, Sara Kiesler, and Paul Resnick
competition, they can raise or lower the visibility of these alternatives when members 
are actually participating in the community. For example, including links to compet-
ing communities increases the ease with which a member can defect by clicking 
competitors ’ sites.  Wang (2007)  found that the more cross-posted messages (i.e., mes-
sages that also were posted to competitor groups) that were displayed in a Usenet 
group during a month, the more quickly members defected from the group. Some 
online communities do post links to competitors. For example, the Advanced Breast 
Cancer Community ( http://advancedbreastcancercommunity.org ) posts links to its 
main competitors, including CancerCare and the Cancer Support Group, but those 
other groups do not (see   figure 3.11 ). 
 Design Claim 33  Showing information about other communities in the same ecologi-
cal niche reduces needs-based commitment. 
 Some online communities try to supplement the psychological benefits members 
derive from being in the community with specific benefits for those who participate 
and contribute. For example, Epinions offers profit sharing, Slashdot ( http://
slashdot.org ) offers recognition, and the crowdfunding site 8-Bit Funding ( http://
8bitfunding.com ) offers T-shirts and other swag that symbolize that the wearer has 
made a meaningful contribution ( Tedjamulia et al. 2005 ). Many sites offer ratings, 
 Figure 3.11 
 Showing links to competitors reduces needs-based commitment. 
 Source : From  http://www.advancedbreastcancercommunity.org . 

Chapter 3: Encouraging Commitment in Online Communities 
109
status, or points to reward contributions. According to some researchers, these direct 
rewards for contributions can rob people of the intangible pleasure they get from 
contributing and their sense of identity with the community ( Deci, Koestner, and Ryan 
1999 ), but other researchers believe that direct rewards can usefully supplement psy-
chological incentives ( Cameron, Banko, and Pierce 2001 ;  Eisenberger, Pierce, and 
Cameron 1999 ). We consider the trade-offs of offering direct rewards in chapter 2 on 
contributions. 
 A variant of needs-based commitment, sometimes referred to as  lock-in ( Shapiro 
and Varian 1999 ), occurs when members accumulate community-specific assets that 
retain their value only through continued participation in the community. These 
assets can include resources in the community, both people and content. For example, 
the friends one is connected to on Facebook are an asset, in that they produce value 
when one continues to use Facebook. The status and privileges that one has accumu-
lated are also community-specific assets. For example, in World of Warcraft, players 
can buy a mount to transport them rapidly across the landscape only after they have 
completed enough quests to reach level 20 or 40 in the game and have accumulated 
the price of the mount in in-game gold. Once acquired, the steed is a community-
specific asset. One ’ s historical data with a site can also be an asset. For example, the 
ratings one has entered in a recommender site, like Netflix ( http://www.netflix.com ) 
or MovieLens, or the financial information that one has posted in financial sites like 
Vanguard ( http://vanguard.com ) or Intuit ( http://www.intuit.com ), are also community-
specific assets that improve service quality. In a study of turnover in customers ’ use 
of online brokerage sites,  Chen and Hitt (2003)  showed that established customers 
were less likely to leave than were new customers when sites provided relationship 
services, which included personalizing data, reusing customer data to facilitate future 
transactions, using customer data to support business or personal needs such as filing 
taxes, and allowing a customer to customize the site. A controlled experiment on eBay 
showed that an established history or reputation was an asset worth about 8 percent 
in additional revenue for a seller ( Resnick et al. 2006 ). 
 To generate needs-based commitment, an asset must be difficult for a member to 
transfer to a new community. Chapter 6 discusses the advantages of importing 
resources of various kinds from external sources. To keep members locked in, however, 
it can be helpful to limit exports. For example, Facebook makes it difficult to export 
friends lists or accumulated personal information such as profiles. Netflix does not 
provide a history of one ’ s ratings in a format that is easily exported to other movie 
recommendation sites. Similarly, because Amazon does not allow a customer to export 
his or her own purchase and shopping history, only Amazon can provide useful 

110 
Yuqing Ren, Robert E. Kraut, Sara Kiesler, and Paul Resnick
customization based on that history. Similarly, eBay has not participated in open repu-
tation systems that would allow reputations built on eBay to be used (and put at risk) 
on other sites. 
 Skills are an interesting special case of a community-specific asset. Members learn 
technical skills at operating a community ’ s software, as well as social skills of effective 
participation. To the extent that the software, modes of interaction, and social eti-
quette are unique, learning them creates a community-specific asset. Indeed,  Chen and 
Hitt  ’ s study ( 2003 ) showed more turnover in sites that were easier to use, presumably 
because ease of use reduced customers ’ investments in learning how to use the site. 
 To generate needs-based commitment, an asset must also be difficult to transfer to 
another member. Otherwise, a member would be able to sell assets when leaving the 
community, and the assets would not create the same lock-in. Thus, developers of 
multiplayer games put policies in place to depreciate the value of these accumulated 
assets if players leave. Selling in-game currency, loot, or other virtual items for real 
money is against the terms of service for most multiplayer games. In 2006, Blizzard 
banned or suspended more than fifteen thousand World of Warcraft accounts for 
selling virtual property ( Dobson 2006 ). The operators of some multiplayer games also 
persuaded eBay to delist auctions for virtual items ( Slashdot 2007 ). 
 Design Claim 34  Making it difficult for members to export assets or transfer them to 
other members increases needs-based commitment. 
 Members ’ community-specific investments that cannot be recouped when they leave 
can generate commitment even when those investments are merely sunk costs that 
do not create any value going forward. For example, even if a member has not yet 
found the upper levels of a multiplayer game particularly enjoyable, the member may 
remain committed to the game because of the extraordinary efforts he or she has 
already invested to reach those levels. 
 From a purely rational cost-benefit analysis, such sunk costs, once incurred, should 
have no influence on members ’ choices. Yet they frequently do ( Arkes and Blumer 
1985 ). One reason is heuristic processing: when it is not clear how valuable an asset will 
be, a larger investment made to acquire it can be interpreted as an indicator of its value. 
A second reason is cognitive dissonance ( Festinger 1957 ): people need to believe that 
their previous investment decisions were good ones, so they make further choices that 
could result in justifying the earlier ones.  Arkes and Hutzel (2000)  demonstrated in lab 
experiments that at least some of the reason that sunk costs influence future choices 
comes from the latter effect. Consistent with this explanation, experimental research 

Chapter 3: Encouraging Commitment in Online Communities 
111
demonstrated that people like groups more if they have to endure a severe initiation 
process to join them than if they undergo a milder initiation ( Aronson and Mills 1959 ; 
 Gerard and Mathewson 1966 ). According to Aronson, people come to like things for 
which they suffer because this is the only way in which they can reconcile their views of 
themselves as intelligent people with the actions they have performed ( Aronson 1997 ). 
 In an online community context,  Drenner, Sen, and Terveen (2008)  introduced 
effortful barriers to MovieLens. All users of the site were asked to rate five movies in 
order to let the site know about their movie tastes. Some new registrants were in addi-
tion required to apply twenty-five descriptive text tags to movies before they were 
allowed to register (Tag 25), some had to apply five tags (Tag 5), some were simply 
shown the tagging interface but not required to tag any movies (Tag 0), and some 
were not even shown the tagging interface (Control). As expected, as the amount of 
work required in the registration process increased, the proportion of registrants who 
completed the full registration process declined, from 90 percent completion in the 
control condition to 85 percent in the Tag 0 condition, 80 percent in the Tag 5 condi-
tion, and 69 percent in the Tag 25 condition. More interestingly, new users who were 
assigned to do more work as part of their registration process were four times more 
likely to provide tags once they become members and contributed more than ten times 
the number of tags as those in the control condition. The effects were only partly the 
result of the greater motivation of those who overcome the barriers. As the light-
colored bars in   figure 3.12  illustrate, the effects of the entry barriers were strong even 
All applicants 
Applicants who completed
any challenges
Control
TAG 0
TAG 5
TAG 25
Percent adding at least one
tag after joining
Entry challenge
5.1% 
4.3% 
15.5% 
16.4% 
5.6% 
5.1% 
19.5% 
23.6% 
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
 Figure 3.12 
 Effects of entry barriers on post-entry contributions to MovieLens ( http://movielens.umn.edu ). 
 Source : From Drenner, Sen, and Terveen 2008. 

112 
Yuqing Ren, Robert E. Kraut, Sara Kiesler, and Paul Resnick
when considering all potential members exposed to them, not just those who sur-
mounted them. 
 In an open source community, requiring programmers to complete many bug fixes 
before earning full membership privileges has two effects. In chapter 5, we point out 
that such a requirement serves as a screening mechanism, weeding out potential 
members who are not a good fit for the open source project. But it may also act as an 
initiation rite, increasing the commitment of those who attain those privileges. Of 
course, any requirement of time investment is a double-edged sword: it increases com-
mitment (and fit) among those who make the investment but may drive away some 
potentially valuable members who are unwilling to make the initial investment. 
 Design Claim 35  Entry barriers and other opportunities for members to make 
community-specific investments, even if they are merely sunk costs that do not create 
valuable assets, increase needs-based commitment. 
 4  Summary of Design Alternatives 
 As in other chapters, we conclude with a table of the design alternatives considered 
in this chapter and an index to the design claims that discuss their implications 
( table 3.1 ). The chapter examined the challenge of increasing commitment to online 
communities. Commitment enhances a community ’ s ability to surmount other 
challenges — getting newcomers to stick around, getting members to contribute, and 
encouraging community members to behave appropriately. Scholars have identified 
several types of commitment to groups and organizations: affective commitment 
 Table 3.1 
 Summary of design alternatives relevant to commitment, ordered by type 
 Type 
 Design alternative 
 Design 
claim 
 Community 
structure 
 Recruiting or clustering those who are similar to each other into 
homogeneous groups 
 3 
 Creating named groups within a larger online community 
 6, 7 
 Recruiting participants who have existing social ties 
 13 
 Large communities with a large volume of communication 
 22 
 Diversity of members ’ interest in an online community 
 23 
 Making group members anonymous 
 12 
 Participation under a pseudonym 
 19 

Chapter 3: Encouraging Commitment in Online Communities 
113
 Content, 
tasks, and 
activities 
 Providing interdependent tasks 
 9 
 Facilitating interaction with  “ friends of friends ” 
 14 
 Displaying photos and information about individual members and 
their recent activities 
 15 
 Providing opportunities for members to engage in personal 
conversation 
 16 
 Providing user profile pages and flexibility in personalizing them 
 18 
 Active self-disclosure with visible response 
 20 
 Off-topic communication 
 24, 25 
 Making it difficult for members to export assets or transfer them to 
other members 
 34 
 Creating opportunities for members to make community-specific 
investments 
 35 
 Selection, 
sorting, and 
filtering 
 Places, spaces, groups, friend feeds, and other mechanisms that 
increase the likelihood that people will encounter the same people 
they have previously encountered 
 17 
 Personalized filters that differentially expose members to 
communications that match their personal interests 
 26 
 Highlighting opportunities to return favors to specific others 
 31 
 Presentation 
and framing 
 Providing a collection of individuals with a name or other indicator 
that they are members of a common group 
 4 
 A name and tagline that articulate the shared interests of a 
community ’ s members 
 5 
 Making community fate, goals, or purpose explicit 
 8 
 Highlighting an outgroup (and competing with it) 
 10 
 Emphasizing a threat to the group, especially from an external source 
 11 
 Highlighting interpersonal similarity 
 21 
 Highlighting a community ’ s purpose and successes at achieving that 
purpose 
 27 
 Testimonials about people ’ s normative commitment to the 
community 
 28 
 Priming norms of reciprocity by highlighting concepts that get 
people to think of their normative obligations 
 29 
 Showing people what they have received from the community 
 30 
 Showing information about other communities in the same 
ecological niche 
 33 
Table 3.1
(continued)
Type
Design alternative
Design 
claim

114 
Yuqing Ren, Robert E. Kraut, Sara Kiesler, and Paul Resnick
based on common identity or interpersonal bonds, normative commitment based on 
feelings of obligation, and needs-based commitment based on perceived benefits of 
staying and the costs of leaving. We conclude by inverting that focus. We reflect on 
the design space of alternatives and the ways in which alternative designs affect the 
various types of commitment. 
 Some design alternatives affect the membership composition of the community or 
its substructure. For example, diversity of members ’ interests can reduce identity-based 
commitment; one way to combat this effect is to limit diversity, either in the group 
as a whole or in subgroups. Recruiting participants based on existing ties can also 
enhance bonds-based commitment. Larger communities with a large volume of com-
munication limit bonds-based commitment; subdividing into smaller groups can help. 
Naming those subgroups can help generate identity-based commitment as well. 
 The next group of design levers changes the content or activities that are available 
in the online community. Interdependent tasks can enhance identity-based commit-
ment. Interactions with  “ friends of friends ” can enhance bonds-based commitment, 
as can displaying photos and profile pages and offering opportunities for personal 
conversation and personal information revelation. Off-topic conversation can enhance 
bonds-based commitment but interfere with identity-based commitment. Activities 
that generate community-specific assets that are difficult to export or transfer can 
build needs-based commitment. 
 Designers can also build commitment through clever selection, sorting, and filter-
ing of the content that is displayed to people. Creating repeated exposure to the 
same people helps build bonds-based commitment, and limiting exposure to content 
not meeting individual topical interests enhances identity-based commitment. Selec-
tively presenting opportunities to reciprocate favors to others induces normative 
commitment. 
 We identified one way in which controlling access to information can be used to 
affect commitment: Anonymity may actually increase identity-based commitment. Of 
course, it is also likely to interfere with bonds-based commitment. We suspect that 
only in very special cases will anonymity have a net positive impact on member com-
mitment to a community. 
 Finally, there is a variety of ways in which designers can influence commitment 
without making changes to the structure or technological features of a community, 
just by changing the contextual information that provides a frame through which 
members understand what they are doing. To generate identity-based commitment, a 
name and tagline can help, as can articulating the community ’ s goals or purpose or 
highlighting an outgroup to compete with or an external threat. Highlighting inter-

Chapter 3: Encouraging Commitment in Online Communities 
115
personal similarities among members can build bonds-based commitment. Normative 
commitment can be enhanced through highlighting the importance of the commu-
nity ’ s purpose, testimonials about others ’ commitments, priming the norm of reci-
procity, and showing people how they have benefited. Presenting another similar 
community as an outgroup to compete with is a double-edged sword. On the positive 
side, it may enhance identity-based commitment. On the negative side, it can reduce 
needs-based commitment as members become more aware of an alternative commu-
nity that they could explore and possibly switch to. 
 As with many of the design alternatives presented in this book, the design claims 
do not imply definitive design guides. Some of the options discussed here, such as 
recruiting participants who have existing social ties, will — to the extent that they are 
feasible — enhance most online communities. But even those options will generally 
have exceptions; for example, some people may be more comfortable sharing informa-
tion about addictions or health problems with strangers than with friends. Many other 
design alternatives — such as homogeneity, small size, anonymity, off-topic communi-
cation, and competition with a related community — have different effects on different 
desirable outcomes. The right choices for building commitment in each particular 
community will depend on a careful analysis of that community and a healthy dose 
of designer intuition. 
 References 
 Abrams ,  D. ,  K.  Ando , and  S.  Hinkle .  1998 .  Psychological Attachment to the Group: Cross-Cultural 
Differences in Organizational Identification and Subjective Norms as Predictors of Workers ’ 
Turnover Intentions.   Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin  24  ( 10 ):  1027  – 1039 . 
 Allen ,  N. J. , and  J. P.   Meyer .  1990 .  The Measurement and Antecedents of Affective, Continuance, 
and Normative Commitment to the Organization .   Journal of Occupational Psychology  63  
( 1 ):1 – 18. 
 Allen ,  N. J. , and  J. P.   Meyer .  1996 .  Affective, Continuance, and Normative Commitment to the 
Organization: An Examination of Construct Validity.   Journal of Vocational Behavior  49  ( 3 ): 
 252  – 276 . 
 Amichai-Hamburger ,  Y.  2005 .  Internet Minimal Group Paradigm.   Cyberpsychology  & Behavior  8 
( 2 ):  140  – 142 . 
 Arkes ,  H. R. , and  C.  Blumer .  1985 .  The Psychology of Sunk Cost.   Organizational Behavior and 
Human Decision Processes  35  ( 1 ):  124  – 140 . 
 Arkes ,  H. R. , and  L.  Hutzel .  2000 .  The Role of Probability of Success Estimates in the Sunk Cost 
Effect.   Journal of Behavioral Decision Making  13  ( 3 ):  295  – 306 . 

116 
Yuqing Ren, Robert E. Kraut, Sara Kiesler, and Paul Resnick
 Aronson ,  E.  1997 .  Back to the Future: Retrospective Review of Leon Festinger ’ s  “ A Theory of 
Cognitive Dissonance . ”   American Journal of Psychology  110  ( 1 ):  127  – 137 . 
 Aronson ,  Elliot , and  Judson   Mills .  1959 .  The Effect of Severity of Initiation on Liking for a Group.  
 Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology  59 : 177  – 181 .  
 Back ,  M. D. ,  S. C.   Schmukle , and  B.   Egloff .  2008 .  Becoming Friends by Chance.   Psychological 
Science  19  ( 5 ):  439 . 
 Backstrom ,  L. ,  D.  Huttenlocher ,  J.   Kleinberg , and  X.   Lan .  2006 . Group formation in large social 
networks: Membership, growth, and evolution.  Proceedings of the 12th ACM SIGKDD International 
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , 44 – 54.  
 Baym ,  N.   1999 .   Tune In, Log On: Soaps, Fandom, and On-Line Community .  Newbury Park, CA : 
 Corwin . 
 Beenen ,  Gerard ,  Kimberly   Ling ,  Xiaoqing   Wang ,  Klarissa  Chang ,  Dan  Frankowski ,  Paul  Resnick , 
and  Robert E.  Kraut .  2004 . Using Social Psychology to Motivate Contributions to Online Com-
munities. In  CSCW  ’ 04: Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work , 
212 – 221. New York: ACM Press.  
 Berscheid ,  Ellen , and  Harry T.  Reis .  1998 .  Attraction and Close Relationships . In   The Handbook 
of Social Psychology  ,  Vol. 2 , ed.  Daniel T.   Gilbert and  Susan T.  Fiske ,  et al. ,  193  – 281 .  New York: 
 McGraw-Hill . 
 Blanchard ,  A. L. , and  M. L.   Markus .  2004 .  The Experienced  “ Sense ” of a Virtual Community: 
Characteristics and Processes .   ACM SIGMIS Database  35  ( 1 ): 64 – 79. 
 Bossard ,  J. H. S.   1932 .  Residential Propinquity as a Factor in Marriage Selection.   American Journal 
of Sociology  38  ( 2 ):  219  – 224 . 
 Bryant ,  Susan L. ,  Andrea   Forte , and  Amy   Bruckman .  2005 . Becoming a Wikipedian: Transforma-
tion of Participation in a Collaborative Online Encyclopedia. In  Proceedings of the 2005 Interna-
tional ACM SIGGROUP Conference on Supporting Group Work , 1 – 10. New York: ACM Press.  
 Butler ,  Brian .  2001 .  Membership Size, Communication Activity, and Sustainability: A Resource-
Based Model of Online Social Structures.    Information Systems Research  12  ( 4 ):  346  – 362 .  
 Butler ,  Brian ,  L.   Sproull ,  S.  Kiesler , and  R.   Kraut .  2007 .  Community Effort in Online Groups: Who 
Does the Work and Why? In   Leadership at a Distance , ed.  Suzanne   Weisband ,  171  – 194 .  Hillsdale, 
NJ :  Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . 
 Byrne ,  Donn .  1997 .  An Overview (and Underview) of Research and Theory within the Attraction 
Paradigm.   Journal of Social and Personal Relationships  14  ( 3 ):  417  – 431 . 
 Cameron ,  J. ,  K. M.   Banko , and  W. D.  Pierce .  2001 .  Pervasive Negative Effects of Rewards on 
Intrinsic Motivation: The Myth Continues.   Behavior Analyst  24  ( 1 ):  1 – 44 . 
 Cancer 
Support 
Community . 
 2010 . 
Cancer 
Support 
Community. 
 http://online
.cancersupportcommunity.org .  

Chapter 3: Encouraging Commitment in Online Communities 
117
 Carron ,  A. V. , and  K. S.  Spink .  1995 .  The Group Size-Cohesion Relationship in Minimal Groups.  
 Small Group Research  26  ( 1 ):  86 . 
 Cartwright ,  D. , and  A.   Zander .  1968 .  Group Dynamics: Research and Theory .  Evanston, IL :  Row 
Peterson . 
 Chen ,  P. Y. , and  L. M.   Hitt .  2003 .  Measuring Switching Costs and the Determinants of Customer 
Retention in Internet-Enabled Businesses: A Study of the Online Brokerage Industry.   Information 
Systems Research  13 ( 3 ):  255 – 274 . 
 Chen ,  Y. ,  F. M.  Harper ,  J.  Konstan , and  S. X.   Li .  2010 .  Social Comparisons and Contributions to 
Online Communities: A Field Experiment on MovieLens.   American Economic Review  100  ( 4 ): 
 1358  – 1398 . 
 Clary ,  E. G. ,  M.  Snyder ,  R. D.   Ridge ,  J.   Copeland ,  A. A.   Stukas ,  J.   Haugen , and  P.   Miene .  1998 . 
 Understanding and Assessing the Motivations of Volunteers: A Functional Approach.   Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology  74 : 1516  – 1530 . 
 Collins ,  N. , and  L.  Miller .  1994 .  Self-Disclosure and Liking: A Meta-Analytic Review.   Psychological 
Bulletin  116  ( 3 ):  457  – 475 . 
 Crain ,  A. L. ,  A. M.  Omoto , and  M.  Snyder .  1998 . What If You Can ’ t Always Get What You Want? 
Testing a Functional Approach to Volunteerism. Paper presented at the annual meetings of the 
Midwestern Psychological Association, Chicago.  
 Curry ,  T. J. , and  R. M.   Emerson .  1970 .  Balance Theory: A Theory of Interpersonal Attraction?  
 Sociometry  33  ( 2 ):  216 – 238 . 
 Dabbish ,  Laura , and  Robert E.   Kraut .  2008 .  Awareness Displays and Social Motivation for Coor-
dinating Communication.   Information Systems Research  19  ( 2 ):  221  – 238 . 
 Deci ,  Edward L. ,  Richard   Koestner , and  Richard M.   Ryan .  1999 .  A Meta-Analytic Review of Experi-
ments Examining the Effects of Extrinsic Rewards on Intrinsic Motivation.    Psychological Bulletin 
 125  ( 6 ):  627  – 668 .  
 Dobson ,  Jason .  2006 . Blizzard Bans, Suspends over 16,000 World of Warcraft Accounts. Gamasu-
tra.  http://www.gamasutra.com/php-bin/news_index.php?story=8907 .  
 Drenner ,  S. ,  S.   Sen , and  L.  Terveen .  2008 . Crafting the Initial User Experience to Achieve Com-
munity Goals. In  Proceedings of the 2008 ACM Conference on Recommender Systems , 187 – 194. New 
York: ACM.  
 Ducheneaut ,  Nicolas , and  Robert J.   Moore .  2004 . The Social Side of Gaming: A Study of 
Interaction Patterns in a Massively Multiplayer Online Game. In  CSCW  ’ 04: Proceedings 
of the ACM Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work , 360 – 369. New York: ACM 
Press.  
 Ducheneaut ,  Nicolas ,  Nicholas   Yee ,  Eric  Nickell , and  Robert J.   Moore .  2006a . Alone Together? 
Exploring the Social Dynamics of Massively Multiplayer Online Games. In  CHI 2006: Proceedings 
of the ACM Conference on Human-Factors in Computing Systems . NY: ACM Press.  

118 
Yuqing Ren, Robert E. Kraut, Sara Kiesler, and Paul Resnick
 Ducheneaut ,  Nicolas ,  Nicholas   Yee ,  Eric   Nickell , and  Robert J.   Moore .  2006b .  Building an MMO 
with Mass Appeal: A Look at Gameplay in World of Warcraft.    Games and Culture  1 ( 4 ):  1  – 38 . 
 Dunbar ,  R. I. M.   1993 .  Co-evolution of Neocortex Size, Group Size, and Language in Humans.  
 Behavioral and Brain Sciences  16  ( 4 ):  681  – 735 . 
 Eisenberger ,  R. ,  W. D.   Pierce , and  J.   Cameron .  1999 .  Effects of Reward on Intrinsic Motivation —
 Negative, Neutral and Positive: Comment on Deci, Koestner, and Ryan (1999).    Psychological 
Bulletin  125  ( 6 ):  677  – 691 . 
 Ethier ,  Kathleen A. , and  Kay  Deaux .  1994 .  Negotiating Social Identity When Contexts Change: 
Maintaining Identification and Responding to Threat.    Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
 67  ( 2 ):  243  – 251 . 
 Facebook .  2011 . Statistics.  http://www.facebook.com/home.php?#!/press/info.php?statistics .  
 Fehr ,  E. , and  S.  G ä chter .  2000 .  Fairness and Retaliation: The Economics of Reciprocity.    Journal of 
Economic Perspectives  14 ( 3 ):  159  – 181 . 
 Festinger ,  Leon .  1957 .  A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance .  Stanford :  Stanford University Press .  
 Festinger ,  L. ,  H. W.   Riecken ,  S.   Schachter , and  E.  Aronson .  1956 .   When Prophecy Fails .  Minneapo-
lis :  University of Minnesota Press . 
 Festinger ,  L. ,  S.  Schachter , and  K.  Back .  1950 .   Social Pressures in Informal Groups: A Study of Human 
Factors in Housing .  Palo Alto, CA :  Stanford University Press . 
 Fisher ,  D. ,  M.  Smith ,  et al.  2006 . You Are Who You Talk To: Detecting Roles in Usenet Newsgroups. 
In  Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , Waikoloa, Big Island, 
Hawaii, IEEE.  
 Foltz ,  P. W. , and  S. T.   Dumais .  1992 .  Personalized Information Delivery: An Analysis of Informa-
tion Filtering Methods.   Communications of the ACM  35 ( 12 ):  51 – 60 . 
 Gaertner ,  Samuel L. ,  John F.   Dovidio ,  Brenda S.   Banker ,  Missy   Houlette ,  Kelly M.  Johnson , and 
 Elizabeth A.   McGlynn .  2000 .  Reducing Intergroup Conflict: From Superordinate Goals to Decat-
egorization, Recategorization, and Mutual Differentiation.   Group Dynamics  4 ( 1 ):  98 – 114 . 
 Gerard ,  Harold B. , and  Grover C.  Mathewson .  1966 .  The Effect of Severity of Initiation on Liking 
for a Group: A Replication.   Journal of Experimental Social Psychology  2 ( 3 ):  278  – 287 .  
  Ghosh ,  R. A.  2005 .  Understanding Free Software Developers: Findings from the Floss Study . In 
 Perspectives on Free and Open Source Software  , ed.  Joseph   Feller ,  Brian  Fitzgerald ,  Scott A.   Hissam , 
and  Karim R.   Lakhani ,  23 – 45 .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press .  
 Gouldner ,  A. W.  1960 .  The Norm of Reciprocity: A Preliminary Statement.    American Sociological 
Review  25  ( 2 ):  161  – 178 .  
 Granovetter ,  M. S.   1973 .  The Strength of Weak Ties .   American Journal of Sociology 78 (6): 
 1360  – 1380 . 

Chapter 3: Encouraging Commitment in Online Communities 
119
 Gross ,  N. , and  W. E.   Martin .  1952 .  On Group Cohesiveness.    American Journal of Sociology  57  ( 6 ): 
 546  – 564 . 
 Hancock ,  J. T. ,  C. L.  Toma , and  K.  Fenner .  2008 . I Know Something You Don ’ t: The Use of Asym-
metric Personal Information for Interpersonal Advantage. In  CSCW  ’ 08: Proceedings of the 2008 
ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work. New York: ACM.  
 Harper ,  F. M. ,  D.   Moy , and  J. A.   Konstan .  2009 . Facts or Friends? Distinguishing Informational 
and Conversational Questions in Social Q & A Sites. In  CHI  ’ 09: ACM Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems , 759 – 768. New York: ACM.  
 Harper ,  F. M. ,  S.  Sen , and  D.  Frankowski .  2007 . Supporting Social Recommendations with Activity-
Balanced Clustering. In  Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Recommender Systems , 165 – 168. New 
York: ACM.  
 Heider ,  F.  1958 .  The Psychology of Interpersonal Relations .  New York :  Wiley . 
 Hinds ,  P. J. ,  K. M.   Carley ,  D.  Krackhardt , and  D.  Wholey .  2000 .  Choosing Work Group Members: 
Balancing Similarity, Competence, and Familiarity.    Organizational Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes  81 ( 2 ):  226  – 251 . 
 Hirschman ,  A. O.   1970 .   Exit, Voice, and Loyalty: Responses to Decline in Firms, Organizations, and 
States .  Cambridge, MA :  Harvard University Press . 
 Hogg ,  M. A.   1992 .   The Social Psychology of Group Cohesiveness: From Attraction to Social Identity . 
New York:  NYU Press . 
 Hogg ,  M. A. , and  D.  Abrams .  1988 .   Social Identifications: A Social Psychology of Intergroup Relations 
and Group Processes . New York:  Routledge . 
 Hogg ,  M. A. , and  D. J.   Terry .  2000 .  Social Identity and Self-Categorization Processes in Organi-
zational Contexts.   Academy of Management Review  25  ( 1 ):  121  – 140 . 
 Hogg ,  M. A. , and  J. C.   Turner .  1985 .  When Liking Begets Solidarity: An Experiment on the Role 
of Interpersonal Attraction in Psychological Group Formation.    British Journal of Social Psychology 
 24 ( 4 ):  267  – 281 . 
 Homans ,  George C.   1958 .  Social Behavior as Exchange.    American Journal of Sociology  63 ( 6 ): 
 597  – 606 . 
 Homans ,  George C.   1961 .   Social Behavior: Its Elementary Forms .  New York :  Harcourt, Brace  &  
World .  
 Honeycutt ,  Courtenay .  2005 .  Hazing as a Process of Boundary Maintenance in an Online Com-
munity .   Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication  10  ( 2 ). 
 Hulin ,  C. L. ,  M.  Roznowski , and  D.   Hachiya .  1985 .  Alternative Opportunities and Withdrawal 
Decisions: Empirical and Theoretical Discrepancies and an Integration.    Psychological Bulletin  97 
( 2 ):  233  – 250 .  

120 
Yuqing Ren, Robert E. Kraut, Sara Kiesler, and Paul Resnick
 Hutchison ,  P. ,  J.  Jetten ,  J.  Christian , and  E.   Haycraft .  2006 .  Protecting Threatened Identity: Stick-
ing with the Group by Emphasizing Ingroup Heterogeneity.   Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin  32  ( 12 ):  1620 . 
 Jeffries ,  Robin ,  Sara   Kiesler ,  Jennifer   Goetz , and  Lee  Sproull .  2000 . Systers: Contradictions in 
Community.  http://www.anitaborg.org/files/contradictionsincommunity.pdf .  
 JoBlo Movie Network .  2005 . Basic Rules and Guidelines.  http://www.joblo.com/forums/
announcement.php?s=641f9cd5b47beab4ad423f0c861dba3c & forumid=21 . 
 Jones ,  Quentin ,  Gilad  Ravid , and  Sheizaf   Rafaeli .  2004 .  Information Overload and the Message 
Dynamics of Online Interaction Spaces: A Theoretical Model and Empirical Exploration .  Informa-
tion Systems Research  15 ( 2 ): 194 – 210.  
 Kim ,  Amy Jo .  2000 .   Community Building on the Web: Secret Strategies for Successful Online Communi-
ties .  Berkeley, CA :  Peachpit Press . 
 Kittur ,  A. ,  B.   Suh ,  B. A.   Pendleton , and  E. H.   Chi .  2007 . He Says, She Says: Conflict and Coordi-
nation in Wikipedia. In  CHI  ’ 07: Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems . New York: ACM Press.  
 Kittur ,  Aniket , and  Robert E.   Kraut .  2008 . Harnessing the Wisdom of Crowds in Wikipedia: 
Quality through Coordination. In  CSCW   ’ 08: Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer-
Supported Cooperative Work , 37 – 46. New York: ACM Press.  
 Krackhardt ,  David , and  Lyman W.  Porter .  1986 .  The Snowball Effect: Turnover Embedded in 
Communication Networks .   Journal of Applied Psychology  71 :  50  – 55 . 
 Landauer ,  T. K. ,  P. W.   Foltz , and  D.  Laham .  1998 .  Introduction to Latent Semantic Analysis.  
 Discourse Processes  25 : 259  – 284 .  
 Leskovec ,  J. ,  D.  Huttenlocher , and  J.   Kleinberg .  2010 . Signed Networks in Social Media. In  CHI 
2010: Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1361 – 1370. New 
York: ACM.  
 Lewin ,  Kurt .  1951 .   Field Theory in Social Science; Selected Theoretical Papers  , ed.  D.  Cartwright .  New 
York :  Harper  & Row . 
 Lott ,  A. J. , and  B. E.   Lott .  1965 .  Group Cohesiveness as Interpersonal Attraction: A Review of Rela-
tionships with Antecedent and Consequent Variables.   Psychological Bulletin  64  ( 4 ):  259  – 309 . 
 McKenna ,  Katelyn ,  Amie S.  Green , and  Marci   Gleason .  2002 .  Relationship Formation on the 
Internet: What ’ s the Big Attraction?   Journal of Social Issues  58  ( 1 ):  9 – 31 .  
 Meyer ,  J. P. , and  N. J.   Allen .  1991 .  A Three-Component Conceptualization of Organizational 
Commitment.   Human Resource Management Review  1 ( 1 ):  61  – 89 . 
 Meyer ,  J. P. ,  D. J.   Stanley ,  L.  Herscovitch , and  L.  Topolnytsky .  2002 .  Affective, Continuance, and 
Normative Commitment to the Organization: A Meta-Analysis of Antecedents, Correlates, and 
Consequences.   Journal of Vocational Behavior  61 ( 1 ):  20  – 52 .  

Chapter 3: Encouraging Commitment in Online Communities 
121
 Michinov ,  N. ,  E.  Michinov , and  M. C.   Toczek-Capelle .  2004 .  Social Identity, Group Processes, and 
Performance in Synchronous Computer-Mediated Communication.   Group Dynamics  8 ( 1 ): 
 27  – 39 . 
 Milgram ,  S.   1977 .  The Familiar Stranger: An Aspect of Urban Anonymity . In   The Individual in a 
Social World: Essays and Experiments  , ed.  S.  Milgram .  Reading, MA :  Addison-Wesley . 
 Mockus ,  A. ,  R. T.   Fielding ,  et al.  2002 .  Two Case Studies of Open Source Software Development: 
Apache and Mozilla .   ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology  11  ( 3 ): 309 – 346.  
 Newcomb ,  T.  1961 .  The Acquaintance Process .  New York :  Holt, Rinehart,  &  Winston . 
 Newman ,  M. W. ,  D.  Lauterbach ,  S. A.   Munson ,  P.   Resnick , and  M. E.   Morris .  2011 . It ’ s Not That 
I Don ’ t Have Problems, I ’ m Just Not Putting Them on Facebook: Challenges and Opportunities 
in Using Online Social Networks for Health. In  CSCW 2011: Proceedings of the ACM Conference on 
Computer-Supported Cooperative Work , 341 – 350. ACM: New York.  
 Nov ,  O.  2007 .  What Motivates Wikipedians?    Communications of the ACM  50 ( 11 ):  60 – 64 . 
 Nowak ,  M. A. , and  K.  Sigmund .  2005 .  Evolution of Indirect Reciprocity.    Nature  437  ( 7063 ): 
 1291  – 1298 . 
 Ouwerkerk ,  Jaap W. ,  Dick  de Gilder , and  Nanne K.  de Vries .  2000 .  When the Going Gets Tough, 
the Tough Get Going: Social Identification and Individual Effort in Intergroup Competition.  
 Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin  26 ( 12 ):  1550  – 1559 . 
 Pichon ,  I. ,  G.  Boccato , and  V.  Saroglou .  2007 .  Nonconscious Influences of Religion on Prosocial-
ity: A Priming Study.   European Journal of Social Psychology  37  ( 5 ):  1032 . 
 Postmes ,  Tom ,  Russell  Spears , and  Martin   Lea .  2000 .  The Formation of Group Norms in Computer-
Mediated Communication .  Human Communication Research  26 ( 3 ): 341 – 371.  
 Postmes ,  Tom ,  Russell  Spears , and  Martin   Lea .  2002 .  Intergroup Differentiation in Computer-
Mediated Communication: Effects of Depersonalization.    Group Dynamics  6 ( 1 ):  3 – 16 . 
  Postmes ,  Tom ,  Russell  Spears ,  Antonia T.   Lee , and  Rosemary J.   Novak .  2005 .  Individuality and 
Social Influence in Groups: Inductive and Deductive Routes to Group Identity.    Journal of Personal-
ity and Social Psychology  89  ( 5 ):  747  – 763 . 
 Postmes ,  T. ,  R.  Spears ,  K.  Sakhel , and  D.  de Groot .  2001 .  Social Influence in Computer-Mediated 
Communication: The Effects of Anonymity on Group Behavior.   Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin  27  ( 10 ):  1243  – 1254 . 
 Prentice ,  Deborah A. ,  Dale T.   Miller , and  Jenifer R.   Lightdale .  1994 .  Asymmetries in Attachments 
to Groups and to Their Members: Distinguishing between Common-Identity and Common-Bond 
Groups .   Personality  &  Social Psychology Bulletin  20 ( 5 ): 484 – 493.  
 Raban ,  D. R. ,  M.   Moldovan , and  Q.   Jones .  2010 . An empirical study of critical mass and online 
community survival. In  CSCW  ’ 10 Proceedings of the 2010 ACM conference on Computer supported 
cooperative work . New York: ACM Press.  

122 
Yuqing Ren, Robert E. Kraut, Sara Kiesler, and Paul Resnick
 Raymond ,  Eric S .  2003 . The Jargon File.  http://www.catb.org/jargon . 
 Ren ,  Yuqing ,  F. Maxwell   Harper ,  Sara   Drenner ,  Loren  Terveen ,  Sara   Kiesler ,  John  Riedl , and  Robert 
E.   Kraut .  In press .  Increasing Attachment to Online Communities: Designing from Theory.  
 Management Information Systems Quarterly .  
 Ren ,  Yuqing , and  Robert E.   Kraut .  Under review .  A Simulation for Designing Online Community: 
Member Motivation, Contribution, and Discussion Moderation.   Information Systems Research .  
 Ren ,  Yuqing ,  Robert E.   Kraut , and  Sara   Kiesler .  2007 .  Applying Common Identity and Bond 
Theory to the Design of Online Communities .   Organization Studies  28  ( 3 ):  379  – 410 . 
 Resnick ,  P. ,  D.  Hansen ,  J.   Riedl ,  L.  Terveen , and  M.   Ackerman .  2005 . Beyond Threaded Conversa-
tion.  Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ,  2138 – 2139 . 
 Resnick ,  Paul ,  Adrienne   Janney ,  R. Lorriane   Buis , and  Caroline R.   Richardson .  2010 .  Adding an 
Online Community to an Internet-Mediated Walking Program. Part 2: Strategied for Encouraging 
Community Participation .  Journal of Medical Internet Research   12  ( 4 ):  e71 . 
 Resnick ,  P. ,  R.  Zeckhauser ,  J.  Swanson , and  K.  Lockwood .  2006 .  The Value of Reputation on eBay: 
A Controlled Experiment.   Experimental Economics  9 ( 2 ):  79  – 101 . 
 Ridings ,  Catherine M. , and  David   Gefen .  2004 .  Virtual Community Attraction: Why People Hang 
out Online .   Journal of Computer Mediated Communication  10  ( 1 ). 
 Rodgers ,  Shelly , and  Qimei   Chen .  2005 .  Internet Community Group Participation: Psychosocial 
Benefits for Women with Breast Cancer .   Journal of Computer Mediated Communication  10 ( 4 ). 
 Rogers ,  P. , and  M.  Lea .  2005 .  Social Presence in Distributed Group Environments: The Role of 
Social Identity.   Behaviour  & Information Technology  24  ( 2 ):  151  – 158 .  
 Sassenberg ,  K.   2002 .  Common Bond and Common Identity Groups on the Internet: Attachment 
and Normative Behavior in On-Topic and Off-Topic Chats.    Group Dynamics: Theory and Practice 
 6  ( 1 ):  27  – 37 .  
 Sassenberg ,  Kai ,  Margerete   Boos ,  Tom   Postmes , and  Ulf-Dietrich   Reips .  2003 .  Studying the Inter-
net: A Challenge for Modern Psychology .   Swiss Journal of Psychology  62  ( 2 ):  75  – 77 . 
 Sassenberg ,  Kai , and  Tom   Postmes .  2002 .  Cognitive and Strategic Processes in Small Groups: 
Effects of Anonymity of the Self and Anonymity of the Group on Social Influence.   British Journal 
of Social Psychology  41  ( 3 ):  463  – 480 .  
 Shapiro ,  Carl , and  Hal   Varian .  1999 .   Information Rules: A Strategic Guide to the Network Economy . 
 Boston :  Harvard Business School Press . 
 Sherif ,  M. ,  L. J.  Harvey ,  B. J.   White ,  W. R.   Hood , and  C. W.  Sherif .  1961  [ 1988 ].   Intergroup Conflict 
and Cooperation: The Robbers Cave Experiment .  Middletown, CT :  Wesleyan University Press .  
 Slashdot .  2007 . eBay Delisting All Auctions for Virtual Property.  http://games.slashdot.org/
story/07/01/26/2026257/eBay-Delisting-All-Auctions-for-Virtual-Property . 

Chapter 3: Encouraging Commitment in Online Communities 
123
 Slater ,  M. ,  A.  Sadagic ,  M.  Usoh , and  R.  Schroeder .  2000 .  Small-Group Behavior in a Virtual and 
Real Environment: A Comparative Study.   Presence  9 ( 1 ):  37  – 51 . 
 Smith ,  Christine B. ,  Margaret L.   McLaughlin , and  Kerry K.   Osborne .  1997 .  Conduct Control on 
Usenet .   Journal of Computer Mediated Communication  2 ( 4 ). 
 Spertus ,  E. ,  R.   Jeffries , and  K.  Sie .  2001 . Scaling Online Communities with Javamlm. Paper pre-
sented at the Fifteenth Systems Administration Conference (LISA), USENIX. San Diego.  
 Stewart ,  K. J. , and  S.  Gosain .  2006 .  The Impact of Ideology on Effectiveness in Open Source 
Software Development Teams.    Management Information Systems Quarterly  30  ( 2 ):  291  – 314 . 
 Sykes ,  R. ,  K.  Larntz , and  J.   Fox .  1976 .  Proximity and Similarity Effects on Frequency of Interac-
tion in a Class of Naval Recruits.   Sociometry  39 : 263 – 269 . 
 Tajfel ,  H. ,  M. G.  Billig ,  R. P.   Bundy , and  C.  Flament .  1971 .  Social Categorization and Intergroup 
Behaviour .   European Journal of Social Psychology  1 ( 2 ):  149  – 178 . 
 Tedjamulia ,  S. J. J. ,  D. L.   Dean ,  D. R.   Olsen , and  C. C.   Albrecht .  2005 . Motivating Content Con-
tributions to Online Communities: Toward a More Comprehensive Theory. In  Proceedings of the 
38th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (CD) , 193b. Waikoloa, Big Island, 
Hawaii Computer Society Press.  
 Thibaut ,  J. W. , and  H. H.   Kelley .  1986 .   The Social Psychology of Groups .  New Brunswick, NJ :  Trans-
action Publishers . 
 Turner ,  J. C.   1985 .  Social Categorization and the Self-Concept: A Social Cognitive Theory of 
Group.   Advances in Group Processes  2 : 77 – 121 . 
 Utz ,  S.  2003 .  Social Identification and Interpersonal Attraction in MUDs.   Swiss Journal of Psychol-
ogy  62  ( 2 ):  91  – 101 .  
 Utz ,  S. , and  K.  Sassenberg .  2002 .  Distributive Justice in Common-Bond and Common-Identity 
Groups .   Group Processes  & Intergroup Relations  5 ( 2 ): 151.  
 Walther ,  Joseph B. ,  Celeste L.  Slovacek , and  Lisa C.  Tidwell .  2001 .  Is a Picture Worth a Thousand 
Words? Photographic Images in Long-Term and Short-Term Computer-Mediated Communica-
tion.  Communication Research  28 ( 1 ):  105  – 134 . 
  Wang ,  Xiaoqing .  2007 . An Ecological Perspective on Online Communities. Ph.D. thesis, Univer-
sity of Pittsburgh. 
 Wasko ,  Molly McLure , and  Samer   Faraj .  2005 .  Why Should I Share? Examining Social Capital 
and Knowledge Contribution in Electronic Networks of Practice.    Management Information Systems 
Quarterly  29  ( 1 ):  35  – 57 .  
 Wikimedia Foundation .  2010 . Support Wikipedia.  http://wikimediafoundation.org/wiki/2010
_Landing_6/en . 
 Wikipedia .  2006 . Wikipedia.  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia . 

124 
Yuqing Ren, Robert E. Kraut, Sara Kiesler, and Paul Resnick
 Williams ,  K. , and  C.  O ’ Reilly .  1998 .  Demography and Diversity in Organizations: A Review of 40 
Years of Research.   Research in Organizational Behavior  20 : 77  – 140 . 
 Williamson ,  I. ,  M.  Snyder , and  A. M.   Omoto .  2000 , May. How Motivations and Re-Enlistment 
Frames Interact to Predict Volunteer Attitudes and Intentions: A Test of the Functional Matching 
Effect. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Midwestern Psychological Association, 
Chicago.  
 Worchel ,  S. ,  H.  Rothgerber ,  E. A.   Day ,  D.  Hart , and  J.   Butemeyer .  1998 .  Social Identity and Indi-
vidual Productivity within Groups.   British Journal of Social Psychology  37 : 389  – 414 . 
 Yamagishi ,  T. , and  T.   Kiyonari .  2000 .  The Group as the Container of Generalized Reciprocity.  
 Social Psychology Quarterly  63  ( 2 ):  116  – 132 . 
 Yarn Harlot .  2011 . Knitters without Borders.  http://www.yarnharlot.ca/blog/tsffaq.html . 
 Yee ,  N. ,  J. N.  Bailenson , and  K.  Rickertsen .  2007 . A Meta-Analysis of the Impact of the Inclusion 
and Realism of Human-Like Faces on User Experiences in Interfaces. In  CHI  ’ 07: Proceedings of 
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . New York: ACM Press.  
 Zaccaro ,  S. J. , and  G. H.   Dobbins .  1989 .  Contrasting Group and Organizational Commitment: 
Evidence for Differences among Multilevel Attachments.   Journal of Organizational Behavior  10  ( 3 ): 
 267  – 273 . 

 4 
  Regulating Behavior in Online Communities 
 Sara Kiesler, Robert E. Kraut, Paul Resnick, and Aniket Kittur 
 1  Introduction 
 “ One bad apple spoils the barrel. ” 
 In thriving communities, a rough consensus eventually emerges about the range of 
behaviors the managers and most members consider acceptable, what we will call 
 normative behaviors , and another range of behaviors that are beyond the pale.  A Rape 
in Cyberspace , a newspaper report by Julian  Dibbell (1993) , describes a classic example 
of unacceptable behavior in LamdaMOO, an early virtual environment. Mr. Bungle, 
an avatar in the online community, wrote a program that forced two avatars controlled 
by other participants to have virtual sex with him and with each other, and to do 
brutal things to their own bodies. In describing the event online the next day, one of 
the victims begged,  “ I am requesting that Mr. Bungle be toaded for raping Starsinger 
and I [sic] ” ;  “ toad ” is the command that would turn Bungle ’ s avatar into a toad, anni-
hilating the character ’ s original description and attributes. Within twenty-four hours, 
fifty other characters also called for his toading. Three days later, the community had 
a real-time discussion of the issue. A system administrator who observed this discus-
sion eventually ran the toad command to eliminate the Mr. Bungle character. Although 
LamdaMOO did not have a policy against cyberrape, when one occurred in its midst, 
the action instigated widespread discussion and crystallized a view among many 
inhabitants of what constituted correct and incorrect types of behavior in this 
community. 
 Communities differ on which behaviors are normative and which are not. Personal 
insults may be the primary way to interact in one community, but frowned upon in 
another. Wikipedia expects writers to adopt a neutral point of view when writing 
articles; the Huffington Post ( http://www.huffingtonpost.com ) expects guest bloggers 
to express a viewpoint. Psych Central ( http://psychcentral.com ), a site with 160 health 

126 
Sara Kiesler, Robert E. Kraut, Paul Resnick, and Aniket Kittur
support communities, forbids members or outsiders from conducting any type of 
research on the site for publication or educational purposes ( Psych Central 2008 ); 
JoBlo ’ s Movie Club ( http://www.joblo.com ) wants only on-topic posts on it forums; 
and while the image-based bulletin board 4Chan ( http://www.4chan.org ) encourages 
posts with pictures of naked women, cute guys, and erotic anomie, it prohibits this 
content from appearing in its forum designated as  “ work safe, ” which should contain 
only  “ content that is safe for viewing in the average working environment ” (4chan 
2011a). As we explore in this chapter, the normative behaviors may be codified and 
articulated or left implicit, and they may be contested by some members at some 
times, but most of the time, most people will agree about behaviors that are acceptable 
and those that are not. 
 Having a rough consensus about normative behaviors can help the community 
achieve its mission. In many technical and health support communities, it is expected 
that responses to questions will be supportive rather than antagonistic, aiding the 
mission of helping the members deal with problems they are having. Many open 
source software (OSS) development communities expect that discussion of plans, fea-
tures, and bugs will occur in open discussion lists, rather than in private email con-
versations between developers. The Apache Web Server project notes,  “ Public forums, 
which include all developer and user mailing lists, wikis, and issue reporting systems, 
are essential to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF). We strive to do our work in 
public forums in a spirit of transparency and openness. They are our preferred means 
of communication ” (Apache Software Foundation 2011). This norm is functional in 
groups where developers are not colocated and work is interdependent. It enables 
project members to maintain an awareness of the state of the project by making avail-
able information that can affect the work of others. The neutral-point-of-view norm 
in Wikipedia supports the community ’ s goal to write a trustworthy encyclopedia 
(Wikipedia 2011b), and the norm that editors take particular care when adding infor-
mation about living persons can reduce threats from lawsuit (Wikipedia 2011a). 
 Expectations about how to handle conflicts are especially important to keeping a 
community productive. Conflicts are inevitable in social interactions, but if they 
become personal and escalate, they can derail a community, drawing attention away 
from its mission. Extended  “ flame wars ” — protracted hostile online interactions — can 
start between two people and grow to involve many. Before they end, some people 
may be sufficiently alienated to leave the community. The LinuxChix community 
( http://www.linuxchix.org ), which encourages women ’ s participation in Linux OSS 
development, prides itself on its nurturing atmosphere, unlike other Linux communi-
ties, which LinuxChix characterizes as  “ dominated by flame wars and ego battles, 

Chapter 4: Regulating Behavior in Online Communities 
127
which tend to drive people away ” ( Vesperman and Henson 2004 , 1). Many communi-
ties have behavioral norms governing conflicts, such as avoiding personal attacks, 
moving conflicts to special locations, or using special mediation processes. A common 
source of conflict in Wikipedia is differences among editors in beliefs about the 
content that should appear on a particular page. This conflict can lead to  “ edit wars ” 
in which editors repeatedly undo each other ’ s work in an attempt to make their own 
preferred version of the article visible ( Kittur et al. 2007 ). These edit wars can even 
occur in seemingly nonpolarized topics. For example,  Viegas, Wattenberg, and Dave 
(2004)  demonstrated an edit war in the Wikipedia entry for chocolate over whether 
a kind of chocolate sculpture called  “ coulage ” really existed and whether the para-
graph describing it should appear on the article. The existence of edit wars resulted 
in the three-revert rule in Wikipedia. (A reversion in Wikipedia occurs when a docu-
ment is restored to its previous version, negating someone ’ s edits.) The three-revert 
rules holds that an editor may revert an article to a previous state a maximum of three 
times per day (Wikipedia 2011d). 
 Not everyone complies with the consensus standards of normative behavior all the 
time. The Internet is filled with  trolls and  griefers , people who derive satisfaction from 
disrupting communities. Trolls pose as legitimate members and post inflammatory 
comments designed to provoke other members. For example, the website Democratic 
Underground ( http://www.democraticunderground.com ) is a community for liberals 
to post and discuss news. Members of this community expressed concern with a troll 
 “ who professes complete faith in the progressive cause, who deliberately works to 
destroy it by claiming falsely that our displays of courage and strength are actually a 
weakness, ” such as when they post comments like,  “ I am a lifelong Democrat but I 
just feel the party is being damaged by association with Howard Dean/Russ Feingold/
DailyKos ” ( bunkerbuster1 2006 ). Both essays by game designers ( Bartle 1996 ) and 
empirical factor-analytic studies by social scientists ( Seay and Kraut 2007 ;  Smith 2007 ) 
indicate that some players in online games are motivated by causing problems for 
other players. For example, in World of Warcraft, a popular role playing game, a griefer 
might engage in what is known as  “ corpse camping, ” in which the griefer remains 
near the corpse of other players after killing them in game and repeatedly rekills them 
whenever they resurrect themselves. 
 Trolls can do a lot of damage. Consider, for example, the alt.hackers newsgroup. 
Ordinarily, to post to alt.hackers, newcomers must hack into the board. Once in, the 
poster is expected to include an ObHack — information about technology shared with 
others.  Wysocki (2003)  describes the regulatory breakdown in this community after a 
Usenet bulletin board in Italy started leaking messages into the alt.hackers site. A 

128 
Sara Kiesler, Robert E. Kraut, Paul Resnick, and Aniket Kittur
member of alt.hackers complained about these new posts, written in Italian,  “ why, 
oh, why do these RUDE BASTARDS *still* post here in a language only morons would 
speak? ” Another member replied that this poster, besides being racist, had not included 
the obligatory ObHack. A spirited discussion and pursuit of the mysterious foreign 
messages ensued. Venom, an Italian hacker, bragged,  “ They can read any message you 
post, the complaints too, they simply don ’ t care, and taunt you. ” Ultimately, the 
Italian hackers left, but at least one member of alt.hackers quit publicly in disgust 
because an alt.hackers member had violated the group ’ s secret procedures:  “ Idiot. This 
whole situation was brought about by someone posting instructions on how to bypass 
the /one/ thing that prevented lusers. ” 
 Another threat comes from manipulators. They do not gain utility from disrupting 
the community but from getting the community to produce particular outcomes. For 
example, in communities like Yelp ( http://www.yelp.com ) or TripAdvisor ( http://
www.tripadvisor.com ) that review and recommend commercial establishments, 
manipulators may want to pump up the ratings of a particular venue. Or on Wikipedia, 
they may want particular pages to reflect their point of view rather than a neutral 
one. Manipulators will make use of multiple  “ shill ” accounts to carry out their manip-
ulations. Wikipedia, for example, has a policy again using shill accounts, also known 
as  “ sock puppets ” (Wikipedia 2011c). 
 Trolls and manipulators are outsiders who have no vested interest in the commu-
nity functioning well. This problem is especially difficult to deal with because social 
sanctions (being disliked or publicly disparaged, or losing status in the community) 
may either have no effect, or, in the case of trolls, may actually increase their 
activity. 
 Insiders, however, may also violate behavioral norms. In discussing the 
socialization of newcomers, we note in chapter 5 that new members of a community 
may often act nonnormatively simply because they do not know the rules of the 
community. Failing to understand the norms of a community may also result from 
a number of causes besides members ’ lack of experience in the community. For 
example, some members may have cognitive or social impairments that make it 
difficult for them to infer rules from observations. As Burke and her colleagues 
notes, young adults with Asperger ’ s syndrome or other disorders on the autism 
spectrum are socially awkward in part because of their difficulties in generalizing 
social norms from repeated exposure to examples of people following them ( Burke, 
Kraut, and Williams 2010 ). These authors describe young men who were cut off by 
communication partners after sending them a few hundred text messages over a 
two-day period or because they revealed too much information about their childhood 

Chapter 4: Regulating Behavior in Online Communities 
129
(i.e., a  “ creepy ” amount) when trying to reconnect to grade-school friends on 
Facebook. 
 Even insiders who know the norms may not comply with them. Existing norms 
may be contested, and they may follow other expectations that they think  should be 
the norms for the community. They may also fail to comply simply because it is in 
their own interest to do so in particular situations. 
 Social scientists use the term  social dilemma to describe situations in which everyone 
is better off if everyone complies with the norms than if no one does, but each indi-
vidual is even better off if he or she does not comply and the others do. One form of 
social dilemma is called a  public goods problem , in which everyone is better off if every-
one contributes some effort to the community but there is a temptation to free-ride 
on others ’ contributions. We consider ways to motivate public goods contributions in 
chapter 2. Another form of social dilemma is the  common pool resource or  public bad 
problem , in which individuals are tempted to take actions that use up or pollute a 
shared resource. In his famous paper  “ Tragedy of the Commons, ” Garrett Hardin 
explained the problem: 
 Picture a pasture open to all. It is to be expected that each herdsman will try to keep as many 
cattle as possible on the commons. . . . As a rational being, each herdsman seeks to maximize 
his gain. Explicitly or implicitly, more or less consciously, he asks,  “ What is the utility to me of 
adding one more animal to my herd? ” This utility has one negative and one positive component. 
The positive component is a function of the increment of one animal. Since the herdsman 
receives all the proceeds from the sale of the additional animal, the positive utility is nearly +1. 
The negative component is a function of the additional overgrazing created by one more animal. 
Since, however, the effects of overgrazing are shared by all the herdsmen, the negative utility for 
any particular decision-making herdsman is only a fraction of  – 1. 
 Adding together the component partial utilities, the rational herdsman concludes that the only 
sensible course for him to pursue is to add another animal to his herd. And another; and another. 
. . . But this is the conclusion reached by each and every rational herdsman sharing a commons. 
Therein is the tragedy. Each man is locked into a system that compels him to increase his herd 
without limit — in a world that is limited. ( Hardin 1968 , 1244) 
 In economics and psychology, different versions of this fundamental conflict have 
been modeled as games and tested in experiments.  Walker, Gardner, and Ostrom 
 ( 1990 ) used this setup: Each subject begins with an endowment of tokens. Each token 
 “ invested ” in the common pool resource market earns twenty-three tokens minus a 
quarter of the total tokens contributed by all the subjects. Investing in this market is 
analogous to grazing a sheep on the common pasture: it creates some value for the 
herdsman but reduces the value of every other sheep using the pasture. This situation 
sets up a social dilemma because it is in each subject ’ s self-interest to put all their 

130 
Sara Kiesler, Robert E. Kraut, Paul Resnick, and Aniket Kittur
tokens into the market that uses the common pool resource. Collectively, however, 
this is a disaster, because they all earn less than they could have had they coordinated 
on a strategy of putting fewer tokens in (using less of the common pool resource). 
 In online communities, people ’ s attention (or bandwidth, as  Kollock and Smith 
[1996]  describe it) is a limited resource. People may be motivated to participate in a 
community for many reasons: to amuse themselves, to help a favorite cause, to utilize 
their expertise, to get people to talk to them, to enhance their reputations, or because 
they expect that they will receive useful help or information in return ( Constant, 
Sproull, and Kiesler 1996 ;  Butler et al. 2007 ). These multiple motivations can lead many 
people to post messages and be actively involved, but if their contributions are trivial or 
silly, these contributions consume others ’ attention for little benefit. Many low-quality 
contributions create a social dilemma wherein these contributions drown out the 
worthy contributions and exhaust the available attention. Like the herdsmen using up 
the limited grassland for his own herd, members of the community may use up every-
one ’ s attention on messages that meet their own needs but not those of the recipients. 
 Similar reasoning applies to the cheats that occur in many multiplayer online games 
that allow one player to gain advantage over other players, while polluting the experi-
ence for other players. For example, in online role playing games,  God-modding is when 
players create a character that is virtually indestructible. As one commenter discussing 
this practice for the Marvel Heroes RPG (role playing game) notes,  “ This is frowned 
upon by other members of the RPG and is extremely annoying ” ( Orion 2010 ). 
 Ostrom studied a number of institutions that have successfully self-governed 
common pool resources over a long period of time ( Ostrom 1990 , 90). The resources 
included forest and grazing grounds, fisheries, and water for irrigation. She identified 
seven design principles that seemed to underlie their success. We will revisit several 
throughout the chapter, including the need for: community participation in rule 
making, monitoring, graduated sanctions, and conflict-resolution mechanisms. We 
adopt the term  “ regulation ” to describe any efforts to decrease the frequency of non-
normative behaviors or lessen their impacts on the community.  Lessig (1999)  identifies 
four elements that regulate behavior online: laws, norms, markets, and technology (or 
code, or architecture, as he called it). Laws are rules propagated and sometimes 
enforced by government and are external to the community itself. For example, most 
western countries have laws against the creation, possession, and distribution of child 
pornography, and these laws are often enforced when these images are distributed 
over the Internet ( Akdeniz 2008 ). Lessig argued that laws are difficult to enforce on 
the Internet and urged policy makers to consider other means of regulation, especially 
technology. In any case, online community designers generally have little control over 

Chapter 4: Regulating Behavior in Online Communities 
131
the laws governing their communities, though they can publicize them more or less. 
Thus, for example, the first of the 124 rules posted at the 4chan website to guide 
participants ’ behavior is  “ Do not upload, post, discuss, request, or link to, anything 
that violates local or United States law. This will be severely punished and strictly 
enforced ” (4chan 2011b) Communities can proactively cooperate more or less with 
law enforcement. 
 This chapter considers means of regulation that fall into the other three categories. 
Some design alternatives, such as making norms more salient or shaming people who 
violate them, create psychological motivations for compliance. Some, such as reputa-
tion systems and internal currencies, create economic incentives. And some employ 
technical means such as moderation systems and reversion tools to prevent and 
recover from bad behavior. Often, means of different kinds complement each other. 
For example, as we shall explain, reputation systems function better in combination 
with technical mechanisms that limit the ability to create new accounts. 
 This chapter begins with an analysis of ways to limit the damage that bad behavior 
causes when it occurs. Next, we consider ways to limit the amount of bad behavior 
that a bad actor can do. Finally, in the third and longest section, we consider ways to 
encourage compliance with norms through psychological and economic incentives. 
 2  Limiting Effects of Bad Behavior 
 In asynchronous conversation communities, posts can be screened. In some email 
lists, for example, a moderator must approve each message before it is forwarded to 
all the members. In many forums, moderators can remove inappropriate messages 
after they are posted or move them to other forums where they may be more appro-
priate. Messages may also be degraded but left in place. For example,  disemvoweling 
removes all the vowels from a message. Readers are quickly aware that the message 
has been degraded, but can still read it, with some effort. Alternatively, posts can be 
labeled or rated, and individual readers can sort or filter what they read. For example, 
at Slashdot ( http://slashdot.org ), where comments are scored from  – 1 to +5, the default 
reading settings hide comments with scores of 0 or  – 1, but individual readers can 
change their own settings. 
 All of these techniques limit the impact of inappropriate messages because they 
reduce the number of people who will read them. To the extent that people are psy-
chologically vested in the community and its reaction to their posts, these techniques 
also act as sanctions against them. We analyze how to make sanctioning mechanisms 
effective later in the chapter. 

132 
Sara Kiesler, Robert E. Kraut, Paul Resnick, and Aniket Kittur
 Design claim 1  Moderation systems that prescreen, degrade, label, move, or remove 
inappropriate messages limit the damage those messages cause. 
 One of the problems with moderation systems is that people may not agree with 
the moderators ’  decisions. If they do not accept the legitimacy of the action, they 
may take further actions (e.g., posting additional inflammatory messages). The net 
damage may even be greater than that caused by the original message, had it 
gone unmoderated. Thus, moderation systems are more effective when the 
decisions are perceived as more legitimate. A similar logic applies to the use of rever-
sion tools. 
 Moderation actions that do not silence the speaker will be met with less resistance. 
Many communities try to keep conversation limited to designated topics. When off-
topic conversation arises, if it is redirected to another, more appropriate forum — either 
by directly moving it or posting a response suggesting where the conversation should 
be continued — people are less likely to insist on their right to talk about the topic in 
its original location. One common approach is to have a special space or spaces where 
the normal rules of behavior do not apply. For example, an off-topic forum can handle 
the messages that don ’ t belong elsewhere. Online community organizer Caleb Clark, 
in an interview with Derek Powazek, reports that he has found it effective to create 
an  “ Outside ” space for flames and fights: 
 Well, I thought, why not have an  “ Outside ” in an online community? A place to go when what 
you are doing is bothering other people, but you still need to do it. Most people hate to be told 
what they can ’ t do. But they don ’ t seem to mind so much a little structure on what they can 
do. So it ’ s worked great whenever I ’ ve tried it. When I encounter flames sparking up, I send an 
email saying,  “ Take it outside. ” It ’ s a great re-director of bad energy in a community. Interestingly, 
it seems to take the gas out of flames very fast, since there are not a bunch of people  “ watching ” 
the flame. ( Powzek 2002 , 113) 
 Design claim 2  Redirecting inappropriate posts to other places creates less resistance 
than removing them. 
 One source of legitimacy comes from the notion of procedural justice: that sanctions 
are given through a fair procedure. In fact, people would rather take a more severe 
punishment after they have had their  “ day in court ” than a milder punishment 
without any hearing ( Tyler 1990 ). In two-party conflicts, people prefer arbitration after 
both sides present information on their case over arbitrary top-down decision making 
( Ross and Conlon 2000 ). People ’ s perceptions that they have been treated fairly are 
greater if procedures: (a) are applied consistently across people and time, (b) are free 

Chapter 4: Regulating Behavior in Online Communities 
133
from bias, (c) collect and use accurate information in decision making, (d) have some 
mechanism to correct flawed or inaccurate decisions, (e) conform to personal or pre-
vailing standards of ethics or morality, and (f) ensure that the opinions of various 
groups affected by the decision have been taken into account ( Colquitt et al. 2001 , 
426;  Leventhal 1976 ). In conventional organizations, perception of procedural justice 
is associated with such desirable outcomes as satisfaction with the outcome of deci-
sions; positive evaluations of decision makers; organizational commitment; willing-
ness to engage in voluntary, organizational citizenship behaviors; and good job 
performance ( Colquitt et al. 2001 , table 5). 
 This research on perceptions of fairness reviewed by  Colquitt et al. (2001)  suggests 
that online community members are more satisfied with moderation decisions if they 
are delivered through fair procedures. Thus, legitimacy is enhanced if criteria for 
moderation are clearly spelled out and consistently applied. It is also enhanced if 
people have a chance to argue their cases with the moderator and even appeal to a 
third party. Of course, those procedures may be costly, taking the time of moderators 
and other authorities, so they may not be practical in all situations. 
 Design claim 3  Consistently applied moderation criteria, a chance to argue one ’ s case, 
and appeal procedures increase the legitimacy and thus the effectiveness of modera-
tion decisions. 
 Procedural justice considerations also have implications regarding who is chosen 
to make moderation decisions. Community members often have mixed feelings 
about moderators ’ interventions. Members are more positive about these authorities 
if they feel this power is deserved (through past contributions to the community or 
demonstrated expertise) or if the community had a say in the selection of these 
persons. Authorities who  “ deserve ” their posts or who are selected by the community 
are more likely to be perceived as less biased and more likely to reflect the prevailing 
standards of the community than those who are self-appointed or appointed by site 
owners. As they enact their roles impartially, they will be seen as more predictable 
and less biased. 
 For example, Slashdot instituted a moderation system in which community 
members rate the quality of contributions to recognize poor or good contributions 
( CmdrTaco 2003 ). The system was designed to  “ promote quality, discourage crap, ” 
that is, to encourage contributions that meet the community ’ s norms of quality. 
The moderation system is also community-based to prevent a single moderator 
from exercising a  “ reign of terror. ” Moderators cannot assign points to their own 

134 
Sara Kiesler, Robert E. Kraut, Paul Resnick, and Aniket Kittur
posts, to  “ prevent abuses. ” Finally,  “ to address the issue of unfair moderators, ” 
Slashdot created a meta-moderation system, in which any logged-in community 
member can evaluate the quality of others ’ moderation. Whatever other virtues this 
moderation system possesses, it increases community members ’  perceptions that the 
moderation process is fair and is not subject to the capricious actions of just a few 
people. 
 Design claim 4  Moderation decided by people who are members of the community, 
who are impartial, and who have limited or rotating power is perceived as more legiti-
mate and thus is more effective. 
 Production communities often employ quick-reversion tools that allow community 
members to repair damage done by vandals, newcomers, or people who harm the 
product by mistake. OSS repositories use version-control tools such as Subversion or 
Git for quick reversion, allowing administrators to easily roll back the code to a previ-
ous state when people offer buggy or inelegant code. Many wiki-based communities 
have tools to show differences between any two versions of a document and to revert 
a document instantly to a previous form. For example, the open-source content-
management system Drupal and the open-source wiki software MediaWiki, upon 
which many online communities are built, provide built-in tools that allow users with 
a certain level of permission to revert any document (see   figure 4.1 ). 
 Figure 4.1 
 Reversion mechanism in Drupal ( http://drupal.org ). 

Chapter 4: Regulating Behavior in Online Communities 
135
 Design claim 5  Reversion tools limit the damage that disrupters can inflict in 
production communities. 
 In recommendation systems such as TripAdvisor or MovieLens, where the threat is 
people trying to manipulate the recommendations that are made, the analog of mod-
eration and reversion is to filter out or discount ratings suspected of coming from 
shills. Researchers have developed algorithms that look for suspicious patterns (e.g., 
too many in a short period of time or insufficient variability). For a survey, see 
 Mobasher and colleagues (2007) . Another approach, the  influence limiter , does not 
throw out suspect ratings completely but instead partially discounts them: the dis-
counting declines as the system gains confidence that the rater is honest rather than 
a shill for a manipulator ( Resnick and Sami 2007 ). The problem with systems that 
partially discount or completely filter out ratings from suspect raters is that when they 
make mistakes, information from honest raters is not fully utilized. An analytic model 
showed that such mistakes are inevitable: any system that limits the damage of shills 
will have to throw away some information from honest raters as well ( Resnick and 
Sami 2008 ). 
 Design claim 6  Filters or influence limits can reduce the damage of shill raters in 
recommender systems, but they do so at the cost of ignoring some useful information 
from honest raters. 
 One of the ways that trolls are able to disrupt is by eliciting reactions from community 
members that create strife within the community. For example, Herring and colleagues 
describe how a troll in a feminist forum was able to provoke not only angry responses 
to him, but also disagreements among other members about whether his behavior was 
acceptable and what to do about it ( Herring, Job-Sluder, Scheckler, and Barab 2002 ). 
For a troll who is seeking to disrupt, sowing contention among other members is 
clearly a victory. Several group members argued that ignoring the troll would be more 
effective. However, doing so would have required everyone to recognize the troll and 
to follow a norm of ignoring him. As more people become experienced with partici-
pating in online communities, it may get easier for communities to follow a norm of 
ignoring trolls. Indeed, attempts to spread the norm have yielded the acronym DNFTT: 
Do Not Feed the Troll (see   figures 4.2  and   4.3 ). 
 Design claim 7  A widely followed norm of ignoring trolls limits the damage they 
can do. 

136 
Sara Kiesler, Robert E. Kraut, Paul Resnick, and Aniket Kittur
 3  Coerced Compliance: Limits on Bad Behavior 
 Even if each individual action can cause only limited damage, the damage can accu-
mulate with many actions. Next, we consider ways in which to limit the amount of 
bad behavior that a bad actor can do. 
 Throttles or  quota mechanisms are one way to prevent large-scale damage by a dis-
rupter, especially damage caused by repetitive actions. For example, chat rooms can 
automatically block participants from posting too many messages in too short a time 
or limit the number of links in those messages. The throttle prevents a person or 
program from barraging a community, whether intentionally, as in the case of a 
spammer, or unintentionally, as in the case of an overzealous newcomer unaware of 
 Figure 4.2 
 Definition for DNFTT from Urbandictionary ( http://www.urbandictionary.com ). 
 Figure 4.3 
 An ASCII-art image encouraging people to ignore a troll, culled from Usenet. 
 Source : Collected at  http://jni.sdf-eu.org/trolls.html . 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Chapter 4: Regulating Behavior in Online Communities 
137
community norms. Similarly, when Facebook detects unusual speed or frequency of 
a behavior, such as friending other users or posting on their walls, it sends a warning 
to the user ( Facebook 2010 ). Though Facebook does not disclose its precise quotas, 
the warning message links users to relevant guidelines, such as how to promote a 
business or an event. Twitter lists spam-like activities that lead to an account being 
investigated, removed from search, or terminated, including  “ aggressive follower 
churn, ” updates composed primarily of links, or large numbers of duplicate @-prefixed 
replies to other users ( Crystal 2009 ). 
 Design claim 8  Activity quotas allow people to participate in a community but 
prevent repetitive, spam-like activity. 
 Rather than responding to the quantity of activity, a member ’ s activity may be limited 
based on a moderator ’ s assessment of its quality. In PalTalk ’ s chat rooms ( http://
www.paltalk.com ), for example, a room ’ s current owner can  “ gag ” any of the partici-
pants. In other systems, a more severe gag or ban imposed on a member would apply 
across the community, not just within a particular space. Gags and bans may be tem-
porary, imposing a cooling-off period of a few minutes, hours, or days, or they may 
be permanent. 
 As in moderating individual messages, gags and bans that are perceived as unfair 
may be resisted by the affected individual and his or her supporters in the community, 
which can cause significant disruption and damage as well. The considerations men-
tioned earlier regarding procedural justice and legitimacy of the moderators apply here 
as well, perhaps even more strongly. Gags and bans are often used as part of an esca-
lating regime of sanctions intended to induce good behavior — a topic analyzed in 
more detail in the next section. 
 Beyond the resistance that they may cause, gags and bans may be ineffective if 
they are easy to circumvent by using a different account. For example, in a chat room 
where people choose a handle to use as they enter the room, it may be trivial for 
someone who has been gagged to exit and come back a few seconds later. More gener-
ally, a gag or ban stops misbehavior only as long as it takes to register for a new 
account. 
 When it is easy for people create new accounts, gags or bans may be more effective 
if the target is not immediately aware of the ban. There are several ways to disguise a 
gag or ban. For example, in a chat room, the gagged person may see an echo of every-
thing he or she types, but his or her comments may not be displayed to others in 
the room. The gagged person may think that everyone is just ignoring her. Another 
www.Ebook777.com

138 
Sara Kiesler, Robert E. Kraut, Paul Resnick, and Aniket Kittur
possibility is to display a system error message suggesting that the site is temporarily 
out of service, but show it to only the gagged person. 
 Design claim 9  Gags and bans can limit the continuing damage of a bad actor, but 
only if it is hard for the bad actor to use a different account or if the ban is 
disguised. 
 As with moderation decisions, a perception of procedural justice makes people think 
that gags and bans are more legitimate, which makes people more willingly acquiesce 
to them. For example, in Wikipedia, editors can be banned from particular pages or 
from editing all pages. These actions are taken following a standardized procedure. 
Wikipedia ’ s blocking policy lists types of behavior that warrants blocking an editor, 
evidence that someone needs to produce to request that an editor be blocked, and 
specifies review by impartial administrators and an appeals process (Wikipedia 2010a). 
 Design claim 10  Consistently applied criteria for gags and bans, a chance to argue 
one ’ s case, and appeal procedures increase the legitimacy and thus the effectiveness 
of gags and bans. 
 Another approach for limiting damage is to require people to earn the privilege of 
taking actions that are potentially harmful. OSS projects have explicit ladders of access. 
Although most projects allow anyone to post a bug report to a public form, people 
who want to change code must go through a vetting process. Typically, they must 
send their patches or other small bug fixes to more senior developers, known as  com-
mitters , before their code is integrated into the main software program. Only after 
participants have shown a substantial history of offering high-quality code and techni-
cal discussion are they granted committer status themselves ( Ducheneaut 2005 ;  Krogh, 
Spaeth, Lakhani, and Hippel 2003 ). 
 The Omidyar Network ’ s community ( http://www.omidyar.com ), where people dis-
cussed issues related to philanthropy, used an internal currency that could be spent 
to create new groups or discussions. The currency was acquired through participation 
in discussions, but was capped at three times the person ’ s feedback score. This approach 
limited the ability to accumulate currency for those who participated in ways that 
others disapproved of. 
 The influence limiter for recommendation systems, mentioned earlier, also instanti-
ates this approach in the recommender system context ( Resnick and Sami 2007 ). New 
raters begin with a very small amount of reputation currency. Influencing others ’  

Chapter 4: Regulating Behavior in Online Communities 
139
ratings requires placing a bet: those without sufficient currency are limited in their 
ability to influence recommendations for others. Normal users who report on their 
actual opinions about items will naturally accumulate reputation currency, and thus 
influence on predictions, for other people who share their tastes. An attacker who has 
no information about the items being rated, however, and who employs some auto-
mated strategy for generating ratings, not revealing any real information about those 
movies, will on average not accumulate any currency with those fake ratings. The only 
way to gain currency and thus influence is to provide genuine information, which is 
easy for normal participants to do but hard for attackers to do. 
 Design claim 11  Paying to take actions in the community with currency accumulated 
through normal participation reduces the ability for trolls and manipulators to 
act. 
 Even if someone can do only a little damage with one account before being detected 
and stopped, if it is possible to create new accounts automatically, the cumulative 
effect can be quite large. For example, the influence limiter described previously gives 
a little bit of reputation currency and thus influence to new raters so that they can 
place bets and prove themselves. An attacker who can create thousands or millions of 
new accounts is able to manipulate recommendations. 
 A CAPTCHA (Completely Automated Public Turing test to tell Computers and 
Humans Apart) is a test presented to a user that should be easy for a human to 
pass but very difficult for a computer.   Figure 4.4 , for example, illustrates a CAPTCHA 
in which the distorted words from old scanned text, which are already difficult 
to read, are then rendered more difficult by adding additional distortions. By requir-
ing applicants to complete a CAPTCHA before subscribing, the community can 
eliminate automated spammers and other computer agents who are attempting to 
violate the community ’ s norms.  1  Craigslist ( http://www.craigslist.org ) uses a related 
tech nique requiring someone who posts a classified ad to enter an email address 
and then respond to an invitation sent to that address before the ad goes public. 
Only bots that have access to a large number of distinct email addresses using a 
variety of different email-provider domain names are able to post large numbers 
of classified ads. 
 Rather than proving only that they are human, account registrants may need to 
prove their identity by providing a driver ’ s license number or credit card number. 
Chapter 5 discusses methods for ensuring a good match between newcomers and the 
communities they join. 

140 
Sara Kiesler, Robert E. Kraut, Paul Resnick, and Aniket Kittur
 Design claim 12  Limiting fake accounts with CAPTCHAs or identity checks limits 
automated attacks. 
 4  Encouraging Voluntary Compliance 
 Compliance can be coerced (and damage limited) by behavior norms; in addition, 
people can be encouraged to comply voluntarily. Techniques for encouraging 
voluntary compliance tend to be more effective with insiders, who care about 
the community ’ s health and their own standings within the community. To gain 
voluntary compliance with behavior norms, designers face two challenges. First, 
members of the community have to know the norms and be aware of them 
when making behavior choices. Second, members have to want to follow the norms, 
even when there are countervailing forces drawing them toward nonnormative 
behavior. 
 Figure 4.4 
 The reCAPTCHA service. 

Chapter 4: Regulating Behavior in Online Communities 
141
 Making Norms Clear and Salient 
 People learn the norms of a community in three ways: 
 1.  Observing other people and the consequences of their behavior 
 2.  Seeing instructive generalizations or codes of conduct 
 3.  Behaving and directly receiving feedback 
 Psychologists distinguish between  descriptive norms and  injunctive norms .  Cialdini  
defines descriptive norms as beliefs about typical behavior ( 2003 ). Injunctive norms, 
on the other hand, define which behaviors people approve or disapprove of. 
 People tend to conform to descriptive norms even though they lack the moral 
force of injunctive norms. The behaviors that others engage in may become a 
focal point and the first option that people consider. In addition, people may 
want to fit in by doing what others do. And they may interpret the descriptive 
norm — what people tend to do — as social proof of what the underlying injunctive 
norms are; indeed, in some circumstances, what people do may be a stronger 
indicator of what they truly believe is acceptable than any explicit statements they 
make. 
 In  1936 , Muzafer  Sherif  put people in a dark room and showed them a stationary 
pinpoint of light, which appeared to move anywhere from 1 to 10 inches. (This phe-
nomenon is a perceptual illusion called the  autokinetic effect .) After hearing other group 
members announce their estimates of how far the light moved, the group converged 
upon a norm, such as 3 inches, with individual group members ’ estimates varying in 
small amounts from this norm. Sherif ’ s study was one of a long tradition of research 
into conformity — how people in groups learn what is acceptable behavior and adopt 
these norms without any external pressure. The power of observing others act in 
particular ways has been demonstrated repeatedly. The effect of the descriptive norms 
in the Sherif experiment can last over a year, even when individuals are tested indi-
vidually ( Rohrer et al. 1954 ). 
 People ’ s behavior produces signals about acceptable and unacceptable behavior to 
others outside of experimental labs as well. Erving Goffman ’ s influential ethnographic 
studies of face-to-face interaction in mental hospitals, elevators, dinner parties, stadi-
ums, and even casinos (where he became a skilled blackjack pit boss) described how 
people negotiate their way around often-packed urban spaces, mark their territories 
while so doing, signal their relationships to others by various  “ tie-signs, ” and manage 
their appearances so as to appear normal or unremarkable ( Goffman 1959 ,  1963 ). 
Using a theatrical metaphor, he described how people act in ways that convey how 

142 
Sara Kiesler, Robert E. Kraut, Paul Resnick, and Aniket Kittur
they can be trusted to act predictably within the range of acceptable behavior for their 
role. For instance, people eating alone in a restaurant often peruse a newspaper or 
paperback book to look occupied because staring into space looks abnormal. When 
people fail to look normal, their behavior signals moral failure, which can lead to their 
stigmatization. 
 It follows from this discussion that one way to encourage normative behavior is 
to make others ’ normative behavior visible to all members of the community. High-
lighting descriptive norms can change behavior. Many colleges and universiti
es use social norm marketing to attempt to reduce binge drinking among students 
by publishing accurate information about how much the typical student drinks. In 
these campaigns, the universities conduct surveys to identify the actual amount of 
drinking on campus and then advertise these rates via posters, direct mail, campus 
newspapers, and other means. Studies have shown that the actual rates are lower 
than many students think ( Perkins et al. 1999 ). DeJong and his colleagues conducted 
a large randomized field experiment of the effectiveness of these social marketing 
programs at eighteen universities. Compared to universities that were not assigned 
to conduct a social norm marketing campaign, students in universities randomly 
assigned to participate in campaigns increased the accuracy of their estimates of the 
others ’ drinking behavior on campus and decreased their own drinking, and these 
effects were stronger the more intensely the university participated in the campaign 
( DeJong et al. 2006 ). 
 Online community designers have a number of options for highlighting the typical 
behavior in the group (i.e., the descriptive norms). At one extreme, they can simply 
make samples of individuals ’ actual behavior in the community visible to others. If 
the behavior is relatively homogeneous and the typical behavior is also the desirable 
behavior, this technique should lead others to act similarly, that is, in desirable ways. 
Buyers and sellers on the online auction community eBay can leave each other posi-
tive and negative comments. Both buyers and sellers overwhelmingly give positive 
feedback (about 99 percent positive approval ratings, according to  Dellarocas and 
Wood 2008  and  Resnick and Zeckhauser 2002 ). Thus, when members of the commu-
nity browse the site, they are likely to see that others are typically responsible and to 
be motivated to be responsible themselves. Although the comments typically posted 
on news feeds on Facebook are more varied than the feedback sellers receive on eBay 
( figure 4.5 ), most are casual and benign (e.g.,  “ has a cold and skinned knees. Totally 
reliving third grade ” ). Therefore, these examples of public user behavior provide 
descriptive norms for the prevalent behavior and should encourage similar casual and 
benign conversation. 

Chapter 4: Regulating Behavior in Online Communities 
143
 Rather than depending on random encounters, designers can also choose to high-
light particular exemplars of desirable behavior. For example, in a forum-based com-
munity, a  “ post of the week ” could be highlighted on the front page. 
 Design claim 13  Publicly displaying examples of appropriate behavior on the site 
shows members what is expected and increases their adherence to those 
expectations. 
 Showing members a small sample of norm violations can encourage appropriate, 
normative behavior if it contrasts with the clearly more prevalent descriptive norm. 
According to Cialdini ’ s focus theory ( Cialdini, Kallgren, and Reno 1991 ), people learn 
norms from salient behaviors — actions that stand out and point out to people what 
is appropriate to do in a situation. Abstractions and routine behavior can be hard to 
make salient, but negative behavior catches people ’ s attention. Negative examples thus 
may highlight the background norm. Cialdini and his colleagues have shown that 
when people see a model littering in the context of an already littered environment, 
they litter more than if they hadn ’ t seen the model. However, seeing the same littering 
behavior in the context of a clean environment causes people to litter less than they 
would otherwise (see   figure 4.6 ;  Cialdini, Kallgren, and Reno 1991 , study 1). That is, 
a negative example that violates a descriptive norm makes the norm more salient and 
causes more people to act consistently with it. 
 In the context of online communities, one example of nonnormative behavior may 
bring into clearer focus a pattern of normative behavior. Many online communities 
such as discussion boards or wikis preserve records of misbehavior and make them 
salient. For example, when moderators flag or disemvowel a message, or respond to 
it with a suggestion that the conversations move elsewhere, there is still a visible trace 
that nonnormative behavior occurred. When a message is moved or removed without 
leaving a trace, others will no longer know that a violation occurred. 
 Wookieepedia, a wiki dedicated to  Star Wars ( http://starwars.wikia.com ,  Wookiee-
pedia 2010 ), has a prominent page on being civil and respectful, which includes 
 Figure 4.5 
 Typical seller feedback rating on eBay ( http://www.ebay.com ). 

144 
Sara Kiesler, Robert E. Kraut, Paul Resnick, and Aniket Kittur
examples of personal attacks that should be avoided. Sometimes conflict continues to 
escalate and mediators are brought in to help resolve it, in which case records of such 
conflicts are preserved for the community to potentially reference in the future. 
 Design claim 14  Publicly contrasting examples of inappropriate behavior in the 
context of a descriptive norm of appropriate behavior highlight the descriptive norm 
and increase people ’ s adherence to it. 
 The tactic of highlighting nonnormative behavior can backfire if it leads to the impres-
sion that the behavior is engaged in by large numbers of people and thus is in fact a 
descriptive norm. In the experiment described previously, seeing someone litter in an 
already littered environment led even more subjects to litter than those who simply 
observed the littered environment. As another example, the attempt by a ranger at 
the National Park Service to deter theft of petrified wood using a sign that reads  “ Your 
heritage is being vandalized every day by theft losses of petrified wood of 14 tons a 
year, mostly a small piece at a time ” may in fact be causing visitors to steal more and 
his colleagues conducted an experiment comparing two signs designed to deter this 
theft ( Cialdini 2003 ). Both signs urged people not to steal. One, though, showed 
three thieves and had the message  “ Many past visitors have removed petrified wood 
from the Park, changing the natural state of the Petrified Forest, ” and the other showed 
a single thief and simply said  “ Please don ’ t remove the petrified wood from the Park, 
in order to preserve the natural state of the Petrified Forest. ” Visitors were four 
Model littered 
Model walked by
Clean
(anti-littering discriptive norm)
Littered
(pro-littering discriptive norm)
Percent littering
State of the environment
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
70%
60%
 Figure 4.6 
 The effect of behavioral exemplars on highlighting descriptive norms. 

Chapter 4: Regulating Behavior in Online Communities 
145
times more likely to steal after seeing the sign with three thieves than the sign 
with one. 
 These results suggest that in a community like eBay, where the descriptive norm is 
one of honesty, revealing a dishonest seller should increase members ’ honesty, not 
undermine it. However, highlighting bad sellers could backfire if the background 
prevalence of such sellers were higher. Similarly, if there are many people in a hobbyist 
community who, against the stated rules of the community, post advertisements for 
their businesses, highlighting these norm violations may serve only to embolden other 
members to advertise their businesses as well. 
 Thus, community managers face a difficult decision regarding what traces to leave 
behind about those actions when they consider taking administrative action to remove 
content or move it to a more appropriate place. On one hand, seeing a trace and being 
able to follow a link to find details about what was moved or removed and why may 
help people to learn the administrator ’ s norms of behavior. On the other hand, seeing 
many such traces will suggest that the administrators ’ expectations do not represent 
a consensus of the community. The best decision often depends on the prevalence of 
the nonnormative behavior; perhaps counterintuitively, the more of it there is, the 
less trace of its existence should be left visible. 
 Design claim 15  Publicly displaying many examples of inappropriate behavior on the 
site leads members to believe such behavior is common and expected. 
 Although observing common online behavior illustrates the descriptive norm 
(i.e., behaviors that are common), observing responses to those behaviors teaches 
the injunctive norms (i.e., what behaviors are approved or disapproved). Observers 
need to see the consequences of behavior — for instance, the feedback that others 
provide regarding it — to understand its appropriateness. Do others say  “ thank you ” 
for behavior x and not for behavior y? Do they rate person x higher than person y? 
Does one person seem to have a better reputation than others? Seeing behavior along 
with its consequences makes norms more learnable ( Fehr, Fischbacher, and G ä chter 
2003 ). 
 The feedback can be informal, formal, or both. The informal feedback that one 
member of a health support group provided others who answered her questions clearly 
highlights valued behavior:  “ I want to thank all of you who responded to my posting. 
I don ’ t know what my future will be with regards to diabetes, but knowing that there 
are people out there who care about each other is wonderful. I especially want to 
thank . . . . ”  2  eBay ’ s feedback mechanism combines informal comments (e.g.,  “ Great 

146 
Sara Kiesler, Robert E. Kraut, Paul Resnick, and Aniket Kittur
honest eBayer! I would purchase from again tomorrow! ” ) with formal, symbolic feed-
back (positive, neutral, or negative ratings). 
 Research suggests that formal feedback is more effective than informal feedback in 
helping people learn the norms of appropriate behavior.  Moon and Sproull (2008) 
compared technical support groups for software problems that allowed only ad hoc 
member feedback about the quality of contributions in the text of replies to support 
groups that allowed more formal feedback (e.g., awarding points or stars). Consistent 
with a reinforcement model, in which quality answerers who get systematic feedback 
contribute more and lower quality answerers who get systematic feedback improve or 
drop out, they found that the formal approach was more effective than informal 
feedback, that technical problem resolution was more effective, and that people who 
had higher-quality contributions had longer participation duration. 
 Design claim 16  Displaying feedback of members to others increases members ’  knowl-
edge of community norms and compliance with them; formal feedback is more effec-
tive than informal feedback. 
 Inferring a norm from a sample of behavior in a community can be difficult when 
there are many examples to observe and they vary in the extent to which people 
adhere to the norm. In large and active communities, there may simply be too much 
to look at to get a sense of what is appropriate in the community simply by looking 
at samples of behavior. To convey a descriptive norm, one alternative is to display 
easily interpreted statistics tallying certain types of behavior. For example, just as some 
workplaces prominently display a sign showing the number of days since the last 
workplace injury, a community could display the number of messages since the last 
reported abuse or the (low) percentage of messages flagged for violating the commu-
nity ’ s official policies. 
 Design claim 17  In large communities, displaying statistics that highlight the preva-
lence of normative behavior increases members ’ adherence to normative behavior. 
 When observers need to infer the norms by integrating over many and varying 
examples of behavior, it is often helpful to crystallize the generalization process by 
providing community members with explicitly stated guidelines or rules. These state-
ments may be descriptive (e.g.,  “ Generally, we are nice to each other even as we cri-
tique each other ’ s photos ” ) or injunctive (e.g.,  “ Be nice even as you critique someone ’ s 
photo ” ). They may describe either normative behavior or nonnormative behavior. 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Chapter 4: Regulating Behavior in Online Communities 
147
They may be set at the origination of the community or articulated as a response to 
critical events in a community ’ s history. Often, a rule is made in order to settle an 
argument about whether someone ’ s behavior violates a norm or not. For example, 
LambdaMOO ’ s norms about violence against others ’  avatars were codified only after 
the cyberrape incident described earlier. 
 The WELL ’ s Host Manual (  figure 4.7 ) was an early attempt to create community 
guidelines for The WELL (Whole Earth  ’ Lectronic Link), one of the first online com-
munities, founded in 1985 ( Hoag 1996 ;  Williams 1997 ). Community designer Nancy 
White has a webpage that provides sample codes of conduct and rules for community 
businesses and associations at  http://www.fullcirc.com/community/sampleguidelines
.htm . 
 Research evidence indicates that when norms are clearly stated, people are more 
likely to act consistently with the norms and to do so over a wide variety of situations. 
Norms that can reasonably be inferred but are not directly stated may not be noticed, 
understood, or obeyed. For example, motorists returning to their cars were less likely 
to toss on the ground a handbill stuffed under their windshield wiper when the hand-
bill explicitly reminded them not to litter ( “ April Is Keep Arizona Beautiful Month. 
Please Do Not Litter ” ) than when it urged a related action ( “ April Is Preserve Arizona ’ s 
Natural Resources Month. Please Recycle ” ), as shown in   figure 4.8  ( Cialdini, Kallgren, 
and Reno 1991 , study 5). 
 The effects of making a social norm explicit are stronger when the norm itself is 
less clear. For example,  Zitek and Hebl  found that participants were far less likely to 
condone prejudice against others when they heard another person also condemn it 
and more likely to condone it when they heard others condone it, compared to condi-
tions when they heard nothing ( 2007 ). These effects of hearing the norm made explicit 
**** ETIQUETTE****
A note about etiquette. Keep in mind when responding
to a topic or entering a new one that the other users
also have feelings. Please avoid trampling on them.
Also, remember that comments entered in hasty
reaction to someone else’s posting will be available to
be read long after you have entered them. So it is wise
to exercise some moderation and good judgment.
 Figure 4.7 
 Early behavioral guidelines from The WELL ( http://www.well.com ), 1985. 
www.Ebook777.com

148 
Sara Kiesler, Robert E. Kraut, Paul Resnick, and Aniket Kittur
were stronger when the preexisting social norms were more ambiguous (discrimina-
tion against ex-convicts and racists) compared to groups in which the preexisting 
norms were clear-cut (discrimination against blacks and gays). 
 Norms are often less clear in the early stages of a new community or any time there 
is fast growth. When reflecting on the current state of Wikipedia and lessons he 
learned as one of its founders, Larry Sanger expressed regret that the current Wikipedia 
community does not sufficiently defer to experts and specialists when they write in 
their areas of expertise, even though the community did so during the encyclopedia ’ s 
early days: 
 “ This is just common sense, ” as I wrote,  “ but sometimes common sense needs to be spelled out. ” 
What I now think is that that point of common sense needed to be spelled out quite a bit sooner 
and more forcefully, because in the long run, it was  not adopted as official policy, as it could 
have been. ( Sanger 2005 , 318). 
 Design claim 18  Explicit rules and guidelines increase the ability for community 
members to know the norms, especially when it is less clear what others think is 
acceptable. 
 Another important design decision is how prominently to display guidelines and rules. 
Some communities require newcomers to read particular rules before they join or post, 
or post them prominently where everyone will see them frequently. Others do not. 
 Social news aggregation sites such as Reddit ( http://www.reddit.com ) face a special 
challenge in making norms and rules salient because the entire content of these sites 
10.1%
15.1%
17.7%
22.2%
25.4%
Identical
(do not litter)
Close
(recycle)
Moderately close
(turn out lights)
Far
(vote)
Control
(arts month)
0.0%
5.0%
10.0%
15.0%
20.0%
25.0%
30.0%
 Figure 4.8 
 Effects of norm explicitness on compliance. 
 Source : Adapted from  Cialdini, Kallgren, and Reno 1991 . 

Chapter 4: Regulating Behavior in Online Communities 
149
revolves around voting and commenting on web links. Although Reddit has an area 
where rules are articulated (known collectively as  “ reddiquette ” ;  http://www.reddit.com/
help/reddiquette ), this area has low salience for most users. 
 The Reddit community ’ s solution is to post dummy  “ articles ” in the main news area 
whose titles describe the norm or rule. Those  “ articles ” that have widespread support 
and relevance in the community are voted up, often reaching the front page and thus 
becoming highly salient. An example of this is a post advocating using comments for 
conducting polls instead of articles. From reddiquette,  “ Please don ’ t conduct polls 
using posts. If you feel you must use Reddit to conduct a poll, do it using a comment. 
Create a self-referencing post and then add a comment for readers to mod up or down 
based on their answer to your poll question. Also, be sure to indicate in the title of 
your post that the poll is being conducted using comments. Including something like 
 ‘ (use comments to vote) ’  in the title would probably be sufficient. ” This new rule was 
developed in response to a slew of polls taking over the front page of Reddit, as each 
poll  “ vote ” had the side effect of increasing the poll ’ s popularity and visibility. The 
new  “ article ” garnered widespread support and high salience (it was voted up more 
than a thousand times), at one point reaching the number-one article spot. 
 Unfortunately, prominently displayed rules and guidelines can convey a negative 
impression. Potential members may fear that they will not be able to do what they 
want to or that they will accidentally fall afoul of one of the rules that they didn ’ t 
understand. Newcomers to Wikipedia may inadvertently violate one of its many poli-
cies and guidelines designed to regulate behavior in  “ the encyclopedia that anyone 
can edit. ” As a result, their contributions are frequently reverted, and they become 
discouraged or driven away ( Halfaker, Kittur, Kraut, and Riedl 2009 , figure 5). When 
we have assigned students to edit a page of their choice on Wikipedia and tell them 
to read Wikipedia ’ s guidelines first, many report feeling very intimidated about making 
an edit. 
 Paradoxically, prominently displayed or excessively detailed rules may also convey 
the wrong descriptive norm. A natural inference is that the rules were created in 
response to problematic behavior. It is also natural to infer that such behavior must 
occur fairly frequently; otherwise, it would not be necessary to prominently display 
the rules. 
 Design claim 19  Prominently displayed guidelines may convey a descriptive norm 
that the guidelines are not always followed. 
 Many sites have compromised by creating explicit rules and guidelines but burying 
them deep in the site where they are visible only to people who go looking for them. 

150 
Sara Kiesler, Robert E. Kraut, Paul Resnick, and Aniket Kittur
Gaia ( http://hubs.gaia.com ) is a community site for teens age thirteen and up. It is a 
very challenging regulatory environment, due to the concern of many parents and 
many laws to protect children. The Gaia site has developed an extensive list of rules, 
safety tips, and information for parents. Yet teens have a strong dislike of rules and 
probably would run in the other direction if the rules were thrown in their face. So, 
the rules are there if you look for them, but they are not prominent. Although most 
members are probably unaware of these explicit rules, as we shall discuss shortly, even 
rules that are not noticed until people are pointed to them may have some value in 
creating legitimacy for assertions of norms or sanctions for violating them. 
 Another option is to make rules and guidelines prominent, but only at the point 
where people may be about to violate them. For example, eBay has a guideline that 
buyers should try to resolve conflicts with sellers before leaving negative feedback for 
them. This guideline is brought to the attention of buyers when they are about to 
leave negative feedback. 
 In a community with a strong norm of polite, supportive responses, automatic text 
analysis of posts that are submitted could be used to alert people that they might be 
about to violate that norm without forcing everyone to read about the guidelines. 
Similar features have been built into some email programs. For example, Eudora ’ s 
MoodWatch software, invented by David Kaufer, automatically cautions users who are 
about to send an email containing  “ flame ” words ( Shankland 2000 ). 
 Design claim 20  Offering people reminders at the point of an action that may violate 
norms reduces the number of offenses. 
 Enhancing Compliance 
 To this point, we have argued that people must know the norms of a community 
before they can follow them and have suggested a number of design choices that 
should increase this knowledge. Even when they are aware of the norms, however, 
people may not always comply. Four things increase compliance: commitment to the 
community, legitimacy of the norms, the ability to save face, and expectations about 
rewards for compliance or sanctions for noncompliance. 
 Scholars since at least the time of Durkheim have argued that group cohesion 
contributes to the social order ( Durkheim 1903 ). To the extent that community 
members care about the welfare of the community and see the norms as linked to 
that welfare, members are more likely to comply with and enforce the norms the more 
they identify with the community. Chapter 3 examined ways of promoting cohesion. 
As described in more detail in that chapter, designers can promote cohesion by empha-

Chapter 4: Regulating Behavior in Online Communities 
151
sizing group identity though providing distinctive group names and missions, empha-
sizing group interdependence, and competing against outgroups. Alternatively, one 
can increase group commitment and cohesion by emphasizing the interpersonal 
relationships between individual group members, for example, by keeping group 
sizes small, by creating opportunities for members to repeatedly see and find out 
about each other, and by encouraging interpersonal communication and mutual 
self-disclosure. 
 Design claim 21  In more cohesive groups to which members are more committed, 
members are more likely to spontaneously comply with the norms. 
 Externally imposed rules and monitoring tend to be viewed as unfair and to lead to 
conflict. In Ostrom ’ s studies of successful institutions for governing common pool 
resources, the third design principle was that  “ most of the individuals affected . . . can 
participate in making and modifying their rules ” ( Ostrom 2000 , 150). Ostrom argues 
that collective choice leads to rules that are better tailored to specific situations, but 
also that it builds legitimacy and thus compliance with the rules. Even if the group 
spends more time initially in discussion and comes to the same decision in the end 
as that made by an elite core, involving everyone in the decision-making process 
should result in long-term benefits. 
 In May 2007, a member of the news aggregation site Digg ( http://www.digg.com ) 
posted a news story consisting of an HD-DVD cracking key — a set of hexadecimal 
numbers that provided people a way to circumvent DVD copyright protection. In a 
rare display of censorship, Digg ’ s administrators removed the post. However, instead 
of accepting this enforcement of rules from above, community members reposted the 
key over and over until the Digg home page was little else than posts about the 
key and stories about how the Digg leadership had  “ betrayed ” the members of 
the site. The disruption to the site was accompanied by an exodus of disgruntled 
members. Reddit — a competitor to Digg — included a top story welcoming the Digg 
exiles. 
 The management of the multiplayer game Everquest imposed rules when it per-
ceived bad behavior was driving away subscribers. (Multiple-player gaming environ-
ments have experienced many hacker attacks, destruction of property, flame wars, and 
spirals of retaliation and cross-retaliation; see  Kolbert 2001 . In  Yee ’ s 2001  survey, 20 
percent of the respondents answered  “ yes ” to the question  “ Would you hack the game 
if you could? ” ). Rules were necessary, but only 12.5 percent of Everquest members 
thought that management ’ s top-down  “ Play-Nice ” rules helped the environment. 

152 
Sara Kiesler, Robert E. Kraut, Paul Resnick, and Aniket Kittur
Social norms and rules generated by the community might have worked as well as 
external rules and would have had more staying power. 
 On the other hand, LambdaMOO, one of the first true online communities, used 
community rule making with good results: 
 We started having disagreements about what was and was not proper conduct here. Eventually, 
I was approached by a number of players and asked to draft a set of rules for proper MOO behav-
ior. . . . I showed the draft to a bunch of people and asked for their comments on its style, 
completeness, and correspondence with their impressions of the  “ right ” way of things. After 
incorporating suggested changes, the first version of  “ help manners ” was publicized in the news-
paper; I had, I think, done as good a job as I could of trying to capture the public consensus of 
that (admittedly early) time. Perhaps surprisingly,  “ help manners ” worked quite well in reducing 
the number of incidents of people annoying each other. That society had a charter that reflected 
the general opinion and social pressure worked to keep the MOO society growing fairly smoothly. 
(Haakon  1992 ) 
 Design claim 22  Community influence on rule making increases compliance with the 
rules. 
 When people violate community norms and the violation is brought to their atten-
tion, they are much more willing to discontinue the bad behavior and correct previous 
errors if they can do so without having to admit that they deliberately violated the 
community ’ s norms. If they can plausibly claim ignorance, or that their actions were 
misunderstood, or that the action was not theirs, they can save face. 
 For example, in the mid-1990s, MIT adopted procedures that they called  “ stopit ” 
for dealing with harassment that occurred through computers on campus. A key 
element was a procedure for notifying norm violators that gave them a face-saving 
way out. As Gregory Jackson, then Director of Academic Computing, wrote: 
 The third stopit mechanism is a carefully structured standard note to alleged perpetrators of 
harassment, improper use, or other uncivil behavior.  “ Someone using your account, ” the note 
begins,  “ did [whatever the offense is]. ” The u.y.a. note (as this mechanism is known, for its 
introductory words) then explains why this behavior or action is offensive, or violates MIT 
harassment policy, or Rules of Use, or whatever.  “ Account holders are responsible for the use of 
their accounts. If you were unaware that your account was being used in this way, ” the note 
continues,  “ it may have been compromised. User Accounts can help you change your password 
and re-secure your account. ” Detailed directions to User Accounts follow. The note concludes 
with a short sentence:  “ If you were aware that your account was being used to [whatever it was], 
then please make sure that this does not happen again. ” 
 Two interesting outcomes ensue. First, many recipients of u.y.a. notes go to User Accounts, say 
their accounts have been compromised, and change their passwords — even when we know, from 

Chapter 4: Regulating Behavior in Online Communities 
153
eyewitnesses or other evidence, that they personally were the offenders. Second, and most impor-
tant, u.y.a. recipients virtually never repeat the offending behavior. This is important: even 
though recipients concede no guilt, and receive no punishment, they stop. If we had to choose 
one lesson from our experience with misbehavior on the MIT network, it is how effective and 
efficient u.y.a. letters are. They have drastically reduced the number of confrontational debates 
between us and perpetrators, while at the same time reducing the recurrence of misbehavior. 
When we accuse perpetrators directly, they often assert that their misbehavior was within their 
rights (which may well be true). They then repeat the misbehavior to make their point and chal-
lenge our authority. When we let them save face by pretending (if only to themselves) that they 
did not do what they did, they tend to become more responsible citizens with their pride intact. 
( Jackson 1994 ) 
 There are other face-saving mechanisms besides the  “ someone using your account ” 
phrasing. Another possible phrasing for a notification message is something like,  “ You 
may not have been aware of this guideline, but we have a stated policy of [fill in here]. 
Please see [link to policy]. No big deal, but please stick to this in the future. ” Rather 
than allowing people to claim that it was someone else, it allows them to plead 
ignorance. 
 Giving people the option of undoing their offending action without leaving a 
trace of it also helps people save face. For example, suppose that someone makes a 
post that violates a community norm, and someone else posts a response chiding 
the original author. If the original author has the opportunity to remove both the 
original post and all replies to it, leaving no ongoing source of embarrassment, he or 
she may do so willingly. Without that option, he or she may feel the obligation to 
defend the action and even to repeat it to demonstrate that he or she thinks it 
acceptable. 
 Design claim 23  Face-saving ways to correct norm violations increases com-
pliance. 
 Rewards and Sanctions 
 Both classic and contemporary theories of deterrence in criminology can help design-
ers think through the best way of preventing misbehavior ( Gibbs 1985 ;  Pratt et al. 
2006 ). These theories hold that the decision to commit a crime or more generally to 
violate a norm is in part a rational decision. Although people vary in their predisposi-
tion to commit crimes (e.g., by class, geographic area, and race), deterrence theory 
argues that those with criminal disposition will violate the rules only when it  “ pays. ” 
That is, based on an informal cost-benefit analysis, they perceive that benefits out-
weigh the costs. Thus, the argument is that actual punishment for offenders and the 

154 
Sara Kiesler, Robert E. Kraut, Paul Resnick, and Aniket Kittur
threat of punishment for future offenders deters misbehavior. Researchers have studied 
how various factors associated with the threat of punishment — such as the use of 
warnings and the certainty of punishment, and its swiftness or its severity — deter 
violations of norms and rules. 
 Sanctions may be delivered by community members but outside the online 
community. For example, students who send inappropriate messages to a school-wide 
email list may be shunned when they encounter fellow students in classrooms or 
hallways. More typically, external sanctions are not possible and sanctions are 
delivered within the community. For example, members may be publicly scolded, or 
their posts may get low ratings. Their contributions may be reverted or their messages 
deleted or moved. They may lose privileges such as posting in particular areas or 
committing code in open source projects. They may be shunned within the commu-
nity: in a gaming community, being shunned detracts from the fun; in a commerce 
community like eBay, it subtracts from the profits. The offender may even be 
banned from particular activities or the community as a whole, temporarily or 
permanently. 
 For spammers, manipulators, and trolls, simply limiting the effectiveness of their 
actions reduces the incentive to participate. Thus, all the techniques described as ways 
to limit the damage they do — if effective — will also help reduce their incentives to try. 
For example, following a norm of not feeding the trolls not only limits the collateral 
damage their behavior can cause, but also makes it less appealing for trolls to partici-
pate in the community. 
 For spammers, reducing the chances that their posts will be seen has a similar 
effect. In the particular case of link spam, bots post links in online forums and blog 
comments to commercial sites (often porn). The spammers ’ real audience is not the 
readers of the forums or blogs but search engines that crawl the forums and blogs 
specifically looking for links. Most search engines give higher rankings to sites that 
have more incoming links (see, for example, the PageRank algorithm that was the 
initial inspiration for Google ’ s search engine ( Page et al. 1998 )). Many blog platforms, 
including Blogger and WordPress, though allowing newcomers to post comments 
subject to the blog owner ’ s preferences, also automatically include the rel=nofollow 
attribute in links embedded in comments. This mechanism directs search engines not 
to trust these links, preventing spam links from receiving PageRank and thus discour-
aging spammers from disguising links to their products within blog comments. Slash-
dot also uses the nofollow attribute in comments from potentially misbehaving users 
using heuristics based on the age of the user ’ s account and the user ’ s karma ( Wikipedia 
2010b ). 

Chapter 4: Regulating Behavior in Online Communities 
155
 Design claim 24  Telling search engines not to follow links discourages spammers from 
posting links. 
 For people, the simplest form of sanction is social approbation from others. People 
are very sensitive to the public impression they present to others ( Goffman 1959 ). 
Their concern about  “ looking good ” and how others evaluate them often causes them 
to underreport lying, stealing, drug use, and illicit sexual relations in in-person inter-
views compared with anonymous surveys ( Kiesler, Weisband, and Drasgow 1999 ), to 
comply with experimenters ’ expectations in psychology experiments ( Rosenberg 
2009 ), to give more money to charities when the identities of contributors are revealed 
( Alpizar, Carlsson, and Johansson-Stenman 2008 ;  Soetevent 2005 ), and to work harder 
in group settings when others know the identities of the contributors ( Karau and Wil-
liams 1993 ). These effects all depend upon people believing that others can see their 
behavior and identity them with it. 
 Festinger, Pepitone, and Newcomb (1952)  defined  deindividuation  in a group as 
being submerged in it. The individuals are not seen or paid attention to as individuals 
and do not feel that they stand out as individuals. Zimbardo ’ s experiments on deindi-
viduation suggest that people are more likely to violate established behavioral norms 
when they can conceal their identities under white robes ( Zimbardo 1969 ). A system-
atic review of sixty separate experiments indicates that deindividuation encourages 
antinormative behavior, although the effect is not a strong one ( Postmes and Spears 
1998 ). Anonymity (at least to outsiders) and larger group sizes both lead to more 
antinormative behavior. 
 For the reasons we have just described, identifiable individuals may be more likely 
to adhere to group norms than anonymous individuals, especially when they face 
social sanctions for misbehavior ( Sassenberg and Postmes 2002 ). Research suggests that 
the relative anonymity of online communication compared with phone and face-to-
face communication is partially responsible for reduced normative pressure online 
( Bordia 1997 ) as revealed, for example, by more flaming and other incivilities online 
( Kiesler et al. 1985 ). For example, online, people are more willing to lie about them-
selves to potential romantic partners ( Cornwell and Lundgren 2001 ). The observation 
that 97 percent of vandalism to Wikipedia articles is done by anonymous editors is 
also consistent with this rationale ( Wikipedia 2010d ). 
 Therefore, one way to increase people ’ s willingness to comply with the norms of a 
community is to prevent anonymous participation. For example, Wikipedia requires 
editors to register before they can edit some especially contentious pages. Sites where 
misrepresentation is a problem often require verified or third-party authentication of 

156 
Sara Kiesler, Robert E. Kraut, Paul Resnick, and Aniket Kittur
identity for anyone who could potentially harm others. Many dating sites let anyone 
peruse the site but require driver license photos in exchange for the email addresses 
of other members. In 2009, Twitter began verifying the identities of well-known users, 
giving them a badge on their pages that serves to confirm that they are who they say 
they are. These communities use authentication of identities to discourage potential 
harm by community members. 
 Design claim 25  Verified identities and pictures reduce the incidence of norm 
violations. 
 Identifiability — the ability of others to see and judge actions and associate them 
with the actor — encourages good behavior and discourages bad behavior in the 
moment. That is, people are concerned about how others will judge them even in 
single-shot encounters, where they do not expect to interact with the same people 
in the future. But concern about future interactions can enhance the power of 
these social judgments. For example, in one experiment, people conformed more to 
group opinions when they anticipated future interaction with members of the group 
( Lewis, Langan, and Hollander 1972 ). A person ’ s actions affect his or her reputation 
and thus how people will interact with him or her later. The  “ shadow of the future, ” 
as  Axelrod and Keohane  call it ( 1985 , 232), creates an incentive for good behavior in 
the present. 
 Informal tracking of reputations sometimes yields only a small shadow, however, 
for two reasons. First, some actions are not publicly observable. For example, on eBay, 
a seller may misrepresent the goods he or she is selling. The buyer will recognize this 
and refuse to buy from the seller again, but the seller ’ s ability to sell to other buyers 
will be unhindered unless the unhappy buyer has a way to communicate with other 
potential future buyers. Second, there may be so many actions that it is hard for people 
to judge someone ’ s overall reputation. 
 In online communities, explicit reputation systems can help solve these problems 
( Resnick et al. 2000 ). For example, eBay provides an opportunity for buyers and sellers 
to leave comments about each other after their transactions. These comments are 
visible to others in the future, providing a public window onto the previously private 
transaction. Second, eBay provides summary statistics so that people do not have to 
read all of the individual comments and ratings. A potential buyer can quickly read 
that one seller has 99.5 percent positive feedback and another has only 94 percent, a 
difference that would take much longer to assess by looking at many pages of indi-
vidual feedback report. 

Chapter 4: Regulating Behavior in Online Communities 
157
 Empirical evidence suggests that explicit reputations can be an effective sanctioning 
mechanism. For example, in cross-sectional comparisons of naturally occurring trans-
actions on eBay, more positive feedback led to higher prices and probability of sale, 
and the opposite was true for negative feedback ( Bajari and Hortacsu 2004 ;  Cabral and 
Hortacsu 2010 ;  Dewally and Ederington 2006 ). In other communities, the deferred 
reward or sanction created by reputations may not be economic in nature but instead 
affect future interactions in other ways. For example, in the Omidyar community 
described earlier, reputation scores had an impact on members ’  ability to create new 
workspaces and discussion threads. Perhaps more important for members who were 
psychologically invested in the community was that each person ’ s reputation score 
was displayed next to each post they made, and high scores became a valued status 
marker.  3  
 Design claim 26  Reputation systems, which summarize the history of someone ’ s 
online behavior, encourage good behavior and deter norm violations. 
 Rather than depending on reputation consequences to affect someone ’ s future interac-
tions in the community, rewards and sanctions can be charged directly to someone ’ s 
account. Rarely, money might change hands. More commonly, accounts might be 
denominated in some internal currency that is earned through actions taken within 
the community, such as the one used in the Omidyar community. If prices are higher 
for undesirable actions than for desirable actions, people will do fewer undesirable 
actions. The problem is assigning prices when actions of the same form (e.g., posting 
a message) may be desirable or undesirable, depending on their contents. One solution 
is to assign the prices after the fact, based on feedback from other users.  4  
 For example, Van Alstyne proposes that email senders should post a small  “ atten-
tion bond ” ( Van Alstyne 2007 ). Recipients who were unhappy to have received a 
message would have the right to collect that small fee. Those who thought the message 
was reasonable to send would return the fee. People sending direct messages to indi-
viduals would face little risk, but senders of commercial spam to thousands or millions 
of people might end up paying quite a bit to do so. 
 The Influence Limiter for recommender systems, described previously, works analo-
gously ( Resnick and Sami 2007 ). Each rating that changes the predictions that are 
made for other people is treated as a bet that other people will or won ’ t like various 
items. When the other people enter their ratings for those items, the bets are resolved 
and people either gain or lose currency. Bad ratings — those that move predictions in 
the wrong direction — are costly, and good ratings actually earn currency. The amount 

158 
Sara Kiesler, Robert E. Kraut, Paul Resnick, and Aniket Kittur
of influence a person ’ s rating has on a prediction determines the amount of the bet 
made, and bet sizes are limited by the currency holdings of the bettor. People whose 
ratings have been very helpful in the past get more influence on predictions for other 
people. 
 Design claim 27  Prices, bonds, or bets that make undesirable actions more costly than 
desirable actions reduce misbehavior. 
 Although identifiability creates opportunities for both informal and formal reputation 
sanctions, many communities allow either completely anonymous participation or 
participation under a long-lasting pseudonym that is not linked to an identity outside 
the community. For communities where members might not want to reveal their 
participation publicly, such as an HIV/AIDS discussion group or an activist political 
group fearing government repression, it is clear why members would prefer anony-
mous or pseudonymous participation. But even in many other, somewhat less sensi-
tive, arenas people often prefer not to reveal their true identities in order to preserve 
some separation of context between different aspects of their lives. For example, one 
of the authors goes by the name  “ informationist ” on eBay.  5  
 Pseudonyms are popular in online communities. However, the impact of any kind 
of sanctions, including reputation consequences, for bad behavior is muted if someone 
can simply create a new account and start over. This problem is often referred to as 
 cheap pseudonyms . 
 Cheap pseudonyms are especially problematic for sanctions such as bans: as men-
tioned previously, when bans were discussed as a means of limiting bad behavior, 
people who are banned from an online community can come back with a new account 
name and thus escape the consequences of their previous actions. If the community 
wants to be open to newcomers, the norm violator who returns under a new pseud-
onym will have the opportunity to violate norms again before being banned again. 
And again. And again. As Donath pointed out, eventually the community may become 
less open to newcomers, not giving them a chance to violate norms until they have 
proved themselves, but that may be a bad outcome for the community as well, as 
valuable newcomers may be turned away by the need to prove themselves ( Donath 
1997 , 54;  1999 ). 
 The same problem can occur even if the sanction is not a complete ban. For 
example, consider a reputation-related consequence on eBay. Suppose buyers were 
very severe in their interpretations of seller feedback profiles. Suppose buyers were 
willing to spend $50 for an item from a seller with an unblemished record of only 

Chapter 4: Regulating Behavior in Online Communities 
159
positive reviews from a hundred or more transactions, but only $40 to buy the same 
item from a seller with one negative review, and $45 to buy from a new seller. This 
approach would not be sustainable. After receiving a negative feedback, a seller would 
choose to start over and make $45 on his or her transactions rather than accepting 
the $40 he or she would receive from continuing to sell with an unfavorable feedback 
profile. If starting over is cost-free, then the worst possible seller feedback profile that 
anyone will continue to use will have to be treated by buyers no worse than they treat 
new sellers. 
 Friedman and Resnick (2001)  created an analytic model that helps clarify the pre-
dicament created by cheap pseudonyms and some of the strategies for dealing with 
it. The fundamental constraint is that for someone who is sanctioned, the utility of 
continuing to participate under the current identity — accepting the sanction — must 
be higher than the utility of starting over with a new pseudonym. Even more so, the 
utility of participating with an established identity without sanctions must be higher 
than the utility of participating as a newcomer. 
 This formulation suggests three ways in which to maintain effective sanctions 
given the possibility of cheap pseudonyms. The first is to increase the benefits of 
maintaining a long-term pseudonym. Online role-playing games such as Everquest 
and World of Warcraft naturally include such a mechanism, as online characters 
need to be leveled up in order to gain access to new realms, equipment, or capabilities. 
When creating a new character, players lose these assets and can no longer play 
in the more interesting regions of the game. Other types of communities can use 
such mechanisms as well. These mechanisms may be explicit, such as requiring 
a threshold for certain capabilities (e.g., only allowing editors in Wikipedia with 
more than some number of posts to vote), or they may be implicit, such as providing 
more weight to old timers (e.g., Digg users with many friends and many front-
page stories may be more likely to have their stories make it to the front page in the 
future). 
 Benefits need not be linked to functionality, either; other factors such as prestige 
may be effective as well. For example, Slashdot assigns user IDs sequentially, with the 
oldest users having the lowest numbers. Despite conferring no extra privileges, such 
a mechanism makes early accounts valuable: in 2007, Slashdot included a low user ID 
as one of the items in a charity auction. Someone possessing a low user ID might be 
more willing to accept sanctions to avoid having to start over with a new, high-
numbered ID. 
 The benefits of using a long-term pseudonym can be financial as well. In a con-
trolled experiment on eBay, the same seller earned about 8 percent more revenue 

160 
Sara Kiesler, Robert E. Kraut, Paul Resnick, and Aniket Kittur
selling matched items with an account having high reputation than with new accounts. 
That means that continuing with an established account is advantageous and thus 
the threat of sanctions can have a deterrent effect. But the maximum sanction will be 
equivalent to no more than 8 percent of the future sales revenue required to build up 
a new account ’ s reputation ( Resnick et al. 2006 ). 
 Some authors have suggested cross-community reputation systems (e.g.,  Pingel 
and Steinbrecher 2008 ) as a way to further increase the value of continued use of a 
single pseudonym, because people would have to abandon any benefits associated 
with the existing pseudonym in all the linked communities. But cross-community 
reputation systems are difficult to implement. Several companies and open source 
efforts have tried and failed to gain widespread adoption for  “ open ” reputation 
systems. 
 Design claim 28  Increasing the benefits of participating with a long-term identifier 
increases the community ’ s ability to sanction misbehavior. 
 A second way to maintain effective sanctions in the presence of cheap pseudonyms 
is to make the pseudonyms expensive. For example, if an invitation is necessary to 
create a new account, the effort involved in gaining an invitation may prevent 
members from creating an alternative persona and from misbehaving in their primary 
persona. Another possibility is to charge an entrance fee. Online multiplayer games 
such as World of Warcraft that limit the number of player characters enabled for a 
registered account use this approach. We have already discussed CAPTCHAs, which 
impose a small time-cost and thus deter the creation of thousands of accounts —
 though not the creation of a few. 
 At the extreme, it may be possible to completely prevent people from getting a 
second pseudonym once they have acquired one. A person wishing to obtain a 
pseudonym to participate in a community would have to provide a real-world identity 
credential to a registration authority, such as a credit card or driver ’ s license. The 
registration authority would check to make sure that the real-world identity had not 
previously been issued a pseudonym. Although one community for doctors, Sermo 
( http://sermo.com ), allows members to participate under pseudonyms, it requires 
them to register with a name that can be checked against national databases of 
physicians, which makes it very difficult to create a second account. Using a 
cryptographic technique called blind signatures, the registration authority could even 
be prevented from knowing the mapping from the user ’ s real-world identifier to the 

Chapter 4: Regulating Behavior in Online Communities 
161
user ’ s pseudonym for the community, if that level of anonymity were important to 
users (Friedman and Resnick 2001). 
 Design claim 29  Imposing costs for or preventing pseudonym switching increases the 
community ’ s ability to sanction misbehavior. 
 Rather than increasing the costs of creating a new pseudonym, another strategy is to 
require each new entrant to put something at stake that will be lost if the community 
decides to sanction the newcomer. One possibility is to require new members to post 
bonds that will be refunded if they build up good reputations in the community. A 
related strategy is to tie the reputation of existing members to new members whom 
they invite. Many studies have shown that recruiting new employees in organizations 
via referrals from existing employees is superior than more formal recruiting methods 
(e.g.,  Kirnan, Farley, and Geisinger 1989 ). This approach works in part because referrals 
lead to better fit, because sponsors know about both the candidate and organization 
and have an incentive to represent both accurately. The new member has an incentive 
to make his or her sponsor look good, and the sponsor has an incentive to help the 
new member learn the norms and regulations of the community so as to avoid viola-
tions. An additional explanation is that the sponsorship creates incentives for both 
the sponsor and newcomer to behave well. If the new members misbehave, sanctions 
may be visited on their sponsoring member. 
 Design claim 30  Forcing newcomers to post bonds that may be forfeited if the new-
comers misbehave or forcing newcomers ’ sponsors to stake their own reputations 
increases the community ’ s ability to sanction misbehavior. 
 Ostrom ’ s fifth principle, culled from studies of successful institutions for managing 
common pool resources, is the need for graduated sanctions ( Ostrom 1990 ). One 
reason is that sanctions disproportionate to the offense may be perceived as unfair 
and illegitimate. She writes,  “ A large monetary fine imposed on a person facing an 
unusual problem may produce resentment and unwillingness to conform to the rules 
in the future ” ( Ostrom 1990 , 98). Minor sanctions, proportionate to the offense, are 
perceived as more legitimate, and errors in their application are also more tolerable. 
Because the decision about whether to categorize something as deliberate misbehavior 
versus an accidental or unknowing violation is noisy and subject to biases (e.g., new-
comers are more likely to be considered deliberate violators than old-timers;  Hollander 

162 
Sara Kiesler, Robert E. Kraut, Paul Resnick, and Aniket Kittur
1958) , lighter sanctions mitigate the ill effects from inevitable mistakes in categoriza-
tion. Stronger sanctions are perceived as more legitimate when applied only after 
lighter sanctions have proven ineffective. 
 People tend to be happier and feel that they have been treated fairly and with more 
respect when they are persuaded to comply through expertise and judgment rather 
than commands and force ( Koslowsky et al. 2001 ;  Tyler 1997 ). Sometimes authorities 
use both nonforceful and forceful measures to gain compliance, and this strategy 
works as long as the forceful measures do not undercut the persuasiveness of nonforce-
ful measures ( Emans et al. 2003 ). Graduated sanctions that begin with persuasion 
based on expertise and judgment and proceed to more forceful measures can be espe-
cially effective. 
 In the online community setting, the lowest level of sanctions is a private message 
explaining the infraction, ideally accompanied by a link to an articulated guideline 
or rule and an invitation to discuss the matter further if desired. Unlike more public 
disapprobation, this method allows people to save face. Sanctions can escalate after 
repeated misbehavior to public rebuke, disemvoweling or other moderation of indi-
vidual messages, or gags or bans. 
 For example, vandals in Wikipedia are initially greeted with an informational 
message assuming good faith (and allowing the vandal to save face while not 
continuing to vandalize),  “ Welcome to Wikipedia. Although everyone is welcome 
to make constructive contributions to Wikipedia, at least one of your recent edits 
did not appear to be constructive and has been reverted. Please use the sandbox 
for any test edits you would like to make, and read the welcome page to learn 
more about contributing constructively to this encyclopedia. Thank you ” (Wikipedia 
2010c). 
 Repeated misbehavior is dealt with through four levels of escalating sanctions and 
more strongly worded messages, culminating in the following brief message:  “ This is 
the  last warning you will receive for your disruptive edits. If you vandalize Wikipedia 
again, you  will be blocked from editing ” (Wikipedia 2010c). 
 Design claim 31  Graduated sanctions increase the legitimacy and thus the effective-
ness of sanctions. 
 Most research on crime prevention shows that perceived certainty of punishment 
has more deterrence value than factors such as the immediacy or severity of 
punishment (see  Pratt et al. 2006  for a recent review). A mild but certain punishment 
is more effective in deterring misbehavior than a severe but uncertain punishment. 

Chapter 4: Regulating Behavior in Online Communities 
163
For instance, the most severe punishment in the United States is the death 
penalty, but this punishment is highly uncertain. The historical evidence is that the 
death penalty has not deterred murder or rape (see  Bailey and Peterson 1997  for a 
review); in some cases, an increase in these crimes followed executions ( Sakamoto 
et al. 2003 ). On the other hand, checking the blood alcohol level of every single 
motorist stopped at sobriety checkpoints is associated with dramatic reductions in 
drunk driving and alcohol related accidents. And across states, mild versus severe 
drunk driving penalties does not differentiate drunk driving rates, but certainty of 
punishment does. It is especially ineffective to ignore misbehavior that negatively 
affects a community. Rule breaking that goes without punishment encourages 
copycat offenses and undermines cooperation. Unpunished rule breaking causes 
even people predisposed to good behavior to cease doing so or exit ( Fehr and G ä chter 
2000 ). This research has encouraged many real-world communities to fine people 
mildly but reliably for visible instances of rule breaking such as panhandling and 
littering. 
 One lesson for online communities is that there must be a high probability that 
norm violations will be detected. One option is that community members can be 
enlisted to flag violations. For example, YouTube has a safety center where users can 
report inappropriate users or content (see   figure 4.9 ). Other online communities use 
software to increase the certainty of detection of inappropriate behavior. Some com-
panies, for example, use software to flag photographs with large flesh-colored areas as 
potentially pornographic. Facebook uses software to detect when users or applications 
send requests to too many subscribers and then bans their accounts for a period. In 
many companies, the flagged material is then handed off to company employees or 
an outsourcing firm for further evaluation ( Stone 2010 ). 
 Figure 4.9 
 YouTube ’ s Safety Center for reporting inappropriate people or content ( http://www.google.com/
support/youtube/bin/request.py?contact_type=abuse ). 

164 
Sara Kiesler, Robert E. Kraut, Paul Resnick, and Aniket Kittur
 Design claim 32  Peer reporting or automatic detection of violations increases the 
deterrent effect of sanctions. 
 To enhance certainty of sanctions for violations, there must also be a high probability 
that sanctions will be imposed after a violation is detected. In many online communi-
ties, many of the sanctions are decided and carried out by members, not by external 
administrators. But the members may not actually impose the sanctions, and for good 
reason: it is often costly for the person imposing the sanctions. The sanctions may 
lead to interpersonal drama and require a significant amount of time and emotional 
energy for the sanctioning party to defend a decision. Moreover, there may be retali-
ation against the sanctioning party. There have been instances in which offenders 
have harassed members who tried to sanction them. On eBay, leaving negative feed-
back often led to receiving negative feedback in return ( Dellarocas and Wood 2008 ). 
One buyer explained,  “ I ’ ve had a few experiences where I didn ’ t leave nonpositive 
feedback I felt was warranted only to avoid the retaliatory negative ” ( sqpantz 2008 ). 
 Ostrom and others refer to the delivery of sanctions as a second-order social 
dilemma or free-rider problem  (Ostrom 1990) . She quotes Jon  Elster  ( 1989 ), discussing 
the problem in the context of union members sanctioning (or not) workers who don ’ t 
join the union:  “ Why, for instance, should a rational, selfish worker ostracize or oth-
erwise punish those who don ’ t join the union? What ’ s in it for him? True, it may be 
better for all members if all punish nonmembers than if none do, but for each member 
it may be even better to remain passive. Punishment almost invariably is costly to the 
punisher, while the benefits from punishment are diffusely distributed over the 
members ” ( Ostrom 1990 , p. 45). 
 Yet in many situations, people do voluntarily sanction others, even at some cost 
to themselves. One common laboratory experiment is called the  ultimatum game . One 
party, the proposer, is given a sum of money. He or she chooses a division of the 
money between him- or herself and the decider. If the decider accepts, they each keep 
the proposed share. If not, neither gets any money. When proposers offer too small a 
share, many deciders reject the proposal, punishing the proposer for the unfair pro-
posed division, but at a cost to themselves. In the United States, for example, when 
offers of a 70/30 percent split of the money were made, more than three-quarters of 
deciders rejected the offers. Somewhat fewer accepted bad splits in Slovenia and some-
what more in Japan and Israel. But even in Israel nearly one-third rejected the 70/30 
split offers, and two-thirds rejected 90/10 offers ( Roth et al. 1991 ). 
 What can designers do to increase the likelihood that members will impose sanc-
tions when they are warranted? Some of the techniques described earlier also have 

Chapter 4: Regulating Behavior in Online Communities 
165
the desirable side effect of increasing members ’ willingness to carry out sanctions. 
First, anything that increases community cohesion will help. Cohesive communities 
are more likely than noncohesive ones both to have well-defined norms and to enforce 
them by sanctioning misbehaviors. In particular, much scholarly research suggests 
that people sanction misbehaviors because in the long run, doing so improves the 
welfare of the groups of which they are a part. Consistent with this logic, Horne 
showed in a series of experiments that individuals in more cohesive groups (i.e., ones 
in which individuals are interdependent upon each other) were more likely to enforce 
norms through social sanctioning ( Horne 2001   2007 ;  Horne and Cutlip 2002 ). 
Second, graduated sanctions can help. The lowest level of lighter sanctions tend to be 
lower in cost to initiate than severe sanctions, which often require significant 
justification and debate. Third, explicit rules and guidelines that are referenced when 
applying sanctions can limit the amount of justification and debate that will occur 
afterward. 
 Finally, as experiments by  Small and Loewenstein (2005)  show, people are more 
punitive toward identified wrongdoers than toward equivalent unidentified wrongdo-
ers. They propose that identifying an offender increases people ’ s punitiveness because 
of the stronger feelings people have toward identified others. In support of this thesis, 
these researchers found that people ’ s anger is much harsher toward identified offend-
ers than unidentified offenders. Thus, when bringing instances of misbehavior to the 
attention of people deciding on sanctions, identifying the perpetrators by name or 
picture should increase willingness to impose sanctions. 
 There are also some additional measures, not discussed previously, that designers 
can take. First, the community can designate formal sanctioning roles so that those 
imposing sanctions have legitimacy. In message boards or blogs, these are typically 
 moderators ; in wikis, they are  administrators . For example, a message with a gentle 
correction coming from someone who is a designated moderator is less likely to gener-
ate drama or retaliation than the same message coming from someone without a 
formal role. 
 Second, steps can be taken to prevent direct retaliation. For example, in 2008 eBay 
introduced a new rule under which sellers are not allowed to submit negative or 
neutral feedback any more — only positive. That change eliminated the possibility of 
sellers retaliating with negative feedback when they received it and should make 
buyers more willing to give negative feedback. 
 Design claim 33  Increased community cohesion, graduated sanctions, explicit rules, 
identifiable perpetrators, formal sanctioning roles, and antiretaliatory measures 

166 
Sara Kiesler, Robert E. Kraut, Paul Resnick, and Aniket Kittur
increase the likelihood that sanctions will be applied and thus increase the deterrent 
effect of sanctions. 
 5  Summary of Design Alternatives 
 This chapter has explored means for regulating behavior that violates behavioral 
norms, both limiting it and limiting the damage that it causes when it does occur. We 
conclude with a summary of the design alternatives considered throughout the 
chapter. 
 Several options are available that alter how information is used or displayed. Inap-
propriate posts can be moved to areas where they are less likely to be seen, scored so 
that they will be hidden from other users, or degraded through techniques like dis-
emvoweling. Bad edits in wikis can be reverted, making them invisible except to 
people who examine a page ’ s history. Ratings that are suspected to be from manipula-
tors can be removed or discounted when making recommendations. Links can be 
annotated so that search engines will ignore them. These options can limit the damage 
that nonnormative behavior causes and/or can reduce incentives for doing such 
behavior in the first place. 
 Feedback and rewards can come in other forms as well. Feedback may be directly 
solicited and displayed along with messages or may be aggregated into reputation 
profiles. A good profile can lead to rewards in the form of better treatment from 
members in the future and the reverse for bad reputations. Instead of affecting reputa-
tion profiles, feedback about individual actions can lead to monetary payoffs (positive 
or negative) or payoffs in an internal currency that has value within the community. 
Rewards or sanctions can also be assigned to someone ’ s cumulative behavior: a bond 
posted upon entry into the community can be forfeited if the person misbehaves. 
 Several technical features can be used to limit the actions available to people who 
may violate behavior norms. Throttles or activity quotas can limit repetitive behavior. 
Charging for actions using a currency accrued through normal participation can also 
limit repetitive behavior. For members who gain value from normal participation, such 
charges do not create a binding constraint but do serve as a disincentive for trolls and 
attackers because earning the currency may be costly for them. Gags and bans can 
silence bad actors altogether. To prevent people from sidestepping gags and bans, or 
any form of sanction, the account registration process can impose limits or costs on 
the creation of new accounts. 
 Roles, rules, policies, and procedures play a big part in regulating nonnormative 
behavior. Having clear rules and policies and fair procedures for applying any of the 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Chapter 4: Regulating Behavior in Online Communities 
167
filters, sanctions, and participation limits decreases resistance to them. Legitimacy will 
also increase and resistance decrease if there is wide participation in setting of rules 
and policies and if the enforcement roles are widely distributed. Two particular features 
of the contents of rules and policies are also helpful. Sanctions should be graduated, 
both to increase their legitimacy and to increase the willingness of enforcers to apply 
them. And everyone should learn to ignore trolls. 
 Finally, as in other chapters, we find that there is considerable power in decisions 
about framing — ways of communicating what is happening in the community. High-
lighting or leaving traces of bad behavior and prominently displaying behavior guide-
lines can help to clarify norms but runs the risk of conveying a descriptive norm that 
misbehavior is rampant. Showing names and pictures of those who took actions makes 
people think twice about misbehaving and increases people ’ s willingness to enforce 
sanctions against those who do misbehave. Framing disciplinary actions in a way that 
allows people to save face ( “ Someone using your account . . . , ” or  “ You may not have 
realized . . . ” ) can make people more receptive and willing to change their behavior. 
 In the face of harmful behavior, it may feel natural to turn first to tangible remedies 
such as removing bad posts or banning or throttling the posters. An important theme 
of the chapter is that less tangible, softer, and more behavioral remedies may be desir-
able to try first. Guidelines can be clarified, and the community as a whole can be 
involved in that process, in order to build legitimacy. Individuals can be reminded 
and corrected in a way that allows them to save face. Off-topic communication can 
be gently encouraged to move to an interaction space where people don ’ t mind the 
digressions. Trolls can be ignored. Responses can escalate if these mild approaches fail, 
with other behavioral remedies such as public rebuke. Behavioral responses, however, 
will not always be sufficient. Especially in the face of manipulators and spammers who 
create many accounts and act through bots, or in the face of trolls who gain rather 
than lose value from other members getting mad at them, communities need some 
more automated and tangible ways to limit damage. 
 Notes 
 1.  Actually, CAPTCHAs do not eliminate the possibility of attackers creating many new accounts, 
but they do make it harder and a little more expensive. A  New York Times article reports that 
sophisticated spammers are paying people in developing countries to answer CAPTCHAs, with 
the going rate at about $1 per 1,000 (Bajaj 2010). The solved CAPTCHAs are passed back to a 
computer program that automatically completes the rest of an account registration process. 
 2.  Quoted from alt.support.diabetes. We don ’ t provide a citation for this quote to protect the 
poster ’ s privacy. 
www.Ebook777.com

168 
Sara Kiesler, Robert E. Kraut, Paul Resnick, and Aniket Kittur
 Access controls 
 Activity quotas 
 8 
 Gags and bans 
 9 
 Paying to take actions in the community 
with currency accumulated through 
normal participation 
 11 
 Limiting fake accounts with CAPTCHAs or 
identity checks 
 12 
 Imposing costs for or preventing 
pseudonym switching 
 29 
 Table 4.1 
 Summary of design alternatives relevant to regulation of behavior, ordered by type 
 Type 
 Design alternative 
 Design claim 
 Selection, sorting, 
highlighting 
 Moderation systems that prescreen, 
degrade, label, move, or remove 
inappropriate messages 
 1 
 Redirecting inappropriate posts to other 
places 
 2 
 Reversion tools 
 5 
 Filters or influence limits 
 6 
 Telling search engines not to follow links 
 24 
 Community structure 
 Cohesive groups 
 21, 33 
 Feedback and rewards 
 Displaying feedback of members to others 
 16 
 Reputation systems 
 26 
 Prices, bonds, or bets that make 
undesirable actions more costly than 
desirable actions 
 27 
 Increasing the benefits of participating 
with a long-term identifier 
 28 
 Forcing newcomers to post bonds that 
may be forfeited if the newcomers 
misbehave or forcing newcomers ’ sponsors 
to stake their own reputations 
 30 

Chapter 4: Regulating Behavior in Online Communities 
169
 Roles, rules, policies, and 
procedures 
 Consistently applied criteria, a chance to 
argue one ’ s case, and appeal procedures 
 3, 10 
 Moderation decided upon by people who 
are members of the community, are 
impartial, and have limited or rotating 
power 
 4 
 A widely followed norm of ignoring trolls 
 7 
 Explicit rules and guidelines 
 18, 19, 33 
 Community influence on rule making 
 22 
 Graduated sanctions 
 31, 33 
 Peer reporting or automatic detection of 
violations 
 32 
 Formal sanctioning roles 
 33 
 Anti-retaliatory measures 
 33 
Type
Design alternative
Design claim
Table 4.1
(continued)
 Presentation and framing 
 Publicly displaying examples of 
appropriate behavior 
 13 
 Publicly contrasting examples of 
inappropriate behavior in the context of a 
descriptive norm of appropriate behavior 
 14 
 Publicly displaying many examples of 
inappropriate behavior 
 15 
 Publicly displaying statistics that highlight 
the prevalence of normative behavior 
 17 
 Prominently displayed guidelines 
 19 
 Reminders at the point of an action that 
may violate norms 
 20 
 Face-saving ways to correct norm 
violations 
 23 
 Verified identities and pictures 
 25, 33 

170 
Sara Kiesler, Robert E. Kraut, Paul Resnick, and Aniket Kittur
 3.  The Omidyar Network is a charitable foundation set up by eBay founder Pierre Omidyar. It is 
probably not a coincidence that the Omidyar community thoroughly integrated a reputation 
system into its operations. 
 4.  If we think of reputation scores as account values in some internal currency unit, then these 
currency charges are actually a form of reputation consequence. The difference is that currency 
units other than reputations may have consequences other than changing how other members 
perceive the currency holder. 
 5.  Of course, revealing this information partially collapses the context separation between my 
professor persona and my trader persona. Interestingly, the collapse is largely one-way: readers 
of this book can look me up on eBay, but most eBay traders who encounter  “ informationist ” will 
not know about my other life as an author and professor. 
 References 
 Akdeniz ,  Yaman .  2008 .   Internet Child Pornography and the Law: National and International Responses. 
 Farnham, Surrey, UK :  Ashgate Publishing, Ltd . 
 Alpizar ,  F. ,  F.   Carlsson , and  O.   Johansson-Stenman .  2008 .  Anonymity, Reciprocity, and Confor-
mity: Evidence from Voluntary Contributions to a National Park in Costa Rica.   Journal of Public 
Economics  92  ( 5 – 6 ):  1047  – 1060 .  
 Apache Software Foundation .  2011 . Public Forum Archive Policy.  http://www.apache.org/
foundation/public-archives.html .  
 Axelrod ,  R. , and  R. O.   Keohane .  1985 .  Achieving Cooperation under Anarchy: Strategies 
and Institutions .   World Politics: A Quarterly Journal of International Relations  38 ( 1 ): 
 226  – 254 .  
 Bailey ,  W. C. , and  R. D.   Peterson .  1997 .  Murder, Capital Punishment, and Deterrence: A Review 
of the Literature . In   The Death Penalty in America: Current Controversies  , ed.  Hugo Adam   Bedau , 
 135  – 161 .  New York :  Oxford University Press .  
 Bajaj ,  Vikas .  2010 . Spammers Pay Others to Answer Security Tests.  New York Times , Apr. 26, 2010. 
 http://www.nytimes.com/2010/04/26/technology/26captcha.html .  
 Bajari ,  P. , and  A.  Hortacsu .  2004 .  Economic Insights from Internet Auctions.    Journal of Economic 
Literature  42  ( 2 ):  457  – 486 . 
 Bartle ,  Richard .  1996 . Hearts, Clubs, Diamonds, Spades: Players Who Suit Mud.  http://
www.mud.co.uk/richard/hcds.htm . 
 Bordia ,  P.  1997 .  Face-to-Face versus Computer-Mediated Communication: A Synthesis of the 
Experimental Literature.   Journal of Business Communication  34 ( 1 ):  99 .  
 bunkerbuster1 . What Is a Concern Troll?  http://www.democraticunderground.com/discuss/
duboard.php?az=view_all & address=364x1382185 . 

Chapter 4: Regulating Behavior in Online Communities 
171
 Burke ,  Moira ,  Robert E.   Kraut , and  Diane   Williams .  2010 . Social Use of Computer-Mediated Com-
munication by Adults on the Autism Spectrum. In  CSCW 2010: Proceedings of the ACM Conference 
on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 425 – 434. New York: ACM Press.   
 Butler ,  Brian ,  L.   Sproull ,  S.  Kiesler , and  R.   Kraut .  2007 .  Community Effort in Online Groups: Who 
Does the Work and Why?  In   Leadership at a Distance  , ed.  S.  Weisband .  Hillsdale, NJ :  Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates . 
 Cabral ,  L. , and  A.  Hortacsu .  2010 .  The Dynamics of Seller Reputation: Evidence from eBay.    Journal 
of Industrial Economics  58 ( 1 ):  54  – 78 .  
 Cialdini ,  R. B.   2003 .  Crafting Normative Messages to Protect the Environment.    Current Directions 
in Psychological Science  12 ( 4 ):  105 . 
 Cialdini ,  R. B. ,  C. A.  Kallgren , and  R. R.   Reno .  1991 .  A Focus Theory of Normative Conduct: A 
Theoretical Refinement and Reevaluation of the Role of Norms in Human Behavior.    Advances in 
Experimental Social Psychology  24  ( 20 ): 20 1 – 243 . 
 CmdrTaco .  2003 . How Does Moderation Work? Slashdot.  http://slashdot.org/faq/com-mod.
shtml . 
 Colquitt ,  J. A. ,  D. E.   Conlon ,  M. J.   Wesson ,  C.  Porter , and  K. Y.   Ng .  2001 .  Justice at the Millen-
nium: A Meta-Analytic Review of 25 Years of Organizational Justice Research.   Journal of Applied 
Psychology  86 ( 3 ):  425  – 445 . 
 Constant , D., L.  Sproull , and S.  Kiesler .  1996 .  The Kindness of Strangers: The Usefulness of Elec-
tronic Weak Ties for Technical Advice .   Organization Science  7  ( 2 ): 119 – 135. 
 Cornwell ,  B. , and  D. C.   Lundgren .  2001 .  Love on the Internet: Involvement and Misrepresenta-
tion in Romantic Relationships in Cyberspace versus Realspace.   Computers in Human Behavior  17 
( 2 ):  197  – 211 . 
 Crystal .  2009 . The Twitter Rules.  http://twitter.zendesk.com/forums/26257/entries/18311 . 
 DeJong ,  W. ,  S. K.   Schneider ,  L. G.   Towvim ,  M. J.   Murphy ,  E. E.   Doerr ,  N. R.   Simonsen ,  K. E.  
 Mason ,  et al .  2006 .  A Multisite Randomized Trial of Social Norms Marketing Campaigns to Reduce 
College Student Drinking.   Journal of Studies on Alcohol  67 ( 6 ):  868 . 
 Dellarocas ,  Chrysanthos , and  Charles A.   Wood .  2008 .  The Sound of Silence in Online Feedback: 
Estimating Trading Risks in the Presence of Reporting Bias.   Management Science  54 ( 3 ): 
 460  – 476 .  
 Dewally ,  M. , and  L.  Ederington .  2006 .  A Comparison of Reputation, Certification, Warranties, 
and Disclosure as Remedies for Information Asymmetries: Lessons from the On-Line Comic Book 
Market.    Journal of Business  79 ( 4 ): 693 – 729.  
 Dibbell ,  Juian .  1993 .  A Rape in Cyberspace: How an Evil Clown, a Haitian Trickster Spirit, 
Two Wizards, and a Cast of Dozens Turned a Database into a Society.   Village Voice 
(December 23).  

172 
Sara Kiesler, Robert E. Kraut, Paul Resnick, and Aniket Kittur
 Donath ,  Judith S.   1997 .  Identity and Deception in the Virtual Community . In   Communities in 
Cyberspace  , ed.  P.  Kollock  and  M.  Smith ,  27  – 58 .  Berkeley :  University of California Press .  
 Donath ,  J. ,  K.  Karahalios , and  F.   Viegas .  1999 .  Visualizing Conversation .   Journal of Computer Medi-
ated Communication  4 ( 4 ). 
 Ducheneaut ,  Nicolas .  2005 .  Socialization in an Open Source Software Community: A Socio-
Technical Analysis.   Computer Supported Cooperative Work  14  ( 4 ):  323  – 368 . 
 Durkheim ,  Emile .  1903  [ 1953 ].  The Determination of Moral Facts . In   Sociology and Philosophy  , 
 35  – 63 .  London :  Cohen and West . 
 Elster ,  Jon .  1989 .   The Cement of Society: A Study of Social Order .  New York :  Cambridge University 
Press . 
 Emans ,  B. J. M. ,  L.  Munduate ,  E.   Klaver , and  E.  Van de Vliert .  2003 .  Constructive Consequences 
of Leaders ’ Forcing Influence Styles .  Applied Psychology 52 (1): 36 – 54.  
 Facebook .  2010 . Warnings.  http://www.facebook.com/help/?page=421 . 
 Fehr ,  E. , and  S.  G ä chter .  2000 .  Cooperation and Punishment in Public Goods Experiments.  
 American Economic Review  90  ( 4 ):  980  – 994 . 
 Fehr ,  E. ,  U.  Fischbacher , and  S.   G ä chter .  2003 .  Strong Reciprocity, Human Cooperation, and the 
Enforcement of Social Norms.   Human Nature  13 ( 1 ):  1  – 25 . 
  Festinger ,  L. ,  A.  Pepitone , and  T.   Newcomb .  1952 .  Some Consequences of De-Individuation in a 
Group.    Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology  47 ( 2 ):  382  – 389 . 
 4chan .  2011a . FAQ.  http://www.4chan.org/faq . 
 4chan .  2011b . Rules.  http://www.4chan.org/rules . 
 Friedman ,  E. , and  Paul   Resnick .  2001 .  The Social Cost of Cheap Pseudonyms .   Journal of Economics 
and Management Strategy 10 (2): 173 – 199.  
 Gibbs ,  Jack P.   1985 .  Deterrence Theory and Research.   Nebraska Symposium on Motivation. Nebraska 
Symposium on Motivation  33 : 87  – 130 .  
 Goffman ,  E.  1959 .   The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life .  Garden City, NY:  Doubleday . 
 Goffman ,  E.   1963 .   Behavior in Public Places .  New York :  The Free Press .  
  Haakon .  1992 . LambdaMOO Takes a New Direction. In the LambdaMOO Help System. 
 Halfaker ,  A. ,  A.  Kittur ,  R.   Kraut , and  J.   Riedl .  2009 . A Jury of Your Peers: Quality, Experience and 
Ownership in Wikipedia. In  Wikisym 2009: Proceedings of the 5th International Symposium on Wikis 
and Open Collaboration. New York: ACM Press.  
 Hardin ,  Garrett .  1968 .  The Tragedy of the Commons .   Science 162:1243 – 1248.  
 Herring ,  S. ,  K.  Job-Sluder ,  R.  Scheckler , and  S.  Barab .  2002 .  Searching for Safety Online: Managing 
 “ Trolling ” in a Feminist Forum.    Information Society  18  ( 5 ):  371  – 384 .  

Chapter 4: Regulating Behavior in Online Communities 
173
 Hoag ,  David .  1996 . The WELL Host Manual.  http://www.well.com/~confteam/hostmanual . 
 Hollander , E. P.  1958 .  Conformity, Status, and Idiosyncrasy Credit .   Psychological Review 65 
(2): 117.  
 Horne ,  Christine .  2001 .  The Enforcement of Norms: Group Cohesion and Meta-Norms.   Social 
Psychology Quarterly  64 ( 3 ):  253 – 266 . 
 Horne ,  Christine .  2007 .  Explaining Norm Enforcement.    Rationality and Society  19  ( 2 ): 139 . 
 Horne ,  Christine , and  Anna   Cutlip .  2002 .  Sanctioning Costs and Norm Enforcement: An Experi-
mental Test.   Rationality and Society  14 ( 3 ):  285  – 307 .  
 Jackson ,  Gregory A .  1994 . Promoting Network Civility at MIT: Crime  &  Punishment, or the 
Golden Rule?  http://www.mit.edu/activities/safe/data/mit-stopit.html .  
 JoBlo Movie Network .  2005 . Basic Rules and Guidelines.  http://www.joblo.com/forums/
announcement.php?s=641f9cd5b47beab4ad423f0c861dba3c & forumid=21 . 
 Karau ,  S. J. , and  K. D.   Williams .  1993 .  Social Loafing: A Meta-Analytic Review and Theoretical 
Integration.   Journal of Personality and Social Psychology  65 ( 4 ):  681  – 706 . 
 Kiesler ,  S. ,  S.  Weisband , and  F.   Drasgow .  1999 .  A Meta-Analytic Study of Social Desirability Distor-
tion in Computer-Administered Questionnaires, Traditional Questionnaires, and Interviews.  
 Journal of Applied Psychology  84 ( 5 ):  754  – 775 .  
 Kiesler ,  S. ,  Zubrow ,  D. ,  Moses ,  A. , and  Geller ,  V.   1985 .  Affect in Computer-Mediated Communica-
tion: An Experiment in Synchronous Terminal-to-Terminal Discussion .   Human-Computer Interac-
tion  1 ( 1 ): 77 – 104. 
 Kirnan ,  J. P. ,  J. A.   Farley , and  K. F.   Geisinger .  1989 .  The Relationship between Recruiting Source, 
Applicant Quality, and Hire Performance: An Analysis by Sex, Ethnicity, and Age.   Personnel Psy-
chology  42 ( 2 ):  293  – 308 . 
 Kittur ,  A. ,  B.   Suh ,  B. A.   Pendleton , and  E. H.   Chi .  2007.  He Says, She Says: Conflict and Coordi-
nation in Wikipedia. In  CHI  ’ 07: Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems , 453 – 462. New York: ACM Press.  
  Kolbert ,  Elizabeth .  2001 . Pimps and Dragons: How an Online World Survived a Social Breakdown. 
 The New Yorker 77:13 – 88. 
 Kollock ,  P. , and  M.  Smith .  1996 .  Managing the Virtual Commons: Cooperation and Conflict in 
Computer Communities . In   Computer-Mediated Communication: Linguistic, Social, and Cross-
Cultural Perspectives  , ed.  Susan   Herring ,  109  – 128 .  Amsterdam :  John Benjamin . 
 Koslowsky ,  M. ,  J.   Schwarzwald , and  S.  Ashuri .  2001 .  On the Relationship between Subordinates ’ 
Compliance to Power Sources and Organisational Attitudes .   Applied Psychology  50  ( 3 ): 455 – 476. 
 von Krogh ,  Georg ,  Sebastian   Spaeth ,  Karim R.   Lakhani , and  Eric   von  Hippel .  2003 .  Community, 
Joining, and Specialization in Open Source Software Innovation: A Case Study .  Research Policy  32 
( 7 ):  1217  – 1241 . 

174 
Sara Kiesler, Robert E. Kraut, Paul Resnick, and Aniket Kittur
 Lessig ,  L.  1999 .  Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace .  New York :  Basic Books .  
 Leventhal ,  G. S.   1976 .  The Distribution of Rewards and Resources in Groups and Organizations . 
In   Advances in Experimental Social Psychology  , ed.  L.   Berkowitz  and  W.  Walster ,  91  – 131 .  New York : 
 Academic Press . 
 Lewis ,  S. A. ,  C. J.   Langan , and  E. P.   Hollander .  1972 .  Expectation of Future Interaction and the 
Choice of Less Desirable Alternatives in Conformity.    Sociometry  35  ( 3 ):  440  – 447 .  
 Mobasher ,  B. ,  R.   Burke ,  R.  Bhaumik , and  C.  Williams .  2007 .  Toward Trustworthy Recommender 
Systems: An Analysis of Attack Models and Algorithm Robustness.   ACM Transactions on Internet 
Technology  7  ( 4 ):  23 .  
 Moon ,  J. Y. , and  L. S.   Sproull .  2008 .  The Role of Feedback in Managing the Internet-Based Vol-
unteer Work Force.   Information Systems Research  19  ( 4 ):  494  – 515 .  
 Orion ,  Crystah .  2010 . Godmodding and borderline goomodding.  http://z3.invisionfree.com/
NJORoleplayingSite/index.php?showtopic=1045 & view=getnewpost . 
 Ostrom ,  E.   2000 .  Collective Action and the Evolution of Social Norms.   Journal of Economic Perspec-
tives  14 ( 3 ):  137 – 158 . 
 Ostrom ,  E.   1990 .   Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action .  New 
York :  Cambridge University Press . 
 Page ,  L. ,  S.  Brin ,  R.   Motwani , and  T.   Winograd .  1998 .   The Pagerank Citation Ranking: Bringing Order 
to the Web .  Stanford, CA :  Stanford University .  
 Perkins ,  H. W. ,  P. W.  Meilman ,  J. S.   Leichliter ,  J. R.  Cashin , and  C. A.   Presley .  1999 .  Mispercep-
tions of the Norms for the Frequency of Alcohol and Other Drug Use on College Campuses.  
 Journal of American College Health  47  ( 6 ):  253  – 258 . 
 Postmes ,  Tom , and  Russell  Spears .  1998 .  Deindividuation and Antinormative Behavior: A Meta-
Analysis.    Psychological Bulletin  123  ( 3 ):  238  – 259 . 
 Powazek ,  Derek M.   2002 .   Design for Community: The Art of Connecting Real People in Virtual Places . 
 Indianapolis, IN :  New Riders .  
 Pratt ,  T. C. ,  F. T.  Cullen ,  K. R.   Blevins ,  L. E.   Daigle , and  T. D.   Madensen .  2006 .  The Empirical 
Status of Deterrence Theory: A Meta-Analysis . In   Taking Stock: The Status of Criminological Theory  , 
ed.  F. T.   Cullen ,  J. P.   Wright , and  K. R.   Blevins ,  367  – 396 .  New Brunswick, NJ :  Transaction 
Publishers .  
 Pingel , F. , and  S.  Steinbrecher .  2008 . Multilateral Secure Cross-Community Reputation Systems 
for Internet Communities. In  Trust, Privacy and Security in Digital Business: 5th International Confer-
ence, TrustBus 2008, Turin, Italy , 69 – 78. 
 Psych Central .  2008 . Terms of Use.  http://psychcentral.com/about/terms.htm .  
 Resnick ,  P. ,  K.  Kuwabara ,  R.   Zeckhauser , and  E.  Friedman .  2000 .  Reputation Systems.   Communica-
tions of the ACM  43  ( 12 ):  45  – 48 .  

Chapter 4: Regulating Behavior in Online Communities 
175
 Resnick ,  P. , and  R.   Sami .  2007 . The Influence Limiter: Provably Manipulation-Resistant Recom-
mender Systems. In  Proceedings of the 2007 ACM Conference on Recommender Systems , 25 – 32. New 
York: ACM.  
 Resnick ,  P. , and  R.  Sami .  2008 . The Information Cost of Manipulation-Resistance in Recom-
mender Systems. In  Proceedings of the 2008 ACM Conference on Recommender Systems , 147 – 154. 
New York: ACM.   
 Resnick ,  P. , and  R.   Zeckhauser .  2002 .  Trust among Strangers in Internet Transactions: Empirical 
Analysis of eBay ’ s Reputation System .   Advances in Applied Microeconomics: A Research Annual 
 11 : 127  – 157 . 
 Resnick ,  P. ,  R.   Zeckhauser ,  J.   Swanson , and  K.  Lockwood .  2006 .  The Value of Reputation on eBay: 
A Controlled Experiment.   Experimental Economics  9 ( 2 ):  79 – 101 .  
 Rohrer ,  J. H. ,  S. H.   Baron ,  E. L.  Hoffman , and  D. V.   Swander .  1954 .  The Stability of Autokinetic 
Judgments .   Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology  49  ( 4 ):  595  – 597 .  
 Rosenberg ,  Milton J.   2009 .  The Conditions and Consequences of Evaluation Apprehension . In 
  Artifacts in Behavioral Research: Robert Rosenthal and Ralph L. Rosnow ’ s Classic Books  ,  211  – 263 .  New 
York :  Oxford University Press .  
 Ross ,  W. H. , and  D. E.   Conlon .  2000 .  Hybrid Forms of Third-Party Dispute Resolution: Theoretical 
Implications of Combining Mediation and Arbitration .   Academy of Management Review  25  ( 2 ): 
416 – 427.  
 Roth ,  A. E. ,  V.   Prasnikar ,  M.  Okuno-Fujiwara , and  S.   Zamir .  1991 .  Bargaining and Market Behavior 
in Jerusalem, Ljubljana, Pittsburgh, and Tokyo: An Experimental Study.   American Economic Review 
 81 ( 5 ):  1068  – 1095 .  
 Sakamoto ,  A. ,  K.  Sekiguchi ,  A.  Shinkyu , and  Y.  Okada .  2003 .  Does Media Coverage of 
Capital Punishment Have a Deterrent Effect on the Occurrence of Brutal Crimes?: An Analysis 
of Japanese Time-Series Data from 1959 to 1990 . In   Progress in Asian Social Psychology: Conceptual 
and Empirical Contributions  , ed.  K.  Yang ,  K.  Hwang ,  P. B.   Pederson , and  I.  Daibo .  Westport, CT : 
 Praeger . 
 Seay ,  A. F. , and  R. E.   Kraut .  2007 . Project Massive: Self-Regulation and Problematic Use of Online 
Gaming. In  Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 829 – 838. 
New York: ACM Press.  
 Sassenberg ,  Kai , and  Tom   Postmes .  2002 .  Cognitive and Strategic Processes in Small Groups: 
Effects of Anonymity of the Self and Anonymity of the Group on Social Influence .   British Journal 
of Social Psychology 41 (3): 463 – 480.  
 Shankland ,  Stephen .  2000 . New Email Software Can Help You Bite Your Tongue.  CNET News . 
 http://news.cnet.com/New-email-software-can-help-you-bite-your-tongue/2100-1040
_3-245790.html .  
 Sherif ,  Muzafer .  1936 . The Psychology of Social Norms .  New York :  Harper .  

176 
Sara Kiesler, Robert E. Kraut, Paul Resnick, and Aniket Kittur
 Small ,  D. A. , and  G.  Loewenstein .  2005 .  The Devil You Know: The Effects of Identifiability on 
Punitiveness.    Journal of Behavioral Decision Making  18 ( 5 ):  311  – 318 . 
 Smith ,  J. H.  2007 .  Tragedies of the Ludic Commons: Understanding Cooperation in Multiplayer 
Games .   Game Studies  7 ( 1 ).  http://gamestudies.org/0701/articles/smith . 
 Soetevent ,  A. R.   2005 .  Anonymity in Giving in a Natural Context: A Field Experiment in 30 
Churches.  Journal of Public Economics  89  ( 11 – 12 ):  2301  – 2323 .  
 sqpantz .  2008 . Works for Me.  http://www.techdirt.com/articles/20080205/160733184.shtml . 
  Stone ,  Brad .  2010 , July 19. Policing the Web ’ s Lurid Precincts.  New York Times (July 19): B1. 
 Tyler ,  T. R. , and  R. J.   Bies .  1990 .  Beyond Formal Procedures: The Interpersonal Context of Proce-
dural Justice .   Applied Social Psychology and Organizational Settings 77:98.  
 Tyler ,  T. R.  1997 .  Citizen Discontent with Legal Procedures: A Social Science Perspective on Civil 
Procedure Reform .   American Journal of Comparative Law 45 (4): 871 – 904.  
 Van Alstyne ,  M.  2007 .  Curing Spam: Rights, Signals, and Screens .   Economists ’ Voice  4 ( 2 ): article 
4.  http://www.bepress.com/ev/vol4/iss2/art4 .  
 Vesperman ,  J. , and  V.  Henson .  2004 . Building and Maintaining an International Volunteer Linux 
Community. In  Proceedings of the Freenix Track: 2004 USENIX Annual Technical Conference . Berkeley, 
CA: USENIX Association.  
 Viegas ,  Fernanda ,  Martin   Wattenberg , and  K.  Dave .  2004 . Studying Cooperation and Conflict 
between Authors with History Flow Visualizations. In  CHI 2004: ACM Conference on Human-
Factors in Computing Systems . New York: ACM Press.  
 Walker ,  J. M. ,  R.   Gardner , and  E.   Ostrom .  1990 .  Rent Dissipation in a Limited-Access Common-
Pool Resource: Experimental Evidence.   Journal of Environmental Economics and Management  19  ( 3 ): 
 203  – 211 . 
 Wikipedia .  2010a . Blocking Policy.  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Blocking_policy . 
 Wikipedia .  2010b . Spam in Blogs.  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spam_in_blogs .  
 Wikipedia .  2010c . Vandalism.  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Vandalism . 
 Wikipedia .  2010d . Wikiproject Vandalism Studies: Study 1.  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Wikipedia:WikiProject_Vandalism_studies/Study1 . 
 Wikipedia .  2011a . Biographies of Living Persons.  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:
Biographies_of_living_persons . 
 Wikipedia .  2011b . Neutral Point of View.  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Neutral_point_
of_view . 
 Wikipedia .  2011c . Sock Puppetry.  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Sock_puppetry . 

Chapter 4: Regulating Behavior in Online Communities 
177
 Wikipedia .  2011d . The Three-Revert Rule.  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Edit_warring#
The_three-revert_rule . 
 Williams ,  Gail Ann .  1997 . Hosting: Online Moderator Guidelines and Community-Building Tips. 
The Well.  http://www.well.com/confteam/hosting.html . 
 Wookieepedia .  2010 . Wookieepedia: The Star Wars Encyclopedia That Anyone Can Edit.  http://
starwars.wikia.com/wiki/Main_Page . 
 Wysocki ,  M. D.   2003 . Cracking the Hacker Code: An Analysis of the Computer Hacker Subculture 
from Multiple Perspectives. Communication Studies, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL. 
 Yee ,  Nick .  2001 . The Daedalus Project.  http://www.nickyee.com/daedalus . 
 Zimbardo ,  P. G.  1969 .  The Human Choice: Individuation, Reason, and Order versus Deindividu-
ation, Impulse, and Chaos . In   1969 Nebraska Symposium on Motivation  , ed.  W. J.   Arnold and  D. 
 Levine , 237 – 307. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press.  
 Zitek ,  E. M. , and  M. R.   Hebl .  2007 .  The Role of Social Norm Clarity in the Influenced Expression 
of Prejudice over Time.   Journal of Experimental Social Psychology  43  ( 6 ):  867  – 876 .  


 5  The Challenges of Dealing with Newcomers 
 Robert E. Kraut, Moira Burke, John Riedl, and Paul Resnick 
 In the face of inevitable turnover, every online community must incorporate succes-
sive generations of newcomers to survive. Without replacing members who leave, a 
community will eventually wither away. Newcomers can also be a source of innova-
tion, new ideas, and work procedures or other resources that the group needs. However, 
attracting newcomers and incorporating them into an existing community can be a 
difficult endeavor. Newcomers have not yet developed the commitment to the group 
felt by old-timers. As a result, they are very sensitive to the public image of a com-
munity and to their own early experiences in it. They may not join or may leave in 
the face of even minor adversity. They have less motivation to be helpful to the group 
or to display good organizational citizenship characteristic of many old-timers ( Organ 
and Ryan 1995 ). In addition, for reasons of ignorance or maliciousness, newcomers 
may behave in ways that can be harmful to the group. They do not yet know the 
norms guiding behavior in the group, and in their ignorance may act in ways that 
offend other group members or otherwise undercut the smooth functioning of the 
group. For example, when participating in Wikipedia, new editors may fail to follow 
the policy of writing with a neutral point of view, or they may add content that has 
already been determined by a consensus of more experienced editors to belong in 
another article. 
 Because they lack experience, when newcomers try to participate, they imperil the 
work that other community members have already performed. For example, they may 
introduce bugs in an open source development project, cause the (virtual) death of 
fellow group members in an online role-playing game, or ask redundant questions in 
discussion groups. Finally, their mere presence can increase diversity in the group — at 
least until they learn the group ’ s norms — and may in itself be off-putting to more 
experienced members of the community who prefer the people and routines they were 
familiar with. 

180 
Robert E. Kraut, Moira Burke, John Riedl, and Paul Resnick
 When dealing with newcomers, online communities must solve five basic 
problems: 
 1.  Recruitment  Communities need to advertise to recruit members and to ensure a 
supply of newcomers for replenishment and growth. 
 2.  Selection  The community should select only those potential members who fit well. 
This process may occur through self-selection, in which potential members who are 
a good fit find the community attractive and those who are not a good fit find it 
unattractive. Or it may occur through screening, in which the community screens out 
undesirable members, while encouraging or selecting the others. 
 3.  Retention  Both theory and experience suggest that newcomers ’ ties to the com-
munity are especially fragile. As a result, the community should engage in tactics that 
keep potentially valuable newcomers around until they can develop more robust ties 
to the community or learn how the group operates. 
 4.  Socialization  The group needs to socialize the newcomers, teaching them how to 
behave in ways appropriate to the group, as discussed in chapter 4. In the current 
chapter, we focus on socialization strategies that are of particular relevance to 
newcomers. 
 5.  Protection  Throughout its interactions with prospective members, visitors, and 
newcomers in their early interactions, the community needs to protect itself from the 
potentially damaging actions of those who either have little knowledge of appropriate 
group behavior or little motivation to follow community norms. 
 These problems vary in importance across different communities, although every 
community faces them to some degree. Some communities may have an abundant 
supply of people clamoring for membership, which makes them want to restrict 
growth; for these communities, word of mouth may be sufficient for recruiting. Com-
munities like open source software (OSS) development projects may have strict stan-
dards for members, but other communities may want almost any warm body who 
shows up. But even these seemingly open communities would like to reject spammers, 
trolls, or others whose primary goal is to disrupt the community. 
 These problems reflect two perspectives — that of the newcomers and that of the 
online community and its existing members. The recruiting process, for example, 
consists of both the activities that potential members might perform in investigating 
different communities and weighting alternatives, and the activities that communities 
and their members might perform in soliciting new recruits and interacting with them. 
In this chapter, we consider the perspective of the newcomer only insofar as it has 
implications for how the online community needs to be designed to accommodate 

Chapter 5: The Challenges of Dealing with Newcomers 
181
them. For example, as we discuss later, newcomers are happier in a community and 
contribute more effectively if they have a complete and accurate impression of the 
community before they join it. To collect the information they need to form this 
impression, they may lurk in the community, silently observing, or may try to partici-
pate and gauge the community ’ s reaction to them. Even though prior research dem-
onstrates that newcomers are happier, stay longer, and perform more effectively if 
they actively seek information about organizations before joining them ( Bauer 
et al. 2007 ), this chapter does not address the proactive moves that newcomers should 
take in order to gain an accurate view of the community, which is not under the 
control of a site designer or manager. Instead, the chapter concentrates on how the 
community should be designed to provide the information newcomers need to make 
a decision about joining and how the community should respond to the common 
moves that newcomers use when forming impressions of the community. For example, 
prospective members are likely to gain a more accurate view of the community if 
communities publish FAQ pages to make policies visible and allow outsiders access to 
archives of conversation among members, enabling them to judge the nature of the 
interactions. However, some communities may decide not to make these resources 
available to outsiders. For example, the managers of cancer support groups hosted at 
ACOR ( http://www.acor.org ) believe that the privacy needs of current members out-
weigh the investigatory needs of prospective members. Therefore, outsiders must 
register to become a member of a support group before they can see any of the inter-
actions that have occurred in that group. The catch, of course, is that most outsiders 
cannot determine whether they want to become a member unless they can sample 
the goods. 
 Researchers in both online and offline settings have identified an analogous set of 
stages that newcomers take on the path to becoming committed members of a group 
or community.  Levine and Moreland (1994) , in discussing offline groups, use the terms 
 investigation ,  socialization , and  maintenance to describe the set of activities that new-
comers and groups engage in as they become increasingly committed to each other. 
Individuals and groups go through an investigatory phase in which newcomers gather 
information about the group to predict whether it will fit their needs; groups use 
recruiting and selection processes to identify prospective members who would fit well 
with the group. During the earliest stages of the socialization period — just after a 
person has joined the community — the central challenge for the community is to keep 
the newcomer around. The relationship between the newcomer and community 
during this early socialization phase is especially fragile, and even small problems may 
drive newcomers out. However, as the newcomer becomes more committed to the 

182 
Robert E. Kraut, Moira Burke, John Riedl, and Paul Resnick
community, helping newcomers learn the norms of the community and how to 
behave becomes increasingly important. In describing the progressive commitment of 
newcomers to online communities,  Preece and Shneiderman (2009)  propose a   “ reader-
to-leader ” funnel in which some newcomers move from being readers to being con-
tributors, then collaborators, and finally leaders. Their transition from reader to 
contributor — analogous to  Levine and Moreland ’ s (1994)  description of the transition 
of potential members from outsiders to organizational members as they move through 
the investigatory phase to the socialization phase — is the focus of this chapter. 
 1  Problem 1: Recruiting Newcomers 
 In the face of turnover in their membership, online communities will inevitably die 
without a constant supply of newcomers. Recently leaders of Wikipedia have been 
bemoaning their dilemma that after years of exponential growth, the number of new 
contributors joining Wikipedia does not compensate for the number of experienced 
editors who drop out ( http://strategy.wikimedia.org/wiki/Community_health ). Thus, 
it is important to consider the processes by which online communities advertise their 
existence and recruit newcomers. These processes determine whether the community 
has enough members to accomplish its goals. In addition, the processes of recruitment 
may have direct consequences for later problems that the community must solve, such 
as selection, retention, and commitment. Although there are many differences between 
online communities and conventional organizations with employees, especially in 
terms of the formality of the recruiting and acceptance process, the research on 
employee recruiting is relevant and we use this material heavily in the following dis-
cussion. We follow the research tradition on employee recruiting and consider recruit-
ing to be  “ those organizational activities that (1) influence the number and/or types 
of applicants who apply for a position [i.e., membership in an online community] 
and/or (2) affect whether a . . . [membership] offer is accepted ” ( Breaugh and Starke 
2000 , 4). 
 Many online communities do little active recruiting for new members. This lack of 
attention to recruiting characterizes most Usenet groups and the OSS development 
projects represented in SourceForge ( http://sourceforge.net ). One can ignore active 
recruiting if potential members ’ random browsing of the web and word-of-mouth 
endorsements from current members provide a sufficient supply of recruits to replace 
losses and meet the community ’ s needs for growth. Active recruitment, however, will 
be necessary if laissez-faire approaches are insufficient. Online communities differ on 
both the degree and methods they use for recruiting, even among those that actively 

Chapter 5: The Challenges of Dealing with Newcomers 
183
recruit new members. Blizzard uses a full gamut of TV, print, and online advertising 
to recruit new World of Warcraft players. In addition to impersonal advertising, Bliz-
zard also uses interpersonal recruiting, such as its  “ recruit-a-friend ” promotion, which 
provides perks to both the recruiter and the recruit when an existing subscriber invites 
a friend to activate a ten-day trial account ( Blizzard Entertainment 2010 ). Within the 
game itself, some guilds seek new members by posting advertisements to sites like the 
guild-recruiting forums within the game or third-party sites like Looking for Guild 
( http://www.lookingforguild.net ); many others recruit guild members from among 
friends and family ( Williams et al. 2006 ). 
 Design Claim 1  Compared to laissez-faire approaches, in which prospective members 
seek out or stumble upon a community, active recruiting leads to the community 
having access to a larger pool of prospective members. 
 Recruiting messages, whether formal or informal, are a specific type of persuasive 
communication. Research on attitudes, attitude change, and the influence of both 
interpersonal and mass communication is voluminous. Although we consider persua-
sion at several points in this book, a complete review is beyond our scope. Instead, 
we sample some highlights in this book and refer the reader to relevant reviews for 
more detail on persuasion in general (e.g.,  Chaiken, Wood, and Eagly 1996 ;  Cialdini 
and Goldstein 2004 ;  McGuire, Lindzey, and Aronson 1985 ;  Petty and Wegener 1998 ). 
 Interpersonal Recruiting 
 A long research tradition starting with Katz and Lazersfeld ( Katz 1957 ;  Katz 1955 ) and 
Coleman ( Coleman, Katz, and Menzel 1957 ) indicates that interpersonal appeals — in 
which the persuasion attempt comes directly from other people, especially those 
whom the target knows — are more effective at influencing attitudes and adoption than 
are impersonal appeals through the mass media. It follows that interpersonal recruit-
ing is more effective than mass communication.  Latan é ’ s social impact model of social 
influence ( 1981 ) holds that social influence is proportional to the immediacy, strength, 
and number of influence sources that a target is exposed to. The immediacy of the 
source is inversely proportional to physical or psychological distance imposed by the 
communication modality. We are more influenced by people who are close by and by 
those who communicate with us in person than by those farther away or who com-
municate through some technology mediation. For example, in political get-out-
the-vote campaigns, face-to-face contacts with potential voters are more cost effective 
than robo-calls and email solicitations, even though the in-person contacts can cost 

184 
Robert E. Kraut, Moira Burke, John Riedl, and Paul Resnick
$20US while the technology-mediated contacts cost pennies each ( Green, Gerber, and 
Nickerson 2008 ); the persuasive power of the contact justifies its high cost. The 
strength of a source includes its status, its credibility, and the strength of the interper-
sonal tie between the source and target. We discuss the strength of a source later in 
our discussion of viral marketing. 
 The literature on the diffusion of innovation has long recognized the role of 
interpersonal communication as a primary mechanism by which earlier adopters 
of a new product or service induce those who have not yet used it to try it out 
and eventually to start using it regularly. The Bass model is one of the most widely 
used and accurate statistical models for predicting  product diffusion , the rate with which 
new adopters start using new products and services and the numbers using it at 
any given time ( Bass 1969 ;  Mahajan, Muller, and Wind 2000 ;  Mahajan, Muller, and 
Bass 1990 ). The Bass model holds that the number of new adopters at any time 
is based on four parameters: (1) the number of people who might potentially adopt, 
perhaps estimated from the adoption of competitive products or from surveys; (2) 
the number of people who have adopted to that point; (3) the parameter  α , represent-
ing the constant proportion of potential adopters who convert because of advertising; 
and (4) the parameter  β , representing the constant proportion of potential adopters 
who convert because of word-of-mouth information from people who have already 
adopted. Most empirical research using the Bass model shows that  β , the impact 
of word of mouth, is substantially higher than  α , the impact of advertising. For 
example, Montgomery used the Bass model to estimate the rate of increase in Hotmail 
subscribers from June 1996 to June 1997 ( Montgomery 2001 ). As seen in   figure 5.1 , 
the model is quite accurate: the predicted values closely track the actual growth in 
subscribers. In this model,  β is 6.7 times as powerful as  α . One quantitative review of 
the literature estimated the word-of-mouth effect was ten times greater than the 
advertising one, across a wide range of durable goods and services ( Sultan, Farley, and 
Lehmann 1990 ). 
 Design Claim 2  Word-of-mouth recruiting is substantially more powerful than imper-
sonal advertising. 
 The Bass model shows that many people adopt new products and services because of 
word-of-mouth influences from existing users. Communities can strategically use 
word-of-mouth recruiting to gain new members. Viral marketing or personalized word 
of mouth are examples of targeting, in which existing community members reach out 
to potential members whom they identify as likely candidates. Churches, theaters, 

Chapter 5: The Challenges of Dealing with Newcomers 
185
doctors, and car mechanics all attempt to use word-of-mouth marketing from current 
patrons to recruit new ones. Recently, the car manufacturer Hyundai formalized this 
recruiting strategy by reframing their manufacturer ’ s rebate to purchasers as a payment 
to mention their new purchases to family, friends, and neighbors. 
 Some of the best sources of new members for a community come from the social 
network links of people who are already members of the community. Many social 
networking sites, such as Facebook ( http://www.facebook.com ) and LinkedIn ( http://
www.linkedin.com ), solicit new members by encouraging existing members to send 
invitations automatically to others in their email address books. (See   figure 5.2 .) Many 
smaller online groups, including guilds in World of Warcraft and projects in Wikipedia 
( http://en.wikipedia.org ), recruit new members informally through their connections 
with existing members. However, it is possible for companies to go overboard with 
the technique of encouraging referrals from existing members. The social networking 
site Tagged ( http://www.tagged.com ) received thousands of complaints for  “ contact 
scraping ” when — according to the company ’ s founder — a software glitch accidentally 
4
3
2
1
0
28June96
20Sep96
15Nov96
13June97
4Apr97
24Jan97
Time
Millions of subscribers
 Figure 5.1 
 Comparing the cumulative number of Hotmail ( http://www.hotmail.com ) subscribers in millions 
(diamonds) at each weekly period with the predictions from the Bass diffusion model (solid line).  
 Source : From Montgomery 2001. 

186 
Robert E. Kraut, Moira Burke, John Riedl, and Paul Resnick
sent invitations to people on members ’ email lists without the list owners ’ permission 
or knowledge ( Tugend 2009 ). 
 One of the most successful examples of this sort of viral marketing is Facebook appli-
cations (apps), which often are designed so that with a single click, a user can invite 
friends to join him or her in using the app. B. J. Fogg of Stanford taught a class in which 
students were encouraged to build Facebook apps that used principles from psychology 
to draw in new members virally ( Fogg and Eckles 2007 ). The result: in just ten weeks, 
the students had attracted an aggregate of sixteen million users to their apps.  Fogg and 
Eckles (2007) explain that these approaches leverage users ’  credibility with their friends 
in a way that is more powerful than any message that appears to come directly from 
the community itself. This sort of recruiting is most effective in environments in which 
a user bringing in friends makes the community more valuable to him or her. For 
instance, one Facebook app lets a user see the places where friends have traveled, which 
is fun and engaging and valuable if the user wants advice on travel in the future. 
 Design Claim 3  Recruiting new members from the social networks of current members 
increases the number of new members more than impersonal methods. 
 Figure 5.2 
 LinkedIn ( http://www.linkedin.com ) invitation screens. 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Chapter 5: The Challenges of Dealing with Newcomers 
187
 Even if it ’ s difficult to talk users into recruiting their friends directly, one can make it 
easy for them to indirectly increase their friends ’ awareness of the community. For 
example, the  New York Times ( http://www.nytimes.org ) makes it easy to share an article 
with friends via email. The  New York Times benefits both by the increased visibility 
through a persuasive social network and by collecting the data: they list the  “ Top 
Emailed ” articles of the day on their front page (see   figure 5.3 ). Similarly, Costco Photo 
Center ( http://www.costcophotocenter.com ), a free photo sharing website, makes it 
easy for a user to share photos with friends and relatives. To use Costco Photo Center, 
the friends and relatives must create free accounts — after which it is easy for them to 
share their own photos (or to buy copies from Costco of the photos they see, but that ’ s 
a different motivation). As with the  New York Times and Costco, this sharing will be 
through channels outside of a community — such as email — but may bring members 
into the community over time. 
 Design Claim 4  Making it easy for users to share content from a community site with 
their friends (e.g., via easy email, Twitter, Facebook,  and similar links) will increase 
the visibility of the community among the users ’  friends and thereby increase the 
likelihood of them joining. 
 Although using viral marketing, in which current members recruit future ones, can 
increase the numbers joining a site, some current members are more powerful conduits 
for new members than others. In his book  The Tipping Point , Malcolm  Gladwell (2002)  
described how marketers work to get key influencers to use their products because 
 Figure 5.3 
 Use of an  “ E-mail this ” link to increase familiarity with a brand, here the  New York Times ( http://
www.nytimes.com ). 
www.Ebook777.com

188 
Robert E. Kraut, Moira Burke, John Riedl, and Paul Resnick
they know that many other consumers will follow their lead. Researchers have been 
studying ways to automatically discover these influencers by analyzing the graph 
structure of the social network with computer algorithms. For instance,  Domingos and 
Richardson (2001)  showed that by analyzing the way opinions appear to flow along 
a social network, one can choose users who would be the best people to market a 
product to. These users are the ones who would most influence other users in the 
social network to use the product.  Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos (2003)  showed that 
under more general models for disseminating information through a social network, 
a simple algorithm that maximized marginal gain at each step could do a very good 
job of choosing a good set of users to market to. 
 Design Claim 5  Identifying the most influential members of a community and 
encouraging them to recruit others in their social networks is more effective than 
soliciting referrals from members at random. 
 Conventional, Impersonal Advertising 
 Even though word-of-mouth recruitment is very effective, impersonal advertising also 
works ( Assmus, Farley, and Lehmann 1984 ). These impersonal persuasion techniques 
can influence people ’ s beliefs, affect, and behavior toward a stimulus object, such as 
a consumer product, health intervention, political candidate, or online community 
( Roberts and Maccoby 1985 ). However, the direct effects of impersonal advertising are 
weaker than many advertisers would like and Orwellian, critiques fear (see  Klapper 
1960 ). According to a recent review of almost five hundred field experiments of adver-
tising effectiveness, for many mature brands the total amount of advertising a firm 
engages in (i.e., its  “ weight ” ) is not critical in influencing sales:  “ More than half the 
time, increases in weight alone do not lead to an increase in sales. . . . [N]either do 
decreases in weight lead to sales decline, at least in the short term ” ( Tellis 2004 , 79). 
There are two main reasons why impersonal advertising has weaker effects than its 
practitioners hope for: confirmatory biases, such as selective exposure, interpretation, 
and retention; and miscomprehension of advertising messages and competing adver-
tising for other products ( Nickerson 1998 ). Studies of selective exposure show that 
people are more likely to be exposed to beliefs that they already agree with. Thus, to 
some degree, advertisements are preaching to the choir and geared toward persuading 
those already convinced. People also differentially interpret persuasive messages based 
on their prior beliefs. For example, among viewers of presidential debates, people 
strongly believe that the candidate they initially supported won the debate ( Munro 
et al. 2002 ). However, these debates can increase viewers ’  knowledge of the issues and 

Chapter 5: The Challenges of Dealing with Newcomers 
189
the ones they consider important in a candidate and — despite viewers ’ biases — can 
influence vote preference, especially in elections in which voters have not yet formed 
strong political beliefs ( Benoit, Hansen, and Verser 2003 ). Extrapolating from this 
literature, advertising may be a more effective recruiting technique for a new com-
munity, when information about the community and confidence in it is low, than it 
would be for an established one. For example, advertising can be more effective for 
the introduction of a new role-playing game than for a new release of the highly 
popular World of Warcraft ( Tellis 2004 , chapter 2). 
 Design Claim 6  Impersonal advertising can effectively increase the number of people 
joining an online community, especially among potential members with little prior 
knowledge of the community. 
 As discussed in more detail in chapter 2, the best way to construct a persuasive message 
depends on the degree of psychological engagement that potential recruits have in 
evaluating the messages. When the potential recruits are actively seeking a community 
to join, such as newly diagnosed cancer patients choosing an online support group, 
they are likely to use effortful  “ systematic processing ” of the quality of the informa-
tion they are exposed to, the consistency of the arguments, and the credibility of the 
sources. In many other cases, however, people are not actively seeking a group or are 
seeking one only casually. In such cases, people tend to form opinions based on what 
psychologists call  heuristic processing . They don ’ t think deeply and evaluate carefully 
the information they are exposed to. Instead, they use many cognitive shortcuts or 
heuristics to form their opinions. The difference in processing affects the kind of 
information that is most effective at attracting new members. 
 One common cognitive heuristic that people follow, the  halo effect ( Cooper 1981 ), 
is that if they perceive that a stimulus is good on one dimension, they assume that it 
will also be good on other, unrelated dimensions ( Thorndike 1920 ). Thus, when evalu-
ating information via heuristic processing such as the halo effect, people are likely to 
be influenced by superficial features. Researchers have indeed found that superficial 
features such as an attractive, professional site design enhance people ’ s credibility 
evaluations of the sites ( Fogg et al. 2003 ) and usage of them ( Van der Heijden 2003 ). 
 On the other hand, with systematic processing, people are likely to be influenced 
by factual information, such as membership size, statistics about activity, or samples 
of activity. For example, because cancer patients are likely to be strongly motivated 
when evaluating alternative support communities to join, they are likely to carefully 
read messages posted to the group, see whether medical professionals are posting, and 

190 
Robert E. Kraut, Moira Burke, John Riedl, and Paul Resnick
compare the advice they see in the group with the advice they are getting from their 
own physician. With systematic processing, people are also likely to assess the credibil-
ity of sites. For example, cancer patients may check to see whether the group is linked 
to a credible national organization like the American Cancer Society. Experiments by 
 Stewart  show that web links between one ’ s site and credible other sites increases visi-
tors ’ trust of the site and their willingness to purchase from it ( 2003 ). 
 These ideas about systematic versus heuristic processing also play out in the types 
of endorsements designers seek for their communities. As discussed further in chapter 
2, the source of a persuasive attempt influences its success. People are more likely to 
be influenced by credible sources with relevant expertise, an effect that is deepened 
when people are engaged in systematic processing of the messages. Therefore, source 
credibility is especially important for serious sites, which potential members are likely 
to care about and be engaged in. For example, eminent biologist E. O. Wilson used 
his acceptance speech at the 2007 TED awards to pitch participation in the community 
creating the  Encyclopedia of Life and endorses it on the encyclopedia ’ s home page (see 
 figure 5.4 ;  Wilson 2007 ). Coming from a world-famous biologist like Wilson, an 
endorsement is likely to be more influential than an endorsement from a less reputable 
source. 
 For heuristic processing, celebrity endorsement can aid recruitment, even if the 
person ’ s celebrity is unrelated to the community ’ s topic or purpose. Many companies 
use celebrity endorsements as part of their advertising strategies, believing that the 
celebrities ’ attractiveness, likeability, and perceived trustworthiness will spill over to 
the product or cause they endorse. They are correct, in that celebrity endorsements 
result in more favorable product evaluations and can have a substantial positive impact 
on financial returns for the companies that use them ( Agrawal and Kamakura 1995 ; 
 Erdogan 1999 ). Game publisher Blizzard has used celebrities to pitch World of War-
craft, including actor William Shatner, who played Captain Kirk on the original  Star 
Trek TV series, with the tagline  “ I ’ m William Shatner, and I ’ m a Shaman, ” and actor 
Mr. T with the tagline  “ I ’ m Mr. T, and this is my Night Elf Mohawk. ” (See   figure 5.5 .) 
 Figure 5.4 
 Credible endorsement for the Encyclopedia of Life ( http://www.eol.org ). 

Chapter 5: The Challenges of Dealing with Newcomers 
191
 Even serious communities can benefit from persuasive messages that appeal to 
heuristic processing, for two reasons. First, sometimes deep information is hard to 
convey. For example, it may be much easier for a cancer community to highlight the 
warm smiles of its members (see   figure 5.6 ) than to convincingly demonstrate that 
people who participate feel that they get emotional support from others on the site. 
Second, when there are many alternatives for people to choose from, they may use 
heuristic processing to choose a smaller number that they will process more 
systematically. 
 Design Claim 7   Recruiting materials that present reasons to join and endorsements 
by credible sources and sites attract people who are actively searching for and evaluat-
ing communities. 
 Design Claim 8   Recruiting materials that present attractive surface features and 
endorsements by celebrities attract people who are casually assessing communities. 
 If people see signs that others are active on a site, then they are more likely to join 
than if they think the site is barren. In chapter 6, we explore how activity levels may 
be interpreted as signals of a community ’ s future trajectory, enabling newcomers to 
make a rational cost-benefit analysis of whether it is worthwhile for them to join now. 
 Figure 5.5 
 Blizzard advertisement with celebrity William Shatner pitching the game World of Warcraft. 
 Source :  http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ykb2A4FtyHQ . 

192 
Robert E. Kraut, Moira Burke, John Riedl, and Paul Resnick
However, seeing activity on the site may also simply invoke the  social proof heuristic 
( Cialdini and Goldstein 2004 ) that it is a good idea to do what others are doing, 
without careful calculation of benefits and costs. 
 The social proof heuristic can be triggered by minor changes in wording in persua-
sive messages urging people to join a site. For example, an experiment by Goldstein 
and his colleagues showed that changing the wording of hotel notices asking guests 
to reuse their towels ( “ Help save the environment . . . by reusing your towels during 
your stay ” ) to one emphasizing social proof ( “ Join your fellow guests in helping to 
save the environment ” ) increased towel reuse by 44 percent ( Goldstein, Griskevicius, 
and Cialdini 2007 ). Applying this logic to the domain of recruiting for an online com-
munity, invitations with a message that implies  “ Join the crowd ” are likely to be much 
more effective than those that say  “ We need you. ” (See  figure 5.7 .) 
 Design Claim 9  Emphasizing the number of people already participating in a com-
munity motivates more people to join than does emphasizing the community need. 
 The familiarity heuristic is another powerful one. People tend to like people, things, 
and ideas they are familiar with ( Zajonc 1968 ). It is for this reason, in part, that name 
recognition does wonders in both consumer products and politics. The familiarity 
heuristic, for example, helps incumbents to be overwhelmingly reelected in congres-
sional and local elections ( Mann and Wolfinger 1980 ), and movie stars with little 
experience and few qualifications to be regularly elected to public office. The implica-
 Figure 5.6 
 Recruiting for the Macmillan Cancer Support Network ( http://www.macmillan.org.uk ). 

Chapter 5: The Challenges of Dealing with Newcomers 
193
 Figure 5.7 
 More (left) and less (right) effective recruiting pitches, based on social proof. 
 Source : From  http://www.ci.minneapolis.mn.us/police/recruiting  and  http://gbomsince2006.blogspot.com/2010/07/
other-we-need-you-were-recruiting.html . 

194 
Robert E. Kraut, Moira Burke, John Riedl, and Paul Resnick
tion is that managers of online communities should simply get the name of their 
community in front of the relevant population to increase their liking of the com-
munity and their likelihood of joining it. The placement of email and tagging links 
on many sites helps make the site familiar to others, increasing their liking for the 
brand and their willingness to become members. (See   figure 5.8 .) 
 Design Claim 10  Placing the name of a community in front of people will often 
activate the familiarity heuristic and their liking of the community and thus their 
willingness to try it. 
 2  Problem 2: Selecting the Right Newcomers 
 Ensuring a good fit between the newcomers and the community is a major challenge. 
A substantial amount of empirical research shows that good outcomes result when 
newcomers to a group or organization perceive themselves as having a good fit with 
it on dimensions such as interests, attitudes, and values that they and the group share 
or the knowledge, skill, and motivations they possess and that the organization desires 
( Chapman et al. 2005 ;  Kristof-Brown, Zimmerman, and Johnson 2005 ;  Kristof 1996 ). 
When potential recruits see that they share a good fit with a group or organization, 
they are more likely to be attracted to it, pursue membership in it, join it if given a 
chance, and be satisfied with their membership and remain in the group or organiza-
tion longer if they do join. 
 Although most research on the benefits of fit has been done in the context of job 
candidates and employees in conventional organizations, the same phenomena also 
occur in the context of voluntary organizations, which are similar in many ways to 
online communities. Volunteers to organizations like Big Brothers Big Sisters or the 
American Red Cross vary in their motivations ( Clary et al. 1998 ), just as do participants 
in online communities (e.g.,  Ridings and Gefen 2004 ;  Roberts et al. 2006 ). Some par-
 Figure 5.8 
 Widgets for sharing an object on the web. 

Chapter 5: The Challenges of Dealing with Newcomers 
195
ticipate out of altruism or because they share the organization ’ s goals. Others partici-
pate for the social experiences they get when working with similar others, to learn 
new skills, to exercise skills and abilities that might otherwise go unpracticed, to obtain 
credentials or experiences relevant to a new career, or to make themselves feel good. 
Fit is important for volunteers. When they participate in volunteer activities that 
match their motivations, they are more satisfied with their volunteerism and are more 
likely to volunteer again ( Clary et al. 1998 ). In addition, volunteer organizations can 
take advantage of this variability in volunteers ’ motivation by varying the wording in 
their advertising to attract those with appropriate motives. For example, brochures 
that highlight the way in which volunteering helps one explore career options, 
develop a strong resume, and network to make career contacts were especially likely 
to appeal to recruits with career-related motivations ( Clary et al. 1998 ). 
 The problem of selecting applicants for membership is common to all groups, but 
it may be especially problematic in online communities because of the relative ano-
nymity of the interaction in them and the ease of creating new identities online. For 
example, one Wikipedia administrator who had presented himself as a professor with 
degrees in theology and canon law was forced to resign when a magazine revealed 
that he had no advanced degrees. He  “ used texts such as  Catholicism for Dummies to 
help him correct articles on the penitential rite or transubstantiation ” ( Elsworth 2007 ). 
 Consider the two messages in   figure 5.9  recruiting new members for guilds in World 
of Warcraft. The announcement on the left describes a testosterone-driven raiding 
guild seeking  “ hard-core ” players. It demands both time and particular types of equip-
ment from its members. In contrast, the guild on the right is more laid back and 
socially oriented. It describes itself as a group that  “ spends way too much time on 
ventrilo [the chat program that supports voice communication among guild members] 
and not nearly enough time raiding. ” It seems to be seeking players with cooperative 
personalities and good social skills (no drama, whining, or getting angry over loot 
distribution). 
 Imagine the problems that would flare if the raid-oriented Premonition guild, on 
the left, ended up with a laid-back chatterer, or if the socially oriented Damage Net-
works, on the right, recruited a hard-core warrior. Our own research shows that new 
recruits to World of Warcraft guilds who prefer the style of play that the guild values 
remain in their guilds substantially longer than players for whom there is a style-of-
play mismatch ( Choi, Kraut, and Fichman 2011 ). 
 A better fit between new members and a community also promises benefits for the 
community. For example, in World of Warcraft, players may apply to become members 
of a guild with the intention of staying only a short time, merely to  “ level up ” their 

196 
Robert E. Kraut, Moira Burke, John Riedl, and Paul Resnick
 Figure 5.9 
 Sample World of Warcraft recruiting announcements. 
 Source : From  http://www.lookingforguild.net . 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Chapter 5: The Challenges of Dealing with Newcomers 
197
character (i.e., gain experience points) before moving to a superior guild ( Ducheneaut 
et al. 2007 ). However, it is not in the guild ’ s interest to recruit players who have inten-
tions to leave as soon as they have accumulated more experience, skills, or gear. Simi-
larly, in an OSS development community, some newcomers may be highly skilled 
software developers with deep knowledge of the application domain, some may 
be novice developers or ignorant of the domain with little knowledge or 
skill to bring to the project, and others may have the malicious intent of introduc-
ing bugs or Trojan horses. In an online support group for abused women, valuable 
members are the survivors who have experience, wisdom, and support to offer to 
others or women who are themselves currently the victims of abuse, and spectators 
or stalking husbands are highly undesirable. Even seemingly open communities may 
want to discriminate between valuable and less valuable members. For example, 
the Democratic Underground ( http://www.democraticunderground.com ), a news 
and discussion site for the exchange of progressive political ideas, wants to enroll 
Democrats and  “ other progressives who will work with us to achieve our shared goals ” 
and wants to reject Republicans and right-wing trolls who join to bait legitimate 
members. In eBay, legitimate sellers would like to weed out scammers who sell used 
goods as new, or copies as originals, or those who collude to inflate bids ( Kinch 2003 ; 
 Postmedia 2010 ). 
 Overall, ensuring that new recruits match the style and values of an online com-
munity will lead them to stay longer and be more satisfied with their membership, 
and it will lead to more benefits for the group as a whole and for existing members. 
Different recruiting and selection methods lead to different degrees of player-
community fit. It ’ s relatively easy to identity hard-core players valued by the hard-core 
Premonition guild in figure 5.9 by examining players ’ online resume (e.g., the weapons 
they have accumulated) and by playing with them a little while. In contrast, guilds 
may need to get referrals from existing members and play with the new recruits for 
longer probationary periods to identity the personality configurations valued by the 
laid back Damage Networks. The general lesson is that the amount and type of infor-
mation and interaction between a community and newcomers needed for selecting 
people who fit well depends upon the ease of revealing or assessing attributes of both 
the recruits and the community. 
 In the following section, we consider two general approaches to selecting new 
recruits who fit with the style, values, and needs of the community. The first is self-
selection, or making sure that only potential recruits who are a good fit choose to 
join. The second is screening, or making sure that only potential recruits who are a 
good fit are allowed to join. 
www.Ebook777.com

198 
Robert E. Kraut, Moira Burke, John Riedl, and Paul Resnick
 Self-Selection 
 When conventional organizations provide recruits accurate and complete information 
about the organization, prospective members can form accurate expectations about 
it, which influences their decisions to seek employment, to join if employment is 
offered, and to have realistic expectations about the organization and their role within 
it once they join. In the context of conventional organizations, this accurate informa-
tion often is conveyed in the form of realistic job previews, in which recruiters and 
other members of the organization present both favorable and unfavorable job-related 
information to job candidates ( Rynes 1991 ). Realistic job previews are associated with 
lower expectations that recruits have about the nature of the job, lower levels of attri-
tion from the recruitment process, and lower turnover if recruits are offered a job. 
Although the effects are small, they are reliably larger if the realistic preview is deliv-
ered verbally than via a written document or video ( Phillips 1998 ). Realistic job pre-
views seem to have beneficial effects on recruiting success through two separable 
routes. First, they selectively attract people who have certain characteristics, including 
motives, skills, and attitudes that better fit the existing community. Second, they lower 
the expectations that newcomers have when they actually join the community, reduc-
ing the chances that the reality that newcomers experience once they join will clash 
with unrealistic idealizations. 
 Online communities can use the methods typical of conventional organizations 
to give off realistic information about the community — websites, online recruiting 
brochures and other documents, videos, direct contact with recruiters or other 
formal representatives of the community, and informal contact with community 
members. For example, when soliciting new members, World of Warcraft guilds 
often post recruiting statements, with information about their mission and style of 
play, at forums such as Looking for Guild or similar recruiting sites. Others post videos 
of their exploits on YouTube ( http://www.youtube.com ), WarcraftMovies ( http://
www.warcraftmovies.com ), and other media-sharing sites. One famous clip is the 
animated saga of the Onyxia Wipe — with more than four million views on YouTube 
and other sites — in which a guild leader shouts at, commands, and curses his guild as 
they try to kill the Onyxia monster and are all killed by it ( Alachas1985 2007 ). 
 Although these realistic previews can be effective, they are rare compared to the 
use of FAQs in many online communities; in these FAQs, the community posts a 
mission statement or goals but not realistic previews of life inside (see  http://
www.faqs.org  for an index to many FAQs for Usenet newsgroups and websites). For 
example, the FAQ for a support group for people who are trying to quit smoking lists 
a policy of bans on commercial posts but provides little information about the fre-

Chapter 5: The Challenges of Dealing with Newcomers 
199
quency of this practice ( Internet FAQ Archives 2010 ). Comparatively few online com-
munities explicitly create realistic membership previews for recruiting purposes.  
 Even though online communities could use the same recruiting mechanisms as 
conventional organizations, they have a potentially unique advantage: much of the 
communication and production work in the community is archived automatically. In 
a conventional organization, new recruits must rely on the organization ’ s explicit 
descriptions via brochure and similar sources or upon word of mouth from current 
and former organizational members, but with an online community, they can see the 
interactions on which these impressions are based. The archival nature of the Internet 
means that complete records of prior interactions among community members are 
available for newcomers to examine and to get an unedited, realistic view of life in 
the community. Investigation is a major reason that newcomers silently read posts 
( lurk ) before posting ( Preece, Nonnecke, and Andrews 2004 ); they are trying to get 
sufficient information about the group to decide whether they should join. They can 
see, for instance, how members treat each other on various online forums and how 
team members work together in creating Wikipedia articles by examining the histories 
and talk pages associated with each article. 
 However, not all communities provide public archives. In the online cancer support 
group for ACOR, readers cannot search or browse archived messages without a sub-
scription. Though subscribing is free, prospective subscribers are vetted by the list 
owners, which delays the newcomer ’ s opportunity to evaluate the group and his or 
her expected fit. Furthermore, the archives are hidden from search engines. Though 
this protects the privacy of existing members, it also reduces the likelihood that desir-
able members will find the group. 
 Compared to lurking, newcomers ’ direct interaction with the group provides more 
useful and personally relevant information to allow them to estimate the benefits that 
they will receive if they join. The investigatory phase in the socialization process is 
an especially fragile one for newcomers. During this early period when they first 
encounter a group, they have little commitment to it and often little data to make 
judgments about whether to invest effort in finding out more or to explore alterna-
tives. As a result, small amounts of either positive or negative evidence about how the 
group behaves and how it treats members may have an especially large impact on 
whether they leave for good or return again ( Arguello et al. 2006 ). 
 Design Claim 11  Providing potential new members with an accurate and complete 
picture of what the members ’ experience will be once they join increases the fit of 
those who join. 

200 
Robert E. Kraut, Moira Burke, John Riedl, and Paul Resnick
 Another way in which community designers can encourage self-selection of potential 
members who fit the community well is to require an action that those who are a 
better fit are more willing to undertake. This action could simply be an entry fee. For 
example, MetaFilter charges $5 for new members (see   figure 5.10 ). If normal members 
get more than $5 of benefit from joining and trolls, spammers, and other disrupters 
get less than $5 of benefit, the entry fee can cause the undesirables to self-select out 
of participation. MetaFilter also imposes a waiting period before new users can post 
questions to Ask MetaFilter or make new posts to MetaFilter, although they can reply 
to others immediately. Presumably, those users who are willing to wait and remember 
to come back will create content that is more valuable to other members. 
 Design Claim 12  Forcing potential new members to pay or wait makes people who 
value the community more likely to join and weeds out undesirables. 
 Alternatively, the required action could be to undertake some task. If the task is inher-
ently interesting to people who are a good fit for the community but not for others, 
then it will lead to the desired self-selection. Tasks that are more interesting or less 
onerous for people who are a good fit for the community are  separating  tasks . In many 
communities, reading and rating or editing material written by other members might 
be effective separating tasks. 
 Design Claim 13  Forcing potential new members to undertake separating tasks will 
encourage those who are a good fit to the community to join while weeding out 
undesirables.  
 Figure 5.10 
 MetaFilter ’ s delay and payment entry fee policies ( http://www.metafilter.com/newuser.mefi ), 
which encourage useful self-selection. 

Chapter 5: The Challenges of Dealing with Newcomers 
201
 One other interesting point about tasks that induce self-selection is that for those 
who do undertake the tasks, the tasks may lead to enhanced commitment to the 
community. Chapter 3 explores cognitive dissonance theory and other theories 
that predict impacts of entry barriers that cause newcomers to suffer a little before 
joining. 
 Screening 
 We now consider ways in which the community can act to screen out those who are 
not a good fit. Screening requires both accurate signals about who is a good fit and 
mechanisms for exclusion. The latter is relatively straightforward in communities that 
require membership for access. Only those passing the screening are allowed to read 
the group ’ s contents or are given some other level of access privilege. 
 We discussed previously how lurking may provide newcomers with information 
about their fit to the group. However, because the group is also evaluating whether 
the newcomer would be a good fit, it needs the newcomer to do more than simply 
lurk. Encouraging interaction between newcomers and old-timers can provide some 
information that the group can then use to evaluate newcomers. 
 Acquiring accurate signals about who is a good fit can be problematic. First, it may 
be cumbersome for the potential members to emit relevant signals. Second, if the 
signals will be used for screening, recruits who would not pass the screen may be 
motivated to lie. They may try to mimic the signals of those who are a good fit, and 
it can be hard for the community to tell which signals are truthful. For example, some 
new recruits to a World of Warcraft guild may honestly describe themselves as extro-
verted and friendly and seeking a relaxed style of play. However, guild masters or 
recruiters have little way to distinguish recruits who will be difficult to get along with 
from those who are easy to get along with. Economists often refer to these cases as 
 signaling problems ( Spence 1973 ). 
 The challenge for designers, then, is to create signals that are hard to mimic. The 
first approach is to assign diagnostic tasks. The most basic diagnostic task is the 
CAPTCHA, as described in chapter 4, which is intended to provide a signal that 
the visitor is human. These tests are difficult for machines to accomplish but easy 
for humans, and they are often used to separate people who sign up for services, such 
as free email accounts or server space, from scripts automatically creating hundreds 
of accounts. A CAPTCHA is an automated test, such as the challenge to recognize 
a distorted word presented against a cluttered background. Craigslist requires posters 
of classified ads to enter their email address and then respond to an invitation 
sent to that address before the ad goes public. The goal is similar to the goal for CAPT-
CHAs: to prevent bots and other software agents from gaining membership in the 

202 
Robert E. Kraut, Moira Burke, John Riedl, and Paul Resnick
community. At some cost, motivated attackers can pass either of these tests. For 
example, computer programs can automatically respond to emails, and attackers 
have been able to circumvent CAPTCHAs by employing people at low wages to solve 
them ( Bajaj 2010 ) or motivating them with promises of pornography (see  http://
www.captcha.net ). 
 To distinguish among humans, a diagnostic task may come after initial entry but 
before full privileges are granted. In many communities, the people who eventually 
go on to become leaders are distinguishable from peripheral participants in their first 
interactions ( Panciera, Halfaker, and Terveen 2009 ;  Panciera et al. 2010 ).  OSS develop-
ment projects often rely upon candidates ’ participation in technical discussions and 
contributions of bug patches and software enhancements to make such assessments. 
Potential members must first demonstrate their competence and commitment to the 
group by offering bug fixes or small enhancements before they are given  “ committer ” 
status, permission to commit (save) their own changes to the software database ( Duch-
eneaut 2005 ;  Krogh, Spaeth, Lakhani, and Hippel 2003 ). In the Freenet Project ( http://
freenetproject.org ), only 8.4 percent of individuals who participated in the technical 
discussions were ever given committer status and considered developers in the project. 
Without committer status, programmers must pass their modifications to more trusted 
members of the group, who then vet the software and decide whether to merge it with 
the existing code base. Mere talk without code — such as describing one ’ s offline tech-
nical accomplishments, asking for tasks to work on, or proposing modifications — did 
not lead to committer status; potential members had to pass substantive contribution 
barriers to become full members. 
 In World of Warcraft, the diagnostic task may be to accumulate experience points, 
weapons, or steeds used for transportation. Guild masters and others recruiting players 
for guilds can screen based on these visible acquisitions. They are signals of past per-
formance as well as tools that the candidates can use to carry out quests, if they 
become members. 
 In one depression forum online, the diagnostic task was to write knowledgeably 
about one ’ s symptoms and treatment. To weed out spectators, established members 
of one such forum had an unspoken practice of engaging newcomers in discussion 
about their symptoms and treatments ( Susan Fussell, personal communication ). Pro-
ducing these medical terms is likely to be easier for people who are clinically depressed 
than for those who aren ’ t. 
 Design Claim 14  Requiring potential members to complete a diagnostic task screens 
out some undesirable members. 

Chapter 5: The Challenges of Dealing with Newcomers 
203
 Another type of signal-based screening is the  credential check : Sermo ( http://www
.sermo.com ), a discussion forum for physicians to discuss medical decisions, asks 
potential members for their names and the zip code of their primary practice and then 
cross-checks that against a national physician database to ensure that its membership 
includes only physicians (see   figure 5.11 ). Pornographic websites that ask prospective 
members to provide a credit card number or license do so to try to differentiate adults 
from minors (or to at least give the illusion of doing so) because adults are more likely 
to have a credit car or driver ’ s license than are minors. 
 Design Claim 15  Requiring potential members to provide external credentials screens 
out some undesirable members. 
 Some communities judge new members by depending upon referrals from existing 
members. Many exclusive BitTorrent tracker sites (groups that provide private BitTor-
rent seeds) require existing members to vouch for new members. Bad behavior on the 
part of a new member (such as downloading much more than they upload) can result 
in sanctions to both the new member and the sponsor. This approach to selecting 
new members is effective because referees have detailed and long-term information 
about both the newcomers and the group to which they are being invited and 
are motivated to present the information accurately to both parties. For example, 
when friends have played World of Warcraft together, they can provide detailed infor-
mation about each others ’ skills and strategy of play when making a referral to a guild. 
The usefulness of references from group members depends, however, upon the type 
of information to which the referrer has access. By interacting with the candidate 
in nongroup settings, the referee might know about a candidate ’ s sociability and 
conscientiousness, for example, but not whether the candidate has specific skills the 
group needs. Our own research shows that referrals are especially helpful in selecting 
 Figure 5.11 
 Account creation for Sermo ( http://www.sermo.com ). 

204 
Robert E. Kraut, Moira Burke, John Riedl, and Paul Resnick
newcomers to World of Warcraft guilds when the group is a low-key social guild 
but not when it is a high-powered, goal-oriented raiding guild. In addition, referees 
have their own reputations to protect, which generally deters them from bringing 
inappropriate members into a group of which they are part ( Fernandez and Weinberg 
1997 ). 
 Some online groups institutionalize referrals by accepting new members only 
through invitations from existing ones and limiting the number of invitations that 
each existing member gets. Invitations to Google ’ s exclusive Gmail Beta were so highly 
coveted that some users put them up for bid on eBay, and Google ’ s Wave roll-out used 
a similar invitation procedure (Kawamoto 2004). A number of Flickr ( http://www
.flickr.com ) photo groups have requirements that users ’ photos have awards or have 
been marked as favorites by some number of other users. 
 Design Claim 16   Requiring potential members to provide referrals from existing ones 
screens out some undesirable members. 
 As with CAPTCHAs, these signals are rarely perfect separators of desirable and undesir-
able new members. At some cost, an undesirable member can usually mimic the signal. 
To gain commit privileges in an open source community or experience points in a 
gaming environment, a rich dilettante could hire someone else to do the work that 
the community assesses. To pass the diagnostic test in the depression forum online, 
pretenders could conduct an online search to discover the names of antidepressants. 
Even credentials and referrals could be faked with a sufficient investment of time and 
money. 
 Conversely, even those who are desirable members may find it costly to provide 
signals that will pass a screening test. For example, people who are not yet connected 
with existing members, but who are a good fit to the community, will be excluded by 
a referral screen. If a health support community for a rare disease required referrals 
from existing members, it would negate one of the most valuable features of online 
support groups: the ability to connect people across distance who would not otherwise 
be able to meet. In those communities, it would make more sense to rely on an outside 
credential such as a referral from a participating hospital or treatment organization, 
or a diagnostic interview or task. 
 To the extent that people can invest in acquiring signals, a screening mechanism 
based on signals also becomes a self-selection mechanism. For example, programmers 
who want to influence the direction of an OSS project will contribute repairs and new 
code because they know that the community uses these as signals of quality. The 

Chapter 5: The Challenges of Dealing with Newcomers 
205
designer ’ s challenge is to find signals that are much less costly for the desirable 
members to emit than for the undesirable members. As with self-selection mecha-
nisms, most screening systems are likely to be imperfect, letting in some undesirable 
members and excluding some desirable ones. 
 3  Problem 3: Keeping Newcomers Around 
 For newcomers to gain benefits from an online group and eventually become com-
mitted members who will  take on core responsibilities, they must stick around long 
enough to learn the ropes, form relationships with other group members, and begin 
to identify with the group as a whole. However, the research on online communities 
also shows that these groups experience a substantial amount of turnover and that 
this turnover is especially high among newcomers. For example, 68 percent of new-
comers to Usenet groups are never seen after their first post; in contrast, those who 
have participated even once in the past are much more likely to return ( Arguello 
et al. 2006 ). Fifty-four percent of developers who registered to participate in the Perl 
open-source development project never returned after posting a single message ( Duch-
eneaut 2005 ). Sixty percent of registered editors in Wikipedia never make another edit 
after their first twenty-four hours participating ( Panciera, Halfaker, and Terveen 2009 ). 
Forty-six percent of the members of guilds in World of Warcraft leave their group 
within one month, generally migrating to other groups rather than abandoning the 
game itself ( Williams et al. 2006 ). 
 Entry Barriers and Initiation Rituals 
 In general, barriers and initiation rituals that cause newcomers to suffer a little before 
joining a group should increase their eventual commitment. As discussed in chapter 
3, the theory of cognitive dissonance holds that if people have two ideas that are 
psychologically inconsistent, they experience the negative drive state of cognitive 
dissonance and try to find a way to reconcile the ideas, generally by changing one or 
both to make them consonant ( Festinger 1957 ). This theory explains why people like 
groups more if they have to endure a severe initiation process to join them than if 
they undergo a milder initiation ( Aronson and Mills 1959 ;  Gerard and Mathewson 
1966 ). According to Aronson, people come to like things for which they suffered 
because this is the only way they can reconcile their views of themselves as intelligent 
people with the actions they have performed ( Aronson 1997 ). 
 Initiation rituals imposed by online communication can range from nonexistent 
to quite severe. At one extreme, Usenet discussion groups impose no initiation at all. 

206 
Robert E. Kraut, Moira Burke, John Riedl, and Paul Resnick
Newcomers can read and post without any formal barrier. Wikipedia explicitly 
encourages gentle treatment of new editors, with its  “ Don ’ t bite the newcomer ” 
policy (Wikipedia 2010c).  At the other extreme are communities like Fark ( http://
www.fark.com ), a website for posting and commenting on weird news headlines and 
stories. Newcomers who make mistakes that violate the norms of the community can 
be publicly criticized or humiliated. Their FAQ states that  “ message boards on sites 
like Fark are forever plagued with morons posting  ‘ First Post ’  anytime a link is posted. 
Fark automatically turns the words  ‘ first post ’ into the word  ‘ boobies ’  and resets the 
timestamp on the message to some time in the future ” so that the post actually appears 
to be a late one. Newcomers trying to introduce themselves occasionally fall victim 
to this and post a message that ends up saying something like,  “ This is my boobies 
on Fark ” (Fark 2010). 
 Game-playing groups like World of Warcraft and OSS projects require newcomers 
to go through a long period of initiation before they can become members. Some 
guilds, for example, require the newcomer to play with the group for a month or 
longer before the newcomer is allowed to become a regular member. In OSS projects, 
it is common practice for newcomers to offer  “ gifts ” of code before they are granted 
membership ( Krogh, Spaeth, Lakhani, and Hippel 2003 ). Although these activities 
provide data by which existing group members can evaluate the newcomers and may 
weed out the least motivated, the activities are also effortful actions that probably 
increase the newcomers ’ loyalty to the group. 
 Severe initiation rituals are common in fraternities and the military. However, 
given the ease with which people can leave an online community (as opposed to a 
military academy or training), a severe initiation process or entry barrier is likely to 
drive away potentially valuable contributors at the same time that it increases the 
commitment of those who endure the initiation or overcome the barrier. Therefore, 
online community designers should not instigate these types of initiations unless there 
is a surplus of prospective members or the increased quality in membership is impor-
tant. However, the newcomers who survive the initiation should have stronger loyal-
ties than those who were invited in without initiation. As we discuss in more detail 
in chapter 3,  Drenner, Sen, and Terveen (2008)  demonstrated that forcing new members 
to work hard for their membership had both of these effects — driving away some 
potential members while increasing the commitment of those who expended this 
effort. 
 Design Claim 17  Entry barriers for newcomers may cause those who join to be more 
committed to the group and contribute more to it. 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Chapter 5: The Challenges of Dealing with Newcomers 
207
 Initial positive interactions help retain new members. Newcomers to Usenet groups 
are more likely to come back for subsequent visits if others reply to them ( Arguello 
et al. 2006 ). These effects are stronger if the people conversing with the newcomer are 
themselves old-timers who have been visible in the discussion in the recent past. The 
effects are also stronger if the responses use more welcoming and inclusive language, 
such as emoticons and first-person plural ( “ we ” ) pronouns, often used to indicate 
solidarity between a speaker and audience, rather than second-person ( “ you ” ) pro-
nouns, which often indicate a divide between a speaker and the people being addressed. 
In an analogous study, songwriters in the February Album Writing Month community 
were heavily influenced by their early experiences ( http://www.fawm.org ). Here, each 
year, writers attempt to complete an entire album (fourteen songs) in the twenty-eight 
days of February. Compared to new songwriters who were not contacted by other 
group members, new   songwriters who received comments during their first week went 
on to write about two more songs in their first month and were 20 percent more likely 
to return the following year.    Comments containing in-group jargon and  “ we ” words —
 indicating the newcomer has been accepted as a member of the community — boosted 
these effects ( Burke and Settles 2011 ). Similarly, Facebook members were likely to post 
more photographs if others commented on the initial ones they added ( Burke, 
Marlowe, and Lento 2009) . 
 Lampe and Johnston (2005)  found that at Slashdot ( http://slashdot.org ), new 
members whose first comment received a rating from other members posted a second 
comment more quickly than new members whose comments weren ’ t rated. They also 
found that even newcomers who received negative ratings on their first comments 
came back faster; they hypothesized that these newcomers returned quickly to improve 
their records or intentionally wrote inflammatory content that they posted more often. 
 Our analysis of initial interactions between newcomers and old-timers in Wikipedia 
projects shows a similar pattern. WikiProjects are groups of editors who work together 
on articles within a domain, like military history, sports, or medicine. New members 
to a project who receive more communication from existing editors during the month 
that they join subsequently edit more on project pages (and in Wikipedia in general) 
and stay active in the project for a longer period. Again, the effects vary with the 
nature of the communication they receive. Personalized messages, such as comments 
about the newcomers ’ background or requests to work on a particular task, led to more 
powerful effects than generic ones in which the newcomer received a standardized 
message such as a welcome-to-the-project template. 
 Wikipedia explicitly encourages gentle treatment of new editors, with its  “ Don ’ t 
bite the newcomer ” policy ( Wikipedia 2010c ). Newcomers whose first edits were 
www.Ebook777.com

208 
Robert E. Kraut, Moira Burke, John Riedl, and Paul Resnick
reverted (rejected and the article restored to its earlier form) are especially likely to 
leave the community ( Halfaker, Kittur, and Riedl 2011 ;  Zhang and Zhu 2006 ). Edits 
by newcomers are disproportionately reverted ( Panciera, Halfaker, and Terveen 2009 ); 
to lessen the negative impact, Wikipedia editors are encouraged to  “ assume good faith ” 
by the editor they are reverting and to carefully explain their rationale for the rever-
sion so as not to deter a potential contributor. There are many pages documenting 
the social framework that accompanies the reversion tools — including guidelines to 
 “ reword rather than revert ” and to  “ revert only when necessary ” (Wikipedia 2010c). 
 Design Claim 18  When newcomers have friendly interactions with existing commu-
nity members soon after joining a community, they are more likely to stay longer and 
contribute more. 
 Discussion forums often include a prominent introduction thread where newcomers 
are encouraged (or required) to post brief biographies. Newcomers to PGHDance 
( http://www.pghdance.com ), a forum for Pittsburgh swing dancers, go to the  “ Hi, 
I ’ m . . . ” thread to describe their level of dance experience, day job, and other cities 
where they ’ ve danced. The forum is a hybrid community in which many members 
socialize in person at local dances; however, that socialization is often hindered by 
loud music and a norm of silence while dancing. Thus, PGHDance allows members 
to get to know each other off the dance floor and, compared to the dance floor, pro-
vides a less evaluative platform where skill is less salient. Veteran forum members greet 
the newcomers and offer to dance with them at local events. Similarly, WrongPlanet 
( http://www.wrongplanet.com ), a community for individuals with autism and other 
developmental disabilities, hosts a  “ Getting to know you ” section where newcomers 
describe their hobbies and diagnoses. These introduction threads serve two purposes: 
first, they allow the newcomers to move beyond the lurking stage and provide enough 
information to invite interaction with other members, and second, the threads 
allow newcomers a safe space to practice using the posting tools. As much research 
in social psychology shows, when people self-disclose, others reciprocate and 
reveal information in exchange. This mutual self-disclosure often leads to the strength-
ening of the relationship between the pair. People like others who self-disclose to 
them more. In addition, they like the people to whom they self-disclose ( Collins and 
Miller 1994 ). 
 Facebook uses a highly distributed welcoming mechanism. It has a feature 
that encourages long-time members to send membership invitations to people in 

Chapter 5: The Challenges of Dealing with Newcomers 
209
their friends list and to reach out to newcomers by adding them as friends (see 
 figure 5.12 ). 
 Design Claim 19  Encouraging newcomers to reveal themselves publicly in profiles 
or introduction threads gives existing group members a basis for conversation and 
reciprocation with them and increases interaction between old-timers and 
newcomers. 
 One technique to encourage initial positive interaction between newcomers and old-
timers is to assign welcoming responsibilities to designated old-timers. The host guide 
for one of the earliest online communities, The WELL, explains that hosts are respon-
sible for welcoming newcomers:  
 Nobody likes to go into a conference for the first time, post a response, then have it sit there 
without ever being acknowledged. Learning to welcome, inspire and incorporate new visitors 
into the conversation is perhaps the most important talent a host can acquire. At the very least, 
as host, you will want to keep an eye out for postings by folks who have never responded in 
your conference before, and acknowledge their participation. ( Hoag 1996 ) 
 Wikipedia has a  “ Welcoming Committee ” whose main activity is to greet new 
editors, known as  red users because they have not yet made a personal page for 
 Figure 5.12 
 Feature encouraging friends to welcome newcomers to Facebook ( http://www.facebook.com ). 

210 
Robert E. Kraut, Moira Burke, John Riedl, and Paul Resnick
themselves and thus their usernames appear in red. Welcoming committee members 
skim Wikipedia ’ s account creation log and lists of contributions by newcomers, select 
friendly text from a set of welcoming templates, and post the text to the user ’ s talk 
page, creating the page if necessary. Welcoming committee members encourage anon-
ymous contributors, identified by their IP addresses, to register, post links to tutorials, 
and offer to answer questions ( Wikipedia 2010d ). 
 Design Claim 20  Assigning the responsibilities of having friendly interactions with 
newcomers to particular community members increases the frequency of these 
interactions. 
 The previous examples from Wikipedia and The WELL are prescriptive in a positive 
way, assigning some people the responsibilities for welcoming newcomers and giving 
the welcomers tools to make the task easier. Another way to encourage newcomers 
is to discourage the hostility that is often the result of the interactions between 
long-time members of a group and newcomers. As the FAQ for the Mozilla project 
notes,  “ Be kind to newcomers. Newcomers may be annoying. They ask the wrong 
questions, including ones that seem obvious (or whose answers seem easy to find). 
But lots of valued contributors started out this way, and treating newcomers kindly 
makes them more likely to turn into the valuable community members we all know 
and love (and cut some slack when they mess up) ” ( Mozilla 2010 ). Similarly, policies 
for experienced users answering questions in the forum for Ubuntu, a graphical user 
interface for the Linux operating system, discourage experienced users from being rude 
to newcomers:  
 Be considerate to the person asking the question. We were all a green user at one point. . . . If 
you wish to remind a user to use search tools or other resources when they have asked a question 
you feel is basic or common, please be very polite. Any replies for help that contain language 
disrespectful towards the user asking the question, i.e.  “ STFU ” [Shut the fuck up] or  “ RTFM ” 
[Read the fucking manual] are unacceptable and will not be tolerated. ( Ubuntu  Forums 2010 ) 
 Wikipedia ’ s Don ’ t Bite the Newcomer policy cautions old-timers that  “ New contribu-
tors are prospective  ‘ members ’ and are therefore our most valuable resource. We 
must treat newcomers with kindness and patience — nothing scares potentially 
valuable contributors away faster than hostility or elitism ” ( Wikipedia. 2010c ; see  
 figure 5.13 ). 
 Design Claim 21  Explicitly discouraging hostility toward newcomers who make mis-
takes can promote friendly initial interactions between newcomers and old-timers. 

Chapter 5: The Challenges of Dealing with Newcomers 
211
 4  Problem 4: Teaching Newcomers the Ropes 
 Different communities have standards and norms that shape and constrain the behav-
ior of their members. Some of these norms are broad and open to different interpreta-
tions. In Wikipedia, for example, a series of guidelines and policies remind members 
to adopt a neutral point of view in the articles that they write ( Wikipedia  2010d ) and 
that they should not use their personal talk pages to discuss personal topics and 
promote relationships with other Wikipedians ( Wikipedia  2010e ). Others are more 
narrowly targeted, such as the Wikipedia copyright policy ( Wikipedia 2010a ) or for-
matting guidelines ( Wikipedia 2010b ). Although many of the norms and behavioral 
standards are explicitly described in Wikipedia, in many other online communities 
the norms that prescribe how members should behave are implicit and must be 
learned by observation. 
 As described in more detail in chapter 4, violation of the behavioral norms can be 
harmful to existing groups for a variety of reasons. Although we treat the general topic 
of norms in online communities in more detail chapter 4, the current chapter deals 
with issues that especially concern newcomers. 
 Organizational socialization theory identifies six dimensions that differentiate the 
techniques that organizations use to help newcomers get adjusted to the organization 
and learn their place in it ( Van Maanen and Schein 1979 ). This research distinguishes 
institutionalized socialization practices, with formal training being its hallmark, from 
 Figure 5.13 
 Wikipedia ’ s  “ Do not bite the newcomers ” policy ( http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia
:Please_do_not_bite_the_newcomers ). 

212 
Robert E. Kraut, Moira Burke, John Riedl, and Paul Resnick
more individualized socialization, based on on-the-job training.   Table 5.1  provides an 
overview of these socialization tactics.  Jones (1986)  created a self-report scale measuring 
these tactics, which has been extensively used in empirical research examining ante-
cedents and consequences of socialization of newcomers in organizations. At the insti-
tutionalized end of these continua, newcomers are segregated from contact with 
old-timers, are all given the same experiences together as a cohort, are told the sequence 
of stages they will go through as they progress though the organization and the amount 
of time they will spend at each stage, and get training from experienced role models. 
In addition, the organization gives them positive feedback, encouraging them to build 
on their distinctive personal characteristics in the process of trying to fit into the orga-
nization. Students going though their PhD training, who are given strong mentorship 
and clear expectations about requirements, are at the institutionalized end of these 
 Table 5.1 
 Six dimension of organizational socialization tactics  1  
 Institutionalized 
 Individualized 
 Collective: Newcomers go through a common set 
of experiences designed to produce standardized 
responses to situations. 
 Individual: Each newcomer receives 
unique training in isolation from 
others. 
 Formal: Newcomers are segregated from other 
organizational members and put through 
experiences tailored to newcomers. 
 Informal: Newcomers receive on-the-job 
training to learn their roles. 
 Sequential: Newcomers are given a clear sequence 
of experiences or stages they will go through. 
 Random: The sequence of stages isn ’ t 
communicated in advance. 
 Fixed: Newcomers are given a fixed timetable 
regarding when they will move through stages. 
 Variable: The timing of role transitions 
is variable. 
 Serial: Newcomers observe and get training from 
experienced role models, who give newcomers a 
clear view of the experiences they will encounter in 
the organization. 
 Disjunctive: Newcomers must develop 
their own definition of the situation 
and do not have more senior people to 
observe. 
 Investiture: Newcomers receive positive feedback 
confirming their prior identity. 
 Divestiture: Newcomers receive negative 
feedback expressing organizational 
disapproval of their prior identity. 
 Jones (1986) and later authors group divestiture with the right column ’ s other  “ individualized ” 
tactics because they have all been found to have similar effects (Bauer et al. 2007). 
 Source : Adopted from  Van Maanen and Schein 1979 ;  Jones 1986 . 
 1.  Jones (1986) and many of the researchers who followed him reversed the conventional 
meaning of divestiture and investiture when they put investiture in the  “ institutionalized ” 
column in this table and divestiture in the  “ individualized ” one. Conventional English would 
label hazing and other divestiture tactics as depersonalizing, and they are often practiced by  “ total 
institutions ” such as mental institutions, militaries, prisons, and religious orders (Goffman 1961).  

Chapter 5: The Challenges of Dealing with Newcomers 
213
dimensions. In contrast, newcomers who join the organization one at a time are at the 
more personalized end of these continua and are immediately surrounded by more 
experienced organizational members, receive personalized, on-the-job training, and are 
not given clear guidelines about their progress through the organization. 
 The original theory hypothesized that these tactics would be used in very different 
contexts (e.g., that collective tactics would be used for jobs in which newcomers 
needed to learn technical skills, and individual socialization would be used for jobs 
in which already existing organizational members were being prepared for promo-
tions) and would have different consequences (e.g., collective socialization would lead 
to newcomers adopting existing social roles and individualistic socialization would 
encourage role innovation) (van Maanen and Schein 1979). However, subsequent 
research has developed a simpler picture of the effects of using these socialization 
tactics. The meta-analysis of  Bauer and colleagues (2007)  summarized seventy separate 
studies of newcomer socialization to organizations; in most cases, measures of orga-
nizations ’ use of these socialization tactics shortly after newcomers joined were cor-
related with newcomers ’ subsequent adjustment, commitment, and performance in 
the organizations (see also  Saks, Uggerslev, and Fassina 2007 ). 
 The main results are summarized in   figure 5.14 . Both active information-seeking 
by newcomers and the use of a more institutional style of socialization by the orga-
nization is associated with more successful outcomes: newcomers do their jobs better, 
are more satisfied with their jobs, become more committed to the organization, and 
are less likely to leave it. The research suggests these effects of the organizations ’ use 
of institutionalized socialization tactics as well as newcomers ’ active information 
seeking have their effects by increasing newcomers understanding of how they should 
behave in the organization (role clarity), their beliefs that they could do what is asked 
of them (self-efficacy), and their beliefs that others in the organization accept them 
(social acceptance). 
 Figure 5.14 
 Antecedents and outcomes of newcomer adjustment during organizational socialization. 
 Source : From  Bauer et al. (2007) . 
Outcomes
Newcomer
information seeking
Organizational
socialization tactics
Newcomer
information
seeking
Role clarity (+)
Self-efficacy (+)
Social acceptance (+)
Performance (+)
Job satisfaction (+)
Organizational
commitment (+)
Intention to remain (+)
Actual turnover (–)

214 
Robert E. Kraut, Moira Burke, John Riedl, and Paul Resnick
 Although the evidence is strong that institutionalized socialization tactics are effec-
tive in developing commitment and appropriate behavior in conventional organiza-
tions, they are not commonly used in online communities. Socialization processes in 
most online communities are informal and individualistic. For example, in Usenet 
groups, lurking newcomers have no opportunities for formal mentorship because their 
presence is unknown to old-timers. WikiProjects rarely uses institutional socialization 
tactics to socialize new members who join these task-oriented groups ( Choi et al. 
2010 ). For example, they do not have newcomers join the project in a group and rarely 
assign new members mentors or provide clear guidance about how to behave in the 
project. 
  Ducheneaut  ’ s description of the socialization of newcomers to the Python OSS 
development community also illustrates the lack of institutionalized socialization 
practices in online organizations where they would probably be helpful ( 2005 ). Even 
in this production-oriented environment, with defined workflows and sharp distinc-
tions among the social roles of those participating in the project, socialization is still 
informal, with new members learning the ropes primarily via trial and error. For 
example, although there is a progression of participation in this community, with 
newcomers first participating in technical discussion and then submitting bug fixes 
before obtaining committer status, this progression of roles is not documented. When 
one new developer who was slowly making his way toward the core of the community 
attempted to introduce a new module to the standard library used in this project, he 
did not know the organizational routines he needed to engage in to make his contri-
bution. A core member of the community eventually stepped in to offer advice (i.e., 
provided mentorship), but mentoring was not a regular socialization practice in this 
community. 
 Rarely do online communities socialize and train newcomers as a group in isolation 
from other members, provide mentors to give guidance, or give newcomers a clear 
timetable about how to progress in the community. Consider the community that 
develops the popular Firefox web browsers. Although the Mozilla foundation main-
tains an extensive set of forums for communication among developers, except for 
FAQ-style documents we were unable to find forums or other resources for training 
newcomers or socializing them to the project. Newcomers who want to join this 
project must struggle to make sense of how to contribute on their own.  
 Online communities generally adopt individualized socialization tactics or none at 
all. The primary exception to this generalization is that many communities provide 
standardized FAQs and help documents to familiarize newcomers with how the com-
munity operates, which can be thought of as a variant of collective socialization. For 

Chapter 5: The Challenges of Dealing with Newcomers 
215
example, the Distributed Proofreaders project ( http://www.pgdp.net ), a community of 
volunteers proofreading digitized public-domain books, has an extensive set of fre-
quently asked questions with answers for newcomers on the project mission, ways to 
get involved, and ways to handle common problems in proofing and formatting docu-
ments ( Rowe 2004 ). 
 The more institutionalized socialization tactics used in conventional organizations 
can be applied online, and some online communities do indeed provide elements of 
institutionalized socialization, although this is rare. For example, World of Warcraft 
offers formal and sequential socialization. When new players start the game, they are 
placed in an area that is isolated from more experienced players. Although they have 
the opportunity to interact with other new players, they also can interact with non-
playing characters (NPCs, or scripts) that give newcomers tasks through which they 
gain both knowledge of basic methods for acting in the world (e.g., navigating, attack-
ing monsters, and collecting loot) and experience points. The rules of the game lay 
out clear progressions and role transitions (e.g., players gain new powers at specified 
levels, for example acquiring a mount or gaining special weapons). World of Warcraft 
does not, however, encourage new players to become socialized in groups, as socializa-
tion theory suggests would be helpful, even though groups are central to World of 
Warcraft. Indeed, as of mid-2011, players using the ten-day free trial to sample the 
game are prevented from participating in groups. 
 Hattrick, a multiplayer game for managing fantasy European football teams ( http://
www.hattrick.org ), is another informative exception, providing both formal and col-
lective socialization tactics. Each player in this game is the manager of a soccer team 
and competes against other managers. The players must make decisions in areas such 
as acquiring, training, and trading players; game tactics; building stadiums; and han-
dling finances. To encourage newcomers to read the full manual, new managers par-
ticipate in the Hattrick Manager License Challenge (also known as Hattrick University), 
where they earn in-game money for studying the rules and answering challenge ques-
tions during their first weeks in the community. If they successfully answer all twenty-
four questions, they graduate and receive a manager ’ s license (see   figure 5.15 ). To 
encourage the development of cohorts of players, new players initially play in leagues 
composed of other new players; if players win their division, they are promoted to 
the next level division the following season. 
 Design Claim 22  By using formal, sequential, and collective socialization tactics, new 
members are likely to become more committed to the community, learn how to 
behave in it, and contribute more. 

216 
Robert E. Kraut, Moira Burke, John Riedl, and Paul Resnick
 Some communities have successfully deployed mentorship practices, both formal and 
informal. Everything2 ( http://everything2.com ) is an online community whose 
members submit written material about any topic they want. The Everything2 Mentor 
System matches new users with experienced mentors who share interests and a time 
zone, who agree to log into the site at least once a day, and who are willing to answer 
the new members ’ questions and critique their work. New sellers at eBay benefit from 
Trading Assistants, experienced and active eBay sellers with feedback that is at least 
97 percent positive. Trading Assistants help new sellers assess whether an item is sale-
able, plan starting prices and shipping methods for items, and communicate directly 
with bidders. Newcomers benefit from the Trading Assistants ’ high reputation scores, 
proficiency with seller tools, and familiarity with listing policies and best practices. 
Newcomers search a directory for assistants who are geographically close and have 
expertise in their particular areas, such as estate liquidation or motor vehicles. Trading 
Assistants themselves have training tutorials, guides to best practices and promotion, 
and a discussion board. Help from Trading Assistants is not limited to newcomers; any 
busy seller can outsource items to others in this way. However, unlike voluntary men-
torship in other communities, eBay ’ s Trading Assistants negotiate fees with new sellers 
for their services ( eBay 2010 ). 
 Figure 5.15 
 Hattrick ’ s manager ’ s license ( http://wiki.hattrick.org/wiki/Hattrick_Manager_License
_Challenge ). 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Chapter 5: The Challenges of Dealing with Newcomers 
217
 Similarly, one of the benefits to being a member of a World of Warcraft guild is 
explicit help from higher-level guild members. Higher-level guild members are expected 
to help their junior colleagues overcome difficult quests or kill monsters more rapidly. 
The higher-level players coach the lower-level players, explaining which quests are 
most valuable, and demonstrating the way to defeat the more difficult challenges. Of 
course, sometimes the mentoring backfires: once the lower-level player becomes more 
powerful, he or she sometimes leaves to join a more powerful guild. 
 Design Claim 23  When old-timers provide newcomers formal mentorship, the new-
comers become more committed to the community, learn how to behave in it, and 
contribute more. 
 5  Problem 5: Protecting the Group from Newcomers 
 Although newcomers are essential to the survival of online communities, they also 
pose real threats. Because newcomers have no history in the community, existing 
group members do not know how much to trust them. There is risk involved if one 
allows a new member of a guild in World of Warcraft to participate in a high-stakes 
raid, a new seller on eBay to sell an expensive item, or a new member of the Apache 
project to commit code. 
 Because newcomers have not yet developed commitment to the group and have 
not yet learned how the group operates, it is rational for established group members 
to distrust them. Because new members don ’ t yet identify with the group, they are 
less likely to have the best interests of the group at heart in deciding how to behave. 
In addition, because they are relatively unsophisticated in how the group operates, 
they may not have the skill or knowledge to operate in the group ’ s best interest, even 
if they cared to. For example, in Wikipedia, newcomers (including those who have 
not registered and those who have registered but not yet edited extensively) are more 
likely to vandalize pages or offer changes that other, more experienced Wikipedians 
will later delete ( Adler and Alfaro 2007 ). As a result of this lack of history and potential 
lack of goodwill or relevant skills, groups need to protect themselves against the 
damage that newcomers can cause. Empirical evidence suggests that established 
members do indeed distrust newcomers. For example,  Resnick et al. (2006)  showed 
experimentally that buyers pay less for comparable items on eBay when purchasing 
from newcomers (i.e., those with no prior transactions), distrusting them because of 
their lack of sales history in eBay. 
www.Ebook777.com

218 
Robert E. Kraut, Moira Burke, John Riedl, and Paul Resnick
 Even if newcomers are not actively behaving inappropriately, the mere fact that 
they are different from the old-timers may change the environment in such a way to 
make the community less desirable for old-timers. Indeed, the simple classification of 
some group members as old-timers and others as newcomers can lead to strong 
ingroup-outgroup biases ( Moreland 1985 ). An influx of new members to social net-
working sites may change the culture for old-timers. This degrading of the culture 
for old-timers happened when Myspace ( http://www.myspace.com ) transitioned 
from a promotion platform for small bands to a crowded venue for teenagers to post 
MP3s and hang out with friends ( Boyd and Ellison 2008 ). Similarly, as new members 
joined Systers, an email list for women in computer science mentioned in chapter 3, 
both the increase in message volume and the very different concerns held by old-
timers and newcomers caused hundreds of senior members to leave ( Spertus, Jeffries, 
and Sie 2001 ). 
 So far, we have suggested that newcomers be socialized through friendly initial 
interactions with old-timers and that old-timers be explicitly discouraged from being 
hostile to newcomers who make mistakes. Yet this is not to say that newcomers should 
receive carte blanche access to the group and its resources. Resources include both 
people — other members ’ attention and support — and any artifacts the group produces, 
such as wikis, collective movie ratings, or software. Should newcomers be isolated to 
prevent annoying other members and damaging community artifacts, or should they 
be allowed to ask questions, write on others ’ walls, delete code, or join raiding parties 
right away? It depends on the kind of community and its goals. 
 The question of whether to quickly attempt to integrate newcomers with the exist-
ing community depends on several factors, including whether the community pro-
duces a group artifact with interdependent parts and the consequences of newcomers ’ 
mistakes on themselves and other members. The more likely it is that that the pres-
ence of newcomers and their inappropriate behavior can damage the current com-
munity or its products and the harder it is to repair this damage, the more the 
community should isolate newcomers until they become more committed and knowl-
edgeable about the community. Many common protection mechanisms serve multiple 
purposes, not only to prevent damage but also to discourage newcomers who would 
be a bad fit and to socialize those who are a good fit. 
 Chapter 4 discusses ways to protect a community from misbehaving participants, 
not just newcomers. Here we focus on two methods, sandboxes and progressive access 
controls, which are especially relevant to the socialization process for newcomers. 
 Sandboxes are safe, isolated areas for exploration and skill development. They 
achieve dual goals of protection and training. Sandboxes take many forms, from text 

Chapter 5: The Challenges of Dealing with Newcomers 
219
 Figure 5.16 
 Sandbox in Second Life ( http://wiki.secondlife.com/wiki/Sandbox ). 
boxes for practicing wiki syntax to virtual land parcels for practicing construction or 
simple scripting, as in the virtual world Second Life ( http://secondlife.com ; see   figure 
5.16 ). Content created in the sandbox is removed regularly, protecting the community 
from clutter. For example, consider how Wikipedia uses sandboxes. All Wikipedia 
editors have a personal sandbox by default, as well as access to communal sandboxes 
(see   figure 5.17 ). Typical policies, such as formatting guidelines or notifying other users 
before making large changes, do not apply to the sandbox, although civility and 
copyright policies still apply. Content in the communal Wikipedia sandboxes is auto-
matically cleaned every twelve hours, although other users tend to overwrite content 
much faster. 
 Design Claim 24  Sandboxes both speed up the learning process for newcomers and 
reduce the harm to the community that newcomers might otherwise cause. 
 Another common protection mechanism is  progressive access control , or allowing new-
comers to participate in less-critical tasks initially and then gradually increasing their 
access to more central and important tasks. This progression may simply be a sugges-
tion in the training documents or FAQs, or it may be enforced by technical constraints 
that prevent newcomers from performing risky actions until they have demonstrated 
competence with simpler ones. Many OSS development projects use some version of 

220 
Robert E. Kraut, Moira Burke, John Riedl, and Paul Resnick
progressive access control, for example allowing newcomers to comment in technical 
discussion forums or to send senior contributors patches for bug fixes for their review, 
but preventing them from directly making changes in the project ’ s code base until 
they have earned the community ’ s trust ( Krogh, Spaeth, Lakhani, and Hippel 2003 ; 
Ducheneaut 2005). 
 Progressive access control prevents newcomers from causing damage while at the 
same time giving them a legitimate but peripheral position in the community to learn 
skills and the community ’ s norms.  Lave and Wenger (1991)  proposed the theory of 
legitimate peripheral participation, by which newcomers become more experienced 
members through small but productive actions in the community. Their research 
describes apprenticeships for midwives, tailors, and butchers, in which the new 
members of the occupation not only acquire occupational knowledge but also take 
part in social practices and learn to understand the community ’ s activities, artifacts, 
and language. By technically constraining newcomers so they learn through small and 
peripheral but helpful tasks, progressive access control serves as both a protection 
mechanism and socialization tool. 
 Similar techniques are occasionally used successfully in online communities. For 
example, Distributed Proofreaders restricts unregistered users, allowing them only to 
proof  “ Smooth Reading ” pages, which are nearly error-free. These pages have been 
reviewed in previous rounds and need light checks by people reading for pleasure, 
rather than readers trained in the formal procedures used by experienced checkers. A 
 Figure 5.17 
 Wikipedia Sandbox for practicing wiki formatting ( http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia
:Sandbox ). 

Chapter 5: The Challenges of Dealing with Newcomers 
221
missed typo in one of these pages will have little consequence for the community 
and will likely be caught by another smooth reader. Newly registered users are also 
restricted to editing  “ Beginners Only ” pages and cannot move to more advanced 
material until they have demonstrated mastery of community editing standards. 
 “ Beginners Only ” edits also trigger special reviews by second-level mentors, who 
email friendly feedback that is sensitive to the tenuous relationship a novice editor 
may have to the community. One such review reads,  “ I have reviewed page 294 that 
you proofed for this project. It looks like you ’ ve made a good start! For example, you 
joined the hyphenated words, and you  ‘ closed ’ the em-dash at the end of a line. 
Nice job! ” 
 Design Claim 25  Progressive access controls reduce the harm a newcomer can do to 
a community while learning the ropes. 
 6  Summary of Design Alternatives 
 As in other chapters, we conclude with a table of the design alternatives considered 
in this chapter and an index to the design claims that discuss their implications. In 
this chapter, we examined the challenges of renewing online communities with new-
comers. We identified five separate subchallenges: recruitment, selection, retention, 
and socialization of newcomers, and protecting the community from newcomers 
while they are learning the ropes. We conclude by inverting that focus. We reflect on 
the design space of alternatives and the ways in which alternative designs affect the 
ability to meet those challenges. 
 Some design alternatives involve communication about the community outside 
the community. This communication is especially important to the recruitment of 
potential new members. Active rather than passive recruiting, and targeting commu-
nication to those who are a good fit to the community, brings in more recruits. 
Relying on word of mouth and recruiting from social networks — in part by 
enabling sharing of content with friends outside the community — both can attract 
people to consider the community and generate leads who are a good fit for the 
community. 
 The content and activities of the community have an impact on potential newcom-
ers once they have been recruited to consider it. Newcomers who have friendly 
interactions with old-timers and who reveal information about themselves will be 
more likely to stick around. On the other hand, newcomers whose contributions 
are ignored or rejected without explanation are less likely to be retained. Collective 

222 
Robert E. Kraut, Moira Burke, John Riedl, and Paul Resnick
socialization tactics, in which newcomers form a cohort and learn about the com-
munity together, can also contribute to retaining newcomers. Sandboxes can give 
newcomers a safe way to explore and try out the software features without fear of 
damaging the community. 
 There is a large scope for design choices that assign special roles to people who 
interact with newcomers and policies for how they will be treated. Specified roles for 
a welcomer and a mentor, with associated privileges that help in accomplishing those 
roles, can help with retention and socialization. Explicit policies that discourage hos-
tility toward newcomers can both reduce the amount of that hostility and make 
newcomers who do experience it feel that it is unrepresentative of the community, 
thus aiding retention. 
 Access control mechanisms can be used to balance newcomers ’ needs for informa-
tion when exploring a community with the community ’ s need to prevent damage 
from people without commitment or skill. Allowing nonmembers to see archives of 
communication within the community can help them evaluate whether they want to 
be members. A variety of barriers can prevent progression to the next stage of privi-
leges. For example, people may have to wait, pay, complete a diagnostic task, or 
provide external credentials or referrals in order to enter the community. These entry 
barriers are effective at selecting the right people to the extent that it is easy for those 
who are a good fit for the community to surmount the barriers and difficult for those 
who are not a good fit. A sequence of stages for entry — each involving specified social-
ization activities — can also help build commitment in the early phases of joining a 
community. Access restrictions, and the progressive removal of them, can also help 
with protection. 
 As in other chapters, we find that there are a variety of ways in which designers 
can meet the socialization challenges, by changing the contextual information that 
provides a frame through which members and potential members understand 
what they are doing without making large changes to the structure or technological 
features of a community. Endorsements of the community by a celebrity or a credible 
source can help recruit potential members. Visibly presenting attractive features of 
the site, such as the physical attractiveness of members, can also help. Highlighting 
that many other people have joined can serve as social proof that the community 
is valuable. Providing an accurate picture of the community ’ s purpose and activities 
can help the right people self-select for membership. These framing actions are often 
the least costly to implement and should thus be the first to be considered. Sometimes 
they will be enough. When they are not, designers must consider more structural 
options. 

Chapter 5: The Challenges of Dealing with Newcomers 
223
 Table 5.2 
 Summary of design alternatives relevant to newcomers, ordered by type 
 Type 
 Design alternative 
 Design 
claim  
 External 
communication 
 Active recruiting 
 1 
 Word of mouth versus impersonal recruiting 
 2, 6 
 Recruiting from social networks of existing members 
 3 
 Making it easy for users to share content from a community site 
with their friends 
 4 
 Disseminating information through well-connected members 
 5 
 Content, tasks, 
and activities 
 Providing newcomers friendly interactions with existing 
community members soon after joining a community 
 18 
 Encouraging newcomers to reveal themselves publicly in profiles 
or  “ introduction threads ” 
 19 
 Socializing newcomers in groups, with collective tactics 
 22 
 Providing sandboxes for newcomers 
 24 
 Roles, rules, 
policies, and 
procedures 
 Assigning the responsibilities of having friendly interactions with 
newcomers to particular community members 
 20 
 Explicitly discouraging hostility toward newcomers who make 
mistakes 
 21 
 Encouraging old-timers to mentor newcomers  
 23 
 Access controls 
 Forcing potential new members to pay or wait 
 12 
 Forcing potential new members to undertake  “ separating ” tasks 
 13 
 Requiring potential members to complete a diagnostic task 
 14 
 Requiring potential members to provide external diagnostic 
credentials 
 15 
 Requiring potential members to provide referrals 
 16 
 Erecting entry barriers for newcomers 
 17 
 Socializing newcomers with formal and sequential tactics 
 22 
 Instituting progressive access controls 
 25 
 Framing 
 Presenting reasons to join and endorsements by credible sources 
and sites 
 7 
 Presenting attractive surface features and endorsements by 
celebrities 
 8 
 Emphasizing the number of people already participating in a 
community 
 9 
 Placing the name of a community in front of people often 
 10 
 Providing potential new members with an accurate and complete 
picture of what the members ’ experience will be once they join 
 11 

224 
Robert E. Kraut, Moira Burke, John Riedl, and Paul Resnick
 References 
 Adler ,  B. Thomas , and  Luca   de Alfaro .  2007 . A Content-Driven Reputation System for Wikipedia. 
In  Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on World Wide Web ,  261 – 270 . New York: ACM 
Press  
 Agrawal ,  J. , and  W. A.   Kamakura .  1995 .  The Economic Worth of Celebrity Endorsers: An Event 
Study Analysis.   Journal of Marketing  59  ( 3 ):  56  – 62 . 
 Alachas1985 .  2007 . Onyxia Wipe Animation. YouTube.  http://www.youtube.com/watch
?v=HtvIYRrgZ04 .  
 Arguello ,  Jaime ,  Brian S.   Butler ,  Lisa  Joyce ,  Robert E.  Kraut ,  Kimberly S.  Ling ,  Carolyn  Ros é , and 
 Xiaoqing   Wang .  2006 . Talk to Me: Foundations for Successful Individual-Group Interactions in 
Online Communities. In  CHI 2006: Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Com-
puting Systems , 959 – 968. New York: ACM Press.  
 Aronson ,  E.  1997 .  Back to the Future: Retrospective Review of Leon Festinger ’ s  “ A Theory of 
Cognitive Dissonance. ”   American Journal of Psychology  110  ( 1 ):  127  – 137 . 
 Aronson ,  Elliot , and  Judson   Mills .  1959 .  The Effect of Severity of Initiation on Liking for a Group.  
 Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology  59 : 177  – 181 .  
 Assmus ,  G. ,  J. U.   Farley , and  D. R.   Lehmann .  1984 .  How Advertising Affects Sales: Meta-Analysis 
of Econometric Results.    Journal of Marketing Research  21 ( 1 ):  65  – 74 .  
  Bajaj ,  Vikas .  2010 . Spammers Pay Others to Answer Security Tests.  New York Times , April 25, B6. 
 Bass ,  F. M.   1969 .  A New Product Growth Model for Consumer Durables.   Management Science  15  
( 5 ):  215  – 227 . 
 Bauer ,  Talya N. ,  Todd  Bodner ,  Berrin   Erdogan ,  Donald M.  Truxillo , and  Jennifer S.   Tucker .  2007 . 
 Newcomer Adjustment During Organizational Socialization: A Meta-Analytic Review of Anteced-
ents, Outcomes, and Methods.   Journal of Applied Psychology  92  ( 3 ):  707  – 721 .  
 Benoit ,  W. L. ,  G. J.   Hansen , and  R. M.   Verser .  2003 .  A Meta-Analysis of the Effects of Viewing 
U.S. Presidential Debates.   Communication Monographs  70 ( 4 ):  335  – 350 . 
 Blizzard Entertainment .  2010 . Recruit-a-Friend FAQ.  http://us.blizzard.com/support/article
.xml?locale=en_US & articleId=20588 .  
  Boyd ,  D. M. , and  N. B.   Ellison .  2008 .  Social Network Sites: Definition, History, and Scholarship.  
 Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication  13  ( 1 ):  210  – 230 . 
 Breaugh ,  J. A. , and  M.  Starke .  2000 .  Research on Employee Recruitment: So Many Studies, So 
Many Remaining Questions.   Journal of Management  26 ( 3 ):  405 . 
 Burke ,  M. ,  C.   Marlow , and  T.  Lento .  2009 . Feed Me: Motivating Newcomer Contribution in Social 
Network Sites. In  CHI 2009: Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems , 945 – 954. New York: ACM Press.  

Chapter 5: The Challenges of Dealing with Newcomers 
225
 Burke ,  M. , and  B.   Settles .  2011 . Plugged in to the Community: Social Motivators in Online Goal-
Setting Groups. In  Proceedings of C & T 2011: Fifth International Conference on Communities and 
Technologies . New York: Springer Publishing.  
 Chaiken ,  Sehlly ,  Wendy  Wood , and  Alice H.   Eagly .  1996 .  Principles of Persuasion . In   Social Psy-
chology: Handbook of Basic Principles  , ed.  E. Tory   Higgins  and  Arie W.   Kruglanski ,  702  – 742 .  New 
York :  Guildford Press . 
 Chapman ,  D. S. ,  K. L.  Uggerslev ,  S. A.   Carroll ,  K. A.   Piasentin , and  D. A.   Jones .  2005 .  Applicant 
Attraction to Organizations and Job Choice: A Meta-Analytic Review of the Correlates of Recruit-
ing Outcomes.   Journal of Applied Psychology  90  ( 5 ):  928  – 944 . 
 Choi ,  Bo Reum ,  Kira  Alexander ,  Robert E.   Kraut , and  John M.   Levine .  2010 . Socialization Tactics 
in Wikipedia and Their Effects. In  CSCW  ’ 10: Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer-
Supported Cooperative Work ,  107 – 116 . New York: ACM Press.  
  Choi ,  Bo Reum ,  Robert E.   Kraut , and  Mark  Fichman .  2011 . Matching People and Groups: An 
Exploratory Study of Recruitment and Selection in Online Games. Unpublished manuscript. 
 Cialdini ,  R. B. , and  N. J.   Goldstein .  2004 .  Social Influence: Compliance and Conformity.   Annual 
Review of Psychology  55  ( 1 ):  591  – 621 . 
 Clary ,  E. G. ,  M.   Snyder ,  R. D.   Ridge ,  J.   Copeland ,  A. A.   Stukas ,  J.  Haugen , and  P.   Miene .  1998 . 
 Understanding and Assessing the Motivations of Volunteers: A Functional Approach.   Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology  74 : 1516  – 1530 . 
 Coleman ,  James ,  Elihu  Katz , and  Herbert   Menzel .  1957 .  The Diffusion of an Innovation among 
Physicians.    Sociometry  20 ( 4 ):  253 – 270 . 
  Collins ,  N. , and  L.  Miller .  1994 .  Self-Disclosure and Liking: A Meta-Analytic Review.   Psychological 
Bulletin  116  ( 3 ):  457  – 475 . 
 Cooper ,  W. H.   1981 .  Ubiquitous Halo.   Psychological Bulletin  90  ( 2 ): 218  – 244 . 
 Domingos ,  P. , and  M.  Richardson .  2001 . Mining the Network Value of Customers. In  Proceedings 
of the Seventh ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , 
57 – 66. New York: ACM.  
 Drenner ,  S. ,  S.   Sen , and  L.  Terveen .  2008 . Crafting the Initial User Experience to Achieve Com-
munity Goals. In  Proceedings of the 2008 ACM Conference on Recommender Systems , 187 – 194. New 
York: ACM Press.  
 Ducheneaut ,  Nicolas .  2005 .  Socialization in an Open Source Software Community: A Socio-
Technical Analysis.    Computer Supported Cooperative Work  14  ( 4 ):  323  – 368 . 
 Ducheneaut ,  Nicolas ,  Nicholas   Yee ,  Eric  Nickell , and  Robert J.   Moore .  2007 . The Life and Death 
of Online Gaming Communities: A Look at Guilds in World of Warcraft. In  Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 839 – 848. New York: ACM Press.  
 eBay.  2010 . eBay Trading Assistant Program.  http://pages.ebay.com/tahub/index.html . 

226 
Robert E. Kraut, Moira Burke, John Riedl, and Paul Resnick
  Elsworth ,  Catherine .  2007 . Wikipedia ’ s Image Is Tarnished as an Editor Is Exposed as Fraud.  Daily 
Telegraph , Mar. 7, 2007. 
 Erdogan ,  Z. B.   1999 .  Celebrity Endorsement: A Literature Review.    Journal of Marketing Management 
 15  ( 4 ):  291  – 314 . 
 Fark.  2010 . FAQ.  http://www.fark.com/farq . 
 Fernandez ,  R. M. , and  N.   Weinberg .  1997 .  Sifting and Sorting: Personal Contacts and Hiring in 
a Retail Bank.   American Sociological Review  62  ( 6 ):  883  – 902 . 
 Festinger ,  Leon .  1957  [ 1962 ].   A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance .  Reprint edition .  Stanford, CA : 
 Stanford University Press . 
 Fogg ,  B. J. ,  Cathy   Soohoo ,  David R.   Danielson ,  Leslie  Marable ,  Julianne   Stanford , and  Ellen R.  
 Tauber .  2003 . How Do Users Evaluate the Credibility of Web Sites? A Study with over 2,500 
Participants. In  Proceedings of the 2003 ACM Conference on Designing for User Experiences , 1 – 15. San 
Francisco: ACM Press.  
 Fogg ,  B. J. , and  D.  Eckles .  2007 .  The Behavior Chain for Online Participation: How Successful 
Web Services Structure Persuasion.   Lecture Notes in Computer Science  4744 : 199 .  
 Gerard ,  Harold B. , and  Grover C.  Mathewson .  1966 .  The Effect of Severity of Initiation on Liking 
for a Group: A Replication.    Journal of Experimental Social Psychology  2  ( 3 ):  278  – 287 . 
 Gladwell ,  M.  2002 .  The Tipping Point: How Little Things Can Make a Big Difference .  New York :  Little 
Brown . 
 Goldstein ,  N. J. ,  V.   Griskevicius , and  R. B.   Cialdini .  2007 .  Invoking Social Norms: A Social Psy-
chology Perspective on Improving Hotels ’ Linen-Reuse Programs.    Cornell Hotel and Restaurant 
Administration Quarterly  48  ( 2 ):  145 . 
 Goffman ,  E.   1961 .   Asylums: Essays on the Social Situation of Mental Patients and Other Inmates . 
 Garden City, NJ :  Anchor Books . 
 Green ,  D. P. ,  A. S.   Gerber , and  D. W.  Nickerson .  2008 .  Getting Out the Vote in Local 
Elections: Results from Six Door-to-Door Canvassing Experiments.   Journal of Politics  65  ( 4 ): 
 1083  – 1096 . 
  Halfaker ,  Aaron ,  Aniket   Kittur , and  John   Riedl .  2011 . Don ’ t Bite the Newbies: How Reverts Affect 
the Quantity and Quality of Wikipedia Work. In  Proceedings of WikiSym 2011 . 
 Hoag ,  David .  1996 . The WELL Host Manual. Version 4.4.  http://www.well.com/~confteam/
hostmanual . 
 Internet FAQ Archives . 2010. Alt.Support.Stop-Smoking Compost. Internet FAQ Archives.  http://
www.faqs.org/faqs/support/stop-smoking/compost/part1 . 
 Jones ,  G. R.   1986 .  Socialization Tactics, Self-Efficacy, and Newcomers ’ Adjustments to Organiza-
tions.    Academy of Management Journal  29  ( 2 ):  262 – 279 . 

Chapter 5: The Challenges of Dealing with Newcomers 
227
 Katz ,  E.   1957 .  The Two-Step Flow of Communication: An Up-to-Date Report on an Hypothesis.  
 Public Opinion Quarterly  12 ( 1 ):  61 – 78 . 
 Katz ,  E. ,  P.  Lazersfeld .  1955 .   Personal Influence: The Part Played by People in the Flow of Mass Com-
munication .  New York :  The Free Press .  
 Kawamoto ,  Dawn .  2004 . Gmail Accounts Go up for Bid. CNET News.  http://news.cnet.com/2100
-1023_3-5203162.html . 
 Kempe ,  D. ,  J.  Kleinberg , and   É .  Tardos .  2003 . Maximizing the Spread of Influence through a Social 
Network. KDD  ’ 03: Proceedings of the Ninth ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowl-
edge Discovery and Data Mining, 137 – 146. New York: ACM.  
 Kinch ,  Richard J.   2003 . A Case of Fraud on eBay. TrueTeX.  http://www.truetex.com/ebayfraud.htm . 
 Klapper ,  J. T.   1960 .  The Effects of Mass Communication .  Glencoe, IL :  Free Press . 
 Kristof-Brown ,  A. L. ,  R. D.   Zimmerman , and  E. C.  Johnson .  2005 .  Consequences of Individuals ’ 
Fit at Work: A Meta-Analysis of Person-Job, Person-Organization, Person-Group, and Person-
Supervisor Fit.   Personnel Psychology  58 ( 2 ):  281  – 320 . 
 Kristof ,  A. L.   1996 .  Person-Organization Fit: An Integrative Review of Its Conceptualizations, 
Measurement, and Implications.   Personnel Psychology  49  ( 1 ):  1 – 49 .  
 Krogh ,  Geor g von,  Sebastian   Spaeth ,  Karim R.   Lakhani , and  Eric   von Hippel .  2003 .  Community, 
Joining, and Specialization in Open Source Software Innovation: A Case Study .   Research Policy  32 
( 7 ):  1217  – 1241 . 
 Lampe ,  Cliff , and  Erik  Johnston .  2005 . Follow the (Slash) Dot: Effects of Feedback on New 
Members in an Online Community. In  Group  ’ 05: Proceedings of the 2005 International ACM SIG-
GROUP Conference on Supporting Group Work , 11 – 20. New York: ACM Press.  
 Latané ,  B.   1981 .  The Psychology of Social Impact.   American Psychologist  36 : 343  – 356 .  
 Lave ,  Jean , and  Etienne   Wenger .  1991 .  Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation .  New 
York :  Cambridge University Press . 
 Levine ,  John M. , and  Richard L.   Moreland .  1994 .  Group Socialization: Theory and Research . In 
  European Review of Social Psychology  vol. 5, ed.  Wolfgan  Strocher  and  Miles   Hewstone , 305 – 336. 
 New York :  John Wiley  &  Sons . 
 Mahajan ,  V. ,  E.  Muller , and  Y.  Wind .  2000 .  New-Product Diffusion Models: From Theory to 
Practice . In   New-Product Diffusion Models  , ed.  V.  Mahajan ,  E.  Muller , and  Y.   Wind , 4 – 24.  Boston : 
 Kluwer Academic Publishers . 
 Mahajan ,  V. ,  E.  Muller , and  F.   Bass .  1990 .  New Product Diffusion Models in Marketing: A Review 
and Directions for Research.   Journal of Marketing  54 : 1 – 26 .  
 Mann ,  T. E. , and  R. E.   Wolfinger .  1980 .  Candidates and Parties in Congressional Elections.    Ameri-
can Political Science Review  74 (3) :  617  – 632 . 

228 
Robert E. Kraut, Moira Burke, John Riedl, and Paul Resnick
 McGuire ,  W. J.   1985 .  Attitudes and Attitude Change . In   Handbook of Social Psychology  , ed. 
 Gardner   Lindzey  and  Elliot  Aronson ,  233  – 346 .  New York :  Random House . 
 Montgomery ,  A. L.  2001 .  Applying Quantitative Marketing Techniques to the Internet.   Interfaces 
 3  ( 2 ):  90  – 108 . 
 Moreland ,  R. L.   1985 .   “ Social Categorization and the Assimilation of  “ New ” Group Members.  
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology  48  ( 5 ):  1173  – 1190 .  
 Mozilla . 2010 Mozilla Forum Etiquette. Mozilla.org.  http://www.mozilla.org/about/forums/
etiquette.html . 
 Munro ,  G. D. ,  P. H.   Ditto ,  L. K.   Lockhart ,  A.  Fagerlin ,  M.  Gready , and  E.  Peterson .  2002 .  Biased 
Assimilation of Sociopolitical Arguments: Evaluating the 1996 U.S. Presidential Debate.   Basic and 
Applied Social Psychology  24  ( 1 ):  15  – 26 . 
  Nickerson ,  R. S.  1998 .  Confirmation Bias: A Ubiquitous Phenomenon in Many Guises.    Review of 
General Psychology  2 : 175  – 220 . 
 Organ ,  D. W. , and  K.  Ryan .  1995 .  A Meta-Analytic Review of Attitudinal and Dispositional Predic-
tors of Organizational Citizenship Behavior.   Personnel Psychology  48  ( 4 ):  775  – 802 . 
 Panciera ,  K. ,  A.   Halfaker , and  L.  Terveen .  2009 . Wikipedians Are Born, Not Made: A Study of 
Power Editors on Wikipedia. In  Proceedings of the ACM 2009 International Conference on Supporting 
Group Work Table of Contents , 51 – 60. New York: ACM Press.  
 Panciera ,  Katherine ,  Reid   Priedhorsky ,  Thomas  Erickson , and  Loren  Terveen .  2010 . Lurking? 
Cyclopaths?: A Quantitative Lifecycle Analysis of User Behavior in a Geowiki. In  CHI  ’ 10: Proceed-
ings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1917 – 1926. New York: ACM 
Press.  
 Petty ,  R. E. , and  D. T.   Wegener .  1998 .  Attitude Change: Multiple Roles for Persuasion Variables . 
 The Handbook of Social Psychology  1 : 323  – 390 .  
 Phillips ,  J. M.  1998 .  Effects of Realistic Job Previews on Multiple Organizational Outcomes: A 
Meta-Analysis.   Academy of Management Journal  41 ( 6 ):  673  – 690 . 
 Postmedia .  2010 . Scam Watch: The Most Popular Scams on eBay. eBay.  http://reviews.ebay.com/
Scam-Watch-The-Most-Popular-Scams-on-Ebay_W0QQugidZ10000000000025238 .  
 Preece ,  Jenny ,  Blair  Nonnecke , and  Dorine  Andrews .  2004 .  The Top Five Reasons for Lurking: 
Improving Community Experiences for Everyone.   Computers in Human Behavior  20 ( 1 ): 
 201  – 223 . 
 Preece ,  J. , and  B.   Shneiderman .  2009 .  The Reader-to-Leader Framework: Motivating 
Technology-Mediated Social Participation.   AIS Transactions on Human-Computer Interaction  1  ( 1 ): 
 13  – 32 .  
 Resnick ,  P. ,  R.  Zeckhauser ,  J.   Swanson , and  K.  Lockwood .  2006 .  The Value of Reputation on eBay: 
A Controlled Experiment.   Experimental Economics  9 ( 2 ):  79  – 101 . 

Chapter 5: The Challenges of Dealing with Newcomers 
229
 Ridings ,  Catherine M. , and  David   Gefen .  2004 .  Virtual Community Attraction: Why People Hang 
out Online.    Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication  10  ( 1 ). 
 Roberts ,  D. F. , and  N.  Maccoby .  1985 .  Effects of Mass Communication . In  Handbook of 
Social Psychology , ed.  Gardner   Lindzey  and  Elliot   Aronson ,  539  – 598 .  New York :  Random 
House .  
 Roberts ,  Jeffrey ,  Il-Horn   Hann , and  Sandra   Slaughter .  2006 .  Understanding the Motivations, 
Participation and Performance of Open Source Software Developers: A Longitudinal Study of the 
Apache Projects.   Management Science  52 ( 7 ):  984  – 999 . 
 Rowe ,  Robert .  2004 . Beginning Proofreaders ’ Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ). Distributed 
Proofreaders. May 27, 2004 version.  http://www.pgdp.net/c/faq/ProoferFAQ.php . 
 Rynes ,  S.   1991 .  Recruitment, Job Choice, and Post-Hire Consequences: A Call for New Research 
Directions . In   Handbook of Industrial and Organizational Psychology  , ed.  M. D.   Dunnette , 
 399  – 444 .  Palo Alto, CA :  Consulting Psychologists Press . 
 Saks ,  Alan M. ,  Krista L.   Uggerslev , and  Neil E.   Fassina .  2007 .  Socialization Tactics and Newcomer 
Adjustment: A Meta-Analytic Review and Test of a Model.   Journal of Vocational Behavior 
 70 : 413  – 446 .  
 Spence ,  Michael .  1973 .  Job Market Signaling.   Quarterly Journal of Economics  87  ( 3 ):  355  – 374 . 
 Spertus ,  E. ,  R.   Jeffries , and  K.  Sie .  2001 . Scaling Online Communities with Javamlm. Paper pre-
sented at the Fifteenth Systems Administration Conference (LISA), USENIX, San Diego.  
 Stewart ,  K. J.   2003 .  Trust Transfer on the World Wide Web.   Organization Science  14 (1):  5 – 17 .  
 Sultan ,  F. ,  J. U.  Farley , and  D. R.   Lehmann .  1990 .  A Meta-Analysis of Applications of Diffusion 
Models.  Journal of Marketing Research  27  ( 1 ):  70  – 77 . 
 Tellis ,  G. J.   2004 .   Effective Advertising: Understanding When, How, and Why Advertising Works . 
 Thousand Oaks, CA :  Sage .  
 Thorndike ,  E. L.  1920 .  A Constant Error in Psychological Ratings.   Journal of Applied Psychology  4  
( 1 ):  25 – 29 . 
  Tugend ,  Alina .  2009 . Typing in an E-Mail Address, and Giving up Your Friends ’ as Well.  New York 
Times , June 20, 2009. 
 Ubuntu Forums .  2010 . Ubuntu Forums Code of Conduct  2010 .  http://ubuntuforums.org/
index.php?page=policy . 
 Van der Heijden ,  H.   2003 .  Factors Influencing the Usage of Websites: The Case of a Generic Portal 
in the Netherlands.   Information  & Management  40 ( 6 ):  541  – 549 . 
 Van Maanen ,  J. , and  E. H.   Schein .  1979 .  Toward a Theory of Organizational Socialization.   Research 
in Organizational Behavior  1 : 209  – 264 . 
 Wikipedia .  2010a . Copyrights.  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Copyrights . 

230 
Robert E. Kraut, Moira Burke, John Riedl, and Paul Resnick
 Wikipedia .  2010b . Manual of Style.  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Manual_of_Style . 
 Wikipedia .  2010c . Please Do Not Bite the Newcomers.  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Wikipedia:Please_do_not_bite_the_newcomers . 
 Wikipedia . 
 2010d . 
Welcoming 
Committee. 
 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia
:Welcoming_committee . 
 Wikipedia . 
 2010e . 
What 
Wikipedia 
Is 
Not. 
 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia
:What_Wikipedia_is_not . 
 Wikipedia .  2010f . Wikipedia:Neutral Point of View. Wikipedia,  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Wikipedia:Neutral_point_of_view . 
 Williams ,  Dmitri ,  Nicholas   Ducheneaut ,  Li   Xiong ,  Yuanyuan   Zhang ,  Nick   Yee , and  Eric  Nickell . 
 2006 .  From Tree House to Barracks: The Social Life of Guilds in World of Warcraft.   Games and 
Culture  1 ( 4 ):  338 – 361 . 
 Wilson ,  E. O.   2007 . E.O. Wilson on Saving Life on Earth. TED Conference.  http://www.ted.com/
talks/e_o_wilson_on_saving_life_on_earth.html . 
 Zajonc ,  Robert B.   1968 .  Attitudinal Effects of Mere Exposure .   Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology  9 ( 2 ):  1 – 27 . 
 Zhang ,  Xiaoquan  ( Michael ), and  Feng   Zhu .  2006 . Intrinsic Motivation of Open Content Contri-
butions: The Case of Wikipedia. Paper presented at the Workshop on Information Systems and 
Economics (WISE), Chicago.  

 6  Starting New Online Communities 
 Paul Resnick, Joseph Konstan, Yan Chen, and Robert E. Kraut 
 “ Build it and they will come. ” If only it were that simple. 
 In reality, most online communities never really get off the ground. On SourceForge 
( http://sourceforge.net ), for example, which offers free tools to open source projects, 
thousands of projects have been created, but only 10.3 percent have more than three 
members.  1  In an effort to test the effects of an online community for helping people 
to quit smoking, researchers gave 684 people access to an online community in addi-
tion to the informational website Smokefree.gov ( http://smokefree.gov ), but so few 
people used the online community features that they were not able to report on its 
effectiveness ( Stoddard, Augustson, and Moser 2008 ). 
 Online communities fail to take off for many reasons. For some, it ’ s just not clear 
whether the community offers services or experiences that potential members want. 
In these cases, why would anyone want to join? In other cases, the people who would 
want to join never find out about it. Some lose in a competition for members with 
another community. Some attract a stream of potential members, one at a time, but 
fail to hold them because there never seems to be anyone else around. 
 There are three major challenges in starting a new community. The first is to carve 
out a useful niche. The second is to defend that niche in the ecology of competing 
communities and alternative ways that potential members can spend their time. 
Meeting these two challenges requires making strategic choices about the scope of the 
community and about its compatibility and integration with other communities. The 
third challenge is to get to critical mass. A new community must recruit members 
before it has become the kind of community that they will value. There are a number 
of design approaches to meeting this challenge, including substituting professionally 
generated content for user-generated content in the early stages, leveraging early par-
ticipants to attract later ones, and setting expectations about the likely future evolu-
tion of the community. 

232 
Paul Resnick, Joseph Konstan, Yan Chen, and Robert E. Kraut
 Because so little empirical research has studied how new communities start, support 
for most of the design claims in this chapter come not from empirical evidence but 
from anecdotes and from theoretical arguments. Many of the theoretical arguments 
are based on simple cost-benefit assessments. Participating in a community involves 
opportunity costs of time and effort that could be spent elsewhere. Some of the costs, 
such as learning the community ’ s software and getting integrated socially, are incurred 
only on entry. Others are incurred on an ongoing basis. Participating also can bring 
benefits, such as information, social connection, or a sense of identity and purpose.  
 Within this cost-benefit framework, the first challenge can be reframed as ensuring 
that net utility, benefits minus costs, is positive for all members in steady state. The 
second is to make net utility be higher than that of competing communities. The third 
challenge — getting to critical mass — can be reframed as assuring net-positive utility 
for each of the members as they join, even though the community has not yet reached 
steady state. 
 1  Carving Out a Niche 
 There are three major design decisions to make when carving out a niche. One is the 
scope of the community, in terms of the breadth of topics to cover, the kinds of people 
to try to attract as members, the activities to support, and the purpose of the com-
munity. Sometimes the community is defined by a topic and activities and attracts a 
set of people who coalesce around the topic. For example, a Minnesota Twins fan 
community is defined by the topic of the baseball team and the activity of discussion 
about the team. The purpose is to inform and entertain the members. A diabetes 
support group for teens includes teens with diabetes, and perhaps their caregivers, 
with the purpose of providing information and emotional support. Sometimes a com-
munity is defined around a preexisting set of people, such as an alumni group, with 
a purpose of staying connected and the topics and activities emerging from the actions 
of the members. 
 The second major design decision is the extent of compatibility and integration 
with other sites, including the borrowing of features and user interface elements, the 
sharing of user identifiers, and the import and export of content and people. Many 
new communities are integrated in some way with existing communities or platforms. 
For example, Facebook applications ( http://www.facebook.com ) often define new 
communities. Individuals can also create new groups on platforms like Google groups 
( http://groups.google.com ), Yahoo! Groups ( http://groups.yahoo.com ), Ning ( http://
www.ning.com ), and Meetup ( http://www.meetup.com ), as well as Facebook. Each 

Chapter 6: Starting New Online Communities 
233
platform offers a slightly different bundle of features such as email lists, forums, chat, 
event calendars, and photo sharing. Building on an existing platform typically means 
that the new community shares user interface elements with other communities using 
the same platform, that members use the same user ID across communities on that 
platform, and sometimes that content is shared between communities. Stand-alone 
communities can also have some degree of compatibility and integration with other 
communities. For example, if they use common software packages like MediaWiki, 
Drupal, or Microsoft SharePoint, then user interface elements will be shared. User 
identities can be shared using technologies like OpenID. Content can be imported. It 
can also be exported to other communities, using technologies like RSS feeds or Face-
book Connect. 
 The third design decision is the internal organization of content, people, and activi-
ties within the community. All but the smallest online communities let people do 
more than one thing. Forum-based communities offer multiple forums covering 
related topics and frequented by different, overlapping subsets of the membership. 
Open source software projects subdivide into work on different modules. Chat com-
munities offer multiple rooms. Some communities, like Facebook, depend on a  pull 
model , in which members regularly visit the community to see any new activity. 
Others, like Meetup, make use of  push alerts , whereby members are notified when there 
is something potentially worth seeing. 
 We first assess the impact of those design alternatives on the marginal costs and 
benefits of participating and then add considerations of fixed initiation and switching 
costs to and from competing communities. Chapter 3 discussed some of the fixed 
benefits, the psychic value people get from membership in a community that is only 
loosely tied to their level of participation. Wenger, White, and Smith (2009) offer an 
alternative, useful framework for defining a community ’ s internal organization by 
analyzing its activity orientations. 
 Opportunities Model 
 Online communities are complex constellations of activities; we begin with analysis 
of the basic building block — a single interaction space. We model each space as a col-
lection of interaction opportunities. For example, upon visiting Facebook, a user might 
look at the newsfeed, which has a list of status updates or other activities from the 
user ’ s friends or groups — each update an opportunity to be amused, bored, or annoyed. 
In a forums-based site, each forum is a collection of individual messages. In a chat 
community, a single chat room at any one time offers the opportunity to interact with 
each of the other people present at that time. 

234 
Paul Resnick, Joseph Konstan, Yan Chen, and Robert E. Kraut
 To analyze the costs and benefits of visiting a space, think of each opportunity as 
having an expected  match_value , the expected utility of examining the opportunity 
and possibly engaging with it. Note that the expected match_value may be negative: 
for example, spam messages or messages about a topic that does not interest the user. 
We define  collection_size as the number of new opportunities since the last visit, such 
as the number of messages in a forum or the number of status updates on a page of 
a Facebook newsfeed. In the typical pull design, in which a user visits a web page (or 
an email folder or an RSS feed) to get a collection, there is a per-collection  naviga-
tion_cost , the cost of getting to the space and waiting for its contents to display. Clearly, 
when a space is nearly empty (i.e., collection_size is low), the navigation cost may 
outweigh the total value, and the net benefits may be negative. The following expres-
sion gives the expected net benefit from accessing a space:  2  
 (match_value  × collection_size)  – navigation_cost 
[pull model] 
 When there are few interaction opportunities, an alternative push model may be 
appropriate, in which users are notified each time a new interaction opportunity 
becomes available. For example, in forums with few posts, new posts may be forwarded 
by email to subscribing members. In synchronous interaction communities like mul-
tiplayer games or Second Life, users may receive alerts when their friends log on or 
enter particular spaces. The problem with the push model is that users are interrupted 
once for each new interaction opportunity, whereas in the pull model users expend 
time once to navigate to the whole collection. The following expresses the net benefit 
of push notifications for a collection of interaction opportunities: 
 (match_value  × collection_size)  – (interruption_cost  × collection_size) 
[push model] 
 The lower the per-item interruption cost is, the more attractive push notifications 
are. For example, many people — depending on their email reading habits — find 
email notifications to be a relatively small interruption cost. Pop-up alerts, on 
the other hand, may have somewhat higher interruption costs because they may 
interrupt an activity that is more time-sensitive than email reading ( Horvitz and 
Apacible 2003 ). 
 The other consideration in assessing push notifications is the time sensitivity of 
the opportunities. For example, when a collection offers synchronous interactions 
(e.g., a chat room), the match value of an interaction opportunity exists only 
while the other person is present. Thus, for example, push notifications about 
favorite chat partners coming online or favorite chat rooms having people in them 
may be especially useful. On the other hand, notifications about new messages in a 
forum would be less useful if the messages are not time-sensitive (e.g., a site like 

Chapter 6: Starting New Online Communities 
235
Lightbulbjokes.com ( http://lightbulbjokes.com ) dedicated to collecting old lightbulb 
jokes). 
 Design Claim 1  Lower volume and higher time sensitivity of interaction opportunities 
and lower interruption costs increase the benefits of push notification. 
 In the remainder of the analysis, we focus on the predominant pull model, in which 
users visit a collection. Because there is a per-visit navigation cost that is independent 
of the number of opportunities actually present, the challenge is to increase the col-
lection size while still maintaining the expected match value for each opportunity. 
One way to increase the volume of activity is to expand the scope, adding more topics 
and people with more diverse interests. As a thought experiment, imagine simply 
merging spaces with different topics. As an extreme example, consider a forum with 
posts about the Minnesota Twins baseball team, Pablo Picasso ’ s paintings, and U.S. 
Civil War reenactments. Mixing the three topics may triple the number of messages, 
but each visitor will discover that two-thirds of the content is uninteresting, and the 
community will likely shrink or fail. We refer to lumping several independent topics 
together as a  mixed-topic scope . 
 Design Claim 2  A mixed-topic scope reduces expected match value. 
 Even when the scope for an interaction space is not deliberately mixed, ambiguity 
about its scope may make it mixed anyway. Different people, thinking that the 
 “ true ” scope is different, will use it differently. Match values are lower when people 
interact with others who have a different interpretation of what the community is 
about. 
 Design Claim 3  An ambiguous scope for an interaction space reduces expected match 
value. 
 In some cases, mixing different topics need not reduce match value. Consider assem-
bling the various Major League Baseball fan communities into a larger MLB forum. 
Will doing so help? If people are simply there to talk about their own teams, then 
probably not. The best we can hope for in that case is a set of separate communities 
sharing infrastructure. But if fans of different teams get some value from interacting 
with each other, then the situation changes. There are two ways this might occur: 
bridging activities and transcendent identities (explained shortly). 

236 
Paul Resnick, Joseph Konstan, Yan Chen, and Robert E. Kraut
 Bridging activities occur when there is an intersection of interests between two 
topical scopes. For example, fans of two teams that are about to play each other may 
enjoy talking with each other. Detroit Tigers fans may be interested in interacting with 
New York Yankees fans to discuss the performance of a player who switched from one 
team to the other or upcoming games between the two teams. Or fans of other teams 
may join into discussion with Minnesota Twins fans about their new stadium. When 
a space has a mixed-topic scope, designers would do well to identify potential bridging 
activities and seed the community with them. 
 Design Claim 4   Activities that bridge interests in different topics increase match value 
in spaces with mixed-topic scope. 
 Members may also have an interest in or identify with a broader topic. To continue 
with the baseball fan analogy, some people are fans of Major League Baseball as a 
whole, instead of or in addition to any particular team. They may be happy to discuss 
the use of instant replay in baseball, the use of the All-Star Game results to determine 
the World Series home field advantage, or the differences between professional base-
ball in the United States and Japan. 
 Over time, names arise for those topics and identities that transcend component 
topics and identities. Over the years, most major sports leagues and events have 
expended significant marketing resources to create widely recognized names like the 
NBA, the World Cup, or Wimbledon to encourage fans to identify with the league or 
event as a whole rather than just individual competitors or teams. One useful rule of 
thumb for designers is to look for topical scopes that do not require compound names 
to describe. If the simplest description for a community is that it covers topics A, B, 
and C, it is a sign that there is not yet a transcendent identity. 
 Sometimes the connections between specific identities or topics can itself become 
a new topic around which identities and a community can form. Wenger refers to 
these as bridging communities of practice ( Wenger 1999 ). For example, a forum 
devoted to reconciliation (or just argument) between Israelis and Palestinians may 
have a high match value for people who want to make connections between the 
groups. In the case of bridging communities, it may be fine if the only descriptive 
name is a compound one that describes the component topics and the fact that con-
nections between them are the purpose of the community. Contrast that with a forum 
devoted to two separate topics, Israeli politics and Palestinian politics. If it attracted 
two groups of people, each interested in discussing only one of the two topics, but 
their discussions were mixed together, there would be a low match value. 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Chapter 6: Starting New Online Communities 
237
 Design Claim 5  A transcendent or bridging topical identity increases match value in 
communities with mixed-topic scope. 
 Communities with Multiple Spaces 
 Combining multiple spaces in a single online community offers several advantages. 
First, it amortizes the fixed costs of development and branding over more users 
and uses. For example, Craigslist has a unified software infrastructure, but interaction 
spaces are partitioned geographically and by category within each locale. Second, 
it reduces search costs for members: once someone finds a useful community or a 
space within it, they are likely to be interested in several of the spaces. Third, because 
there is participant overlap in the different parts of a community, synergies are 
created — that is, a personal connection that two people make through interacting 
in one space also increases the value they get from interacting in another space 
within the community. We refer to the second and third advantages, reduced search 
costs and benefits of overlapping memberships, as  synergies among spaces within a 
community. 
 The first question facing designers when a community has multiple subspaces is 
whether these should be globally defined, looking the same to all members, or whether 
there should be personalized views of the community ’ s activity. Facebook provides 
groups and pages, which look the same to all users who visit them, but also provides 
a personalized newsfeed containing content posted by the user ’ s friends. Because those 
friends may not be friends with each other, they may not see the same content in 
their news feeds that the user sees. 
 As another example, UpMyStreet ( http://www.upmystreet.com ) is a site in Britain 
that provides information about local businesses and real estate. It also provides 
a message board for conversations with one ’ s neighbors. This feature may be more 
popular in some regions than in others. Rather than defining a separate forum 
for each city or region, all conversation goes into a single container with messages 
indexed by the location of the person posting. In   figure 6.1 , messages from the 
previous two weeks that were posted by people near the city of Cambridge are dis-
played. In a city with more participants, such as London, it automatically selects 
conversations within a smaller geographic radius. When people in a city such as Cam-
bridge with no recent conversations explore the site, they are more likely to view the 
site favorably if presented with activity in nearby towns than if they are shown no 
activity at all. 
 The same idea could be applied to other distance metrics. For example, sites could 
determine what to display for a particular user through text-processing algorithms that 
www.Ebook777.com

238 
Paul Resnick, Joseph Konstan, Yan Chen, and Robert E. Kraut
select the most relevant content or people profiles or recommender algorithms that 
select content or people most likely to be liked by a particular person. Again, this 
method would have the effect of always showing the closest content or people, so 
that something would be displayed even when a perfect match does not exist. By 
contrast, dividing the people and content up into spaces creates hard boundaries, so 
that when a space is empty, it looks truly empty. Computer simulations suggest that 
these personalized displays of information provide more benefit to participants than 
do nonpersonalized displays, which show all content or show the same subset of 
content for everyone ( Ren and Kraut Under review ). 
 What is lost with personalized spaces is a shared context. In a forum whose bound-
aries are the same for everyone, it is reasonable to write a comment that alludes to 
other recent threads in the same forum. Most readers will also have seen those threads. 
In UpMyStreet, responding to a post at a distance of 4 miles with an allusion to 
another post would risk confusing readers who may live on the other side of town 
and not have seen the other post. Similarly, when commenting on a Facebook status 
message, it is unreasonable to assume that other commenters, or even the poster of 
the status message, will have seen the same other posts in their newsfeeds (though 
this doesn ’ t seem to stop some people from posting comments that assume such a 
shared context). 
 Design Claim 6  Personalized collections of  “ most related content ” enhance match 
value but reduce shared context. 
 Figure 6.1 
 Personalized views in UpMyStreet ( http://www.upmystreet.com ). 

Chapter 6: Starting New Online Communities 
239
 Assuming that designers do create rooms, groups, forums, or other globally shared 
contexts, the next question is which ones and how many. A search-cost perspective 
suggests that it is important for people to be able to easily identify those spaces that 
will have high utility for them, meaning a high match value for the contents and a 
high level of activity, so that there are many interaction opportunities. 
 A common mistake that online community designers make is to imagine all the 
topics that their hoped-for members might want to discuss, and to create separate 
forums or chat rooms for each topic. Initially, at least, most of these spaces will be 
empty. People who choose a space to visit based solely on the topic name will find 
an empty space. Because there is a cost to each such visit, the net benefit of spaces 
with few items will be negative. 
 An alternative is to provide initially just one space for interaction. Although the 
interaction in that space may cover a broader range of topics and thus not completely 
match a visitor ’ s interests, it will at least limit the number of separate access costs that 
need to be paid to examine the community ’ s content. As a space gets enough activity, 
it can be split into multiple spaces that are all active. A secondary benefit is that the 
community designers or decision makers will have the opportunity to observe the natu-
rally occurring topics of conversation and create spaces based on the topics actually of 
interest to the membership rather than on a priori assumptions about the hot topics. 
On Usenet, there is a long history of broader groups forking into more specialized 
groups: for example, the denizens of the rec.humor newsgroup eventually split it into 
subspaces, rec.humor.funny for actually funny posts and rec.humor.d for discussion of 
humor. Similarly, Slashdot ( http://slashdot.org ) started with a single collection of news 
items, under the tagline  “ news for nerds. ” After Slashdot grew in popularity, it subdi-
vided into specialized sections including topics such as hardware, games, science, and 
rights online, each of which attracted enough commenters to maintain a lively feel. 
 Design Claim 7  Subdividing spaces after they become active creates more net benefits 
for participants than having lots of inactive spaces. 
 One way to mitigate the negative effects of empty spaces is to decrease the chances 
that visitors will stumble on them, which can be done through navigation aids that 
filter or sort based on activity or at least provide activity indicators. For example, the 
online support community for the Drupal software package ( http://drupal.org ) lists 
the time of the most recent message for each forum topic (see   figure 6.2 ). In this case, 
all of the support forums are relatively active. In startup communities, however, sorting 
the forums by most recent activity could help newcomers find the most active forums. 

240 
Paul Resnick, Joseph Konstan, Yan Chen, and Robert E. Kraut
 In the group chat community Paltalk ( http://www.paltalk.com ), most of the open 
chat rooms at any one time have very few participants in them — people who are regu-
lars in those rooms may be satisfied with the small number of participants and the 
occasional interactions that occur in them. New users, however, who are exploring 
and evaluating the service, are less likely to find such rooms attractive. The user inter-
face to select chat rooms encourages users to select a room to visit from a display of 
the rooms that are currently most active, sorted in descending order by number of 
people in them (see   figure 6.3 ). 
 Design Claim 8  In communities with lots of interaction spaces, navigation aids that 
highlight more active spaces increase the net benefits members experience. 
 In communities with synchronous interaction spaces such as chat rooms or islands in 
Second Life ( http://secondlife.com ), if they are not always active, it may be helpful to 
schedule times when they are expected to be active. That way, people can avoid visit-
ing only to find the space empty and, if the space is compelling enough, can plan to 
visit when it will be open and active. The times may be announced when the space 
 Figure 6.2 
 Drupal ( http://drupal.org ) support forums with indicators of recent activity. 

Chapter 6: Starting New Online Communities 
241
is created, based on intuitions about when people will want to participate or just the 
availability of the moderator or creator of the space. For example, the Wellness Com-
munity ( http://www.thewellnesscommunity.org ) organizes small online support 
groups for cancer patients. Each group has a scheduled ninety-minute weekly synchro-
nous session in addition to a private asynchronous discussion forum. Similarly, on 
PalTalk, someone who stumbles on the room titled  “ Bobby Likis Car Clinic Show ” and 
finds it empty will be informed that it is  “ Live every Saturday from 10a to 12n ET. ” 
In the absence of fixed schedules, information may be provided based on historical 
data about when a space has been active, with the  “ expected popular hours ” posted. 
 Design Claim 9  In synchronous spaces that are not always active, a schedule of 
 “ expected active times ” coordinates visitors and can become a self-fulfilling 
expectation. 
 Navigation aids can reduce search costs not only by identifying active spaces but also 
by identifying spaces that are likely to have a high match value. A visitor who finds 
 Figure 6.3 
 The Paltalk ( http://www.paltalk.com ) chat rooms in the category  “ Government and Politics, ” 
sorted by number of people currently logged in to them. 

242 
Paul Resnick, Joseph Konstan, Yan Chen, and Robert E. Kraut
one space he or she likes can be directed to other spaces that are  “ similar ” in some 
way, where similarity may be defined by text matching (content-based filtering) or 
based on the participants in them (collaborative filtering). For example, in a chat 
community where there are hundreds or thousands of separate rooms, someone might 
be informed of other rooms frequented by the people he or she has interacted with 
previously. 
 Design Claim 10  In communities with many interaction spaces, recommender systems 
that help people navigate to spaces that best suit them increase the net benefits people 
experience. 
 Although ambiguity about the scope of individual spaces is largely harmful, some 
ambiguity about the scope of the community as a whole is natural and sometimes 
beneficial. Organization theorists point out that uncertainty and disagreement about 
the purpose is a natural and unavoidable part of the startup phase of any new com-
munity of practice, including new online communities ( Wenger, McDermott, and 
Snyder 2002 ). It can be more or less painful, and cause more or fewer problems in the 
retention of members, depending on design choices that are made. But the negotiation 
of a shared purpose cannot be eliminated entirely. Even if the founder of a community 
announces a purpose, the members may not accept it as their purpose — it becomes a 
shared purpose only through the actions of members that serve to reinforce or chal-
lenge it. One example: Amy Jo  Kim  ( 2000 , 19) described how the L ’ eggs pantyhose 
website discussion area — against the wishes of its owner — became a site whose main 
purpose, shared by its active participants, was to provide an anonymous forum for 
men to discuss the joys of wearing pantyhose. 
 Some ambiguity about the eventual scope of the community has some advantages. 
First, it allows the community designers to learn from the members what the members 
want. A topic may attract an unexpected audience or the audience may be interested 
in different topics or activities than the designer first intended. Fighting against what 
the members want, by trying to stick to the original vision, can alienate them. For 
example, the founder of Friendster ( http://www.friendster.com ), the first widely 
popular social networking site, alienated many of its members when he refused to 
allow them to engage in playful uses of the site with fake profiles that did not accu-
rately describe themselves. According to boyd and others, the active deletion of these 
 “ Fakester ” accounts ruptured trust between the company and its users, causing many 
to leave ( Anderson 2003 ;  boyd 2006 ;  Ellison 2007 ). Second, the activity of negotiating 
the scope — especially through explicit meta-discussion about it — can itself be a reward-

Chapter 6: Starting New Online Communities 
243
ing activity for some members and can lead them to feel  “ ownership ” of the com-
munity and thus commitment to it, as discussed in chapters 3 and 4. 
 Design Claim 11  Ambiguity of scope for the community creates opportunities for 
adjustment and member ownership. 
 Even when everyone is interested in a narrow topic, communities with too many 
people may have a reduced match value. As described in more detail in chapter 3, in 
so-called  bond-based communities the primary source of commitment to the group 
derives from interpersonal bonds with other individual members. Those interpersonal 
bonds depend on repeated exposure to the same people. Consider, for example, a 
cancer support community. A person who reads thirty messages per day will likely get 
more emotional support if the same people write those messages each day. Indeed, 
the match value might be enough higher that it would be worth restricting the com-
munity size (or subdividing it so that it effectively creates several smaller communi-
ties). For this reason, the Wellness Community, mentioned previously, deliberately 
launches small subcommunities of just twelve people, in addition to offering a set of 
forums for the community as a whole. 
 Design Claim 12  A larger community leads to lower match value in bond-based 
communities. 
 2  Competing for a Niche 
 Some new communities enter a crowded landscape. If a company introduces enterprise 
social networking software, it needs to be cognizant of the other social networking 
sites its employees may already be participating in, such as Facebook and LinkedIn 
( http://www.linkedin.com ), because the internal site will be competing with those 
other sites for employees ’ time and attention. If a new site for cooking enthusiasts 
starts up, its potential members will have many other options for places to interact 
online with other cooking enthusiasts. Even when a new community does not have 
any obvious competition, it will be useful for designers to conduct a competitive 
analysis for two reasons. First, potential members always have the option of muddling 
through with their existing communication patterns. For example, a newly diagnosed 
diabetic, instead of joining a diabetes support group, has the option to just commu-
nicate with his or her existing email, IM, or Facebook networks, even if the people in 
those networks are not very interested in or knowledgeable about diabetes. Second, 

244 
Paul Resnick, Joseph Konstan, Yan Chen, and Robert E. Kraut
even if there is not currently a crowded landscape, there may be competitors in the 
future. For example, if you start a fan club for an obscure band, there are likely to be 
competing clubs in the future if the band becomes popular. By conducting a competi-
tive analysis, the designer can carve out a niche that can be defended against future 
competitors.  Shapiro and Varian  analyze competitive strategies for information prod-
ucts more generally ( 1999 , chapters 5 – 8). Drawing on that analysis, we pull out impli-
cations for online communities. 
 Our initial interaction opportunities model for analyzing costs and benefits con-
sidered only the marginal costs of continued participation once someone had already 
joined. For competitive analysis, we need to consider also a new member ’ s switching 
costs of leaving a community and getting started with a new one. Startup and switch-
ing costs come from a number of sources. First, new users have to learn to operate the 
community ’ s software. Second, new users have to learn their way around, finding the 
areas of the community that have high match value for them. Third, new users have 
to learn the social norms of appropriate behavior. Finally, to achieve maximum ben-
efits from participation, new users have to build up social connections and gain status 
in the community. We will model the sum of all these as a single quantity, the 
 switching _ cost . 
 These switching costs must be amortized in some way if we are to compare them 
against the benefits from participating over a period of time. We simplify this com-
parison by assuming there is some expected duration of participation. We roll up the 
expected net participation benefits (i.e., benefits minus costs) from the opportunities 
model of the previous section over the expected duration of participation into a single 
number: the  participation_benefits .  3  
 In a competition between an incumbent community that someone is already a 
member of and a competitor that the person could join, the competitor must offer 
participation benefits that are enough better than the incumbent to compensate for 
the switching cost. Incumbents gain strategic advantage when switching costs are 
higher: the costs serve to lock in members. In the startup stage, a community is in 
the role of competitor and will generally want the switching costs to be low, making 
it easy for people to join. Once people have joined, however, the community is in an 
incumbent role, and a community designer will want the costs of those same members 
switching out to be high. 
 Choices about compatibility will affect switching costs. For example, if the new 
community uses the same interface elements as other communities, it reduces the 
costs of learning to use the software, thereby reducing switching costs. One way to do 
that is to use a popular software platform for online communities, like phpBB ( http://

Chapter 6: Starting New Online Communities 
245
www.phpbb.com ), Drupal, Ning, or Yahoo! Groups. Employing innovative user inter-
face elements makes sense in a community ’ s startup stage only if they create signifi-
cant additional participation benefits — enough to outweigh the additional switching 
costs. Moreover, innovative interface elements that are truly valuable may not convey 
a long-term edge against future competitors, as other communities can copy them. 
 Another compatibility decision that affects switching costs is sharing user IDs or 
profiles. A competitor that allows members to register and login using OpenID cre-
dentials issued by an incumbent (or by some other popular site such as Facebook) can 
reduce potential members ’ switching costs. If a user can import his or her profile and 
friend links from the incumbent site as well, switching costs are further reduced. Of 
course, the incumbent may not allow the sharing of IDs and profiles, in order to keep 
switching costs high (e.g., eBay does not allow its members ’  feedback profiles to be 
imported to other sites). When sharing IDs and profiles is an option, designers must 
judge which is more important: the initial strategic value when recruiting members 
or the later strategic value when trying to retain them. In addition, in some cases dif-
ferentiated IDs may be critical to the participation benefits in the community, preserv-
ing the ability for members to separate their different online social contexts rather 
than collapsing them as happens when people from different parts of one ’ s life access 
the same online persona ( boyd 2008 ). For example, a health support community 
might advertise itself as a safe environment for sharing personal experiences, which 
inherently requires that the user ID not be shared between the health support com-
munity and other communities. In interviews with people who participated in a 
stand-alone health community as well as Facebook, a recurring theme was that people 
were willing to share some things in the stand-alone community, like weight loss 
setbacks or even just weight loss goals, that they did not want to share with all their 
Facebook friends (Newman et al. 2011). 
 Design Claim 13  Differentiated user interface elements in the competitor community 
create startup costs and thus favor the incumbent community in any competition over 
members. 
 Design Claim 14  Nonshared user IDs and profiles between incumbent and competitor 
communities create startup costs and thus favor the incumbent community in any 
competition over members. 
 Design choices about import and export of content from competing communities 
affect the relative benefits of the communities. Importing content from an incumbent 

246 
Paul Resnick, Joseph Konstan, Yan Chen, and Robert E. Kraut
competitor incorporates some of the benefits of the other community into the 
new community. That is, participation benefits increase in the importing community. 
In the next section, we explain how temporarily importing data can be an effective 
tool to get through the initial stages before there is sufficient participation in the 
community. 
 The opposite analysis holds for exporting data: if the new community exports 
content, then its competitors are able to increase their net participation benefits and 
thus compete more effectively. Why, then, would any community export its data? 
One possibility is that it does not think it is in competition with the communities to 
which it exports its content. A second reason is that it increases visibility for the com-
munity that is the source of the content, allowing it to compete for members who 
would not otherwise have been aware of it. This is especially true if the exported 
content is read-only, in which case it may serve as a lure to those who wish to respond 
or join a discussion. A third possibility is that some content contributors may be 
motivated to reach as wide an audience as possible: exporting the content may 
increase their benefits of participation in the community where they post. For example, 
someone who has many friends on Facebook but few followers (so far) on Twitter 
might post on Facebook only, if that person had to choose one or the other. An appli-
cation that automatically reposts his or her tweets as Facebook status messages might 
tip the balance so that the user would post on Twitter. 
 As with many design choices, trade-offs are involved. A community that is not yet 
well established may benefit from importing content (to enhance the value of reading 
there) and from exporting content (to enhance the value of writing, and to enhance 
awareness of the community). Sharing with less well established competitors, however, 
may help the competitor more than the incumbent. 
 Design Claim 15  Content sharing between competing communities raises awareness 
of the exporting community and the value of posting there, but raises the value of 
consuming content in the importing community. 
 In competitive situations, it is especially important to clearly convey the benefits of 
a community. Many people will not carefully investigate the community, but will 
instead assess the community based on short descriptions or reviews from others who 
do investigate. Given limited attention from evaluators, it is difficult to convey the 
value of a large set of small improvements. Instead, it is far more effective to identify 
one or two key elements. In television advertising, Rosser Reeves argued for conveying 
a  “ unique selling proposition, ” a benefit to the user that the competing product 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Chapter 6: Starting New Online Communities 
247
doesn ’ t offer ( Reeves 1961 ). In the online community setting, the unique selling 
proposition or core selling proposition may be a topic not covered elsewhere (e.g., 
 “ the Wikipedia of news translation ” ), a different set of participants (e.g.,  “ the dating 
site for artists and lawyers ” ), a different set of activities and interaction tools (e.g.,  “ an 
easier way to connect with your friends ” ) or a different set of social norms ( “ a truly 
 supportive community to help you lose weight ” ). 
 Design Claim 16  Conveying a succinct unique selling proposition attracts members. 
 Economists describe some competitions as  “ winner-take-all. ” For example, if there are 
two communities competing for exactly the same niche, if either community attracts 
most of the available members, their membership will make that community more 
attractive than its competitor for the remaining people as well. In a winner-take-all 
situation, it is more important to convince people that your community will succeed 
than to convince them that your community is inherently better. If everyone thinks 
that others will join community C2, they will join it, but if they all think others will 
join C1, they will join that one. If either C1 or C2 becomes what is called a  focal point 
( Schelling 1958 ), widely shared expectations of success will be self-fulfilling. 
 As  Shapiro and Varian  argue,  “ The aura of inevitability is a powerful weapon ”  (1999 , 
181). Cultivating public awareness is one way to create that aura. If the public is much 
more aware of C1 than C2, then even people who are aware of both know that many 
people are familiar only with C1. Therefore, they will expect C1 to win and will prefer 
to join it. Consider, for example, Angie ’ s List ( http://www.angieslist.com ), a site that 
provides reviews of local contractors and businesses that serve household needs, which 
has spent much more visibly than other sites in this arena. It has advertised extensively 
on NPR and even television spots (Adweek 2006). In a city where there are competing 
online communities providing this service, many more people will be aware of Angie ’ s 
List than its competitors. Even people who are aware of competitors may participate 
in Angie ’ s List simply because they expect others to join it. 
 Celebrity endorsements can also help to create a focal point. For example, online 
poker sites have emerged and grown rapidly in the past several years as poker itself 
has grown and become a major televised activity. The sites themselves are organized 
into poker tables based on the game played and the betting limits. Because play is 
against other members, a site without enough traffic to have members populating 
nearly every type of table is likely to lose out to its competitors. PokerStars ( http://
www.pokerstars.net ) heavily advertises its team of celebrity poker professionals. Its 
home page prominently features three recognizable  “ world champions, ” and its 
www.Ebook777.com

248 
Paul Resnick, Joseph Konstan, Yan Chen, and Robert E. Kraut
television advertisements (which run during televised poker tournaments) highlight 
the professionals associated with the site. Indeed, all of the major online poker sites 
build their image around a set of nationally visible poker stars (and with mottos like 
 “ play where the pros play ” ). Even though amateurs will probably never play with the 
pros (unless they are willing to play for high monetary stakes and lose a lot of money 
to them), the endorsements from stars help to create a focal point that amateurs will 
visit when they want to play poker online. 
 Design Claim 17  Advertising and celebrity endorsements help create awareness of a 
community and thus make it a focal point in a competition between communities. 
 3  Getting to Critical Mass 
 The third major challenge is to get past the initial growing pains to a critical mass of 
participation. There are two ways in which a community in the startup stage may 
provide less value initially than it will after it reaches steady state. First, it may not 
have enough members to provide the content and interaction opportunities that some 
prospective members want. Second, the members may not yet have a shared purpose, 
including rough agreement about the scope of activity and membership, along with 
the norms and governance needed to achieve that purpose, so that less valuable 
content and interactions may crowd out the valuable activity. Social science theory 
can help us understand the challenges and point us in the direction of strategies to 
help online communities succeed through the initial growing pains. 
 The economic theory of network externalities or network effects explains situations 
in which one person ’ s value from using a product or system increases with the number 
of participants in the system ( Katz and Shapiro 1985 ;  Farrell and Saloner 1985 ). A good 
example is the fax machine. Being the only person in the world who owns a fax 
machine does not generate much utility. A user ’ s value for a fax machine increases 
with the number of other people who use the fax machines. The term  “ Metcalfe ’ s 
Law ” , invented by George Gilder, is often used to describe situations in which the 
benefits of increasing the network size dwarf the costs of doing so. 
 There are two problems, however, when individuals decide sequentially whether to 
join a network. First, below the critical mass size, adding a member may not create 
enough benefits to outweigh the costs. In the extreme case, people may decide sequen-
tially, one at a time, not to join, even if they could all benefit from a coordinated 
decision to join. Second, joining creates an externality — a benefit for all the other 
members. Thus, even when the total benefits to the community outweigh the new 

Chapter 6: Starting New Online Communities 
249
member ’ s costs, the benefits to the new member may not outweigh the costs, and the 
member may not join. 
 The same concepts can easily be applied to online communities. A social network-
ing site such as LinkedIn or Facebook has little or no value if nobody else is using it 
and much greater value if many of the friends or colleagues of a prospective user are 
already signed up. Communities built more around content rather than connections 
not only face the public goods underprovision problem addressed in Chapter 2 but 
may also have a notion of critical mass — a level of usage at which it becomes clear 
that one ’ s efforts are worthwhile. There must be both enough people editing and 
reading and enough high-quality articles at a site such Wikipedia for new users to 
perceive it as a venue worthy of their own participation. 
 Given these problems, there are two useful approaches. One is to make the com-
munity more attractive to early joiners. The other is to make more effective use of the 
early members, leveraging them to attract additional members. An understanding of 
how to leverage early joiners has implications for the types of people that are most 
valuable as early members. Thus, we first analyze how to leverage early joiners. Then, 
in our discussion of how to attract them to join early, we are able to suggest design 
alternatives that are tailored to attracting the most valuable types. 
 Bootstrapping: Leveraging Early Members to Get More Members 
 A community may go through a series of states, each of which is attractive enough to 
engage a new subset of members who improve the quality of the community for the 
next wave of membership. When the presence or actions of early members lead other 
people to join the community, we describe it as  bootstrapping . One approach is to 
organize activity so that it creates content that will be attractive to future users. A 
second approach is to include viral elements so that current members bring in their 
friends and acquaintances, who increase the value of the community to others. 
 The natural use of a site by early members may not always be sufficient to generate 
content that attracts others. But they may be more inclined if they are paid to do so. 
For example, Epinions initially paid contributors for providing reviews. Chapter 2 
examined ways to motivate contributions more generally. Here we note some special 
considerations about tangible rewards for early content contributions. The fact that 
other members are paid to perform certain activities may demotivate volunteers from 
performing those same actions for free. Once offered, it is also demotivating to take 
away rewards for actions. When Epinions reduced the payments to reviewers and 
changed its terms, it lost many contributors and had to put a lot of customer service 
energy into quelling dissatisfaction. Discounts or free service may be a less problematic 

250 
Paul Resnick, Joseph Konstan, Yan Chen, and Robert E. Kraut
way to encourage early members to contribute. It is easier to discontinue these moti-
vations once the community reaches a critical mass. They may also be continued for 
the early members without offering them to those who join later, creating a form of 
early-adopter benefit that we will discuss shortly. Discounts and free service may avoid 
creating the kind of envy that direct cash payments would generate. 
 Design Claim 18  Incentives for early members to generate content can increase 
bootstrapping. 
 In order to leverage early members, it is most useful to encourage them to create 
primary content. In online communities, the primary content consists of blog entries, 
forum posts and responses, audio, video, and text documents, items for sale, and the 
like. Metadata consists of tags, ratings, commentary about primary content, and 
behavioral clickstream data regarding which primary content items were accessed. 
Metadata adds a lot more value once it is needed to help navigate through a large 
quantity of primary content. For example, imagine a new, specialized photo sharing 
site. Suppose that it had only three photos posted, but hundreds of tags for those 
photos and votes from users about which of the three they liked best. It would be less 
likely to attract new members than one with hundreds of photos and only a few tags 
and votes. 
 Design Claim 19  User-generated primary content does more to bootstrap additional 
membership than does user-generated metadata in the community startup stage. 
 In addition to generating attractive content, members can directly attract other 
members. Because people are members of multiple groups and communities, aware-
ness of one community can spread to other communities. Indeed, a viral spread of 
membership is a natural phenomenon that may occur organically, without special 
intervention from designers. For example, Backstrom and colleagues examined pat-
terns of joining communities within the blogging site LiveJournal and of joining 
(participating in) academic conferences that occur annually. They found that people 
are more likely to join groups the more of their existing friends are members and the 
more those friends are friends with each other ( Backstrom et al. 2006 ). 
 One trick for designers who want to supercharge the normal viral dissemination 
process is to get some marker of membership to display on web pages or in .sig (sig-
nature) lines of messages that are viewed by people who are not members. For 
example, within the overall Facebook site, there are lots of specific communities. 

Chapter 6: Starting New Online Communities 
251
When a person joins one of those communities, that membership can be displayed 
on the user ’ s profile, visible to any of his or her acquaintances who view the profile. 
The action of joining the group may also be propagated to the feeds of other people 
on Facebook who are official  “ friends ” but who may not yet be a member of the group. 
 Design Claim 20  Services that enable displays of membership that are visible to non-
members lead to bootstrapping. 
 An even more effective way to leverage the fact that early members are also members 
of other communities is to make actions within the community visible to acquain-
tances outside the community. For example, presidential candidate Barack Obama ’ s 
website allowed members to create blogs on the site and take various actions. It gave 
members the option of linking with their existing Facebook accounts, so that some 
of their actions on the Obama site generated entries in Facebook and thus were visible 
in the feeds of the Facebook  “ friends. ” Numerous Facebook apps work similarly. For 
example, many people have been introduced to the FarmVille and Foursquare apps 
by seeing status messages in their main Facebook newsfeeds that describe their friends ’  
notable — or not so notable — events within those apps (see   figure 6.4 ). 
 Figure 6.4 
 Foursquare ( http://foursquare.com ) newsfeeds. 

252 
Paul Resnick, Joseph Konstan, Yan Chen, and Robert E. Kraut
 Design Claim 21  Services that make members ’ actions in the community visible to 
their acquaintances outside the community lead early participants to attract later 
participants. 
 News and content sites often provide a feature that lets readers notify friends about 
content that they found interesting. For example, the  New York Times website offers 
buttons that allow readers to forward content by email or to recommend the article 
on news aggregator services like Digg. Because the site facilitates the forwarding, the 
notification about the interesting content can also highlight the existence of the site 
as a whole. The same mechanism can be provided in online communities for forward-
ing interesting content. For example, the Food Network ( http://www.foodnetwork.com ) 
has an Email button that allows a user to email a recipe to a friend with an embedded 
sentence,  “ Checkout this awesome recipe on FoodNetwork.com! ” 
 Design Claim 22  Services that allow members to forward content from the commu-
nity to their acquaintances outside the community lead early participants to attract 
later participants. 
 The viral marketing approach is even more evident in some of the explicit social 
networking sites. When signing up for the professional social network site LinkedIn, 
members are invited to let the software scan their instant messenger contacts and their 
email contacts both to help them connect with those already in the site (increasing 
value) and to invite those who are not there (bootstrapping). Thus, each new member 
potentially brings in other acquaintances, and the site provides tools that reduce the 
effort needed for such invitations. 
 Design Claim 23  Services that allow members to invite acquaintances outside the 
community to join lead early participants to attract later participants. 
 As with content generation, explicit incentives may be provided for referring new 
members. Physician community Sermo has offered cash and prizes to members who 
refer their friends. Cloudmark ’ s SpamNet offered a free month of service for each 
customer referred. One challenge with pay-for-referral schemes — and the reason that 
most free sites don ’ t use them — is ensuring that members refer actual people who are 
likely participants rather than their own six other email accounts. Sermo handles this 
with an elaborate signup process; even though the site is free to members, those 
members have to demonstrate that they are licensed physicians. Cloudmark ’ s model 

Chapter 6: Starting New Online Communities 
253
is similar to many pay services; you get the credit only after the referred member has 
been a paying subscriber for two months. Other commercial sites offer members the 
chance to give discounts with their referral (10 percent off the items you recommend) 
or give a percentage back to the referrer, in a form of multilevel marketing. 
 Design Claim 24  Pay-for-referral methods and revenue sharing from referrals increase 
bootstrapping. 
 Attracting Early Members 
 We adapt the previous cost-benefit analysis framework to consider the problem of 
attracting early members, who decide whether to join before the community has 
reached a critical mass of participation from other people. There are many possible 
futures for a community in its early stages, with each providing a different level of 
possible benefits for members. The key idea for understanding the impacts of different 
design choices is that they affect the likelihood of those future states or the value that 
members will get from them. To present that idea in its simplest form, imagine that 
after an initial time period in its current state (the first stage), there are only two pos-
sible future states: one in which the community fails completely and one in which it 
succeeds completely. A potential member will have a belief about the  success_probabil-
ity , the likelihood that the community will achieve the success state. 
 We model the expected utility of a decision to join early and compare it to the 
expected utility of waiting and joining later.  4  Joining early, in the first stage, requires 
paying the  startup_cost , as in the model from the previous section. It also yields 
an expected total net benefit from the first stage, prior to either achieving critical 
mass or failing, which we represent as  participation_benefit stage1 . If the community goes 
to the failure state, assume that no one will continue to use it, so there are no addi-
tional costs or benefits for anyone. If the community succeeds, participation in the 
second stage will yield additional benefits,  participation_benefit stage2 . In addition, as we 
shall describe, in the success state, there may be additional benefits for the early 
members, such as status in the community, which we model with the variable 
 early_adopter_benefit . 
 In summary, we have expected utility of joining the community in the first stage: 
 util(join now) =  participation_benefit stage1 - startup_cost +  
 success_probability  ×  ( participation_benefit stage2 + early_adopter_benefit ) 
 Instead of joining in the first stage, a member has the option of waiting until stage 2. 
If the community succeeds, the new member can join then. The member gets no 

254 
Paul Resnick, Joseph Konstan, Yan Chen, and Robert E. Kraut
benefits in stage 1, but has the advantage of not paying the startup costs in those 
cases in which the community is not going to succeed. The expected utility of that 
option is: 
 util(wait) =  success_probability  ×  ( participation_benefit stage2 - startup_cost ) 
 For someone to prefer joining now rather than waiting, the expected utility must be 
higher: 
 util(join now) - util(wait)  > 0 
 Expanding the two quantities and simplifying, people prefer joining now only if: 
 participation_benefit stage1  –  startup_cost (1  –  success_probability )  + 
early_adopter_benefit  × success_probability  > 0 
 From this inequality, it is easy to list approaches that make it more attractive to join 
now rather than waiting. The following subsections examine the approaches in more 
detail. 
 1.  Increase stage 1 value of the community  Ideally, the net benefits of early stage par-
ticipation can be made positive, despite the lack of other members. We describe ways 
to provide nonsocial value that is independent of other members ’ participation, in 
the form of access to content or services that are exogenously generated rather than 
provided by community members. 
 2.  Reduce startup costs of joining the community  Reducing startup costs makes early 
joining more attractive relative to waiting because these costs are paid by early joiners 
even when the community fails. The effects of design choices such as user interface 
compatibility that affect these joining costs were already explored in the previous 
section and are not repeated here. 
 3.  Early adopter benefits  We present three approaches for creating early adopter ben-
efits. One focuses on the benefits of having skills and familiarity when the community 
becomes popular. A second focuses on the benefits of establishing a reputation as a 
leader early in a community ’ s life. A third, in communities expected to generate rev-
enues, is to promise a share of future monetary revenues to early contributors, analo-
gous to startup companies ’ offers of stock to early employees. 
 4.  Expectation setting  Increasing expectations about the probability of the commu-
nity ’ s success reduces the chances that an early joiner ’ s entry costs will be wasted. It 
also increases the probability of receiving any early adopter benefits that will be avail-
able if the community succeeds. Expectations can be shaped through signaling about 
commitments to future resource expenditure. Other expectation-setting approaches 
include conveying a trajectory of growth, conveying images of what the community 

Chapter 6: Starting New Online Communities 
255
is expected to be like at some future time, drawing analogies to other successful com-
munities, and communicating contingent participation commitments that other 
potential members have made. 
 All of these approaches can be targeted toward specific subpopulations. One pos-
sibility is to target the natural  “ lead adopters, ” those who need the least extra encour-
agement to join early. The lead adopters for many innovations are people with special 
needs for the good or service being offered. For example, men seeking sexually ori-
ented entertainment were early adopters of the French Minitel system in 1982 and 
1983, an early information service widely deployed in homes. Shortly after Minitel 
offered text-based communication, sexually oriented chats known as  messagerie rose 
 ( pink messaging ) became  “ one of the main forces behind Minitel ’ s success, especially 
between about 1983 and 1987, by which year  ‘ pink sites ’ were clocking up staggeringly 
high usage figures ” ( Jacobs 2003 , 81). Doctors, factory managers, and isolated farm 
women — all social categories with strong needs for communication — became early 
adopters of the telephone system in the United States ( Fischer 1992 ). Translated to 
the online community domain, early adopters would be the people who are most 
interested in the topic to be discussed or who most want to use the products (e.g., 
open source software) that the community will create. One study found that the 
people most likely to make use of the online community features of a pedometer-based 
walking program were those who had the least offline social support for their efforts 
to become more physically active ( Richardson et al. 2010 ). 
 Those who need the community most may not always be the best targets for early 
adoption.  Rogers (1995 , chapter 7) notes other characteristics of early adopters of 
innovations, some of which are relatively easy to discern among potential members 
of a new community, and some of which are less so. In terms of their demographic 
characteristics, early adopters tend to be richer, of higher social status, and better 
educated than later adopters. In terms of personality and cognitive and attitudinal 
individual differences, early adopters tend to be more intelligent, rational, better able 
to deal with abstractions, and have more favorable attitudes toward change and 
toward science than later adopters. In addition, they are better able to cope with risk 
and uncertainty. Taken together, these characteristics fall along two dimensions: (1) 
the education, intelligence, rationality, and ability to deal with abstractions, which 
allows them to understand better the potential future benefits they may receive from 
adopting the innovation; and (2) the wealth, status, and ability to deal with uncer-
tainty that allows them to cope with the risks associated with adopting an innovation. 
These characteristics can also partly explain what Rogers calls the  “ innovation-need 
paradox ” ( Rogers 1995 , 275) — the observation that in many cases those who most 

256 
Paul Resnick, Joseph Konstan, Yan Chen, and Robert E. Kraut
need the benefits of a new idea (e.g., the poorer or less educated) are among the last 
to adopt it. In the United States, the poor, the less educated, and the elderly are among 
the last to use online resources, including health support groups, to deal with illness 
( Fox and Jones 2009 ). They may not have the financial resources to absorb the risks 
associated with innovations or the information or education to understand sufficiently 
the potential advantages. In starting an online health support group, then, it may be 
better to focus first on attracting younger, more connected people, even though they 
may have less need than people at a more advanced illness stage who are homebound 
and more socially isolated. 
 Another useful population to target is the people who provide the greatest leverage 
in attracting other members. We have already argued that content production is more 
valuable than metadata production for attracting additional members. In many com-
munities, there are some people who are natural content producers and others who 
are more naturally content consumers or producers of metadata. For example, on a 
blogging site like LiveJournal, which has many groups, there are some people who 
primarily benefit from having an audience for what they write and others who primar-
ily benefit from being the audience. In the early stages of starting a blogging com-
munity, it is more important to attract those who want to write than those who want 
to read. 
 More generally, economists describe two-sided networks ( Armstrong 2006 ;  Caillaud 
and Jullien 2003 ;  Rochet and Tirole 2003 ;  Parker and Van Alstyne 2005 ). These are 
situations in which there are complementary types of participants, each of which 
produces value for the other type. For example, in a LiveJournal group, the presence 
of a lot of readers makes the site more attractive for writers, and vice versa. The pres-
ence of other writers may not be so attractive for writers, as they create competition 
for reader attention, though their presence may be tolerated if it is the reason that 
there are many readers. Dating sites for heterosexuals are another type of online com-
munity with two-sided externalities. eHarmony ( http://www.eharmony.com ) is more 
attractive for women if there are more men participating, and vice versa. Thus, a useful 
strategy in the startup phase may be to provide incentives for one gender to participate 
in order to attract the other, much as bars and nightclubs sometimes offer free entry 
to women on  “ ladies night ” in order to make the venue more attractive for men. 
 When there is a choice about which type to try to attract first, there are a couple 
of considerations to keep in mind. First, it may be that only a few of one type are 
needed to attract the other type, yet many of the other type are required to attract 
the first type. For example, attracting a few blog writers may be sufficient to subse-
quently attract many readers. By contrast, attracting a few readers is rarely sufficient 

Chapter 6: Starting New Online Communities 
257
to subsequently attract many writers. Second, one type or the other may be more 
patient about waiting for the second type to arrive or more willing to endure the first 
stage before the other arrives. If either type will attract the other, it may be useful to 
target the early recruitment to the more patient type. 
 Increase Stage 1 Value of the Community 
 Many online sites with successful social content started by providing services of value 
to their customers in the absence of critical mass for an online community. Delicious 
( http://www.delicious.com , formerly Del.icio.us) pioneered online bookmarking. It 
has offered the personal productivity tool of keeping and organizing one ’ s personal 
tags for web content on a server on the Internet. That service allows people who use 
multiple computers to access their tags regardless of which computer they are using. 
This personal productivity aid provided sufficient value to some users that they would 
use the service even in the absence of any other users, and thus helped attract users 
even before the service reached a critical mass of social usage. 
 Instead of offering a service that is individually valuable to one person, it is some-
times possible to offer a group service that is valuable to a small enough group that 
the group can collectively decide to join. For example, to many of the users of Yahoo! 
Groups, the value lies entirely within the groups they (or their friends) create. Presum-
ably, however, some people who were first invited by an acquaintance to join a par-
ticular group subsequently became involved in the larger constellation of Yahoo! 
Groups, helping to build the critical mass for the overall service. 
 Shopping opportunities may provide another nonsocial source of benefits. Shut-
terfly ( http://www.shutterfly.com ) is an online photo printing/storage/sharing site. 
Unlike some photo sharing sites (such as Flickr,  http://www.flickr.com ), Shutterfly 
started primarily as a site at which digital photos could be uploaded and printed, both 
as traditional prints and as enhanced products such as calendars, mugs, prints with 
fancy borders, and so forth. People uploaded their pictures to Shutterfly for the non-
social purpose of ordering prints. Social interaction, however, was a natural side effect. 
From the start, Shutterfly allowed photographers to share their photos with friends 
and family (and to thereby allow those friends and family to order prints). Today, the 
site has grown to build its theme around the tag line  “ tell your story ” and to have a 
gallery of community-created photo books, complete with personal profiles of the 
photographers and scrapbookers. What was initially single-user commerce activity of 
photo printing attracted users to what eventually became a social site for many. 
 Amazon ( http://www.amazon.com ) is another example of a site that attracted initial 
users for shopping. It has a large collection of successful social content options within 

258 
Paul Resnick, Joseph Konstan, Yan Chen, and Robert E. Kraut
its site. It uses collaborative recommender technologies (both contextual  “ customers 
who bought this item also bought ” and overall recommendations for products of 
interest to an individual). It has an extensive set of product reviews. Many people 
have posted gift or wish lists that others can browse (and shop from). Each of these 
 “ social applications ” would have had trouble launching without critical mass, however, 
and indeed most did not exist when Amazon was launched. Instead, Amazon amassed 
a critical mass of people and data by offering a distinctly nonsocial application — book 
buying. 
 Design Claim 25  Single-user and small-group productivity, entertainment, or com-
merce tools can attract people to an online space before the community features are 
successful. 
 The  New York Times is a content site that hosts both the newspaper ’ s print articles and 
a substantial number of online-only columns and blogs. Although it did not start out 
as a social site, it has clearly become one. A quick review of this morning ’ s articles 
finds that many of them have reader discussion postings from ten or more different 
readers and that many of those discussions are truly interactive (with messages, 
responses, and responses to the responses). Launching a stand-alone news discussion 
site from scratch has a serious critical mass problem: many have tried, but only a few 
(notably Slashdot, Digg, and Reddit) have been successful. Instead, by using their 
content to attract people for nonsocial purposes — reading news articles and columns —
 the  New York Times easily created a community of readers who then generated com-
ments and discussion. 
 Design Claim 26  Providing access to professionally generated content can help attract 
people to an online space before the community features are successful. 
 Another way to compensate for an initially small community is to import user-
generated content from elsewhere. In section 2, we pointed out that importing content 
can create some of the same positive externalities that other members would provide 
because some of the benefit their presence would provide is through the content they 
would provide. This may be especially useful in the startup stage, when there are few 
members generating content locally. Consider, for example, MovieLens. Users rate 
movies and the system uses the ratings of other people to predict how well individuals 
will like particular movies. When MovieLens started, it imported a database of ratings 
that had been gathered by another movie rating site, EachMovie, which was no longer 

Chapter 6: Starting New Online Communities 
259
operational. With the EachMovie data available, even the first MovieLens subscriber 
received useful predictions (after entering a few ratings so that the site could calibrate 
the user ’ s tastes). Subsequent MovieLens subscribers benefited from both the preexist-
ing EachMovie data and from the ratings that other MovieLens subscribers had entered. 
The imported data compensated for a small membership. Once MovieLens was well 
established, the marginal value of the imported data was reduced. 
 A number of product review sites appear to follow the syndicated data strategy. For 
example, Epinions generated a large number of product reviews as a stand-alone site. 
It then sold its content to other sites that wanted to include product reviews but did 
not have enough users to generate their own. There are a large number of travel review 
sites; on occasion they seem to share content. For example, we found the same review 
for a hotel in Florence on several different sites.  5  
 As described in section 2, one danger with using syndicated data as a strategy for 
jump-starting an online community is that users may discover the original source and 
choose to join the already active community instead. Syndicated data provide value 
to individuals, but don ’ t create the stickiness or competitive advantage that having a 
large community would create. In combination with other useful content or services, 
however, or with a novel presentation, syndicated data can increase the value of a 
community before it becomes self-sustaining. 
 Design Claim 27  Providing access to syndicated data can help attract people to an 
online space before the community features are successful, if the syndicated data is 
not otherwise easily accessible or if it is presented in a novel way that adds value. 
 Another way to compensate for an initially small community is for paid staff to par-
ticipate and provide the benefits that will eventually be provided by members. For a 
community in which the externalities come from a large number of participants, such 
as a movie recommendation site, this approach would be prohibitively expensive. For 
smaller niches, however, such as technical support for products, this may be a viable 
option. For example, when launching discussion boards for a group of patients enrolled 
in a research study on how to motivate increased exercise, staff members pre-populated 
the forums with introductions and questions before inviting the study participants 
and made sure to respond to all the study participants ’ posts (Resnick et al. 2010). 
This approach made it more attractive to post and to check the boards for new mes-
sages and thus helped build participation by patients. 
 As another example, in January 2007, Microsoft embarked on an effort to grow the 
peer technical support that occurred in the online forums of MSDN, the Microsoft 

260 
Paul Resnick, Joseph Konstan, Yan Chen, and Robert E. Kraut
Developer Network. Managers hypothesized that a low answer rate for posted ques-
tions (about 35 percent) was discouraging people from posting questions, so they hired 
staff to answer some of the questions. The answer rate went up to about 80 percent. 
Not surprisingly, the volume of posts tripled in a year.  6  
 Design Claim 28  Participation by professional staff can help attract people to an 
online space before the community features are successful. 
 The need for staff involvement in the early stages suggests that it may be helpful to 
start a community with an original scope narrower than its eventual aspirations. For 
example, a book site that is hoping to eventually have reviews for all books might 
start with a subset (current bestsellers or book club selections) as a way of building 
more content in a narrower area (rather than fewer reviews per item across a broad 
area). In addition to the need for staff attention to seed the contents, staff attention 
may be needed for marketing. 
 Communities based on geographic locality, with little synergy between activity 
in different locations, offer the strongest case for starting with a small scope and 
expanding gradually. A wide range of sites from Angie ’ s List to Citysearch ( http://
www.citysearch ) to Craigslist launched over time in different cities. A smaller site —
 Localfiles ( http://localfiles.com ), a directory for the Indian expatriate community in 
the United States — followed the same approach, launching a site in Minneapolis before 
expanding to other cities. 
 Other communities may have more synergy between activities in different parts of 
the eventual community scope. A restricted scope in the startup stage involves a trade-
off between the focusing of staff resources for marketing and content creation and the 
lost synergies. For example, in a community for baseball fans, many people might be 
interested in discussing a particular favorite team and also discussing the state of the 
sport as a whole. If the community starts with just a single team ’ s fans, it may not 
have enough people to generate good discussion of baseball as a whole and may thus 
also lose some people who would have joined if there were lively discussion of baseball 
as a whole in addition to their favorite team. On the other hand, trying to simultane-
ously seed discussion spaces for all of the teams might overtax the available staff 
resources. 
 Design Claim 29  Starting with a limited scope and expanding later allows focusing 
of staff resources toward getting to critical mass in the limited scope. 

Chapter 6: Starting New Online Communities 
261
 One problem with paying staff to participate is that it may be difficult to get volunteers 
to assume the roles initially filled by staff. People are less motivated to contribute 
when they think that someone else will carry the load if they don ’ t, as explored in 
detail in chapter 2. Worse yet, people may also be less motivated to contribute on a 
voluntary basis when they know that someone else is getting paid for similar work.  7  
Perhaps most critically, staff may notice tasks and complete them even before volun-
teers notice them and volunteers may thus never develop the habit of taking on tasks 
that they could do. There is thus a real danger that the roles for professional staff will 
become permanent, with a need for continued payments. 
 One possible solution to a community becoming dependent on staff contributors 
is for them to wait for volunteers to perform tasks and take on only those tasks that 
volunteers do not. This method not only gives volunteers enough time to find tasks, 
but also degrades the quality of service provided by the professionals (because of the 
delay) and thus encourages members to take on the tasks so that they will be com-
pleted sooner. For example, when Microsoft hired staff to answer questions on MSDN 
forums, as a way to encourage more posting of questions, the staff answered only 
questions that had gone unanswered for twenty-four hours, which was the approxi-
mate time it took for items to scroll off the front page, at which point they were 
unlikely to be noticed by volunteer members. Over time, the percentage of questions 
answered by members increased and the need for staff went down. 
 Design Claim 30  If professionals act as contributors of last resort, they will be needed 
less as the community achieves critical mass. 
 In some cases, software bots can offer a partial substitute for the value that would be 
provided by other participants. For example, the now-defunct jsettlers.com was a 
website for playing an online version of the popular German board game Settlers of 
Catan. Three or four players are needed for a game session. Visitors to the site who 
tired of waiting for other opponents to join their games could invite software bots to 
play instead. The software bots may not be quite as fun to play against, but sometimes 
they ’ re better than waiting for real opponents. 
 Similarly, the online ESP Game, mentioned earlier, pairs two people for a coordina-
tion game in which each tries to assign the same tag the partner does, without com-
municating with each other. Part of the fun is the sense of connection one experiences 
with an unknown partner, especially when a partnership selects matching tags that 
are unusual or quirky. The game has become popular; often, one can be matched with 

262 
Paul Resnick, Joseph Konstan, Yan Chen, and Robert E. Kraut
a partner with little waiting. When there are few participants, however, the game pairs 
a live player with a replay of a previously recorded game session (von Ahn and Dabbish 
2004). Knowing that one can always find a partner makes it more attractive to visit 
the site, even if the partner is sometimes not live. 
 Design Claim 31  Bots that simulate other participants can help attract people to an 
online space before the community features are successful. 
 Early Adopter Benefits 
 We now turn to early adopter benefits as a way of convincing potential members to 
join early. Early adopter benefits are common outside of online communities. For 
example, early employees in a company receive larger numbers of stock shares than 
later employees receive. As another example, early employees in a presidential political 
campaign — even those with little prior experience — can expect White House jobs, 
should their candidate win. Joining the campaign after the Iowa caucuses, when it ’ s 
easier to pick the winner and there are more people involved, leads to less personal 
benefit, should one ’ s candidate win. 
 We describe three approaches to providing early adopter benefits in online com-
munities. One focuses on continuing monetary advantages for the early adopters, 
in terms of either payments or discounts. The other two focus on benefits within 
the community, either the benefits of having skills before others do or the status 
and privileges that stick with early adopters even after the community becomes 
sustainable. 
 First, consider promises of future discounts. One example comes from the previ-
ously mentioned antispam service SpamNet by Cloudmark. An important ingredient 
in the service was reports, from customers, of particular emails that were spam. These 
reports enabled Cloudmark to flag and filter similar messages sent to other customers. 
Clearly, this service exhibits significant network externalities because it will be useful 
to join only if there are many other members reporting on spam. In its early stages, 
Cloudmark offered the service for free and — more important — promised a special life-
time subscription rate to its early users when it went commercial. Although intended 
primarily as a retention strategy, this type of offer can be an additional incentive for 
early users by increasing the expected future value of the service, should it achieve criti-
cal mass (i.e., many people will find it worth paying full price for, but I won ’ t have to). 
 Design Claim 32  Promising permanent discounts to early adopters can attract early 
adopters to the community. 

Chapter 6: Starting New Online Communities 
263
 There are many less tangible benefits that early joiners of an online community can 
expect. For example, early members are likely to be better known and have higher 
status once the community gets large. This change may occur through informal pro-
cesses of preferential attachment. For example, in a blogging network such as Live-
Journal, new members will be more likely to link to blogs of people who are already 
prominent, thus making them even more prominent for people who come even later. 
 Joining early can lead to higher status or positions of leadership after a community 
succeeds. The reputation and status benefits of being an early adopter may emerge 
naturally in an online community, or they may be more explicit. A conversation-based 
community may need to do little more than make a poster ’ s identity visible for such 
benefits to emerge because people will recognize the identifier and treat the long-time 
members with extra respect. When a group of old-timers reminisced about Usenet 
news, it occurred to us that we all remembered a large number of the early active 
Usenet posters, moderators, and administrators — even though nearly twenty-five years 
had passed since encountering them and many of them were no longer active. In 
communities with clear leadership roles having differential privileges, such as Wiki-
pedia and open source projects, many people understand intuitively that there are 
more opportunities to assume the high status roles if one  “ gets in on the ground floor. ” 
For example, the process for gaining editor privileges at Wikipedia has becomes more 
codified and presumably more stringent over time ( Burke and Kraut 2008 ). Empirically, 
longevity was found to matter in promotion decisions: each additional month as editor 
led to a 2.9 percent increase in the probability of approval for administrator status. 
 Early joining benefits may also occur through explicit status markers not tied to 
explicit leadership roles. For example, just as American Express prints  “ Member since ” 
dates on credit cards (and advertises this fact), eBay shows a  “ Member since ” date on 
its user feedback profiles. Many online forums display the date a user first entered the 
community alongside each post. Some communities, such as Slashdot, assign user IDs 
sequentially, and display these ids with posts; people with very low IDs have status in 
the community, much as people with low  “ badge numbers ” have high status in large 
high-tech companies. 
 One of the challenges of participating in communities is the time and investment 
needed to  “ get up to speed ” building skills and a social network. This challenge can 
be reframed as a benefit of early adoption. One of the benefits of early adoption 
germane to online communities is the ability to build skills ahead of other members. 
In online gaming communities such as World of Warcraft there is a tremendous surge 
of activity as new levels are introduced, in part so that those achieving them can do 
so before their friends. In a virtual world, an early adopter may show off his or her 

264 
Paul Resnick, Joseph Konstan, Yan Chen, and Robert E. Kraut
skills at moving around, knowledge of the world, and even the special features of his 
or her avatar that early adoption provided before his or her peers joined. 
 Turning these potential benefits of early adoption into early adoption decisions 
requires careful communication so that potential members are aware of the advantages 
of learning the ropes early. Potential members need to be informed about benefits 
available only to early adopters. One common technique is to fix either an expiration 
time ( “ this week only ” ) or the number of people who can claim the benefit ( “ the first 
100 members get . . . ” ). 
 Design Claim 33  Promoting the status or readiness benefits of being early to an online 
community can attract early adopters to the community. 
 It may be possible to market an online community as  “ undiscovered ” with the impli-
cation that those who adopt early will be recognized by their peers as trend-setters. 
In social networking communities, early adopters may see a benefit in being the one 
to invite all their friends (rather than being the last one to the party). Exclusivity, or 
the appearance thereof, is one way to promote a site as cool. Google did this particu-
larly well with Gmail, which had a limited beta release in which you could only 
get an account by being invited by someone who already had one — this approach 
linked social word of mouth with scarcity. The goals are to reach potential early adopt-
ers and to reframe the message from one in which  “ new ” might imply uncertain and 
risky to one in which  “ new ” implies the chance to get in while it ’ s still cool and 
undiscovered. 
 Design Claim 34  Promoting a site as cool but undiscovered can attract early 
adopters. 
 The default assumption in most online communities is that supply is infinite and that 
hence there is no chance of a resource running out. If the supply can be limited or 
differentiated in such a way so as to create a limited amount of  “ preferred ” member-
ship, then individuals can be enticed to join early. The namespace of usernames within 
a community is a naturally scarce resource. On eBay, memorable usernames like 
 “ coinguy ” and  “ informationist ” are available on a first-come, first-served basis. The 
hundredth member had more options than the millionth. Similarly, nearly all of the 
free email services and many virtual world communities allow you to select your name, 
as long as it is not already in use. Interestingly, many online community sites have 
specifically chosen different paths (e.g., many social networking sites use your email 

Chapter 6: Starting New Online Communities 
265
address, which is already unique, and Second Life limits character names to those 
chosen from a template, which are unlikely to be particularly meaningful in the real 
world). Nonetheless, we ’ ve observed a rush of users to new email sites when announced 
(to claim their names). Making this opportunity salient in marketing is a way to 
encourage earlier membership. Namespace isn ’ t the only resource that can be made 
scarce. In online games, limited quantities of special objects may be made available 
to early users. 
 Design Claim 35  Creating scarce, claimable resources can induce prospective members 
to join earlier. 
 One challenge when creating scarcity is that members may  “ squat ” on their names or 
other resources without contributing to the community. That is, they may join but 
not participate. A common technique for preventing squatting is to require a certain 
level of sustaining activity to maintain the claimed resource. In the early days of the 
Internet, people who claimed domain names understood that they had to pay a regular 
fee to keep them, but they were never required to use them. Many of today ’ s email 
addresses and site addresses expire if they are not used at least every three to six 
months. Indeed, greater demands can likely be made; the endowment effect ( Kahne-
man and Thaler 1990 ) suggests that people will do more to keep such  “ property ” than 
they would have done to acquire it. 
 Design Claim 36  Contribution minima for maintaining scarce status can lead to 
greater contribution by status-holding members. 
 An extra beneficial side effect for the community designer is that members who join 
early in order to get in on the ground floor will be especially motivated to help make 
the community thrive. There is nothing valuable about knowing one ’ s way around 
before others do if no one else joins. There is no value in a permanent discount if the 
community doesn ’ t survive. There ’ s nothing cool about being first to a community 
that failed. And it is meaningful to have high status only if there are other people 
who join the community who have lower status. 
 The investments that people make through early adoption are sunk costs that in 
principle should not affect a rational decision maker ’ s future choices. People do, 
however, often take into account sunk costs, in part out of a desire to make the earlier 
decisions seem like good ones. Thus, people who join because of early adopter benefits 
will therefore be more likely to help the community succeed through recruitment, 

266 
Paul Resnick, Joseph Konstan, Yan Chen, and Robert E. Kraut
content creation, or other actions. The effects of sunk costs on commitment more 
generally is explored in chapter 3. 
 Setting Expectations for Success 
 Whether a community is likely to succeed is not always obvious to potential members. 
Expectations of success make it more attractive to join early, which in fact fuels 
success, so that the expectations become self-fulfilling. A number of design choices 
can affect expectations of success. Some convey signals of the community convener ’ s 
skill and commitment. Some convey signals that potential members are reacting 
favorably or are committed. Some convey external expectations. We consider each in 
turn next. 
 Signals of Convener Quality and Commitment  In the early days of the Internet, users 
had low expectations for usability, design, and interaction. With few choices, even 
venues with poor appearances might hold promise as the source for valuable content. 
As professionalism increased, ordinary web users learned a set of heuristics to distin-
guish legitimate high-quality sites from low-quality or fraudulent ones.  Fogg et al. 
(2003)  studied how users determine the credibility of websites, finding that the two 
influences on credibility cited most often were the design look of the site (e.g., profes-
sional look, pleasing graphics) and the information design/structure of the site (e.g., 
organization). Other oft-cited influences include tone of the writing (e.g., slang, poor 
language), functionality of the site (e.g., error messages, poor search), clarity of infor-
mation, and readability of text. 
 Today, the importance of credibility and professionalism is even greater. Internet 
users are regularly inundated with unprofessional-looking spam and phishing attacks 
(unwanted messages that attempt to elicit personal information). Indeed, the preva-
lence of poor writing, spelling, and layout in such scam attacks is one of the reasons 
people generally don ’ t fall for them (a test of various phishing attacks found that ones 
without such errors caught a high percentage of even skilled users ( Egelman, Cranor, 
and Hong 2008 ). 
 Design Claim 37  Professional site design increases expectations about the probability 
of success. 
 In addition signaling a convener ’ s capabilities through professional site design, it may 
also be useful to demonstrate the convener ’ s ongoing commitment. If potential 
members believe that the individuals or organization who started the community are 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Chapter 6: Starting New Online Communities 
267
committed to additional investment even if the community does not immediately 
take off, these expected future investments will factor into a judgment about whether 
the community will take off — there will be less risk that one ’ s own early efforts will 
be stranded. It is not, however, simple for the conveners of a community to credibly 
convey such a commitment. After all, they might be expected to  “ cut their losses ” if 
there is no immediate success. 
 The theory of credible signaling (Spence 1973), as discussed in the context of screen-
ing and self-selection mechanisms in chapter 5, begins with one key insight: in order 
to distinguish between high-quality and low-quality actors, it must be easier or less 
costly for the high-quality actors to provide the signal. In our situation, a  “ high-
quality ” actor is a community convener that is committed to future resource expen-
ditures on a community, even if it does not immediately achieve critical mass. A 
 “ low-quality ” actor is one that needs to see more immediate indicators of success in 
order for it to continue making investments. It is more costly for the low-quality 
community convener to make an immediate expenditure because it has a lower assess-
ment about the probability of eventual success (in part because it knows about its own 
lack of future commitment). Thus, we should expect the high-quality community 
convener to be more willing to undertake early expenditures. And when we observe 
such resource expenditures, it is a credible signal of greater commitment to future 
expenditures. 
 Sermo started an online community for doctors. It is relatively easy to create such 
a community using generic technologies such as Yahoo! Groups or an email list or a 
forum site using phpBB. Indeed, there were existing competitors. One way in which 
Sermo signaled a commitment to continued investment in its community was through 
expenditure on a custom software platform that it developed. It also had paid staff 
whose presence was very visible in the community early on, and did one-on-one 
demos for physicians at medical conferences. In the early days of Sermo, when it did 
not have more members than some of its noncommercial competitors, the visible 
expenditures and claims of its venture capital backing contributed to a sense that 
Sermo would eventually be a bigger, better community than its competitors — even 
though that was not yet the case. 
 When a number of new features are available, we speculate that deliberately holding 
some new features back so that they can be released on a more even time interval 
might be a better strategy than releasing all of them at once. There are three reasons 
for this speculation. First, user utility for new features might exhibit decreasing returns; 
that is, their marginal utility for the first new feature of the day might be higher than 
subsequent new features. Therefore, sequential releases might increase overall user 
www.Ebook777.com

268 
Paul Resnick, Joseph Konstan, Yan Chen, and Robert E. Kraut
utility. Furthermore, from a usability perspective, the sequential release approach also 
helps the site isolate and evaluate the effects of the new feature. Finally, from a signal-
ing perspective, frequent releases of new features convey a trajectory of growth and 
continued commitment. This approach is especially applicable to the initial public 
announcement of a new community. If some features that are implemented are delib-
erately held back, it may make it easier for people to get started. The held-back features 
can then be released a week or two later, conveying an image of continuing invest-
ment from the site ’ s founders. 
 Design Claim 38  Visible expenditures can be a credible signal of commitment to 
future investment in a community and thus help to increase expectations about the 
probability that the community will eventually succeed. 
 Signals of Positive Member Response  When the quality of a public good is uncertain, 
announcing early contributions provides a credible signal that the public good is 
valuable and thus helps to attract later contributors ( Vesterlund 2003 ), which is 
why major fundraising campaigns begin publicly only after  “ quiet periods ” in 
which major donors make commitments. Similarly, indicators that other potential 
members are responding favorably to a new community are a form of social proof, 
enhancing expectations that the community will succeed. This impression can be 
accomplished by making membership and activity visible and by showing a trajectory 
of growth. 
 One way to convey membership is to prominently post photos of members. Simply 
adding photos of random people to a move ratings site did not have a noticeable effect 
on user behavior (experiment with MovieLens; Regina Tassone and Sara Kiesler, per-
sonal communication). We speculate, however, that posting photos of members along-
side their user-contributed content, or posting photos of the most recent new members, 
may convey a signal that others like the community and are joining it. 
 Design Claim 39  Images of members convey the presence of other people and thus 
expectations of future success. 
 One way to convey activity in the community is through examples. Recent user con-
tributed content can be made prominent — perhaps even on the front entry page. Of 
course, making user-contributed content visible on the entry page risks conveying an 
image of amateurism if that content is not good, which is a negative signal of quality. 
One solution is to include user-contributed content but to confine it to a small sidebar 

Chapter 6: Starting New Online Communities 
269
so that new visitors will first notice the professional-looking presentation of the com-
munity. Another solution is to allow only a limited number of members — those who 
can be trusted to produce professional-looking content — to post messages that go on 
the front page. For example, the online community for developers and users of the 
Drupal content management system software includes a top area with static informa-
tion, a wide blog-style left column with official announcements that are added by 
only certain people, and a narrow block on the right with the titles of the most recent 
forum topics, which can be added by anyone (see   figure 6.5 ). 
 Design Claim 40  Prominent display of user-contributed content conveys activity, and 
thus expectations of future success, as long as there is new user-contributed content. 
 Another way to convey activity without actually showing the contents — which may be 
amateurish — is to show indicators. For example, rather than showing the actual com-
ments on blog entries, the number of comments can be shown and users can click 
through to see the actual comments, or the number of new forum topics can be shown 
without showing the actual posts. As another example, many sites show an indicator 
of how many people are currently logged in to the site. Even if there is no synchronous 
interaction, many others currently using the community is an indicator that it is well 
 Figure 6.5 
 Making recent user contributions visible in a sidebar in Drupal ( http://drupal.org ). 

270 
Paul Resnick, Joseph Konstan, Yan Chen, and Robert E. Kraut
liked. Of course, such an indicator is more effective at showing activity if — at most times 
when visitors would arrive — many other people are actually logged in. The indicator 
in  figure 6.6 , conveying that there is only one current user of a site, would discourage 
rather than encourage visitors. In sites that are intermittently active, it may be helpful 
at inactive times to show indicators about times when a lot of people were active. 
 Design Claim 41  Indicators of participation levels convey activity, and thus expecta-
tions of future success, as long as there actually is activity. 
 Conveying a trajectory of growth in membership and activity is especially helpful in 
raising expectations. There are several ways to display indicators of growth. One pos-
sibility is to publicly acknowledge each new member or each new content entry. 
Another possibility is to show a running tally of the current membership size or amount 
of content. A third possibility is to show the percentage growth. Depending on the size 
and growth rate of the community, one or another of these options may paint a more 
favorable picture of the community ’ s current quality and long-term prospects. 
 For example, in the earliest days of Wikipedia, the most effective signal of growth 
on the front page would probably have been a list of new pages that had reached an 
acceptable quality level and a list of new first-time contributors. When it started to 
take off, the most effective signal would have been to show the percentage change in 
content and contributors from month to month. Now that it is wildly successful, the 
site creates a signal that it has already succeeded by showing the absolute number of 
articles in each language (3.6 million in English as of April 6, 2011). 
 Design Claim 42  Indicators of membership and content growth signal a higher prob-
ability that the community will eventually reach critical mass, provided that there 
really is growth. 
 Figure 6.6 
 Activity indicators can highlight activity, or lack of it. 

Chapter 6: Starting New Online Communities 
271
 Design Claim 43  When a community is small and growing slowly, acknowledging 
each new member or contribution creates a more favorable signal of growth than 
showing total numbers or percentage change. 
 Design Claim 44  When a community is small and growing quickly, displaying per-
centage growth creates a more favorable signal of growth than displaying absolute 
numbers. 
 Design Claim 45  When a community has reached critical mass, displaying absolute 
numbers conveys a signal that the community is already successful. 
 Designers can also allow for conditional commitments of membership and activity, 
which allow the community to convey an expectation of success. Under this approach, 
potential members can commit to joining (or to taking certain actions), but only if 
enough other people also commit to membership or actions that will cause the com-
munity to succeed. Conditional commitments can reduce the risk of an early member-
ship decision being a wasted cost when the community fails to catch on. RSVPs for 
meetings or parties are good examples of commitment mechanisms: if not enough 
people indicate a willingness to attend, an event can be canceled without anyone 
suffering the cost of attending an empty event. 
 Meetup makes extensive use of conditional commitments. In the first couple of years 
of Meetup ’ s operation, there were no long-standing groups. Instead, each hobby or 
other interest group had a standard day of the month to meet at a local caf é , restaurant, 
or other venue. If you RSVP ’ d for the next meeting of a group, you were notified if not 
enough others had RSVP ’ d to hold the event. More recently, Meetup has also reified the 
notion of a group and provided a conditional quasicommitment mechanism for mem-
berships. If you are interested in a topic, you can register that interest with the site. 
Meetup then notifies you when other people also register an interest in the topic. When 
enough people have indicated an interest, and someone has sufficient energy to lead 
the formation of a group, Meetup provides a mechanism to contact all the people who 
have registered an interest in the group. Because there is relatively little cost involved 
with signaling an interest in a topic, people are willing to signal interest in topics that 
do not yet have a critical mass of other interested participants. 
 Another example in a slightly different setting is Groupon ( http://www.groupon
.com ). Each day there is an offer for one item, typically a gift certificate or coupon to 
a restaurant or entertainment venue (see   figure 6.7 ). People commit to buy an offer, 
knowing that the offer is on only if enough people buy it to meet the maker ’ s threshold 

272 
Paul Resnick, Joseph Konstan, Yan Chen, and Robert E. Kraut
(e.g., we ’ ll give out $40-off dinner coupons, but only if 250 people buy them for $20 
each). In principle, the conditional commitment here has two sides. On the seller side, 
it ensures enough participants to make it worthwhile to produce the items. On the 
buyer side, it is a safety measure — a buyer may not want to commit to an unknown 
restaurant, even at a good price, unless hundreds of other people (who may know 
more about it) also do.  8  
 The idea of conditional commitments can be applied to forming a new purely online 
community or to starting up a new forum within an existing online community. Rather 
than simply launching, which may lead to a problem of a sequence of visitors each 
seeing an empty forum and giving up, people can preregister an interest in a topic, or 
even tag their content as being applicable to the potential new forum. When enough 
people have registered an interest, or enough relevant content has been accumulated, 
the new forum can be launched and people who registered an interest can be notified. 
 Design Claim 46  Conditional participation commitments can draw people to join 
communities that they would not join if they had to do so without knowledge that 
others were also joining. 
 External Signals  External signals can also fuel expectations of success. One way is to 
draw analogies to other communities that are successful. We previously described the 
value of analogies in conveying the intended scope of a community. But describing 
something as the  “ Wikipedia of Numbers ” or the  “ Wikipedia of Music ” not only 
conveys an intended scope but also subtly suggests that because Wikipedia was suc-
cessful at attracting many editors and readers, so will these other sites. Mommasource.
com, an online community for mothers, rebranded itself as mamapedia ( http://
www.mamapedia.com ) with the tagline  “ The wisdom of moms. ” 
 Figure 6.7 
 Commitment contingent on others ’ participation at Groupon ( http://www.groupon.com ). 

Chapter 6: Starting New Online Communities 
273
 Design Claim 47  Drawing analogies to successful communities can raise expectations 
that a new community will be similarly successful. 
 External publicity in mainstream media and the blogosphere can also fuel expectations 
of success. Online communities that are fortunate enough to get such external public-
ity can post links to it on their sites for members and potential members who might 
have missed it (see mamapedia ’ s press page in   figure 6.8 ). 
 Design Claim 48  Drawing attention to external publicity and endorsements can raise 
expectations about future success. 
 4  Summary of Design Alternatives 
 This chapter has explored two critical challenges for communities that are just getting 
started. The first is to carve out a useful and defendable niche in the ecology of com-
peting communities. The second is to get to a self-sustaining critical mass of users. We 
 Figure 6.8 
 Highlighting external publicity in Mamapedia ( http://www.mamapedia.com ). 

274 
Paul Resnick, Joseph Konstan, Yan Chen, and Robert E. Kraut
conclude with a summary of the design alternatives considered throughout the 
chapter. 
 The first category of design alternatives are ones that structure the set of interaction 
opportunities: selecting, sorting, and highlighting them; grouping them into interac-
tion spaces; and notifying people about them. The various alternatives are most useful 
in carving out a useful niche where people will gain benefits from participating. Tech-
niques such as subdividing spaces after they become active also help in conveying a 
sense of activity, which can affect expectations about the community ’ s likely future 
success and thus help the community get through its initial stage prior to achieving 
critical mass. 
 A related category of design alternatives involve the structure of the community: 
its size and the breadth of topics covered. Larger communities have more activity, but 
that may not be so desirable in niches where the value of participating comes from 
interpersonal bonds with a few people. Starting with a limited scope and expanding 
later can also focus staff and marketing attention on getting to a critical mass of par-
ticipation in a more limited scope. 
 A number of design alternatives involve the content, tasks, and activities in the 
community. Topics and activities that bridge separate interests can make mixed-topic 
spaces work well — and these spaces can be subdivided into single-topic spaces later. 
Offering valuable activities or content that is not generated by other members can 
make the community attractive in its early stages before it achieves critical mass. 
 Because new communities often share people and content with other communities, 
the chapter also analyzed several design alternatives that involve external communica-
tion and integration. Decisions about the sharing of user IDs and profiles and the 
import and export of content are critical elements of a competitive strategy. In addi-
tion, making people ’ s membership and participation in a community visible to their 
friends outside the community and enabling members to invite friends are valuable 
ways to leverage a community ’ s early adopters and get to critical mass. 
 There are several ways to create rewards that help a community reach critical mass. 
Promises of future discounts or status for joining early or the presence of scarce, claim-
able resources can make it more attractive for people to join early. And those early 
members can be given incentives for creating content that will attract other members 
or for directly recruiting other members. 
 Finally, we find that there is remarkable power in framing things in the right way. 
Articulating a clear rather than an ambiguous topical scope for interaction spaces 
makes them more useful for most participants. Conveying a unique selling proposition 
makes it easy for people to see why they should join. Advertising and celebrity 

Chapter 6: Starting New Online Communities 
275
endorsements can make one community a focal point when there is fierce competition 
among communities. Presenting the community as cool but not yet discovered can 
make early joining attractive. Drawing analogies to successful communities, highlight-
ing external publicity, and a variety of ways of highlighting good things happening 
in the community can all convey an expectation that the community is well on its 
way to success, even if it has not yet achieved critical mass. 
 There is a lot to think about, and dream about, in the startup stage of an online 
community. Don ’ t just build it and hope for the best. Build it, provide content and 
activities that people want, structure them in a way that provides maximal benefit, 
give people some reason to be early members, leverage their early participation to 
recruit others, and frame things in a way that conveys expectations of success. Then 
they ’ ll come. 
 Table 6.1 
 Summary of design alternatives relevant to community startup, ordered by type 
 Type 
 Design alternative 
 Design 
claim 
 Selection, sorting, 
highlighting 
 Push notification 
 1 
 Mixed-topic scope for an interaction space 
 2 
 Personalized collections of  “ most related content ” 
 6 
 Subdividing spaces after they become active 
 7 
 Navigation aids that highlight more active spaces 
 8 
 A schedule of  “ expected active times ” 
 9 
 Recommender systems that help people navigate to spaces that 
best suit them 
 10 
 Community 
structure 
 Larger community 
 12 
 Starting with a limited scope and expanding later 
 29 
 Content, tasks, 
and activities 
 Activities that bridge interests in different topics 
 4 
 Differentiated user interface elements 
 13 
 User-generated primary content versus user-generated metadata 
 19 
 Productivity, entertainment, or commerce tools 
 25 
 Access to professionally generated content 
 26 
 Access to syndicated data 
 27 
 Participation by professional staff 
 28, 30 
 
 Bots that simulate other participants 
 31 

276 
Paul Resnick, Joseph Konstan, Yan Chen, and Robert E. Kraut
 External 
communication 
 Nonshared user IDs and profiles between competing 
communities 
 14 
 Content sharing between competing communities 
 15 
 Displays of membership that are visible to nonmembers 
 20 
 Members ’ actions in the community visible to their 
acquaintances outside the community 
 21 
 Allow members to forward content from the community to 
their acquaintances outside the community 
 22 
 Allow members to invite acquaintances outside the community 
to join 
 23 
 Feedback and 
rewards 
 Incentives for early members to generate content 
 18 
 Pay-for-referral and revenue sharing from referrals 
 24 
 Promising permanent discounts to early adopters 
 32 
 Promoting the status or readiness benefits of being early 
 33 
 Creating scarce, claimable resources 
 35, 36 
 Presentation and 
framing 
 Ambiguous scope for an interaction space 
 3 
 Transcendent or bridging topical identity 
 5 
 Ambiguity of scope for the community 
 11 
 Conveying a succinct unique selling proposition 
 16 
 Advertising and celebrity endorsements 
 17 
 Promoting a site as cool but undiscovered 
 34 
 Professional site design 
 37 
 Visible expenditures 
 38 
 Images of members 
 39 
 Prominent display of user-contributed content 
 40 
 Indicators of participation levels 
 41 
 Indicators of membership and content growth 
 42, 43, 
44, 45 
 Conditional participation commitments 
 46 
 Drawing analogies to successful communities 
 47 
 Drawing attention to external publicity and endorsements 
 48 
Table 6.1
(continued)
Type
Design alternative
Design 
claim

Chapter 6: Starting New Online Communities 
277
   Notes 
 1.  January 2008 data pulled by Nate Oostendorp. 
 2.  Of course, interaction design options can have a big impact on the expected value of each 
opportunity, even for identical content. For example, consider a dating site. If the potential 
matches are presented as a list of names, each one has to be clicked on, and there is a ten-second 
delay before the page for a person loads, then the average match value may be low. By contrast, 
the same set of potential dates may have higher average value if there is a page that shows photos 
and a few key attributes and it thus takes very little time to weed out those who are incompat-
ible. Interaction design alternatives are largely beyond the scope of this book. For the purposes 
of the model, assume that the interaction design has been optimized to yield the best possible 
match value and navigation cost. 
 3.  Readers familiar with economic models may think of a discount-rate delta for benefits or a 
per-period probability of exit delta. The participation_benefits quantity would then be the 
expected discounted net benefits, integrated over all time periods. 
 4.  The decision is taken against a backdrop of some other ways in which the person could 
spend their time. All utilities in the model should be thought of as net utilities relative to 
the outside option — the best other way the user could spend their time. That is, we have normal-
ized the value of the outside option to 0, allowing us to omit it from the models for 
simplicity. 
 5.  For example, the comment,  “ Was disappointed in Villa de Vedetta . . . thought was quite 
stuffy ” was found at one point on  http://en.venere.com ,  http://bookingclick.com ,  http://
www.alibabuy.com , and  http://www.tvtrip.es . 
 6.  Sean O ’ Driscoll, personal communication, April 2008. 
 7.  This is not always a showstopper, as there is a countervailing effect in which people are more 
likely to participate in more successful communities. Wagstrom, Herbsleb, Kraut, and Mockus 
(2010) found that getting more  “ community-focused ” professional developers involved in open 
source projects within the GNOME community actually drew in more unpaid labor, rather than 
alienating the volunteer participants. More  “ product-focused ” professional developers had no 
net impact on volunteer participation in a project. 
 8.  In practice, the items tend to be services in which there is no minimum production level 
required to keep costs down, and the threshold always seems to be met early in the morning, so 
the signaling value of others buying may be limited. 
 References 
 Anderson ,  Lessley .  2003 . Attack of the Smartasses.  SF Weekly News , August 13.  http://
www.sfweekly.com/2003-08-13/news/attack-of-the-smartasses . 

278 
Paul Resnick, Joseph Konstan, Yan Chen, and Robert E. Kraut
 Armstrong ,  Mark .  2006 .  Competition in Two-Sided Markets.   Rand Journal of Economics  37 ( 3 ): 
 668  – 691 . 
 Backstrom ,  L. ,  D.  Huttenlocher ,  J.   Kleinberg , and  X.   Lan .  2006 . Group Formation in Large Social 
Networks: Membership, Growth, and Evolution.  Proceedings of the 12th ACM SIGKDD International 
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining ,  44 – 54 . Philadelphia, PA: ACM.  
 boyd ,  dana .  2006 . Friendster Lost Steam. Is Myspace Just a Fad?  Apophenia Blog .  http://
www.danah.org/papers/FriendsterMySpaceEssay.html . 
 boyd ,  dana .  2008 .   Taken Out of Context: American Teen Sociality in Networked Publics . PhD diss., 
 Berkeley :  University of California . 
 Burke ,  Moira , and  Robert E.   Kraut .  2008 . Mopping Up: Modeling Wikipedia Promotion Processes. 
In  CSCW 2008: Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work . New 
York: ACM Press.  
 Caillaud ,  Bernard , and  Bruno  Jullien .  2003 .  Chicken  & Egg: Competition among Intermediation 
Service Providers.    Rand Journal of Economics  34  ( 2 ):  309  – 328 .  
 Egelman ,  S. ,  L. F.   Cranor , and  J.   Hong .  2008 . You ’ ve Been Warned: An Empirical Study of the 
Effectiveness of Web Browser Phishing Warnings. In  CHI 2008: Proceeding of the ACM SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ,  1065 – 1074 . New York: ACM Press.  
 Ellison ,  N. B.   2007 .  Social Network Sites: Definition, History, and Scholarship.    Journal of Computer-
Mediated Communication  13 : 210  – 230 . 
 Farrell ,  Joseph , and  Garth   Saloner .  1985 .  Standardization, Compatibility, and Innovation.    Rand 
Journal of Economics  16  ( 1 ):  70 – 83 . 
 Fischer ,  C. S.   1992 .   America Calling: A Social History of the Telephone to 1940 .  Berkeley :  University 
of California Press . 
 Fogg ,  B. J.  Cathy Soohoo, David R. Danielson, Leslie Marable, Julianne Stanford, and Ellen R. 
Tauber.  2003 . How Do Users Evaluate the Credibility of Web Sites?: A Study with over 2,500 
Participants. In  Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on Designing for User Experiences , 1 – 15. San 
Francisco, CA: ACM.  
 Fox ,  Susannah , and  Sydney   Jones .  2009 .   The Social Life of Health Information .  Washington, DC : 
 Pew Internet  & American Life Project .  
 Gilder ,  George .  1993 . Metcalfe ’ s Law and Legacy.  Forbes ASAP , Sept. 13, 1993. 
 Horvitz ,  Eric , and  Johnson   Apacible .  2003 . Learning and Reasoning About Interruption. In  Pro-
ceedings of the 5th International Conference on Multimodal Interface , 20 – 27. New York: ACM Press.  
 Jacobs ,  Gabriel .  2003 .  Cyberculture . In   French Popular Culture: An Introduction  , ed.  Hugh  Dauncey , 
 77 – 87 .  London :  Hodder Headline Group .  
 Kahneman ,  Daniel ,  Jack L.   Knetsch , and  Richard H.   Thaler .  1990 .  Experimental Tests of the 
Endowment Effect and the Coase Theorem.   Journal of Political Economy  98  ( 6 ):  1325  – 1348 . 

Chapter 6: Starting New Online Communities 
279
 Katz ,  Michael L. , and  Carl  Shapiro .  1985 .  Network Externalities, Competition, and Compatibilty.  
 American Economic Review  75  ( 3 ):  424  – 440 . 
 Kim ,  Amy Jo .  2000 .  Community Building on the Web: Secret Strategies for Successful Online Communi-
ties .  Berkeley, CA :  Peachpit Press . 
 Newman ,  Mark ,  Debra   Lauterbach ,  Sean   Munson ,  Paul  Resnick , and  Margaret   Morris .  2011 .  “ It ’ s 
not that I don ’ t have problems, I ’ m just not putting them on Facebook ” : Challenges and Oppor-
tunities in Using Online Social Networks for Health. In  Proceedings of CSCW 2011 . Hangzhou: 
ACM Press.  
 Parker ,  Geoffrey G. , and  Marshall W.   Van Alstyne .  2005 .  Two-Sided Network Effects: A Theory of 
Information Product Design.    Management Science  51 ( 10 ):  1494  – 1504 . 
 Reeves ,  R.  1961 .  Reality in Advertising .  New York :  Alfred A. Knopf ,   
 Ren ,  Yuqing , and  Robert E.   Kraut .  Under review .  A Simulation for Designing Online Community: 
Member Motivation, Contribution, and Discussion Moderation.    Information Systems Research . 
 Resnick ,  Paul J. ,  Adrienne W.   Janney ,  Lorraine R.   Buis , and  Caroline R.   Richardson .  2010 .  Adding 
an Online Community to an Internet-Mediated Walking Program. Part 2: Strategies for Encourag-
ing Community Participation.   Journal of Medical Internet Research  12  ( 4 ):  e72 . 
 Richardson ,  Caroline R. ,  Lorraine R.   Buis ,  Adrienne W.  Janney ,  David E.  Goodrich ,  Ananda   Sen , 
 Michael L.  Hess ,  Laurie A.   Fortlage ,  et al.  2010 .  An Online Community Improves Adherence in 
an Internet-Mediated Walking Program. Part 1: Results of a Randomized Controlled Trial.   Journal 
of Medical Internet Research  12  ( 4 ):  e71 .  
 Rochet ,  Jean-Charles , and  Jean   Tirole .  2003 .  Platform Competition in Two-Sided Markets.    Journal 
of the European Economic Association  1 ( 4 ):  990  – 1029 .  
 Rogers ,  E.   1995 .   The Diffusion of Innovations .  4th ed.   New York :  Free Press . 
 Schelling ,  T. C.  1958 .  The Strategy of Conflict. Prospectus for a Reorientation of Game Theory.  
 Journal of Conflict Resolution  2 ( 3 ):  203 . 
 Shapiro ,  Carl , and  Hal   Varian .  1999 .   Information Rules: A Strategic Guide to the Network Economy . 
 Boston :  Harvard Business School Press .  
 Spence ,  Michael .  1973 .  Job Market Signaling.    Quarterly Journal of Economics  87  ( 3 ): 355  – 374 . 
 Stoddard ,  J. L. ,  E. M.   Augustson , and  R. P.   Moser .  2008 .  Effect of Adding a Virtual Community 
(Bulletin Board) to Smokefree.gov: Randomized Controlled Trial.    Journal of Medical Internet 
Research  10  ( 5 ): e53.  
 von Ahn ,  Luis , and  Laura   Dabbish .  2004 . Labeling Images with a Computer Game. In 
 Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , 319 – 326. Vienna, 
Austria: ACM.  
 Vesterlund ,  Lise .  2003 .  The Informational Value of Sequential Fundraising.   Journal of Public Eco-
nomics  87  ( 3 – 4 ):  627  – 657 . 

280 
Paul Resnick, Joseph Konstan, Yan Chen, and Robert E. Kraut
 Wagstrom ,  Patrick ,  James  Herbsleb ,  Robert   Kraut , and  Audris  Mockus .  2010 . The Impact of Com-
mercial Organization on Volunteer Participation in an Online Community. Academy of Manage-
ment Annual Meeting, Montreal, Canada, August 2010.  
 Wenger ,  Etienne .  1999 .   Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning, and Identity .  New York :  Cam-
bridge University Press .  
 Wenger ,  Etienne ,  Richard   McDermott , and  William  Snyder .  2002 .   Cultivating Communities of 
Practice .  Boston :  Harvard Business School Publishing . 
 Wenger ,  Etienne ,  Nancy   White , and  John D.   Smith .  2009 .   Digital Habitats: Stewarding Technology 
for Communities .  Portland, OR :  CPSquare .  
  Y & L Brings Angie ’ s List to Life .  Adweek . March 22,  2006 .  http://www.allbusiness.com/marketing
-advertising/4163708-1.html . 

 Contributors 
 Moira Burke   HCI Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, moira@cmu.edu 
 Yan Chen   School of Information, University of Michigan, yanchen@umich.edu 
 Sara Kiesler   HCI Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, kiesler@cs.cmu.edu 
 Aniket Kittur   HCI Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, nkittur@cs.cmu.edu 
 Joseph Konstan   Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of 
Minnesota, konstan@cs.umn.edu 
 Robert E. Kraut   HCI Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, robert.kraut@cmu.edu 
 Yuqing Ren   Carlson School of Management, University of Minnesota, chingren@
umn.edu 
 Paul Resnick   School of Information, University of Michigan, presnick@umich.edu 
 John Riedl, University of Minnesota   Department of Computer Science and 
Engineering, University of Minnesota, riedl@cs.umn.edu 


 Index 
 Page numbers with a  t indicate a table and with an  n a note. 
 Advertising 
 behavior and, 142, 145 
 celebrity endorsements and, 190 – 192, 222, 
247 – 248, 274 – 275, 276t 
 contribution and, 30, 33, 38 
 conveying deep information and, 191 
 effectiveness of, 188 – 189 
 familiarity principle and, 192 – 194 
 halo effect and, 189 
 heuristic processing and, 189 – 194 
 interpersonal, 188 – 194 
 prior beliefs and, 188 – 189 
 recruiting newcomers and, 180, 182 – 184, 
188 – 195 
 starting new online communities and, 
245 – 248, 263, 274 – 275, 276t 
 systematic processing and, 189 – 190 
 Advocacy, 85, 102, 149 
 Affective commitment 
 anonymity and, 87 
 balance theory and, 88 
 bond-based, 79 – 81, 87 – 102 
 common fate and, 84 – 85 
 content feeds and, 93 
 diversity of members ’ interest and, 99 – 100 
 external threats and, 87 
 familiarity principle and, 90 – 91, 99 
 frequency of interaction and, 91 – 92 
 friends of friends and, 89 – 91 
 Access controls, 6 – 8, 168t, 218 – 222, 223t 
 ACOR, 181, 199 
 Administrators, 6 
 authority figures and, 32 
 commitment and, 102, 125, 134, 138, 145, 
151, 164 – 165 
 contribution and, 25 – 27, 32, 57, 61 
 newcomers and, 195 
 new online communities and, 263 
 Adoption 
 behavior regulation and, 141, 148, 
152, 160 
 early adopter benefits and, 250, 253 – 256, 
262 – 266, 274, 276t 
 goals and, 36 
 neutrality and, 125 – 126, 211 
 nontransparency and, 57 – 58 
 norms and, 141 
 open reputation systems and, 160 
 participation benefits and, 244 – 246, 
253 – 254, 277n3 
 pattern language approach and, 14 
 permanent discounts and, 262 – 265, 
276t 
 product diffusion and, 184 
 recruitment and, 183 – 184 
 reward systems and, 57 
 socialization and, 213 – 214 
 Advanced Breast Cancer Community, 108 

284 
Index
 going off-topic together and, 101 – 102 
 group cohesiveness theory and, 79, 85, 88 
 group size and, 97 – 102 
 identity-based, 79 – 87, 90, 95, 99 – 102 
 ingroups and, 86, 97 
 interchangeable members and, 81 
 interdependent tasks and, 85 – 86 
 interpersonal similarity and, 97 
 joint tasks and, 85 
 labels and, 82 
 names and, 82 – 85 
 off-topic conversations and, 99 – 102 
 online neighborhoods and, 92 – 93 
 outgroups and, 86 – 87 
 personal conversation and, 92 – 94 
 personal information and, 94 – 95, 100 
 photos and, 91 – 92 
 psychology and, 79, 89 – 90, 95, 99 
 recruitment and, 81, 88 – 89, 99 
 repelling forces that undercut, 97 – 102 
 resistance to disruptive forces and, 88 
 self-disclosure and, 90, 94 – 97, 100 
 social identity theory and, 79 – 82, 99 
 software monitoring and, 93 – 94 
 subgroups and, 81 – 85 
 Alexander, C., 14 
 Alliance, 86 
 Altruism, 106, 195 
 Amazon, 52 – 54, 109 – 110, 257 – 258 
 American Cancer Society, 190 
 American Express, 263 
 American Red Cross, 194 
 Angie ’ s List, 247, 260 
 Anonymity 
 accountability and, 5 
 commitment and, 87, 114 – 115 
 newcomers and, 195 
 pseudonyms and, 95, 112t, 158 – 161, 168t 
 regulation and, 155, 161 
 AOL, 100 
 Apache, 21, 26, 86, 126, 217 
 Archives, 5, 80, 181, 199, 222 
 Aristotle, 24 
 Arkes, H. R., 110 – 111 
 Aronson, E., 111 
 Asperger ’ s syndrome, 128 
 Association of Cancer Online Resources 
(ACOR), 81 – 82 
 Authority figures, 31 – 32 
 Autokinetic effect, 141 
 Axelrod, R., 156 
  
 Back, M. D., 79 
 Backstrom, L., 88, 250 
 Balance theory, 88 
 Bandura, A., 36 
 Bans 
 commercial posts and, 198 
 newcomers and, 198 
 regulation and, 137 – 139, 158, 162 – 163, 166, 
168t – 169t 
 Barker, Roger, 78 
 Bass model, 184 
 Bauer, Talya N., 213 
 Beenen, Gerard, 36, 82 – 83 
 Behavior, 16 
 acceptable, 125 – 126, 135, 141 – 142, 148, 153 
 advertising and, 142, 145 
 altruistic, 106, 195 
 anonymity and, 5, 87, 114 – 115, 155, 
161, 195 
 authority figures and, 31 – 32 
 coerced compliance and, 136 – 140 
 commitment and, 77 
 common pool resource and, 129 – 130, 
151, 161 
 competition and, 5, 231, 236, 243 – 248, 256, 
259, 267, 274 – 275 
 contact scraping and, 185 – 186 
 contrast and, 144 – 145 
 cost of undesirable, 158 – 160 
 cyberrape and, 125, 147 
 decision frame and, 17n1 
 deindividuation and, 155 
 design claims for, 132 – 165, 168t – 169t 
 displayed statistics and, 146 – 148 
 displaying examples of preferred, 143 – 144 
Affective commitment (cont.)

Index 
285
 Don ’ t Bite the Newcomer policy and, 
206 – 208, 210 
 door-to-door canvassing and, 29 
 email and, 126, 131 – 132, 139, 150, 154, 
156 – 157 
 examples and, 145 – 146 
 expectancies and, 23 – 25, 55 – 56, 62 – 66 
 explicit rules and, 146 – 149 
 fairness and, 133 
 fake profiles and, 242 – 243 
 fear campaigns and, 31 – 32 
 filters and, 131, 135, 167, 168t 
 flame wars and, 126 – 127, 132, 150 – 151 
 framing and, 167, 169t 
 free riders and, 164 
 friendship and, 5, 129, 137, 159 
 games and, 127 – 130, 151, 159 – 160, 164 
 gaming the system and, 13, 53 – 58 
 hackers and, 103, 127 – 128, 151 
 high-status people and, 31 – 33, 35 
 identifiability and, 155 – 157 
 inappropriate, 5, 144 – 145, 163, 217 – 218 
 influence limiters and, 135, 138 – 139, 157 
 initiation rituals and, 205 – 210 
 interpersonal relationships and, 151, 164 
 laws and, 130 – 131, 150 
 limiting effects of bad, 131 – 140 
 lurking, 181, 199, 201, 208, 214 
 manipulators and, 128, 135, 139, 154, 
166 – 167 
 moderation systems and, 131 – 134, 168t 
 MoodWatch and, 150 
 morality of design and, 9 – 10 
 motivation and, 23 – 24 ( see also Motivation) 
 music download experiment and, 35 
 newcomers and, 127 – 128, 134, 136 – 139, 
148 – 149, 154, 158 – 161, 168t, 179 – 182, 
188, 199, 203, 211 – 218 
 non-normative, 128, 130, 140, 143 – 146, 
166 
 normative, 125 – 127, 142 – 143, 146, 155, 
169t ( see also Norms) 
 off-topic conversations and, 5, 132, 167 
 organizational, 23 
 peer pressure and, 35 – 37, 146 – 148 
 peer reporting and, 164 – 165, 169t 
 persuasion and, 12, 24, 27 – 33, 68, 70, 162 
 power of liking and, 32 – 33 
 preferential attachment and, 35, 263 
 protection from newcomers and, 217 – 221 
 pseudonyms and, 158 – 161, 168t 
 psychology and, 129, 131, 141, 155, 157 
( see also Psychology) 
 public bad problem and, 129 
 reciprocity and, 8, 31, 102 – 104, 113t, 115 
 recruitment and, 161 
 regulation of, 125 – 170 ( see also Regulation) 
 reputation systems and, 131, 156 – 158, 160, 
168t, 170n3 
 rewards and, 153 – 166 
 sanctions and, 153 – 166 
 shills and, 68, 128, 135 
 Slashdot and, 131, 133 – 134, 154, 159 
 social contact and, 43 – 47, 106 
 social dilemma and, 129 – 130, 164 
 socially desirable characteristics and, 
33, 35 
 social proof and, 35 
 social science and, 1, 10 – 13, 248 
 spammers and, 5, 84, 136 – 137, 139, 
154 – 155, 157, 167, 180, 200, 234, 
252, 262, 266 
 status and, 7, 24, 41, 52 – 58, 60, 68, 109, 
138, 157, 202, 214, 244, 253, 255, 262 – 265, 
274, 276t 
 summary of design alternatives for, 166 – 167, 
168t – 169t 
 trolls and, 5, 9, 127 – 128, 135 – 136, 139, 154, 
166 – 167 
 utility and, 128 – 129, 159 
 value and, 129, 145, 150, 157, 160, 162, 
166, 170n4 
 voluntary compliance and, 140 – 166 
 Bejeweled, 90 
 Big Brothers Big Sisters, 194 
 BitTorrent, 203 
 Blizzard, 86, 110, 183, 190 
 Blogger, 58, 154 

286 
Index
 Blogs 
 commitment and, 81, 88, 93, 95 
 new online communities and, 250 – 251, 256, 
258, 263, 269, 273 
 promise of, 1 
 regulation and, 125, 154, 165 
 Bond-based communities, 243 
 Bonds-based commitment, 79 – 81, 87 
 balance theory and, 88 
 building, 88 – 89 
 content feeds and, 93 
 familiarity principle and, 90 – 91, 99 
 frequency of interaction and, 91 – 92 
 friends of friends and, 89 – 91 
 going off-topic together and, 101 – 102 
 group size and, 97 – 102 
 interpersonal similarity and, 97 
 off-topic conversations and, 99 – 102 
 online neighborhoods and, 92 – 93 
 personal conversation and, 92 – 94 
 personal information and, 94 – 95, 100 
 photos and, 91 – 92 
 recruitment and, 88 – 89, 99 
 repelling forces that undercut, 97 – 102 
 resistance to disruptive forces and, 88 
 self-disclosure and, 90, 94 – 97, 100 
 software monitoring and, 93 – 94 
 Bookmarking, 257 
 Boot, Das (film), 64 
 Bootstrapping, 249 – 253 
 boyd, danah, 242 
 Breastcancer.org, 95 
 Bridging activities, 236 
 Bruckman, Amy, 85 
 Bryant, Susan L., 85 
 Bugs 
 GNOME and, 22t, 25 – 26 
 goals and, 36 
 open source software (OSS) and, 15, 22t, 23, 
25 – 26, 126, 179, 197 
 Bugzilla, 26 
 Bulletin boards, 126 – 127 
 Burke, Moira, 128 
  
 Cameron, J., 59 
 CancerCare, 108 
 Cancer Support Community, 82 
 Cancer Support Group, 108 
 CAPTCHA (Completely Automated Public 
Turing Test to tell Computers and Humans 
Apart), 8, 139 – 140, 160, 167n1, 168t, 
201 – 202, 204 
 Carnegie, Dale, 32 
 Catholicism for Dummies , 195 
 Celebrity endorsements 
 recruiting newcomers and, 190 – 192, 222 
 starting new online communities and, 
247 – 248, 274 – 275, 276t 
 CET theory, 59 
 Chat rooms, 28, 136 – 137, 233 – 234, 239 – 241 
 Chen, P. Y., 109 – 110 
 Cialdini, R. B., 31, 141, 143 
 Cisco, 2, 52 
 Citysearch, 260 
 Clark, Caleb, 132 
 Clickworker, 21 
 Cloudmark, 252 – 253, 262 
 Clustering, 81 – 82, 92, 99 
 CNET, 101 
 Code base, 15, 202, 220 
 Coleman, James, 183 
 Collection size, 234 – 235 
 Collective effort model 
 commitment and, 87 
 contribution and, 11, 25, 62 – 64 
 motivation and, 62 – 64 
 Colquitt, J. A., 133 
 Commitment, 16 
 administrators and, 102, 125, 134, 138, 145, 
151, 164 – 165 
 advocacy and, 85, 102, 149 
 affective, 78 – 102 
 alternative groups and, 4 
 anonymity and, 87, 114 – 115 
 behavior and, 77 
 blogs and, 81, 88, 93, 95 
 bonds-based, 79 – 81, 87 – 102 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Index 
287
 as building block, 77 
 clustering and, 81 – 82, 92, 99 
 collective effort model and, 87 
 common fate and, 84 – 85 
 competition and, 83, 86, 107 – 108, 115 
 compliance and, 150 – 151 
 content feeds and, 93 
 contribution and, 77 
 convener quality and, 266 – 268 
 design claims for, 81 – 112, 113t, 115 
 difficulty of achieving, 77 
 discussion groups and, 81, 100, 105 – 106 
 diversity of members ’ interest and, 99 – 100 
 effortful barriers and, 110 – 112 
 email and, 26, 29 – 30, 32, 36, 80, 89, 94, 98 
 entry barriers and, 206 – 208 
 external threats and, 87 
 Facebook and, 79, 84 – 85, 89 – 97, 109 
 familiarity principle and, 90 – 91, 99 
 feedback and, 104 
 field theory and, 78 
 filters and, 101 – 102, 113t, 114 
 flight and, 77 – 78 
 formation of, 79 
 framing and, 113t 
 friendship and, 79 – 80, 88 – 97, 100, 105 – 106, 
109, 113t, 114 – 115 
 friends of friends and, 89 – 91, 113t, 114 
 games and, 84 – 86, 90 – 92, 96, 105, 
109 – 110 
 GNOME and, 106 – 107 
 goals and, 83 – 85, 97, 105, 114 
 going off-topic together and, 101 – 102 
 group cohesiveness theory and, 79, 85, 88 
 group dynamics and, 78 
 group norms and, 77, 81 – 82, 87, 
103 – 104, 113t 
 group size and, 97 – 102 
 guilds and, 84 – 86, 93 
 identity-based, 79 – 87, 90, 95, 99 – 102 
 ingroups and, 86, 97 
 initiation and, 78 – 79, 111 – 112 
 interdependent tasks and, 85 – 86, 113t, 114 
 interpersonal-based, 79 – 80, 90, 92 – 97, 100, 
107, 113t, 114 
 joint tasks and, 85 
 lock-in and, 109 – 110 
 loyalty and, 78 – 79, 102 
 moderators and, 96, 105 
 names and, 82 – 85 
 needs-based, 78, 105 – 112 
 newcomers and, 89, 99 – 100, 102, 112, 179, 
182, 199, 201 – 202, 205 – 206, 208 – 209, 
213 – 214, 217, 222 
 new online communities and, 77 
 normative, 78, 102 – 105 
 obligation and, 102 – 105 
 off-topic conversations and, 99 – 102, 113t, 
114 – 115 
 online neighborhoods and, 92 – 93 
 outgroups and, 86 – 87, 113t, 114 – 115, 151 
 performance and, 86 
 personal information and, 94 – 95, 100, 
109, 114 
 posters and, 86, 98 
 presentation and, 95, 113t, 155 – 156, 169t 
 principle of proximity and, 4, 78, 92 
 pseudonyms and, 95, 112t 
 psychology and, 78 – 79, 89 – 90, 95, 99, 104, 
108 – 109 
 reciprocity and, 102 – 104, 113t, 115 
 recruiting and, 81, 88 – 89, 99, 106, 114 – 115 
 regulation and, 77 
 repelling forces that undercut, 97 – 102 
 rewards and, 84, 105, 109 
 sanctions and, 5 
 screening and, 112 
 self-disclosure and, 90, 94 – 97, 100, 113t 
 skills and, 110 
 Slashdot and, 108, 110 
 social contact and, 106 
 social identity theory and, 79 – 82, 99 
 social networks and, 88 – 90, 94, 97 
 social science and, 11 – 12 
 software monitoring and, 93 – 94 
 spam and, 84 
www.Ebook777.com

288 
Index
 starting new online communities and, 243, 
254 – 255, 266 – 268, 271 – 272 
 subgroups and, 81 – 85, 114 
 summary of design alternatives for, 112 – 115 
 support groups and, 77, 80, 82, 95, 103, 108 
 taglines and, 83, 113t, 114 
 testimonials and, 103 – 104 
 turnover and, 80 – 81, 99, 109 – 110 
 value and, 77, 82 – 83, 97, 102 – 105, 109 – 110 
 volunteers and, 106 
 Wikipedia and, 77, 83, 85 – 86, 88, 104, 107 
 Common fate, 84 
 Common pool resource, 129 – 130, 151, 161 
 Community structure, 6, 7t, 79t, 112t, 168t, 
275t 
 Competition, 2, 5, 15, 151 
 commitment and, 83, 86, 107 – 108, 115 
 content sharing and, 245 – 247 
 contribution and, 41 – 42, 46t, 49 – 50, 67 – 68 
 newcomers and, 184 
 for a niche, 243 – 248 
 starting new online communities and, 231, 
236, 243 – 248, 256, 259, 267, 274 – 275 
 unique selling proposition and, 247 – 248 
 Compliance 
 access ladders and, 138 
 anonymity and, 155, 161 
 clear/salient norms and, 141 – 150 
 coerced, 136 – 140 
 cohesion and, 150 – 152, 165 – 166 
 commitment and, 150 – 151 
 community influence on rulemaking and, 
152 – 153 
 compromising displays and, 149 – 150 
 consistent criteria and, 138 – 139 
 contrast and, 144 – 145 
 currency and, 138 – 139, 157 – 158, 166, 168t, 
170n4 
 deindividuation and, 155 
 displayed statistics and, 146 – 148 
 enhancing, 150 – 153 
 examples and, 143 – 146 
 explicit rules and, 146 – 149, 165 – 166 
 feedback and, 138, 141 – 146, 150, 156 – 159, 
164 – 166 
 gags and, 137 – 138, 162, 166, 168t – 169t 
 identifiability and, 155 – 157 
 influence limiters and, 135, 138 – 139, 
157 – 158 
 long-term identities and, 160 – 161 
 newcomer bonds and, 161 – 162 
 peer pressure and, 146 – 148 
 peer reporting and, 164 – 165, 169t 
 pseudonyms and, 158 – 161, 168t 
 quota mechanisms and, 136 – 137 
 reputation systems and, 156 – 158, 160 
 rewards and, 153 – 166 
 sanctions and, 153 – 166 
 saving face and, 153 
 search engine algorithms and, 155 – 156 
 stopit procedures and, 152 – 153 
 throttles and, 136 – 137, 166 
 voluntary, 140 – 166 
 Contact scraping, 185 – 186 
 Content feeds, 93 
 Contest design, 66 – 68 
 Continuance commitment.  See Needs-based 
commitment 
 Contribution, 16, 130 
 administrators and, 25 – 27, 32, 57, 61 
 advertising and, 30, 33, 38 
 authority figures and, 31 – 32 
 basic drives and, 41 
 CET theory and, 59 
 collective effort model and, 11, 25, 62 – 64 
 commitment and, 77 
 competition and, 41 – 42, 46t, 49 – 50, 67 – 68 
 contests and, 66 – 68 
 deadlines and, 40 
 design alternatives and, 63, 68 – 70 
 design claims for, 26 – 66, 69t 
 discussion groups and, 64 
 door-to-door canvassing, 29 
 do your best (DYB) and, 36 – 37 
 early adopter motivations and, 265 – 266 
Commitment (cont.)

Index 
289
 economics and, 23, 30, 66 
 enthusiasm for, 22 – 23 
 expectancy and, 23 – 25, 55 – 56, 62 – 66 
 extrinsic motivation and, 24, 51 – 62 
 Facebook and, 26 – 27, 63 
 fairness and, 65 
 false praise and, 48 – 49 
 familiarity principle and, 33, 69t 
 fear campaigns and, 31 – 32 
 feedback and, 24, 26, 40, 44, 46t, 47 – 50, 
56 – 57, 59, 67 – 68, 69t 
 formatting improvement and, 26 
 framing and, 60t 
 friendship and, 24, 27, 32, 42 
 games and, 24, 35, 39 – 47, 50 – 54, 57 – 58, 67 
 gaming the system and, 13, 53 – 58 
 GNOME and, 22, 25, 39, 42 – 43 
 goals and, 24 – 25, 35 – 40, 44, 46t, 47, 61, 65, 
67 – 68 
 group context and, 35 
 group size and, 62 – 64 
 high-challenge goals and, 35 – 40 
 high-status people and, 31 – 33, 35 
 initiation and, 23 
 intrinsic motivation and, 24, 41 – 50, 58 – 62 
 lists of needed, 25 – 27 
 lost causes and, 65 
 motivation and, 28 – 70 ( see also Motivation) 
 newcomers and, 30, 52, 63, 181 – 182, 
202 – 210, 214 – 217, 220 – 222 
 norms and, 58, 65 – 66 
 peer pressure and, 35 – 37 
 performance and, 23 – 25, 36, 40, 47 – 50, 
53 – 63, 67 – 68 
 persuasion and, 24, 27 – 29, 31 – 33, 68, 70 
 posters and, 32, 52 
 power-law distribution of, 4 – 5, 64 
 power of liking and, 32 – 33 
 presentation and, 68, 70 
 problems of, 21 – 25 
 psychology and, 23 – 24, 32, 36, 58, 61, 66 
 recruiting and, 27 
 requests for, 22, 24 – 40 
 rewards and, 12, 24 – 25, 40 – 41, 47, 49 – 62, 
66 – 70 
 self-determination theory (SDT) and, 59 
 self-efficacy and, 36, 40, 68 
 simple requests and, 30 – 31 
 skill and, 25 – 27, 39 – 40, 44 – 47, 64 
 Slashdot and, 47, 49, 52, 54 – 57, 61 
 social contact and, 41 – 47 
 socially desirable characteristics and, 33, 35 
 social networks and, 26, 32, 35, 63 
 social proof and, 35 
 social science and, 10 – 12 
 starting new online communities and, 246, 
249 – 250, 254, 261, 265 – 271 
 stressing benefits of, 31 
 stubs and, 5, 21 – 22, 26 
 support groups and, 4 – 5, 21, 41 
 task interest and, 27 
 tracking tools and, 27 
 uniqueness principle and, 11, 14, 63 – 68 
 useful tasks and, 22 
 user support and, 23 
 utility and, 23 – 24, 56, 64, 66 
 volunteers and, 21 – 23, 26 – 27, 61 
 watchlists and, 26 
 Wikipedia and, 21 – 27, 30 – 32, 35, 38 – 39, 49, 
60 – 64 
 Coordination work, 21 
 Copyright, 151, 211, 219 
 Cosley, Dan, 27 
 Costco Photo Center, 187 
 Craigslist, 139, 201, 237, 260 
 Credentials, 8, 195, 203 – 204, 222, 
223t, 245 
 Critical mass of participation 
 attracting early members and, 253 – 257 
 bootstrapping and, 249 – 253 
 convener quality/commitment and, 266 – 268 
 cost-benefit analysis of new members and, 
248 – 249 
 early adopter benefits and, 250, 253 – 255, 
262 – 266, 274, 276t 
 external signals and, 272 – 273 

290 
Index
 increasing value of community and, 
257 – 262 
 innovation-need paradox and, 255 – 256 
 Metcalfe ’ s Law and, 248 
 network externalities and, 248 
 participation benefits and, 253 – 254, 277n3 
 permanent discounts and, 262 – 265, 276t 
 pink sites and, 255 
 positive member response and, 268 – 272 
 scope of the community and, 260 – 261 
 startup cost and, 245, 253 – 254 
 success indicators and, 253 – 254, 266 – 273 
 syndicated data and, 259 – 260 
 theory of credible signaling and, 267 – 268 
 two-sided networks and, 256 
 Crossword puzzles, 44 
 Crowdfunding, 108 
 Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly, 43 – 44 
 Cutlip, Anna, 165 
 Cyberrape, 125, 147 
  
 Dabbish, Laura, 44 
 Damage Networks, 195 
 Dave, K., 127 
 Deadlines, 40 
 Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency 
(DARPA), 66 
 Deindividuation, 155 
 Del.icio.us, 257 
 Dellarocas, Chrysanthos, 142 
 Democratic Underground, 127, 197 
 Design 
 access controls and, 6 – 8, 168t, 218 – 222, 
223t 
 community structure and, 6, 7t, 79t, 112t, 
168t, 275t 
 content and, 6 – 7 
 contests and, 66 – 68 
 external communication and, 7, 233t, 274, 
276t 
 goals for, 12 – 16 
 morality of, 9 – 10 
 positivists and, 12 
 social science and, 1, 10 – 13, 248 
 sociotechnical systems and, 6 – 8 
 Design claims 
 affective commitment and, 81 – 102 
 behavior regulation and, 132 – 165, 168t-169t 
 carving out a niche and, 232 – 243 
 commitment and, 81 – 112, 113t, 115 
 competing for a niche and, 243 – 248 
 compliance and, 136 – 166 
 contribution and, 26 – 66, 69t 
 critical mass of participation and, 248 – 273 
 deadlines and, 40 
 expectancy enhancement and, 62 – 66 
 extrinsic motivation and, 53 – 62 
 fear campaigns and, 31 – 32 
 feedback and, 40 ( see also Feedback) 
 high-challenge goals and, 35 – 40 
 high-status people and, 31 – 33, 35 
 intrinsic motivation and, 43 – 50 
 needs-based commitment and, 107 – 112 
 newcomers and, 183 – 194, 199 – 210, 
215 – 221, 223t 
 new online communities and, 232, 235, 253, 
275t – 276t 
 normative commitment and, 103 – 105 
 pattern languages and, 13 – 14 
 peer pressure and, 35 – 37 
 power of liking and, 32 – 33 
 preferential attachment and, 35 
 prescriptive rules and, 14 – 15 
 recruitment and, 183 – 194 
 regulation and, 132 – 133 ( see also Regulation) 
 retaining newcomers and, 206 – 210 
 screening and, 201 – 205 
 simple requests and, 30 – 31 
 socialization and, 215 – 217 
 socially desirable characteristics and, 33, 35 
 social proof and, 35 
 specific requests and, 29 – 30 
 task interest and, 27 
 teaching newcomers and, 215 – 217 
 tracking tools and, 27 
Critical mass of participation (cont.)

Index 
291
 Diagnostic tasks, 201 – 203 
 Dibbell, Julian, 125 
 Digg, 151, 159, 252, 258 
 Discussion groups 
 commitment and, 81, 100, 105 – 106 
 contribution and, 64 
 newcomers and, 179, 205 
 regulation and, 5, 158 
 Disemvoweling, 131, 143, 162, 166 
 Distributed Proofreaders, 220 – 221 
 DNFTT (Do Not Feed the Troll), 135 
 Doctors Without Borders, 101 
 Dodds, P. S., 35 
 Dogster, 83 
 Domingos, P., 188 
 Donath, Judith S., 158 
 Don ’ t Bite the Newcomer policy, 206 – 208, 
210 
 Door-to-door canvassing, 29 
 Drenner, S., 111 
 Drupal, 104 – 105, 134, 233, 245 
 Ducheneaut, Nicolas, 39 
 Dunbar, Robin, 97 
 Durkheim, Emile, 150 
  
 EachMovie, 258 – 259 
 Early adopter benefits, 250, 253 – 255, 
262 – 266, 274, 276t 
 Eating clubs, 80 
 eBay, 5, 11 
 behavior regulation and, 142, 145 – 146, 
150, 154, 156 – 159, 164 – 165, 
170nn3,5 
 commitment and, 109 – 110 
 feedback and, 216, 263 
 Gmail Beta auctions and, 204 
 newcomers and, 197, 204, 216 – 217 
 sharing profiles and, 245 
 Trading Assistants and, 216 
 usernames and, 264 
 Economics 
 behavioral, 17n1, 129 ( see also Behavior) 
 contribution and, 23, 66 
 crowdfunding and, 108 
 decision frame and, 17n1 
 face-to-face recruitment and, 183 – 184 
 motivation and, 1, 10, 17n1 
 permanent discounts and, 262 – 265, 276t 
 shopping and, 109, 257 – 258 
 tragedy of the commons and, 129 
 Effortful barriers, 110 – 112 
 eHarmony, 256 
 Elster, Jon, 164 
 Email, 1, 3, 14 
 behavior and, 126, 131 – 132, 139, 150, 154, 
156 – 157 
 commitment and, 80, 89, 94, 98 
 contact scraping and, 185 – 186 
 contribution and, 26, 29 – 30, 32, 36 
 LISTSERV communities and, 98 – 99 
 motivation and, 183 – 184 
 newcomers and, 183 – 187, 194, 201 – 202, 
218, 221 
 recruitment and, 183 – 187 
 regulation and, 126, 131 – 132, 139, 150, 154, 
156 – 157 
 starting new online communities and, 
233 – 234, 243, 252, 262, 264 – 267 
 Encyclopedia Brittanica , 86 
 Encyclopedia of Life , 190 
 Entry barriers 
 newcomers and, 201, 205 – 211, 222, 223t 
 normative commitment and, 111 – 112 
 Entry fees, 200 
 Epinions, 54 – 55, 88, 108, 249, 259 
 ESP Game, 44, 261 – 262 
 Ethnicity, 81 
 Eudora, 150 
 Everquest, 151 
 Everything2, 54, 216 
 Expectancy 
 contribution and, 23 – 25, 55 – 56, 62 – 66 
 enhancing, 62 – 66 
 motivation and, 23 – 25, 55 – 56, 62 – 66 
 Expertise, 32 
 Explorers ’ group experiment, 83 

292 
Index
 External communication, 7, 223t, 
274, 276t 
 External signals, 272 – 273 
  
 Facebook, 2 – 3, 11 
 carving out a niche and, 232 – 233 
 commitment and, 79, 84 – 85, 89 – 97, 109 
 Connect, 233 
 contribution and, 26 – 27, 63 
 friending and, 89, 93, 137 
 newcomers and, 185 – 187, 207 – 209 
 new online communities and, 232 – 234, 
237 – 238, 243, 245 – 246, 249 – 251 
 pull model and, 233 
 recruitment and, 185 – 186 
 regulation and, 129, 137, 142, 163 
 viral marketing and, 186 
 welcoming mechanism of, 208 – 209 
 Face-to-face interaction, 5, 141, 
183 – 184 
 Fairness, 65, 133 
 Fake profiles, 242 – 243 
 False praise, 48 – 49 
 Familiarity principle 
 advertising and, 192 – 194 
 commitment and, 90 – 91, 99 
 contribution and, 33, 69t 
 newcomers and, 179, 192 – 194, 214, 216 
 recruitment and, 192 – 194 
 starting new online communities and, 
247, 254 
 Familiar stranger, 90 
 FAQs, 15, 86, 181, 198 – 199, 206, 210, 214, 
219 
 Fark, 206 
 Fear campaigns, 31 – 32 
 February Album Writing Month, 207 
 Feedback.  See also Rewards; Sanctions 
 attackers and, 57 
 commitment and, 104 
 comparative, 49 – 50, 68 
 compliance and, 138, 141 – 146, 150, 
156 – 159, 164 – 166 
 contribution and, 24, 26, 40, 44, 46t, 47 – 50, 
56 – 57, 59, 67 – 68, 69t 
 eBay and, 216, 263 
 editors and, 26 
 encouraging contribution and, 24, 26, 40, 
44, 47 – 50, 56 – 57, 59, 67 – 68 
 formal vs. informal, 7, 145 – 146 
 games and, 44 
 goals and, 44, 47 
 motivation and, 40, 44, 46t, 47 – 50, 56 – 57, 
59, 67 – 68, 69t 
 negative, 146, 150, 157, 159, 164 – 165, 212 
 neutral, 146, 165 
 newcomers and, 212, 216, 221 
 new online communities and, 245, 263 
 nonverbal, 47 
 performance, 40, 47 – 50, 59, 67 – 68 
 persuasive techniques and, 24 
 positive, 47, 59, 142, 146, 156 – 157, 164, 212 
 praise and, 47 – 49 
 profile of, 5, 158 – 159, 245, 263 
 on progress, 40 
 quantitative, 47 – 49 
 regulation and, 138, 141 – 146, 150, 156 – 159, 
164 – 166 
 sellers and, 142, 158 
 sincere, 49 – 50 
 solicited, 166 
 trustworthiness and, 11 
 verbal, 47 – 49, 56 
 Festinger, Leon, 78 – 79, 155 
 Field theory, 78 
 FilterMyRSS, 27 
 Filters 
 behavior regulation and, 131, 135, 167, 168t 
 commitment and, 101 – 102, 113t, 114 
 contribution and, 26 – 27, 68 
 starting new online communities and, 239, 
242, 262 
 Flame wars, 126 – 127, 132, 150 – 151 
 Flickr, 93, 204, 257 
 Focal point, 247 – 248, 275 
 Fogg, B. J., 186, 266 

Index 
293
 Food Network, 252 
 Forte, Andrea, 85 
 43Things, 47 
 4Chan, 126, 131 
 Framing, 8 
 behavior regulation and, 167, 169t 
 commitment and, 113t 
 contribution and, 60 
 newcomers and, 185, 222, 223t 
 starting new online communities and, 
274 – 275, 276t 
 Fraternities, 80, 206 
 Freenet Project, 4, 202 
 Free-rider problem, 164 
 Friedman, E., 159 
 Friend feeds, 7, 94, 113t, 251 
 Friending, 89, 93, 137 
 Friends, 7 
 behavior regulation and, 5, 129, 137, 159 
 commitment and, 79 – 80, 88 – 97, 100, 
105 – 106, 109, 113t, 114 – 115 
 contribution and, 24, 27, 32, 42 
 eating clubs and, 80 
 familiar stranger and, 90 
 fraternities and, 80, 206 
 of friends, 89 – 91, 113t, 114 
 newcomers and, 183 – 187, 201, 203, 
208 – 210, 218, 221, 223t 
 recruitment and, 183, 186 – 188 
 starting new online communities and, 
233 – 234, 237, 242, 245 – 252, 257, 263 – 264, 
274 
 Friendster, 2, 242 
  
 Gags, 137 – 138, 162, 166, 168t – 169t 
 Gaia, 150 
 Game levels, 39 – 40 
 Games, 11 
 behavior and, 127 – 130, 151, 159 – 160, 164 
 challenging, 44, 47 
 clear goals for, 44 – 45, 46t 
 commitment and, 84 – 86, 90 – 92, 96, 105, 
109 – 110 
 contribution and, 24, 35, 39 – 47, 50 – 54, 
57 – 58, 67 
 designing enjoyable, 44 – 47 
 feedback and, 44 
 God-modding and, 130 
 motivation and, 35, 39 – 47, 50 – 54, 
57 – 58, 67 
 MUDs, 92 – 93 
 newcomers and, 179, 183, 189 – 191, 
205 – 206, 215 
 non-playing characters (NPCs) and, 215 
 online neighborhoods and, 92 – 93 
 role-playing, 84, 92 – 93, 159, 179, 189 
 socialization and, 215 
 starting new online communities and, 234, 
236, 239, 247, 261 – 262, 265 
 ultimatum experiment and, 164 
 Games with a Purpose, 44 
 Gaming the system, 13, 53 – 58 
 Gardner, R., 129 
 Gender, 12 
 commitment and, 79, 82 
 contribution and, 62 
 starting new online communities and, 
256 
 Gilder, George, 248 
 Git, 134 
 Gladwell, Malcolm, 187 – 188 
 Gmail Beta, 204 
 Gneezy, 62 
 GNOME 
 commitment and, 106 – 107 
 contribution and, 22, 25, 39, 42 – 43 
 starting new online communities and, 
277t 
 Gnutella, 21 
 Goals 
 behavior regulation and, 126 
 clarity of, 44, 46t, 47 
 commitment and, 83 – 85, 97, 105, 114 
 common fate and, 84 – 85 
 contribution and, 24 – 25, 35 – 40, 44, 46t, 47, 
61, 65, 67 – 68 

294 
Index
 deadlines and, 35 – 40 
 high-challenge, 35 – 40 
 motivation and, 24 – 25, 35 – 40, 44, 46t, 47, 
61, 65, 67 – 68 
 newcomers and, 180, 182, 195, 197 – 198, 
201, 204, 218 
 online communities and, 6, 9 – 16 
 starting new online communities and, 
245, 264 
 God-modding, 130 
 Goffman, Erving, 141 – 142 
 Going off-topic together, 101 – 102 
 Goldstein, N. J., 31, 192 
 Good faith, 162, 208 
 Google, 3, 53, 57 – 58, 154, 204, 232, 264 
 Griefers, 127 
 Gross, N., 88 
 Group cohesiveness theory, 79, 85, 88 
 Group context, 35 
 Group dynamics, 78 
 Groupon, 271 – 272 
 Guest books, 96 
 Guilds 
 commitment and, 84 – 86, 93 
 joint tasks and, 85 
 newcomers and, 183, 185, 195 – 198, 
201 – 206, 217 
  
 Hackers 
 alt.hackers newsgroup and, 127 – 128 
 behaving like, 103 
 regulation and, 127 – 128, 151 
 thinking time of, 103 
 Hardin, Garrett, 129 
 Hattrick, 83, 215 
 Hebl, M. R., 147 – 148 
 Henderlong, J., 48 
 Heuristic processing, 189 – 194 
 High-challenge goals, 35 – 40 
 High-status people, 31 – 33, 35 
 Hitt, L. M., 109 – 110 
 Hollander, E. P., 161 – 162 
 Horde, 86 
 Horne, Christine, 165 
 How to Win Friends and Influence People 
(Carnegie), 32 
 Huffington Post, 125 
 Hutzel, L., 110 – 111 
  
 IBM, 23 
 Idealism, 42 
 Identifiability 
 behavior and, 155 – 161, 168t 
 long-term, 160 – 161 
 pseudonyms and, 95, 112t, 158 – 161, 168t 
 Identity-based commitment, 90, 95 
 anonymity and, 87 
 common fate and, 84 – 85 
 diversity of members ’ interest and, 
99 – 100 
 encouraging, 80 – 87 
 external threats and, 87 
 going off-topic together and, 101 – 102 
 group cohesiveness theory and, 79, 85 
 ingroups and, 86 
 interchangeable members and, 81 
 interdependent tasks and, 85 – 86 
 joint tasks and, 85 
 labels and, 82 
 names and, 82 – 85 
 outgroups and, 86 – 87 
 Influence limiters, 135, 138 – 139, 
157 – 158 
 Ingroups, 86, 97, 218 
 Initiation 
 commitment and, 78 – 79, 111 – 112 
 contribution and, 23 
 mild, 111 
 newcomers and, 205 – 211 
 new online communities and, 233 
 recruitment and, 16 ( see also Recruitment) 
 regulation and, 165 
 rites of, 111 – 112, 205 – 211 
 severe, 111 
 volunteer, 23 
Goals (cont.)

Index 
295
 InnoCentive, 66 – 67 
 Innovation, 17 
 newcomers and, 179, 184, 213 
 new online communities and, 255 – 256 
 online bookmarking and, 257 
 Instant messaging (IM), 94, 252 
 Interdependent tasks, 85 – 86, 113t, 114 
 Internet Movie Database (IMDB), 98 
 Internet Relay Chat (IRC), 98 
 Interpersonal relationships, 5 
 advertising and, 188 – 194 
 behavior regulation and, 151, 164 
 bond formation and, 10 – 12 
 commitment and, 79 – 80, 90, 92 – 97, 100, 
107, 113t, 114 
 newcomers and, 183 – 194 
 recruitment and, 183 – 189 
 starting new online communities and, 
243, 274 
 Investigation, 100, 181, 199 
 Israel, 62, 164, 236 
  
 Japan, 164, 236 
 JoBlo Movie Network, 100, 126 
 John McCain Facebook Challenge, 
84 – 85 
 Johnston, Erik, 207 
 Joint tasks, 85 
 Jones, G. R., 212 
  
 Karau, S., 25 
 Karma points, 54 – 55, 57, 61, 154 
 Katz, Elihu, 183 
 Kaufer, David, 150 
 Kempe, D., 188 
 Kennedy, John F., 36 
 Keohane, R. O., 156 
 Kiesler, Sara, 268 
 Kim, Amy Jo, 84, 242 
 Kittur, Aniket, 83 
 Kleinberg, J., 188 
 Knitters Without Borders, 101 
 Kolbert, Elizabeth, 151 
  
 LambdaMOO, 125, 147, 152 
 Lampe, Cliff, 207 
 Latan é , B., 183 
 Lave, Jean, 220 
 Laws, 130 – 131, 150 
 Lazersfeld, P., 183 
 Lea, Martin, 81 
 Lepper, M. R., 48 
 Leskovec, J., 88 
 Lessig, L., 130 
 Levine, John M., 181 – 182 
 Lewin, Kurt, 78 
 Liking, 7 
 commitment and, 79, 91 – 97 
 contribution and, 25, 31 – 33, 63 
 newcomers and, 194 
 photos and, 91 – 92 
 LinkedIn, 63, 89, 94, 185, 243, 249, 252 
 Linksys, 2 
 Linux, 106, 126, 210 
 LinuxChix, 126 – 127 
 LISTSERV, 98 – 99 
 LiveJournal group, 88, 256 
 Localfiles, 260 
 Lock-in, 109 – 110 
 Loewenstein, G., 165 
 Lost causes, 65 
 Lott, Bernice, 78 
 Loyalty 
 commitment and, 78 – 79, 102 
 newcomers and, 206 
 Ludford, Pamela J., 64 
 Lurking, 181, 199, 201, 208, 214 
  
 Maintenance, 181 
 Mamapedia, 272 
 Manipulators, 128, 135, 139, 154, 166 – 167 
 Markey, P. M., 63 
 Martin, W. E., 88 
 Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), 
152 – 153 
 Matching algorithms, 5 – 6 
 Match value, 234 – 239, 241, 243 – 244, 277n2 

296 
Index
 MathWorks, 66 
 McCain, John, 84 – 85 
 Mechanical Turk, 52 – 54 
 MediaWiki, 134, 233 
 Meetup, 232, 233, 271 
 Mentors 
 newcomers and, 212 – 217, 221 – 223 
 Trading Assistants and, 216 
 Meridian 59, 84 
 Metadata, 250 
 MetaFilter, 200 
 Microsoft, 233, 259 – 261 
 Milgram, S., 31, 90 
 Minitel system, 255 
 Mixed-topic scope, 235 – 237 
 Moderation systems, 131 – 134, 168t 
 Moderators 
 commitment and, 96, 105 
 member self-disclosure and, 96 
 new online communities and, 241, 263 
 regulation and, 131 – 134, 137, 143, 
165 
 Mommasoure.com, 272 
 MoodWatch, 150 
 Moreland, Richard L., 181 – 182 
 Motivation 
 Aristotle and, 24 
 authority figures and, 31 – 32 
 basic drives and, 41 
 CET theory and, 59 
 collective effort model and, 62 – 64 
 contests and, 66 – 68 
 contribution and, 28 – 70 
 deadlines and, 40 
 door-to-door canvassing and, 29 
 do your best (DYB) and, 36 – 37 
 economics and, 1, 10, 17n1 
 email and, 183 – 184 
 expectancy and, 23 – 25, 55 – 56, 62 – 66 
 extrinsic, 24, 51 – 62 
 false praise and, 48 – 49 
 family and, 42 
 fear campaigns and, 31 – 32 
 feedback and, 40, 44, 46t, 47 – 50, 56 – 57, 59, 
67 – 68, 69t 
 flow and, 43 – 44 
 games and, 35, 39 – 47, 50 – 54, 57 – 58, 67 
 gaming the system and, 53 – 58 
 “ get out the vote ” campaigns and, 28 – 29 
 goals and, 24 – 25, 35 – 40, 44, 46t, 47, 61, 65, 
67 – 68 
 group context and, 35 
 group size and, 62 – 64 
 high-challenge goals and, 35 – 40 
 high-status people and, 31 – 33, 35 
 idealism and, 42 
 intrinsic, 24, 41 – 50, 58 – 62 
 music download experiment and, 35 
 peer pressure and, 35 – 37 
 performance and, 23 – 25, 36, 40, 47 – 50, 
53 – 63, 67 – 68 
 personal, 28 – 29 
 persuasion and, 24, 27 – 29, 31 – 33, 68, 70 
 power of liking and, 32 – 33 
 preferential attachment and, 35, 263 
 psychology and, 1, 23 – 24, 32, 36, 58, 61, 66 
 Reiss ’ s sixteen types of, 41 – 44 
 request structuring and, 28 – 40 
 rewards and, 47, 49 – 62, 66, 67 – 70 
 romance and, 42 
 self-determination theory (SDT) and, 59 
 self-efficacy and, 36, 40, 68 
 skill and, 25 – 27, 39 – 40, 44 – 47, 64 
 social contact and, 41 – 47 
 socially desirable characteristics and, 33, 35 
 social proof and, 35 
 specific questions and, 28 
 trade-offs in, 58 – 62 
 uniqueness principle and, 11, 14, 63 – 66, 68 
 value and, 23, 25, 29, 31, 35, 42, 49, 52, 57, 
62 – 66 
 Wikipedia and, 24 – 25 
 MovieLens, 135, 268 
 commitment and, 97, 104, 109, 111 
 comparative performance feedback and, 
49 – 50 

Index 
297
 contributions and, 30, 36 – 37, 49 – 50, 64 
 member uniqueness and, 64 
 power of goals and, 36 – 37 
 professionally-generated content and, 
258 – 259 
 Mozilla, 210, 214 
 Mr. T., 190 
 MUDs (Multi – User Dungeon) games, 92 – 93 
 Myspace, 218 
  
 Names, 82 – 85 
 NASA, 21, 36 
 National Park Service, 144 – 145 
 National Rifle Association, 81 
 Navigation cost, 234 – 235, 240 – 241, 277n2 
 Needs-based commitment 
 benefits and, 105 – 110 
 cohesion and, 105 
 defined, 105 
 open source software (OSS) and, 106 
 Netflix, 66 – 67, 109 
 Network externalities, 10, 248, 256, 258 – 259, 
262 
 Neutrality 
 moral, 9, 17n2 
 newcomers and, 179, 211 
 regulation and, 125 – 126, 128 
 Newcomb, T., 97, 155 
 Newcomers, 1, 3 – 5, 12, 16 
 administrators and, 195 
 anonymity and, 195 
 bans and, 198 
 behavior and, 127 – 128, 134, 136 – 139, 
148 – 149, 154, 158 – 161, 168t, 179 – 182, 
188, 199, 203, 211 – 218 
 bug introduction by, 179 
 commitment and, 89, 99 – 100, 102, 112, 
179, 182, 199, 201 – 202, 205 – 206, 213 – 214, 
217, 222 
 contribution and, 30, 52, 63, 181 – 182, 
202 – 210, 214 – 217, 220 – 222 
 design claims for, 183 – 194, 199 – 210, 
215 – 221, 223t 
 diagnostic tasks and, 201 – 203 
 discussion forums and, 179, 205, 208 – 210 
 diversity and, 179 
 Don ’ t Bite the Newcomer policy and, 
206 – 208, 210 
 early adopter benefits and, 250, 253 – 255, 
262 – 266, 274, 276t 
 email and, 183 – 187, 194, 201 – 202, 
218, 221 
 entry barriers and, 201, 205 – 211, 222, 
223t 
 entry fees and, 200 
 external credentials and, 203 – 204 
 Facebook and, 185 – 187, 207 – 209 
 familiarity principle and, 179, 192 – 194, 214, 
216 
 feedback and, 212, 216, 221 
 framing and, 185, 222, 223t 
 friendship and, 183 – 187, 201, 203, 208 – 210, 
218, 221, 223t 
 games and, 179, 183, 189 – 191, 205 – 206, 
215 
 goals and, 180, 182, 195, 197 – 198, 201, 204, 
218 
 group values and, 197 
 guilds and, 183, 185, 195 – 198, 201 – 206, 217 
 information collections and, 180 – 181 
 initiation rituals and, 205 – 210 
 innovation and, 179, 184, 213 
 interpersonal relationships and, 183 – 194 
 investigation and, 181, 199 
 loyalty and, 206 
 lurking and, 181, 199, 201, 208, 214 
 maintenance and, 181 
 mentors and, 212 – 217, 221 – 223 
 neutrality and, 179, 211 
 norms and, 179 – 180, 206, 211, 220 
 old-timers and, 179, 201, 207, 209 – 214, 
217 – 218, 221, 223t 
 performance and, 202, 213 
 persuasion and, 183 – 184, 187 – 192 
 posters and, 201 
 posting bonds and, 161 – 162 

298 
Index
 product diffusion and, 184 
 progressive access control and, 219 – 221 
 protection and, 180, 218 – 222 
 psychology and, 183, 186, 189, 205, 208 
 public profiles and, 209 – 210 
 reader-to-leader funnel and, 182 
 recruitment of, 180 – 202, 221 – 223 
 referrals and, 185, 188, 197, 203 – 205, 222, 
223t 
 retention of, 180, 182, 188, 205 – 210, 
221 – 222 
 sanctions and, 203 
 sandboxes and, 218 – 222 
 screening and, 180, 197, 200 – 205 
 selection of, 180 – 182, 194 – 201, 204 – 205, 
221 
 self-efficacy and, 213 
 separating tasks and, 200 – 201 
 skills and, 194 – 198, 203, 208, 213, 217 – 222 
 Slashdot and, 207 
 socialization and, 128, 180 – 182, 199, 208, 
211 – 222, 223t 
 social networks and, 218 
 spam and, 180, 200 
 starting new online communities and, 240 
 support groups and, 181, 189, 197 – 199, 
204 
 switching cost and, 233, 244 – 245 
 Trading Assistants and, 216 
 transparency for, 199 – 200 
 trolls and, 180, 197, 200 
 turnover and, 179, 182, 198, 205 
 Usenet groups and, 182, 205 – 207, 214 
 value and, 194, 195, 197, 200, 210 
 volunteers and, 194 – 195, 215 
 welcomers and, 6, 8, 210, 222 
 Wikipedia and, 179, 182, 185, 195, 199, 
205 – 211, 217, 219 – 220 
 New Israeli Shekels (NIS), 62 
 Newsfeeds, 142, 237, 238, 251 
 Newsgroups, 1, 98, 102, 127, 198, 239 
 New York Times , 187, 258 
 Niches 
 bridging activities and, 236 
 carving out, 232 – 243 
 collection size and, 234 – 235 
 compatibility/integration with other sites 
and, 232 – 233, 244 – 245 
 competing for, 231, 243 – 248 
 distance metrics and, 237 – 238 
 expected active times and, 241 – 242 
 fake profiles and, 242 – 243 
 focal point and, 247 – 248, 275 
 import/export of content and, 245 – 247 
 internal organization of content and, 233, 
243 
 match value and, 234 – 239, 241, 243 – 244, 
277n2 
 multiple-space communities and, 
237 – 243 
 navigation cost and, 234 – 235, 240 – 241, 
277n2 
 opportunities model and, 233 – 237 
 participation benefits and, 244 – 246, 
253 – 254, 277n3 
 personalized collections of related content 
and, 238 – 239 
 pull model and, 233 – 235 
 push alerts and, 233 
 recommender systems and, 242 – 243 
 scope of the community and, 232, 235 – 237, 
242 – 243 
 subdividing spaces and, 239 – 240 
 switching cost and, 233, 244 – 245 
 synergies among spaces and, 237, 260 
 time sensitivity of opportunities and, 
234 – 235 
 unique selling proposition and, 247 – 248 
 Ning, 232, 245 
 Nokia, 23 
 Non-playing characters (NPCs), 215 
 Normative commitment 
 defined, 102 
 effortful barriers and, 110 – 112 
 experience provision and, 107 – 108 
Newcomers (cont.)

Index 
299
 exporting assets and, 110 – 112 
 lock-in and, 109 – 110 
 moral obligation and, 103 
 niche information and, 108 – 110 
 obligation and, 102 – 105 
 open source software (OSS) and, 102 – 103 
 reciprocity and, 102 – 104 
 testimonials and, 103 – 104 
 Norms 
 behavior regulation and, 127 – 133, 137, 
139 – 155, 158, 161, 165 – 167, 169t 
 clear, 141 – 150 
 commitment and, 77, 81 – 82, 87, 103 – 104, 
113t 
 compliance with, 81 – 82 
 contrast and, 144 – 145 
 contribution and, 58, 65 – 66 
 descriptive, 141 – 146, 149, 167, 169t 
 examples and, 143 – 144 
 explicit, 146 – 149 
 injunctive, 141, 145 
 newcomers and, 179 – 180, 206, 211, 220 
 reciprocity and, 8, 31, 102 – 104, 113t, 115 
 salient, 141 – 150 
 starting new online communities and, 244, 
247 – 248 
  
 Obama, Barack, 85 
 ObHack, 127 – 128 
 Off-topic conversations 
 behavior regulation and, 5, 132, 167 
 commitment and, 99 – 102, 113t, 
114 – 115 
 Old-timers, 263 
 behavior regulation and, 161 
 commitment and, 99 
 mentoring and, 212 – 217, 221 – 223 
 newcomers and, 5, 179, 201, 207, 209 – 214, 
217 – 218, 221, 223t 
 Omidyar Network, 138, 157, 170n3 
 “ One Million Strong for Barack ” 
campaign, 85 
 Online bookmarking, 257 
 Online communities 
 access controls and, 6 – 8, 168t, 218 – 222, 
223t 
 attracting members and, 3 – 4 ( see also 
Recruitment) 
 benefits of joining early, 250, 253 – 255, 
262 – 266, 274, 276t 
 bootstrapping and, 249 – 253 
 commitment and, 77 – 115 
 content and, 6 – 7 
 contribution and, 21 – 70 ( see also 
Contribution) 
 critical design challenges and, 2 – 6 
 defined, 1 
 design claims and, 12 – 15 
 fake profiles and, 242 – 243 
 goals and, 6, 9 – 16 
 increasing value of community and, 
257 – 262 
 morality and, 9 – 10 
 multiple-space, 237 – 243 
 navigation cost and, 234 – 235, 277n2 
 network externalities and, 10, 248, 256, 
258 – 259, 262 
 newcomers and, 179 – 223 ( see also 
Newcomers) 
 newsgroups and, 1, 98, 102, 127, 198, 239 
 pattern languages and, 13 – 14 
 platforms for, 1, 154, 208, 218, 232 – 233, 
244, 267 
 promise of, 1 – 2 
 purpose of, 2 
 regulating behavior and, 125 – 170 ( see also 
Regulation) 
 setting expectations for success and, 
266 – 273 
 social science and, 10 – 12 
 sociotechnical systems design and, 6 – 8 
 starting new, 3, 231 – 277 ( see also Starting 
new online communities) 
 subdividing spaces and, 239 – 240 
 success probability and, 253 – 254 
 switching cost and, 233, 244 – 245 

300 
Index
 Onyxia Wipe, 198 
 OpenID, 233, 245 
 Open reputation systems, 110, 160 
 Open source software (OSS), 2 – 4 
 access ladders and, 138 
 bugs and, 15, 22t, 23, 25 – 26, 126, 179, 197 
 commitment and, 77, 85, 102 – 107, 112 
 common purpose and, 85 
 contribution and, 21 – 26, 41 – 42, 65 
 diagnostic tasks and, 202 
 Drupal and, 104 – 105 
 initiation rituals and, 206 
 internal organization of content and, 233 
 Linux and, 106, 126, 210 
 needs-based commitment and, 106 
 newcomers and, 179 – 180, 182, 197, 202, 
204 – 206, 214, 219 
 normative commitment and, 102 – 103 
 paying employees for, 23 
 Perl, 205 
 progressive access control and, 219 – 220 
 public forums and, 126 
 Python, 214 
 referrals and, 204 – 205 
 regulation and, 126, 134, 138, 154, 160 
 salient purpose and, 102 – 103 
 social contact and, 42 – 43 
 SourceForge and, 231 
 starting new online communities and, 231, 
233, 255, 263, 277n7 
 Ubuntu and, 210 
 version-control tools and, 134 
 Opportunities model, 233 – 237 
 Ostrom, E., 129 – 130, 151, 161, 164 
 Outgroups, 86 – 87, 113t, 114 – 115, 
151, 218 
  
 PageRank, 58, 154 
 PalTalk, 137, 240, 241 
 Participation benefits, 244 – 246, 253 – 254, 
277n3 
 Passive disclosure, 96 – 97 
 Patriotism, 87 
 Pattern Language, A: Towns, Buildings, and 
Construction (Alexander), 14 
 Pattern languages, 13 – 14 
 Peer pressure, 35 
 Peer reporting, 164 – 165, 169t 
 Pepitone, A., 155 
 Performance 
 Aristotle and, 24 
 behavior and, 133 ( see also Behavior) 
 commitment and, 86 
 contribution and, 23 – 25, 36, 40, 47 – 50, 
53 – 63, 67 – 68 
 enhancing expectancy value and, 62 – 66 
 feedback and, 104 ( see also Feedback) 
 high-challenge goals and, 35 – 37 
 motivation and, 23 – 25, 36, 40, 47 – 50, 
53 – 63, 67 – 68 
 newcomers and, 202, 213 
 regulation and, 133 
 starting new online communities and, 236 
 Perl, 205 
 Permanent discounts, 262 – 265, 276t 
 Personal conversation, 92 – 94 
 Personal information 
 commitment and, 94 – 95, 100, 109, 114 
 starting new online communities and, 266 
 Persuasion, 12 
 behavior regulation and, 162 
 contribution and, 24, 27 – 29, 31 – 33, 68, 70 
 motivation and, 24, 27 – 29, 31 – 33, 68, 70 
 newcomers and, 183 – 184, 187 – 192 
 PGHDance, 208 
 phpBB, 244 – 245, 267 
 Pink messaging, 255 
 Platforms, 1, 154, 208, 218, 232 – 233, 244, 
267 
 PokerStars, 247 – 248 
 Posters, 2 
 commitment and, 86, 98 
 contribution and, 32, 52 
 newcomers and, 201 
 new online communities and, 238, 263 
 regulation and, 127 – 128, 142, 167 

Index 
301
 Postmes, Tom, 81 
 Powazek, Derek, 132 
 Power-law distribution, 4 – 5, 64 
 Preece, Jenny, 10, 182 
 Presentation 
 commitment and, 95, 113t, 155 – 156, 169t 
 contribution and, 68, 70 
 framing and, 274 – 275 ( see also Framing) 
 misrepresentation and, 155 – 156 
 starting new online communities and, 259, 
269, 276t 
 Principle of proximity, 4, 78, 92 
 Product diffusion, 184 
 Progressive access control, 219 – 221 
 Protection 
 copyright, 151, 211, 219 
 newcomers and, 180, 218 – 222 
 Pseudonyms 
 behavior regulation and, 158 – 161, 168t 
 cheap, 158 – 160 
 commitment and, 95, 112t 
 Psych Central, 125 – 126 
 Psychology, 10 
 authority figures and, 31 – 32 
 basic drives and, 41 
 Carnegie and, 32 
 CET theory and, 59 
 commitment and, 78 – 79, 89 – 90, 95, 99, 
104, 108 – 109 
 competition and, 231, 236, 243 – 248, 256, 
259, 267, 274 – 275 
 contribution and, 23 – 24, 32, 36, 58, 61, 66 
 door-to-door canvassing and, 29 
 do your best (DYB) and, 36 – 37 
 expectancies and, 23 – 25, 55 – 56, 62 – 66 
 extrinsic motivation and, 51 – 62 
 false praise and, 48 – 49 
 familiar stranger and, 90 
 fear campaigns and, 31 – 32 
 field theory and, 78 
 group cohesiveness theory and, 79, 85, 88 
 halo effect and, 189 
 heuristic processing and, 189 – 194 
 high-challenge goals and, 35 – 40 
 high-status people and, 31 – 33, 35 
 interpersonal relationships and, 79 – 80 
( see also Interpersonal relationships) 
 intrinsic motivation and, 41 – 50 
 Milgram experiment and, 31 
 motivation and, 1, 23 – 24, 32, 36, 58, 61, 66 
 music download experiment and, 35 
 names and, 82 – 85 
 newcomers and, 183, 186, 189, 205 – 206, 
208 
 patriotism and, 87 
 peer pressure and, 35 – 37 
 persuasion and, 12, 24, 27 – 29, 31 – 33, 68, 70 
 power of liking and, 32 – 33 
 preferential attachment and, 35, 263 
 recruitment and, 183 – 194 
 regulating behavior and, 129, 131, 141, 155, 
157 
 Reiss and, 41 – 44 
 self-determination theory (SDT) and, 59 
 self-efficacy and, 36, 40, 68, 213 
 social contact and, 43 – 47, 106 
 socially desirable characteristics and, 33, 35 
 social proof and, 35 
 status rewards and, 7, 24, 41, 52 – 58, 60, 68, 
109, 138, 157, 202, 214, 244, 253, 255, 
262 – 265, 274, 276t 
 systematic processing and, 189 – 190 
 ultimatum experiment and, 164 
 uniqueness principle and, 11, 14, 63 – 66, 68 
 Public bad problem, 129 
 Public forums, 126 
 Pull model, 233 – 235 
 Push alerts, 233 
 Python, 214 
  
 Question-answering sites, 42 
 Quota mechanisms, 136 – 137 
  
 Rape, 125, 147, 163 
 Rape in Cyberspace, A (Dibbell), 125 
 Rathunde, Kevin, 44 

302 
Index
 Ravelry, 1 – 2 
 Raymond, Eric S., 103 
 Reader-to-leader funnel, 182 
 Reciprocity, 8 
 commitment and, 102 – 104, 113t, 115 
 contribution and, 31 
 normative commitment and, 102 – 104 
 Recruitment, 3 – 4, 6, 11, 16 
 active, 182 – 183 
 advertising and, 180, 182 – 184, 188 – 195 
 attracting early members and, 253 – 257 
 Bass model and, 184 
 bootstrapping and, 249 – 253 
 celebrity endorsements and, 190 – 192, 222, 
247 – 248, 274 – 275, 276t 
 commitment and, 81, 88 – 89, 99, 106, 
114 – 115, 266 – 268 
 contact scraping and, 185 – 186 
 content sharing and, 187 – 188 
 contribution and, 27 
 convener quality and, 266 – 268 
 conveying deep information and, 1 
 diagnostic tasks and, 201 – 203 
 early adopter benefits and, 250, 253 – 255, 
262 – 266, 274, 276t 
 email solicitation and, 183 – 187 
 entry barriers and, 205 – 210 
 entry fees and, 200 
 external credentials and, 203 – 204 
 external signals and, 272 – 273 
 face-to-face, 183 – 184 
 familiarity principle and, 192 – 194 
 free trial accounts and, 183 
 friends and, 183, 186 – 188 
 halo effect and, 189 
 heuristic processing and, 189 – 194 
 increasing community visibility and, 
187 – 188 
 increasing value of community and, 
257 – 262 
 influential members and, 188 
 interpersonal, 183 – 194 
 laissez-faire approaches to, 182 – 183 
 newcomers and, 180 – 202, 221 – 223 
 participation benefits and, 253 – 254, 277n3 
 passive, 182 – 183, 221 
 permanent discounts and, 262 – 264 
 positive member response and, 268 – 272 
 product diffusion and, 184 
 psychology of, 183 – 194 
 referrals and, 161, 185, 188, 197, 203 – 205, 
222, 223t, 252 – 253, 276t 
 regulating behavior and, 161 
 robo-calls and, 183 
 screening and, 200 – 205 
 selection and, 180 – 182, 194 – 201, 204 – 205, 
221 
 separating tasks and, 200 – 201 
 setting expectations for success and, 
266 – 273 
 social networks and, 185 – 188, 221, 223t 
 starting new online communities and, 231, 
245, 247 – 248, 257, 265, 274 – 275, 276t 
 success probability and, 253 – 254 
 systematic processing and, 189 – 190 
 targeting and, 184, 221 
 unique selling proposition and, 247 – 248 
 viral marketing and, 184 – 187, 252 
 word of mouth, 180, 182, 184 – 186, 188, 
199, 221, 223t 
 Reddit, 148 – 149, 151, 258 
 Red Hat, 23 
 Red users, 209 – 210 
 Referrals 
 benefits of, 161 
 newcomers and, 185, 188, 197, 203 – 204, 
222, 223t 
 starting new online communities and, 
252 – 253, 276t 
 Regulation, 16 
 access ladders and, 138 
 advertising and, 142, 145 
 anonymity and, 155, 161 
 appeal procedures and, 133 – 134 
 bans and, 137 – 139, 158, 162 – 163, 166, 
168t – 169t 

Index 
303
 blogs and, 125, 154, 165 
 clear/salient norms and, 141 – 150 
 coerced compliance and, 136 – 140 
 commitment and, 77 
 community influence on rulemaking and, 
152 – 153 
 compromising displays and, 149 – 150 
 consistent criteria and, 138 – 139 
 contact scraping and, 185 – 186 
 contrast and, 144 – 145 
 currency and, 138 – 139, 157 – 158, 166, 168t, 
170n4 
 cyberrape and, 125, 147 
 deindividuation and, 155 
 discussion groups and, 5, 158 
 disemvoweling and, 131, 143, 162, 166 
 displayed statistics and, 146 – 148 
 email and, 126, 131 – 132, 139, 150, 154, 
156 – 157 
 examples and, 143 – 146 
 explicit rules and, 146 – 149, 165 – 166 
 Facebook and, 129, 137, 142, 163 
 fairness and, 133 
 fake profiles and, 242 – 243 
 feedback and, 138, 141 – 146, 150, 156 – 159, 
164 – 166 
 filters and, 131, 135, 167, 168t 
 flame wars and, 126 – 127, 132, 150 – 151 
 framing and, 167, 169t 
 free riders and, 164 
 friendship and, 5, 129, 137, 159 
 gags and, 137 – 138, 162, 166, 168t – 169t 
 goals and, 126 
 identifiability and, 155 – 157 
 import/export of content and, 245 – 247 
 influence limiters and, 135, 138 – 139, 
157 – 158 
 initiation and, 165 
 interpersonal relationships and, 151, 164 
 labeled posts and, 131 
 laws and, 130 – 131, 150 
 legitimacy and, 132 – 134, 137 – 138, 150 – 151, 
161 – 162, 165, 167 
 long-term identities and, 160 – 161 
 markets and, 129 – 130 
 moderators and, 131 – 134, 137, 143, 165 
 neutrality and, 125 – 126, 128 
 newcomers and, 127 – 128, 134, 136 – 139, 
148 – 149, 154, 158 – 161, 168t, 217 – 221 
 norms and, 127 – 133, 137, 139 – 155, 158, 
161, 165 – 167, 169t 
 off-topic conversations and, 5, 132, 167 
 peer reporting and, 164 – 165, 169t 
 performance and, 133 
 persuasion and, 162 
 posters and, 127 – 128, 142, 167 
 progressive access control and, 219 – 221 
 pseudonyms and, 158 – 161, 168t 
 psychology and, 129, 131, 141, 155, 157 
 publication of research and, 126 
 public forums and, 126 
 quota mechanisms and, 136 – 137 
 rated posts and, 131 
 recruitment and, 161 
 redirecting inappropriate posts and, 132 – 133 
 reputation systems and, 131, 156 – 157, 160, 
168t, 170n3 
 reversion tools and, 134 – 135 
 rewards and, 150, 153 – 166 
 sanctions and, 5, 7, 128, 130 – 132, 137, 150, 
153 – 167 
 sandboxes and, 162, 218 – 222 
 Slashdot and, 131, 133 – 134, 154, 159 
 spam and, 5, 136 – 137, 139, 154 – 155, 157, 
167 
 summary of design alternatives for, 166 – 167, 
168t – 169t 
 support groups and, 145 – 146 
 technology and, 127, 130 – 131 
 three-revert rule and, 127 
 throttles and, 136 – 137, 166 
 trolls and, 5, 9, 127 – 128, 135 – 136, 139, 154, 
166 – 167 
 utility and, 128 – 129, 159 
 value and, 129, 145, 150, 157, 160, 162, 
166, 170n4 

304 
Index
 voluntary compliance and, 140 – 166 
 wikis and, 125 – 128, 138, 143, 148 – 149, 
154 – 155, 159, 162, 165 – 166 
 work safe environment and, 126 
 Reiss, S., 41 – 44 
 Religion, 82 
 Republicans, 197 
 Reputation systems, 110, 131, 156 – 158, 160, 
168t, 170n3 
 Retention 
 newcomers and, 180, 182, 188, 221 – 222 
 starting new online communities and, 242, 
262 
 Rewards 
 bootstrapping and, 249 – 250 
 CET theory and, 59 
 commitment and, 84, 105, 109 
 compliance and, 153 – 166 
 contribution and, 12, 24 – 25, 40 – 41, 47, 
49 – 62, 66, 67 – 70 
 expectancies and, 23 – 25, 55 – 56, 62 – 66 
 gaming the system and, 13, 53 – 58 
 intrinsic/extrinsic trade-offs and, 58 – 62 
 labels and, 52 
 monetary, 52, 59 – 60, 62 
 motivation and, 40 – 41, 47, 49 – 62, 66, 67 – 70 
 new online communities and, 242 – 243, 249, 
274 
 performance-contingent, 53, 56 
 permanent discounts and, 262 – 265, 276t 
 predictable, 13 
 privileges and, 52 – 53, 57 – 58 
 regulation and, 7, 150, 153 – 166 
 self-determination theory (SDT) and, 59 
 small tangible, 12, 14 – 15 
 status and, 7, 24, 41, 52 – 58, 60, 68, 109, 
138, 157, 202, 214, 244, 253, 255, 262 – 265, 
274, 276t 
 task-contingent, 53, 55 – 56, 60 – 62 
 Turkers and, 52 – 54 
 Richardson, M., 188 
 Robo-calls, 183 
 Rogers, E., 255 
 Role-playing games, 84, 92 – 93, 159, 
179, 189 
 Romance, 42 
 Rotten Tomatoes, 101 
 RSS feeds, 26 – 27, 93, 233 – 234 
 Rustichini, A., 62 
  
 Salganik, M. J., 35 
 Sanctions.  See also Rewards 
 commitment and, 5 
 compliance and, 153 – 166 
 enhancing certainty of, 164 – 165 
 graduated, 130, 161 – 166, 169t 
 increasing deterrent effect of, 164 – 165 
 newcomers and, 203 
 regulation and, 5, 7, 128, 130 – 132, 137, 150, 
153 – 167 
 Sandboxes 
 defined, 218 – 219 
 newcomers and, 218 – 222 
 Wikipedia and, 162, 219 
 Sanger, Larry, 148 
 Sassenberg, K., 81 
 Schachter, S., 79 
 Scrabulous, 11 
 Screening 
 acquiring accurate signals for, 201 – 202 
 commitment and, 112 
 design claims for, 201 – 205 
 diagnostic tasks and, 201 – 203 
 external credentials and, 203 – 204 
 newcomers and, 180, 197, 200 – 205 
 new online communities and, 267 
 referrals and, 203 – 205 
 separating tasks and, 200 – 201 
 signaling problems and, 201 
 Search engine optimization (SEO), 58 
 Seekers, 66 – 67 
 Selection 
 entry fees and, 200 
 external credentials and, 203 – 204 
 FAQs and, 198 – 199 
Regulation (cont.)

Index 
305
 newcomers and, 180 – 182, 194 – 201, 
204 – 205, 221 
 screening and, 200 – 205 
 self, 180, 198 – 201, 204 – 205, 267 
 separating tasks and, 200 – 201 
 signaling problems and, 201 
 Self-determination theory (SDT), 59 
 Self-disclosure, 6 
 behavior regulation and, 151 
 commitment and, 90, 94 – 97, 100, 113t 
 moderators and, 96 
 newcomers and, 208 
 pseudonyms and, 95 – 97 
 Self-efficacy, 36, 40, 68, 213 
 Self-selection, 180, 198 – 201, 204 – 205, 267 
 Sen, S., 111 
 Separating tasks, 200 – 201 
 September 11 attacks, 87 
 Sermo, 54, 252, 267 
 Shapiro, Carl, 244, 247 
 Shatner, William, 190 – 191 
 Sherif, Muzafer, 141 
 Shills, 68, 128, 135 
 Shneiderman, B., 182 
 Shopping, 109, 257 – 258 
 Shutterfly, 257 
 Sierra Club, 81 
 Skills, 3 
 commitment and, 110 
 contribution and, 25 – 27, 39 – 40, 44 – 47, 64 
 motivation and, 25 – 27, 39 – 40, 44 – 47, 64 
 newcomers and, 194 – 198, 203, 208, 213, 
217 – 222 
 starting new online communities and, 254, 
262 – 264, 266 
 Slashdot 
 behavior regulation and, 131, 133 – 134, 154, 
159 
 commitment and, 108, 110 
 contribution and, 47, 49, 52, 54 – 57, 61 
 newcomers and, 207 
 starting new online communities and, 239, 
258, 263 
 Small, D. A., 165 
 Smith, John D., 233 
 Smokefree.gov, 2 – 3 
 Smooth Reading pages, 220 – 221 
 Social contact, 41 – 47, 106 
 Social dilemma, 129 – 130, 164 
 Social identity theory, 79 – 82, 99 
 Socialization 
 collective tactics and, 215 – 217 
 FAQs and, 214 – 215 
 formal, 215 – 217 
 games and, 215 
 mentoring and, 212 – 217, 221 – 222, 
223t 
 newcomers and, 128, 180 – 182, 199, 208, 
211 – 222, 223t 
 organizational theory and, 211 – 217 
 reader-to-leader funnel and, 182 
 sequential, 215 – 217 
 six dimensions of tactics for, 212 – 213 
 stages of, 181 – 182 
 Trading Assistants and, 216 
 Social networks, 2 
 commitment and, 88 – 90, 94, 97 
 encouraging contribution and, 26, 32, 
35, 63 
 newcomers and, 218 
 recruitment and, 185 – 188, 221, 223t 
 starting new online communities and, 
242 – 243, 249, 252, 263 – 264 
 Social proof, 35 
 Social science, 1, 10 – 13, 248 
 Sociotechnical systems design, 6 – 8 
 Sock puppets, 128 
 Solvers, 66 – 67 
 Source code, 21, 57 
 SourceForge, 231 
 Spam 
 commitment and, 84 
 newcomers and, 180, 200 
 new online communities and, 234, 252, 
262, 266 
 quota mechanisms and, 136 – 137 

306 
Index
 regulation and, 5, 84, 136 – 137, 139, 
154 – 155, 157, 167, 180, 200, 234, 252, 262, 
266 
 search engine algorithms and, 155 – 156 
 throttles and, 136 – 137, 166 
 SpamNet, 252 – 253, 262 
 SparkPeople, 95 
 Speakeasy, 101 
 Spears, Russell, 81 
 Specialized groups, 239, 250 
 Starting new online communities, 16 
 administrators and, 263 
 advertising and, 245 – 248, 263, 274 – 275, 
276t 
 benefits of early adoption and, 250, 
253 – 256, 262 – 266, 274, 276t 
 blogs and, 250 – 251, 256, 258, 263, 269, 273 
 bridging activities and, 236 
 carving out a niche and, 231 – 243 
 celebrity endorsements and, 247 – 248, 
274 – 275, 276t 
 collection size and, 234 – 235 
 commitment and, 77, 243, 254 – 255, 
266 – 268, 271 – 272 
 competition and, 231, 236, 243 – 248, 256, 
259, 267, 274 – 275 
 contribution and, 246, 249 – 250, 254, 261, 
265 – 271 
 convener quality and, 266 – 268 
 critical mass of participation and, 248 – 273 
 design claims for, 232, 235, 253 – 273, 
275t-276t 
 distance metrics and, 237 – 238 
 early adopter benefits and, 250, 253 – 255, 
262 – 266, 274, 276t 
 email and, 233 – 234, 243, 252, 262, 264 – 267 
 expected active times and, 241 – 242 
 external signals and, 272 – 273 
 Facebook and, 232 – 234, 237 – 238, 243, 
245 – 246, 249 – 251 
 failure of, 231 
 fake profiles and, 242 – 243 
 familiarity principle and, 247, 254 
 filters and, 239, 242, 262 
 focal point and, 247 – 248, 275 
 framing and, 274 – 275, 276t 
 friendship and, 233 – 234, 237, 242, 245 – 252, 
257, 263 – 264, 274 
 games and, 234, 236, 239, 247, 261 – 262, 
265 
 getting to critical mass and, 248 – 273 
 GNOME and, 277t 
 goals and, 245, 264 
 import/export of content and, 245 – 247 
 incumbent communities and, 244 – 246 
 initiation and, 233 
 innovation-need paradox and, 255 – 256 
 interpersonal relationships and, 243, 274 
 match value and, 234 – 239, 241, 243 – 244, 
277n2 
 Metcalfe ’ s Law and, 248 
 moderators and, 241, 263 
 navigation cost and, 234, 240 – 241 
 newcomers and, 240 
 norms and, 244, 247 – 248 
 opportunities model and, 233 – 237 
 participation benefits and, 244 – 246, 
253 – 254, 277n3 
 performance and, 236 
 permanent discounts and, 262 – 265, 276t 
 personal information and, 266 
 personalized collections of related content 
and, 238 – 239 
 positive member response and, 268 – 272 
 posters and, 238, 263 
 presentation and, 259, 269, 276t 
 professionally-generated content and, 231, 
258 – 262, 266 – 268, 275t 
 pull model and, 233 – 235 
 push alerts and, 233 
 recommender systems and, 242 – 243 
 recruitment and, 231, 245, 247 – 248, 257, 
265, 274 – 275, 276t 
 retention and, 242, 262 
 rewards and, 242 – 243, 249, 274 
Spam (cont.)

Index 
307
 scope of the community and, 232, 235 – 237, 
242 – 243, 260 – 261 
 screening and, 267 
 skills and, 254, 262 – 264, 266 
 Slashdot and, 239, 258, 263 
 social networks and, 242 – 243, 249, 252, 
263 – 264 
 spam and, 234, 252, 262, 266 
 startup cost and, 245, 253 – 254 
 success indicators and, 266 – 273 
 support groups and, 3, 232, 241, 243, 256 
 syndicated data and, 259 – 260 
 synergies among spaces and, 237, 260 
 targeting and, 255 – 257 
 theory of credible signaling and, 267 – 268 
 time sensitivity of opportunities and, 
234 – 235 
 two-sided networks and, 256 
 unique selling proposition and, 247 – 248 
 user-generated content and, 231, 250 – 251, 
275t 
 utility and, 232, 234, 239, 248, 253 – 254, 
267 – 268 
 value and, 231, 233 – 235, 272, 274, 
277nn2,8 
 volunteers and, 249, 261 – 262, 277n7 
 Wikipedia and, 247, 249, 263, 270, 272 
 word of mouth approach and, 264 
 Startup cost, 245, 253 – 254 
 Star Wars (film), 143 – 144 
 Stewart, K. J., 190 
 Stopit procedures, 152 – 153 
 Stubs, 5, 21 – 22, 26 
 Subgroups, 6, 11, 81 – 85, 114 
 Subversion, 134 
 Success indicators 
 displaying absolute numbers and, 271 – 272 
 displaying user-contributed content and, 
269 – 270 
 external signals and, 272 – 273 
 member images and, 268 – 269 
 participation-level indicators and, 270 
 positive member response and, 268 – 273 
 signals of convener quality and, 266 – 268 
 starting new online communities and, 
266 – 273 
 Success probability, 253 – 254 
 SuggestBot, 27 
 Sun, 23 
 Sunstein, Cass R., 17n2 
 Support groups 
 commitment and, 77, 80, 82, 95, 103, 108 
 contribution and, 4 – 5, 21, 41 
 health, 2 – 3, 21, 77, 81 – 82, 95, 108, 126, 
145, 181, 199, 204, 245, 256 
 newcomers and, 181, 189, 197 – 199, 204 
 new online communities and, 3, 232, 241, 
243, 256 
 regulation and, 145 – 146 
 technical, 4, 14, 21, 42, 77, 146, 259 
 Switching costs, 233, 244 – 245 
 Synergy, 237, 260 
 Systematic processing, 189 – 190 
 Systers, 79, 99 
  
 Tagged, 185 – 186 
 Taglines, 8, 15, 83, 113t, 114, 190, 239, 272 
 Tajfel, H., 82 
 Tardos,  É ., 188 
 Targeting, 184, 221, 255 – 257 
 Tassone, 268 
 TED awards, 190 
 Terrorism, 87 
 Terveen, L., 111 
 Testimonials, 103 – 104 
 Thaler, Richard, 17n2 
 Theory of credible signaling 
 convener quality and, 266 – 268 
 external signals and, 272 – 273 
 newcomers and, 191, 201 – 205 
 positive member response and, 268 – 273 
 Threadless, 33, 61, 62 
 Threats, 87 
 Throttles, 136 – 137, 166 
 Tipping Point, The (Gladwell), 187 – 188 
 Titanic (film), 64 

308 
Index
 Trading Assistants, 216 
 “ Tragedy of the Commons ” (Hardin), 129 
 Transparency, 49, 57 – 58, 126, 199 – 200 
 TripAdvisor, 128, 135 
 Trojan horses, 197 
 Trolls 
 griefers and, 127 
 ignoring, 135 – 136 
 newcomers and, 180, 197, 200 
 regulation and, 5, 9, 127 – 128, 135 – 136, 139, 
154, 166 – 167 
 Usenet and, 127 – 128 
 Turing tests, 8, 139 – 140, 160, 167n1, 168t, 
201 – 202, 204 
 Turkers, 52 – 54 
 Turnover 
 commitment and, 80 – 81, 99, 109 – 110 
 contribution and, 47 
 newcomers and, 179, 182, 198, 205 
 Twitter, 93, 137, 156, 187, 246 
  
 Ubuntu, 210 
 Ultimatum game, 164 
 Uniqueness principle, 11, 14, 63 – 66, 68 
 UpMyStreet, 237 
 Usenet, 85 
 benefits of joining early, 263 
 defection and, 107 – 108 
 needs-based commitment and, 107 
 newcomers and, 182, 205 – 207, 214 
 newsgroups and, 1, 98, 102, 127, 198, 
239 
 recruitment and, 182 
 specialization and, 239 
 support groups and, 2, 5 
 trolls and, 127 – 128 
 User profiles, 6, 40, 94 – 96, 113t 
 User support, 23 
 Utility, 11 – 12 
 behavior regulation and, 128 – 129, 159 
 contribution and, 23 – 24, 56, 64, 66 
 new online communities and, 232, 234, 239, 
248, 253 – 254, 267 – 268 
  
 Value 
 affiliation and, 83 
 behavior and, 129, 145, 150, 157, 160, 162, 
166, 170n4 
 commitment and, 77, 82 – 83, 97, 102 – 105, 
109 – 110 
 contribution and, 23, 25, 29, 31, 35, 42, 49, 
52, 57, 62 – 66 
 expectancy and, 23 – 25, 55 – 56, 62 – 66 
 motivation and, 23, 25, 29, 31, 35, 42, 49, 
52, 57, 62 – 66 
 newcomers and, 194, 195, 197, 200, 210 
 political, 82 
 regulation and, 129, 145, 150, 157, 160, 
162, 166, 170n4 
 starting new online communities and, 231, 
233 – 235, 272, 274, 277nn2,8 
 Van Alstyne, M., 157 
 Vanguard, 109 
 Varian, Hal, 244, 247 
 Viegas, F., 127 
 Viral marketing, 184 – 187, 252 
 Volunteers 
 appealing to, 22 – 23 
 commitment and, 106 
 contribution and, 21 – 23, 26 – 27, 61 
 newcomers and, 194 – 195, 215 
 new online communities and, 249, 261 – 262, 
277n7 
 political, 61 – 62 
 user support and, 23 
 Von Ahn, Luis, 44 
  
 Walker, J. M., 129 
 Wang, Xiaoqing, 108 
 WarcraftMovies, 198 
 Watchlists, 26 
 Wattenberg, Martin, 127 
 Watts, D. J., 35 
 Welcomers, 6, 8, 210, 222 
 WELL (Whole Earth  ’ Lectronic Link), 147, 
209, 210 
 Wellness Community, 241 

Index 
309
 Wenger, Etienne, 220, 233, 236 
 White, Nancy, 147, 233 
 White, Robert W., 41 
 Wikifying, 26 
 Wikimedia, 2 – 3, 104, 182 
 Wikipedia, 2 
 commitment and, 77, 83, 85 – 86, 88, 104, 
107 
 contribution and, 21 – 27, 30 – 32, 35, 38 – 39, 
49, 60 – 64 
 Don ’ t Bite the Newcomer policy and, 
206 – 208, 210 
 English-language version of, 3, 5 
 Featured Article status and, 38 
 growth challenges of, 182 
 meaningful content and, 21 – 22 
 motivation and, 24 – 25 
 named subprojects and, 83 
 newcomers and, 179, 182, 185, 195, 199, 
205 – 211, 217, 219 – 220 
 new online communities and, 247, 249, 263, 
270, 272 
 red users and, 209 – 210 
 regulation and, 125 – 128, 138, 148 – 149, 
154 – 155, 159, 162 
 relevancy and, 21 – 22 
 reversions and, 127 
 sandboxes and, 162, 219 
 stubs and, 5, 21 – 22, 26 
 SuggestBot and, 27 
 three-revert rule and, 127 
 Welcoming Committee of, 209 – 210 
 WikiProjects, 25, 38 – 39, 85, 207, 214 
 Wikis 
 Apache Software Foundation (ASF) and, 126 
 information-sharing, 3 
 newcomers and, 218 
 promise of, 1 
 regulation and, 126, 143, 165 – 166 
 Williams, K., 25 
 Wilson, E. O., 190 
 Wood, Charles A., 142 
 Wookieepedia, 143 – 144 
 Word of mouth 
 recruitment and, 180, 182, 184 – 186, 188, 
199, 221, 223t 
 starting new online communities and, 264 
 WordPress, 58, 154 
 Work safe environment, 126 
 World of Warcraft, 263 
 behavior regulation and, 127, 159 – 160 
 commitment and, 84, 86, 92, 105, 109 – 110 
 contribution and, 24, 29, 49 
 corpse camping and, 127 
 guilds and, 195, 197 
 newcomers and, 183, 185, 189 – 191, 195, 
198, 201 – 206, 215, 217 
 Shatner and, 190 – 191 
 socialization and, 217 
 World Trade Center, 87 
 WrongPlanet, 208 
  
 X – Fileaholics, 100 
  
 Yahoo!, 1, 3, 42, 100, 232, 245, 257, 267 
 Yarn Harlot, 100 – 101 
 Yelp, 128 
 YouTube, 3, 21, 163, 198 
  
 Zeckhauser, R., 142 
 Zimbardo, P. G., 155 
 Zitek, E. M., 147 – 148 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
www.Ebook777.com

