Robert Bruce 
Thompson 
Barbara Fritchman 
Thompson 
(n 
Foreword by 
^ 
Jerry Pournelle 
Y S . , C I 
PERFECT FOR 
WINDOWS 7, 
LINUX. AND 
MORE 
The perfect PC is the one you build yourself. 
3rd Edition 
Building the 
Perfect PC 
Learning by 
Discovery 
O'REILLY' 
Make: 
makezine.com 

Building the Perfect PC 
Third Edition 
Robert Bruce Thompson 
Barbara Fritchman Thompson 
O ' R E I L L Y ® 
Beijing • Cambridge • Farnham • Köln • Sebastopol • Tokyo 

Building the Perfect PC, Third Edition 
by Robert Bruce Thompson and Barbara Fritchman Thompson 
Copyright © 2011 Robert Bruce T h o m p s o n and Barbara Fritchman Thompson. All rights reserved. 
Printed in Canada. 
Published by O'Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA 95472. 
O'Reilly Media books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use. Online editions are also 
available for most titles (http://my.safaribooksonHne.com). For more information, contact our corporate/institutional sales 
department: 800-998-9938 or 
corporate@oreilly.com. 
Editor: Brian Jepson 
Production Editor: Rachel M o n a g h a n 
Copyeditor: Rachel Head 
Proofreader: Rachel M o n a g h a n 
Indexer: Angela Howard 
Cover Designer: Mark Paglietti 
Interior Designer: Ron Bilodeau 
Illustrator: Robert Romano 
Print History: 
August 2004: 
December 2006: 
November 2010: 
First Edition. 
Second Edition. 
Third Edition. 
The O'Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O'Reilly Media, Inc. M a n y of the designations used by manufacturers and 
sellers to distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks. Where those designations appear in this book, and O'Reilly 
Media, Inc., was aware of a trademark claim, the designations have been printed in caps or initial caps. 
While every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this book, the publisher and authors assume no responsibility 
for errors or omissions, or for d a m a g e s resulting from the use of the information contained herein. 
ISBN: 978-1-449-38824-9 
[Tl] 

Contents 
Foreword to ch© Third Edition 
¡x 
Preface 
xm 
1. Fundamentals 
l 
Why Build a PC? 
2 
Designing the Perfect PC 
6 
Things to Know and Do Before You Start 
18 
Things You Need to Have 
21 
Troubleshooting 
24 
2. Choosing and Buying Components 
33 
Choosing Components 
37 
Buying Components 
80 
Final Words 
86 
3. Building a Budget PC 
89 
Determining Functional Requirements 
90 
Hardware Design Criteria 
91 
Component Considerations 
92 
Building the Budget System 
99 
Final Words 
117 
4. Building a Mainstream System 
119 
Determining Functional Requirements 
120 
Hardware Design Criteria 
120 
Component Considerations 
122 
Building the Mainstream System 
130 
Final Words 
157 

5. Building an Extreme System 
159 
Determining Functional Requirements 
160 
Hardware Design Criteria 
160 
Component Considerations 
162 
Building the Extreme System 
176 
Final Words 
204 
6. Building a Media Center System 
205 
Determining Functional Requirements 
207 
Hardware Design Criteria 
209 
Component Considerations 
210 
Building the Media Center System 
220 
Installing Software 
245 
Final Words 
260 
7. Building an Appliance/Nettop System 263 
Determining Functional Requirements 
263 
Hardware Design Criteria 
265 
Component Considerations 
266 
Building the Appliance System 
273 
Final Words 
290 
8. Building a Home Server 
291 
Determining Functional Requirements 
292 
Hardware Design Criteria 
295 
Component Considerations 
299 
Building the Home Server 
308 
Final Words 
326 
Index 
323 
viii 
Contents 

Foreword to the 
Third Edition 
A lot has changed in the computer world since the last edition of this book, 
and even more since its first edition. Computers have become more power-
ful: when I wrote the foreword for the first edition, I had over 20 networked 
desktop computers, far more than I needed, but networking was complex and 
I needed a full network so that I could understand networking problems. To-
day, either of the two desktops I use as main machines have more computing 
power and disk storage than did all my computers put together a few years 
ago—and if I have a sudden need for a lot more storage or computing power, 
I have access to "cloud computing"that can supply far more. 
There have been other changes since the last edition of Building the Perfect 
PC. Quad- and even hex-core processors (and the chipsets and CPU sockets to 
support them) have not only become commonplace, but pretty well required. 
Tiny Mini-ITX systems, formerly niche products, are mainstream. CRT monitors— 
bottles—have pretty well vanished, replaced by flat-panel LCD displays, some 
as large as TV sets used to be. Audio and video built in to the motherboard are 
now good enough for a lot more than they used to be, while some external 
video cards now do as much computing as the best CPUs did. Audio process-
ing has changed dramatically. Memory has gone through transmogrifications 
from DDR to DDR2 (now giving way to DDR3). Solid-state drives are available 
for both laptops and desktops. 
If you're contemplating building your own PC, you need to know about all this 
before you decide what to build. For that matter, you need to know what's 
going on before you buy a ready-built system, and other than in this book it's 
hard to find all that information in one place. 
The reasons for building your own PC haven't changed a lot in the past de-
cade. You build your own PC so that you will know more about it, how it works, 
what's probably wrong if something does go wrong, and just for the sheer 
satisfaction that you've got precisely the machine you want and need. But 
then, I covered all that in the foreword to the first edition, and those principles 
haven't changed. If you don't know whether to build or buy, this is still the best 
book I know of that will help you make that decision; and if you do decide to 
build your own, you really need this book. 
—Jerry Pournelle 
Chaos Manor 
August 2010 

Foreword to the Second Edition 
Foreword to the Second Edition 
I was asked to revise the foreword I wrote for the first edition of this book, 
but I found there was no need. A few details have changed, but the principles 
haven't. 
However, the details are important. My main systems at Chaos Manor now 
mostly run with dual-core (both Intel and AMD) CPU chips. Since the first edi-
tion of Building the Perfect PC, the video card scene has changed several times. 
Intel lost its dominance as the maker of the fastest desktop CPUs for the mon-
ey. AMD took advantage of the Intel stumble and surged ahead to its highest 
market share yet. AMD and nVidia joined forces, and now AMD has bought ATI. 
Case designs have changed. We have both DDR and DDR2 RAM to contend 
with. 
If you have the first edition, you know how important the book is, and when 
you contemplate building a new system, you'll be wise to upgrade. And if you 
don't have the first edition, this remains the best book you can buy if you're 
building or planning to build a PC. Now read the foreword to the first edition. 
—Jerry Pournelle 
Chaos 
Manor 
August 
2006 
Foreword to the First Edition 
I presume you're reading this because you've either just bought this book or 
you're thinking of buying it, so let's get that out the way now. Should you buy 
this book, or, having bought it, should you be happy you did? The answer is 
yes. If the subject of building your own computer interests you—and why in 
the world are you reading this if it doesn't?—then you need this book. 
That out of the way, we can look at the broader question of whether you 
should build your own computers. 
As I look around Chaos Manor (http://www.jerrypournelle.com) I see that I have 
over 20 computers, all networked, and I built nearly every one of them myself. 
The exceptions are Princess, an ancient Compaq desktop Professional Work-
station running Dual Pentium Plus 200 MHz CPUs; a Mac; a TabletPC; and 
another laptop. No one in his right mind builds his own laptop orTablet. I keep 
Princess because I've had her for a decade, and she hasn't been shut down in 
more than a year, and I haven't the heart to scrap her; besides, she's still useful 
for doing long web searches. Until fairly recently I had a Compaq Professional 
Workstation (Dual 750 MHz Pentium III) as my communications system, but I 
retired it a few months ago in favor of a new 3 GHz built here, and since then 
every server and workstation added to the Chaos Manor network was built 
here. Clearly I must like building systems and using them. 
x 
Foreword 

It wasn't always this way. Until a few years ago I had at least as many brand-
name systems as home-built "white boxes."Then came the consumerization 
of the PC industry. Manufacturers were forced into cost reduction after cost 
reduction. Some of those cost reductions were not wise. Some were disasters. 
Worse, component makers were themselves competing on cost. It became 
more and more difficult to build a quality line of PCs to sell at any realistic price. 
It is still possible to buy quality computers. You'll pay for them, though, and 
sometimes having paid an arm and a leg, you still won't know what quality you 
have bought. There are still big companies with mission-critical tasks who are 
well advised to buy the very best machines from top-of-the-line companies, 
but most users and small businesses would be better advised to consider build-
ing their own, or having them built to specs by a trustworthy local shop—and 
this book is indispensable when it comes to writing out those specifications. 
In general, there are two reasons why you build your own systems. First is if 
you want the highest possible performance using only the latest and greatest 
components. When new and better components come out, it takes a while for 
commercial system builders to change over, and the first ones to come out 
with the latest in high-performance demand and get premium prices; and you 
can customize your high performance system for your specific needs. If you're 
interested in building a really screaming machine, you need this book, be-
cause building that kind of system is tricky. Components like power supplies, 
cases, and fans are important, and information about why they are important 
is often hard to come by. You'll find all the information you need in this book. 
The other reason for building your own system is to get the best performance 
and quality for your money and to customize your high-performance system for 
your specific needs. You probably don't need the very best performance avail-
able, and often you can get more than good enough systems at dramatically 
lower prices. These are known as "sweet spot"systems, and once again, if that's 
your goal, you need this book, because that too can be tricky. Sometimes sav-
ing money isn't a good idea at all. You can fudge on some components, but 
you're better off paying a premium for others. Bob and Barbara Thompson of-
fer great advice on which is which. 
So, if you're thinking of building your own system, you need this book to give 
you some notion of how difficult it's likely to be, and help you decide if it's a 
good idea; and if you're determined to build a PC, you need this book because 
most of us who build PCs have picked up a number of techniques and tricks 
over the years, and the Thompsons know nearly all of them. Learn from our 
mistakes. It's a lot easier. 
—Jerry Pournelle 
Chaos Manor 
August 2004 
Foreword 

Preface 
The more things change, the more they remain the same. When we sat down 
to write this preface—always the last thing we do when writing a book—it 
was déjà vu all over again. For the second edition, we reused the preface from 
the 2004 first edition, and for this third edition we'll largely do the same. 
In one sense, things have changed a lot over the years. None of the compo-
nents we used in the second edition are still available. They've been replaced 
by bigger, faster, better, cheaper parts. But those are mere details. In a funda-
mental sense, nothing has changed. The reasons for building your own PC are 
the same. The decisions you need to make differ only in the details. The skills 
you need to master are the same, and the satisfaction you'll gain from design-
ing and building your own PC is as great as ever. 
So, on with the nearly original preface, which needed only slight modifications 
to update information about the system configurations in the book and other 
similar details. 
Building PCs isn't just for techies anymore. 
It used to be, certainly. Only gamers and other geeks actually built their PCs 
from the ground up. Everyone else just called Dell or Gateway and ordered a 
system. That started to change around the turn of the century. The first sign 
was when general merchandisers like Best Buy started stocking upgrade com-
ponents. If you wanted to expand the memory in your PC or install a larger 
hard drive or add a CD writer, you could now get the components you needed 
at the local big-box store. 
A year or two later, things changed again. Big-box retailers started carrying PC 
components like cases and motherboards—parts seldom needed by upgrad-
es, but necessary to build a new PC from scratch. Nowadays, although Best 
Buy and other local retailers may not carry as broad a range of PC components 
as some online specialty retailers, you can get everything you need for a new 
PC with one visit to a big-box store. 
And you can bet that big-box stores don't allocate shelf space to products that 
aren't selling. Building your own PC has become mainstream. Nowadays, even 
regular nontechnical people build their own systems and have fun doing it. In-
stead of settling for a mediocre, cookie-cutter system from Dell or HP, they get 
Specialty PC component 
superstores 
like Fry's carry a full range of 
compo-
nents at extremely good prices. We 
wish we had a Fry's within driving 
distance. Then again, maybe not. 
There's too much good stuff there. 
Our credit cards are smoking 
already, 
and a trip to Fry's might be the last 
straw. 
xiii 

Goals of This Book 
Every project system in this book can 
be built entirely from 
components 
available atyour local big-box store. 
If some of the components 
we recom-
mend aren't in stock, one or more 
of the alternative components 
we 
recommend 
almost certainly will be. 
If you buy this book on a Friday, you 
can buy your components 
Saturday 
morning, assemble the new system 
Saturday afternoon, test it Sunday, 
and have it up and running 
Monday 
morning. 
Brian Jepson Comments 
Hell, technically Apple has 
something 
to worry about, since a lot of people 
build PCs to run Mac OS X even 
though they aren't supposed to. 
a PC with exactly the features and components they want, at a good price, and 
with the pride that comes from knowing they built it themselves.They also get 
a faster, higher-quality PC with much better reliability than any mass-market 
system. No small thing, that. 
Robert visited Best Buy one day and spent some time hanging out in the PC 
component aisles. He watched a lot of regular people comparing hard drives, 
video adapters, DVD writers, and other PC components. Some of them were 
buying components to upgrade their current systems, but many of them were 
buying components to build new systems. 
Robert watched one grandmotherly woman fill her shopping cart. She chose 
an Antec case and power supply, a Maxtor hard drive, an Abit motherboard, 
an AMD Athlon XP processor, an NVIDIA graphics adapter, a couple of sticks of 
DDR memory, and a LiteOn DVD writer. He approached her, and the conversa-
tion went something like this: 
Robert:"Looks like you're building a new computer." 
Woman:"Yes, I'm building my granddaughter a new PC for her birthday." 
Robert:"Are you worried about getting everything to work?" 
Woman: "Oh, no. This is the third one I've built. You should try it. It's easy." 
Robert:"l may do that." 
If she'd had this book, she might have made different choices for one or two of 
her components. Still, Dell, ASUS, HP Compaq, and Gateway may have some-
thing to worry about. 
Goals of This Book 
This book is your guide to the world of building PCs. Our goal is to teach 
you—even if you have no training or prior experience—everything you need 
to know to select the best components and assemble them into a working PC 
that matches your own requirements and budget. 
We present six projects, in as many chapters (Chapters 3 through 8), each of 
which details design, component selection, and assembly instructions for a 
particular type of PC. You can build any or all of these systems as presented, or 
you can modify them to suit your own requirements. 
Rather than using a straight cookbook approach, which would simply tell you 
how to build a PC by rote, we spend a lot of time explaining why we made 
particular design decisions or chose certain components or did something 
a certain way. By "looking over our shoulders" as we design PCs and choose 
components, you'll learn to make good decisions when it comes to designing 
and building your own PC. You'll also learn how to build a PC with superior 
quality, performance, and reliability. 
Not that we skimped on the how-to. Each project system chapter provides 
detailed assembly instructions and dozens of photographs that illustrate the 
assembly process. Even if you've never seen a hard drive, after reading this 
book you should be completely comfortable sitting down with a bunch of 
components to build your own PC. 
xiv 
Preface 

Organization of This Book 
If you have never built a PC, we hope this book will inspire you to build your 
first system. If you have some PC-building experience, we hope this book will 
provide the ideas and advice that you need to make the next PC you build the 
Perfect PC for your needs. 
Audience for This Book 
This book is intended for anyone who wants to build a PC for personal or 
business use. System builders of any experience level will find this book use-
ful because it explains the concepts used to design a PC to fit specific needs 
and budgets and provides the information needed to choose the best com-
ponents. First-time system builders will also find this book helpful because it 
provides detailed step-by-step instructions for building a PC, supplemented 
by numerous photographs that illustrate each step in detail. 
Organization of This Book 
The first two chapters of this book are a short but comprehensive course in 
planning the perfect PC and choosing and buying components for it. 
Chapter 1, Fundamentals, focuses on things you need to know, things you 
need to have, and things you need to do before you start to buy components 
and build your new PC. This chapter explains the advantages of building a 
PC versus buying one {you control the quality, performance, reliability, and 
quietness of your components), provides design guidelines, and explains the 
inevitable trade-offs in performance, price, size, and noise level. We list the 
tools and software you'll need, and we also provide detailed troubleshooting 
information in this chapter, because it's easier to avoid problems if you know 
from the beginning what to look out for. After you read this chapter, you'll be 
prepared for the next step, actually buying the components for your new PC. 
Chapter 2, Choosing and Buying Components, tells you everything you need to 
know about how to choose and buy the components you need to build your 
new PC. 
We explain the important characteristics of each component and how to choose 
among alternatives. We also recommend brands, and provide alternative rec-
ommendations for those with different requirements or smaller budgets. 
The final six chapters detail project systems, any of which you can build as-is or 
modify to suit your particular needs. The introductory section of each project 
chapter is a design guide that explains the choices we made (and why) and how 
we decided to implement them. Following that is a detailed section on selecting 
components, with specific products listed by brand name and a bill of materials 
at the end of the section. In each case, we list alternatives for those with different 
needs or budgets. The bulk of each chapter is a detailed guide, with numerous 
photographs, that shows you step-by-step how to build the system. 
Chapter 3, Building a Budget PC, shows you how to build a fast, reliable PC on a 
minimum budget. For only $300 or so (not counting external peripherals), you 
can build a system with high-quality components that matches or exceeds 
the performance of last year's mainstream models. We designed this budget 
When you design and build your 
own PC, you get something 
that 
money can't buy if you purchase 
a 
preassembled 
machine: total control 
over quality, reliability, 
performance, 
and noise level. 
We designed all of the project 
systems in the book to be capable of 
running Windows 7. We also verified 
that each system was in fact able to 
run Windows 7 Ultimate at the per-
formance levels that anyone 
might 
reasonably 
expect. Of course, those 
performance 
levels varied by system, 
from the blazing-fast extreme system 
to the rather pedestrian 
appliance 
system. 
Preface 
xv 

We'd Like to Hear from You 
Each project chapter is full of tips, 
many of which are useful no mat-
ter what type of system you build. 
Accordingly, we suggest you read 
the entire book, including all project 
system chapters, before you start 
building your new system. 
system to run the free Linux operating system, but it's also fully capable of 
running Windows 7. It's ideal as a secondary system—or even a primary sys-
tem, if your needs are modest—and can be upgraded incrementally to add 
additional features. 
Chapter 4, Building a Mainstream System, teaches you how to build a general-
purpose PC that is a jack of all trades and a master of... well, quite a few, actu-
ally. In the standard configuration, this system combines high performance, 
top-notch reliability, and moderate cost. Depending on the components you 
choose—and how much you're willing to spend—you can make this system 
anything from an inexpensive entry-level box to a do-it-all powerhouse. And 
it's also quiet, particularly if you build it in a midrange configuration. In a nor-
mal office or home environment, you can barely hear it running. 
Chapter 5, Building an Extreme System, is all about building an extreme-
performance PC on a reasonable budget. The project system is optimized for 
video editing and scientific number crunching but with minimal changes it 
can easily be morphed into an extreme gaming PC. 
Chapter 6, Building a Media Center System, shows you how to build a small, 
quiet, attractive PC to sit in your den or media room to centralize storage and 
access to your audio and video collection—CDs, DVDs, streaming videos, cam-
corder footage, digital photographs, and so on. Although we didn't do so for 
our media center system, you can also enable it to record over-the-air, cable, 
or satellite television programs by installing one or more tuner cards and a 
copy of Windows 7 Media Center or a free PVR/DVR package like MythPC. De-
pending on how you configure it, the media center PC can substitute not only 
for a commercial DVR unit, but also for an AV receiver, CD player, DVD and/or 
Blu-ray player, DVD recorder, 5.1 home-theater speaker system, and gaming 
console. Talk about serious bang for the buck. 
Chapter 7, Building an Appliance/Nettop System, shows you how to build a fully 
featured PC that is small enough and quiet enough to fit in almost anywhere. 
Depending on the components you choose, you can make an appliance PC 
that can serve as an inexpensive secondary system suitable for a dorm room 
or child's bedroom, a primary general-purpose system, a home theater or PVR 
system, a barn-burner of a portable gaming system, or a dedicated small server. 
Chapter 8, Building a Home Server, focuses on building a reliable, high-
performance home server. We emphasize reliability and data safety regardless 
of configuration, because a server failure is as disruptive for a home office as 
it is for a business. Accordingly, we cover such optional features as redundant 
disk storage (RAID) and such mandatory features as reliable backup. 
We'd Like to Hear from You 
We have tested and verified the information in this book to the best of our abil-
ity, but we don't doubt that some errors have crept in and remained hidden 
despite our best efforts and those of our editors and technical reviewers to find 
and eradicate them. Those errors are ours alone. If you find an error or have 
other comments about the book, you can contact the publisher or the authors. 
xvi 
Preface 

Disclaimer 
How to Contact O'Reilly 
Please address comments and questions concerning this book to the publisher: 
O'Reilly Media, Inc. 
1005 Gravenstein Highway North 
Sebastopol, CA 95472 
(800) 998-9938 (in the United States or Canada) 
(707) 829-0515 (international or local) 
(707) 829-0104 (fax) 
You can also send usemail.To be put on our mailing list or to request a catalog, 
send email to: 
info@oreilly.com 
To comment on the book, send email to: 
bookquestions@oreilly.com 
For more information about books, conferences, Resource Centers, and the 
O'Reilly Network, go to: 
http://www.oreilly.com 
How to Contact the Authors 
To contact one of the authors directly, send mail to: 
barbara@hardwareguys.com 
robert@hardwareguys.com 
We read all mail we receive from readers, but we cannot respond individually. 
If we did, we'd have no time to do anything else. But we do like to hear from 
readers. 
We each maintain a personal journal page, updated daily, which frequently 
includes references to new PC hardware we're working with, problems we've 
discovered, and other things we think are interesting. You can view these jour-
nal pages at: 
Barbara: 
http://www.fritchman.com/diaries/thisweek.html 
Robert: 
http://www.ttgnet.com/thisweek.html 
Disclaimer 
Much of the information contained in this book is based on personal knowl-
edge and experience. While we believe that the information contained herein 
is correct, we accept no responsibility for its validity. The hardware designs and 
descriptive text contained herein are provided for educational purposes only. 
It is the responsibility of the reader to independently verify all information. 
Original manufacturer's data should be used at all times when implementing 
a design. 
- A 
i Warning 
i 
Although 
we tested the 
configura-
1 
tions we specified for each project 
i 
system, we did not build and test ev-
i 
erypermutation 
with the alternative 
1 
components 
we listed. Those 
alterna-
tives are simply what we might 
have 
i 
used if our requirements had been 
i 
different. That said, we would 
expect 
1 
the alternative components 
we list to 
i 
work in any combination, 
and 
would 
i 
be very surprised if they didn't. When 
1 
we are aware of a potential 
conflict 
or compatibility 
issue, we say so. 
Preface 
xvii 

Safari® Books Online 
Safari8 Books Online 
Safari. 
Safari Books Online is an on-demand digital library that 
lets you easily search over 7,500 technology and creative 
Books online 
reference books and videos to find the answers you 
need quickly. 
With a subscription, you can read any page and watch any video from our 
library online. Read books on your cell phone and mobile devices. Access new 
titles before they are available for print, and get exclusive access to manu-
scripts in development and post feedback for the authors. Copy and paste 
code samples, organize your favorites, download chapters, bookmark key sec-
tions, create notes, printout pages, and benefit from tons of other time-saving 
features. 
O'Reilly Media has uploaded this book to the Safari Books Online service. To 
have full digital access to this book and others on similar topics from O'Reilly 
and other publishers, sign up for free at http://my.safaribooksonline.com. 
Acknowledgments 
The first edition of this book was conceived one day in late 2003, when Robert 
received a phone call from Mark Brokering, Vice President of Sales and Market-
ing for O'Reilly Media. Mark had decided to build a new PC rather than buy 
one, and he'd picked up a copy of Robert and Barbara's book, PC Hardware in 
a Nutshell. 
Mark had lots of good questions about which components to choose and, 
later on, questions about assembling his new system. At some point during 
the back-and-forth of emails and phone calls, Mark commented, "You know, 
we really need to do a book about building a PC." And so this book was born. 
The working title was Build Your Own Computer. None of us thought that was a 
great title, but none of us could come up with a better one. Then one day Tim 
O'Reilly weighed in:"Why don't we call it Building the Perfect PC?" Duh. It always 
seems so obvious after the fact. 
In addition to Mark, Tim, and the O'Reilly production staff, we want to thank 
our technical reviewers. 
Ron Morse has been an electronics hobbyist for as long as he can re-
member. "Probably longer. There was that unfortunate incident as a teen-
ager when I removed the back of a then-new color television set...." In 
the more than 30 years since he was released from the hospital, he has 
devoted every spare dollar and available credit card balance to pursuing 
his interests in aviation, photography, and electronics. He bought his first 
personal computer in 1983 and has been upgrading, modifying, and re-
pairing them (mostly in that order) ever since. 
xviii 
Preface 

Thank You 
In his spare time Ron served on active duty with the Navy for 26 years, 
retiring in 2001 with the rank of Captain. He was awarded the Bronze Star 
medal for his service in Bahrain and Saudi Arabia during Operations Des-
ert Shield and Desert Storm and also holds the Defense Superior Service 
Medal, the Defense Meritorious Service Medal, the Navy Meritorious Ser-
vice Medal, and the Army Commendation Medal, among others. 
After retiring from the Navy, Ron designed and maintained custom com-
puter systems for small businesses and served as a director of the Rinconada 
Group, a strategic communications firm specializing in programs for busi-
ness and elected officials and government agencies at the local, state, and 
national levels. 
He lives with his wife Deborah, three Border Collies, and a Queensland 
Blue Heeler in Albuquerque, New Mexico. 
Brian Bilbrey started working with electronics back when vacuum tubes 
were still in vogue. In passing, he's built gear with those tubes, and with 
many forms of digital technology, from wirewrapand PCB design through 
specifying and assembling desktop and server systems for many compa-
nies over the years. Usually Brian's formal role in a firm is some form of 
system administrator, but he finds several hats to wear as time goes on. 
Brian is approaching the end of his fourth decade in pursuit of an actual 
sheepskin, as life and work always seemed more interesting and, well, ed-
ucational. But in a couple of years, with optional sleep and an understand-
ing full-time job, that item will get crossed off the bucket list, too. 
Brian lives in Bowie, Maryland, with his lovely bride of 12 years, Marcia, and 
a slowly evolving collection of rescue dogs. Currently those are Molly, a lov-
ing but elderly black lab, and Lexi, a tactical nuke disguised as a 15-pound 
chipuggle. 
Both Ron and Brian did yeoman duty in finding mistakes we made and in mak-
ing numerous useful suggestions, all of which helped make this a better book. 
We're entirely responsible for any errors that remain. 
We also want to thank our contacts at the hardware companies, who provided 
technical help, evaluation units, and other assistance. There are far too many 
to list individually, but they know who they are. We also want to thank the 
readers of our books, websites, and forums, many of whom have taken the 
time to offer useful suggestions for improvements to this book. Thanks, folks. 
We couldn't have done it without you. 
Finally, we want to thank our editor, Brian Jepson, who contributed numerous 
useful comments and suggestions. 
Thank You 
Thank you for buying this new edition of Building the Perfect PC. We hope you 
enjoy reading it as much as we enjoyed writing it. 
Preface 
xix 

Fundamentals 
The idea of building their first PC intimidates many people, but there's really 
nothing to worry about. Building a PC is no more technically challenging than 
changing the oil in your car or hooking up a DVD player. Compared to assem-
bling one of those "connect tab A to slot B"toys for the kids, it's a breeze. 
PC components connect like building blocks. Component sizes, screw threads, 
mounting hole positions, cable connectors, and so on are mostly standard-
ized, so you needn't worry about whether something will fit. There are minor 
exceptions, of course. For example, some small cases accept only microATX 
motherboards and half-height or half-length expansion cards. There are also 
some important details to pay attention to. You must verify, for example, that 
the motherboard you intend to use supports the processor you plan to use. 
But overall, there are few "gotchas" involved in building a PC. If you follow our 
advice in the project system chapters, everything will fit and everything will 
work together. 
Nor do you need to worry much about damaging the PC—or it damaging 
you. Simple precautions such as handling components with reasonable care, 
grounding yourself before touching static-sensitive components, and verify-
ing cable connections before you apply power are sufficient to prevent dam-
age to all those expensive parts you bought. Other than inside the power 
supply—which you should never open—the highest voltage used inside a 
modern PC is 12V, which presents no shock hazard. 
This chapter doesn't cover the nuts-and-bolts details of assembling a PC, be-
cause that's covered exhaustively in text and images in the project system 
chapters. Instead, this chapter explains the fundamentals—everything you 
need to prepare yourself properly. It examines the advantages of building 
your own PC and explains how to design a PC that is perfect for your needs. 
It tells you what you need to know and do before you start the project, and 
lists the components, hand tools, and software tools you'll need to build your 
system. Finally, because the best way to troubleshoot is to avoid problems in 
the first place, it includes a detailed troubleshooting section. 
IN THIS CHAPTER 
Why Build a PC? 
Designing the Perfect PC 
Things to Know and Do Before You Start 
Things You Need to Have 
Troubleshooting 
Mixing Old and New 
Most compatibility 
issues arise 
when 
you mix new components 
with 
older ones. For example, an older 
video card may not fit the video slot 
in anew 
motherboard, 
and 
anew 
processor 
may not be 
compatible 
with an older motherboard. 
If you 
build a PC from all new 
components, 
you are likely to encounter 
few such 
issues. Still, it's a good idea to verify 
compatibility 
between the 
mother-
board and other major 
components, 
particularly 
the CPU, video 
adapters, 
and memory. 
The 
configurations 
in this book have been tested for 
compatibility. 
Let's get started. 
1 

Why Build a PC? 
Cheaper by the Dozen? 
For example, when AMD or Intel an-
nounces new processor models, the 
news stories often report 
"Quantity 
1000"pricing 
for the OEM or "tray" 
versions. This is what a computer 
maker who buys processors 
1,000 
at a time pays. A maker who buys 
I00,000ata 
time may pay a few dol-
lars less per processor. If you buy just 
one OEM processor, you'll 
typically 
paya couple bucks more than the 
Quantity 1000 pricing. You may even 
pay less, because PC makers often or-
der more processors 
than they need 
to take advantage 
of price breaks on 
larger quantities, and then sell the 
unneeded processors at a slight loss 
to distributors who then sell them to 
retailers. 
Why Build a PC? 
With entry-level PCs selling for less than $500 and fully equipped mainstream 
PCs for $1,000, you might wonder why anyone would bother to build a PC. Af-
ter all, you can't save any money building one, can you? Well, yes, you can. But 
that's not the only reason to build a PC. There are many incentives: 
Lower cost 
PC makers aren't in business for charitable reasons. They need to make 
a profit, so they need to sell computers for more than they pay for the 
components and the labor to assemble them. Significantly more, in fact, 
because they also need to support such expensive operations as research 
and development departments, toll-free support numbers, and so on. 
But PC manufacturers get big price breaks because they buy components 
in huge volume, right? Not really. The market for PC components is ex-
tremely efficient, with razor-thin margins whether you buy one unit or 
100,000. A volume purchaser gets a price break, certainly, but it's a lot 
smaller than most people think. 
Mass-market PCs are inexpensive not because the makers get huge price 
breaks on quality components, but because they generally use the cheapest 
possible components. Cost-cutting is a fact of life in mass-market, consumer-
grade PCs. If mass-market PC makers can save a few bucks on the case or 
the power supply, they do it every time, even though spending a few dol-
lars more (or even a few cents more) would have allowed them to build 
a noticeably better system. If you compare apples to apples—a home-
built system versus a corporate business-class system—you'll find you can 
build it yourself for less (sometimes a lot less). Our rule of thumb is that, 
on average and all other things being equal, you can build a midrange PC 
yourself for about 75% to 85% of what a major manufacturer charges for 
an equivalent top-quality system. 
More choice 
When you buy a PC, you get a cookie-cutter computer. You can choose 
such options as a larger hard drive, more memory, or a better display, but 
basically you get what the vendor decides to give you. If you want some-
thing that few people askfor, like a better power supply or quieter cooling 
fans or a motherboard with more features, you're out of luck. Those aren't 
options. 
And what you get is a matter of chance. High-volume direct vendors like 
Dell and HP often use multiple sources for components. Two supposedly 
identical systems ordered the same day may contain significantly differ-
ent components, including such important variations as different mother-
boards or displays with the same model number but made by different 
manufacturers. When you build a PC, you decide exactly what goes into it. 
2 
Chapter 1 

Why Build a PC? 
DON'T COMPARE APPLES TO ORANGES 
For more than 25 years, Robert's friend Jerry Pournelle 
wrote the Chaos Manor column for BYTE. One month, Jerry 
decided to build an inexpensive PC as a project system for 
his column. He wanted to see if he could match the price of 
a mass-market system he'd seen advertised in the morning 
paper. So Jerry headed off to Fry's and returned to Chaos 
Manor with a stack of components. 
Shortly afterward, Robert got a phone call from Jerry. Jerry 
said he'd spent $50 more on components than the mass-
market PC would have cost him,"and that doesn't even 
count the time it'll take me to assemble it."That didn't sound 
right, so Robert started asking questions. The processor 
speed, amount of memory, and hard drive size were the 
same, so Robert started drilling down. 
Robert:"What 
kind of case and power supply did you buy, 
and how much did they cost you?" 
Jerry: "It's an Antec with a 350W power supply. I paid about 
$70 for it." 
Robert:"Was 
that the cheapest case and power supply Fry's 
had?" 
Jerry: "Well, no. They had a no-name case with a 300W 
power supply for $14, but I sure wouldn't use something 
that cheap for any of my systems." 
ftoberf:"Howabout 
the motherboard?" 
Jerry:"I got an ASUS motherboard for $130. They didn't have 
that $90 ASUS motherboard you recommended. They had 
an ECS motherboard for $38, but there was no way I was 
going to use that." 
And so on. Jerry did what most of us would do and what any 
sensible person would do. He built his "inexpensive" PC us-
ing the least expensive high-quality components he could 
find. But he then compared that top-notch inexpensive 
system against a mass-market system that was built using 
the cheapest components available. Would the mass-market 
system's maker have used a $14 case and power supply and 
a $38 motherboard? In a heartbeat. 
Jerry couldn't bring himself to take the cost-cutting mea-
sures that mass-market PC makers take without a second 
thought, so he ended up comparing apples to oranges. 
Jerry spent about $150 more on just the case, power supply, 
and motherboard, and ended up with a system than cost 
only $50 more than the piece of junk being advertised in 
the morning paper. If instead he'd compared the cost of 
his system against a system of equivalent quality, such as 
an entry-level business-class system, he might have been 
surprised at just how much he saved. 
Flexible design 
One of the best things about building your own PC is that you can opti-
mize its design to focus on what is important to you and ignore what isn't. 
Off-the-shelf commercial PCs are by nature jacks of all trades and masters 
of none. System vendors have to strike a happy medium that is adequate, 
if not optimum, for the mythical "average" user. 
Want a small, quiet PC for your home theater system? There are three op-
tions. You can use a standard PC despite its large size and high noise level, 
you can pay big bucks for a system from a specialty builder that does 
just what you want, or you can build your own. Need a system with a ton 
of redundant hard disk storage for editing video or a professional audio 
workstation? Good luck finding a commercial system that fits your require-
ments, at least at a reasonable price. When you build your own PC, you can 
spend your money on things that matter to you, not things that don't. 
Better component quality 
Most computer vendors cut costs by using cheaper OEM versions of pop-
ular components if they're "visible" and no-name components if they're 
not. By "visible" we mean a component that people might seek out by 
Brian Jepson Comments 
Regarding 
home theater systems, 
there is another option: the Mac 
Mini 
is hugely popular here, so you 
might 
want to give it a nod. That's 
probably 
one reason that it's often at the top 
of Amazon's 
desktop PC category. 
Fundamentals 
3 

Why Build a PC? 
brand name even in a prebuilt PC, such as an ATI or NVIDIA video adapter. 
Invisible components are ones that buyers seldom ask about or notice, 
such as motherboards, optical and hard drives, power supplies, and so on. 
OEM components may be identical to retail models, differing only in pack-
aging. But even if the parts are the same, there are often significant differ-
ences. Component vendors usually do not support OEM versions directly, 
for example, instead referring you to the system vendor. If that system 
vendor goes out of business, you're out of luck, because the component 
maker provides no warranty to end users. Even if the maker does support 
OEM products, the warranty is usually much shorter on OEM parts—often 
as little as 30 to 90 days. The products themselves may also differ signifi-
cantly between OEM and retail-boxed versions. Major PC vendors often 
use downgraded versions of popular products, for example, an OEM video 
adapter that has the same or a very similar name as the retail-boxed prod-
uct but runs at a lower clock rate than the retail version. This allows PC 
makers to pay less for components and still gain the cachet from using 
the name-brand product. 
It's worse when it comes to "invisible" components. We've popped the lid 
on scores of consumer-grade PCs over the years, and it never ceases to 
surprise us just how cheaply they're built. Not one of them had a power 
supply that we'd even consider using in one of our own systems, for ex-
ample. They're packed with no-name motherboards, generic memory, 
the cheapest optical drives available, and so on. Even the cables are often 
shoddy. After all, why pay a buck more for a decent cable? In terms of reli-
ability, we consider a consumer-grade PC a disaster waiting to happen. 
No bundled software 
Most purchased PCs include Microsoft Windows. If you don't need or want 
this software, building a PC allows you to avoid paying the "Microsoft tax." 
Quality Costs Money 
Not all commercial 
PCs are poorly 
built. Business-class 
systems 
and 
gaming 
systems from 
"boutique" 
vendors are well engineered 
with 
top-quality components 
and high 
build quality. Of course, they also 
costa lot more than 
consumer-grade 
systems. 
Full, Upgrade, and OEM Windows Licenses 
We formerly recommended 
installing an OEM (System Builder) 
version of Windows. No more. We used to pay $50 or $60 for an 
OEM Windows license, but beginning 
with Windows Vista, Mi-
crosoft started increasing the prices of OEM Windows 
licenses 
and putting increasingly 
Draconian 
restrictions on them. 
Buying an individual OEM Windows license is now a sucker bet. 
Actually, using an OEM Windows license on a system you build 
for your own use violates and voids the license. An OEM 
Win-
dows license is technically valid only for a system that you build 
and subsequently 
sell to someone 
else. We suppose you could 
build a system and sell it to your husband 
or girlfriend 
without 
violating the license agreement, but that's treading a fine line. 
Assuming 
you have a qualifying older version of Windows, 
a Windows Retail Upgrade license—which 
costs about the 
same amount as an OEM license—is 
a much better deal for 
most people. Finally, a full retail Windows license is available 
for those who don't qualify for an upgrade. A full retail license 
costs about 50% more than an OEM or Retail Upgrade 
license, 
but that license (including upgraded versions of it) can be freely 
moved from system to system. 
Before you buy Windows, make sure you understand 
all the 
license alternatives. The best discussion we've seen of the com-
plexities of Windows licensing is Ed Bott's column on the subject 
(http://www.zdnet.com/blog/bott/what-microsoft-wont-tell-
you-about-windows-7-licensing/l 
514). 
Finally, as long as you have a new system with no 
operating 
system installed on it, you might as well give Linux a try before 
you shell out money for Windows. Most people who give Linux 
a serious trial are very impressed with it, and a 
significant 
number of them end up converting 
to using Linux exclusively. 
We and many of our friends are among 
that group. There are 
many different Linux distributions available, but two of the 
most newbie-friendly 
are Ubuntu 
(http://www.ubuntu.com) 
and Linux Mint 
(http://www.linuxmint.com). 
4 
Chapter 1 

Why Build a PC? 
Warranty 
The retail-boxed components you'll use to build your own PC include full 
manufacturer warranties that may run from one to five years or more, 
depending on the component. PC makers use OEM components, which 
often include no manufacturer warranty to the end user. If something 
breaks, you're at the mercy of the PC maker to repair or replace it. We've 
heard from readers who bought PCs from makers who went out of busi-
ness shortly thereafter. When a hard drive or video card failed six months 
later, they contacted the maker of the item, only to find that they had OEM 
components that were not under manufacturer warranty. 
Experience 
If you buy a computer, your experience with it consists of taking it out of 
the box and connecting the cables. If you build the computer, you know 
exactly what went into it, and you're in a much better position to resolve 
any problems that may occur. 
Upgrades 
If you design and build your own PC, you can upgrade it later using industry-
standard components. That's sometimes not the case with commercial 
systems, some of which are intentionally designed to be incompatible 
with industry-standard components (although this is a less common prac-
tice today than when we wrote the first edition of this book). PC makers 
do this because they want to force you to buy upgrade and replacement 
components from them, at whatever price they want to charge. 
A 
Save Those Receipts 
Keep receipts together with the "re-
tain this portion" of warranty 
cards 
and put them someplace 
they can be 
found if required for future warranty 
service. This goes for software, too. 
Ron Morse puts all that stuff in an 
envelope and tapes it to the inside of 
the case cover, or some other out-of-
the-way location. That keeps all the 
papers in one place and 
everything 
associated 
with that particular 
com-
puter. .. well, associated 
with that 
particular 
computer. 
Intentional Gotchas 
These designed-in 
incompatibilities 
maybe 
as trivial as 
nonstandard 
screw sizes, or as profound as components 
that 
are electrically incompatible 
with standard components. 
For ex-
ample, some Dell PCs have used motherboards 
and power 
sup-
plies with standard connectors 
but nonstandard 
pin 
connec-
tions. If you replaced a failed Dell power supply with a standard 
ATX power supply—or 
if you connected 
the nonstandard 
Dell 
power supply to a standard motherboard—the 
power 
supply 
and motherboard 
were destroyed as soon as you applied 
power 
to the system. 
Brian Bilbrey Adds 
Another egregious offender in this realm was 
eMachines, 
which put proprietary, really terrible power supplies in their 
systems. For a while there, I was putting compatible 
quality 
replacements 
in those for friends and family... from PC Power & 
Cooling. 
Ron Morse Comments 
You missed one of the best reasons to build your own PC, at 
least if you have children (or grandchildren). 
Building a PC 
is one of the best mother/father-daughter/son 
weekend 
projects I can 
imagine. 
Brian Bilbrey Adds 
/ second this, especially since you can't buy a Heathkit tube 
radio or television 
anymore. 
Fundamentals 
5 

Designing the Perfect PC 
A sign you'll see in many repair shops says, "Good. Cheap. Fast. Pick any two." 
That's also true of designing a PC. Every choice you make involves a trade-off, 
and balancing those trade-offs is the key to designing a PC that's perfect for 
your needs. Each project system chapter has a graphic that looks something 
like this: 
Price 
Reliability 
Size 
Noise level 
Expandability 
Processor performance 
Video performance 
Disk capacity/performance 
Ah, if it were only true. Reality, of course, is different. One can't put the high-
est priority on everything. Something has to give. As Frederick the Great said 
of designing military defenses, "He who defends everything defends nothing." 
The same is true of designing a PC. 
If you focus on these elements while designing your PC, you'll soon realize that 
compromises are inevitable. If small size is essential, for example, you must 
make compromises in expandability, and you may very well have to compro-
mise in other respects. The trick is to decide, before you start buying com-
ponents, which elements are essential, which are important, which would be 
nice to have, and which can be ignored. 
Once you have the priority of those elements firmly fixed in your mind, you 
can make rational resource allocations and good purchasing decisions. It's 
worth looking at each of these elements in a bit more detail: 
Price 
We put price first, because it's the 900-pound gorilla in system design. If 
low price is essential, you'll be forced to make compromises in most or all 
of the other elements. Simply put, high performance, reliability, low noise, 
small size, and other desirable characteristics cost money. We suggest you 
begin by establishing a ballpark price range for your new system and then 
play "what-if" with the other elements. If you've set too low a price, it will 
soon become clear that you'll need to spend more. On the other hand, 
you may well find that you can get away with spending less and still get 
everything you want in a system. 
24 Chapter 2 

Designing the Perfect PC 
Reliability 
We consider high reliability essential in any system, even the least expen-
sive entry-level PC. If a system is unreliable, it doesn't matter how feature-
laden it is, or how fast, or how cheap. We always aim for 5-star reliability 
in systems we design for ourselves and others, although sometimes price 
and other constraints force us to settle for 4-star reliability. The best mass-
market systems may have 3-star reliability, but most deserve only a 1- or 
2-star rating. 
What does reliability mean, and how do you design for it? A reliable sys-
tem doesn't crash or corrupt data. It runs for years with only an occasional 
cleaning. We are always amused when people claim Windows is crash-
prone. That was true of Windows 9X, of course, but Windows NT/2000/XP/ 
Vista/7 has never blue- or black-screened on us without good reason, and 
that's going back to the early days of Windows NT 4. We're not Microsoft 
fanboys—far from it—but the truth is that most system crashes that are 
blamed on Windows are actually caused by marginal or failing hardware, 
buggy third-party drivers, or malware. 
There are a few simple rules for designing a reliable system. First, use only 
top-quality parts. They don't have to be the fastest available—in fact, 
high-performance parts often run hotter and are therefore less reliable 
than midrange ones—but top-quality components may be a full order of 
magnitude more reliable than run-of-the-mill ones. Use a motherboard 
built around a reliable chipset and made by a top-notch manufacturer. 
For Intel processors, Intel motherboards and chipsets are the standard by 
which we judge, and for AMD processors the same is true of ASUS and 
GIGABYTE motherboards and AMD chipsets. Use a first-rate power supply 
and the best memory available. Avoid cheap cables. Keep the system cool 
and clean out the dust periodically. That's all there is to it. Following this 
advice means the system will cost a bit more, but it will also be signifi-
cantly more reliable. 
Most people prefer a small PC to a large one, but it's easy to design a sys-
tem that's too small. Albert Einstein said, "Everything should be made as 
simple as possible, but not simpler." In other words, don't oversimplify. Use 
the same rule when you choose a size for your PC. Don't over-smallify. 
Choosing a small case inevitably forces you to make compromises. A small 
case limits your choice of components, because some components sim-
ply won't fit. For example, you may have to use a different optical drive 
than you'd prefer because your first choice is too long or too tall to fit 
into the case. A small case also limits the number of components you can 
install. For example, you may have to choose between installing a card 
reader and installing a second hard drive. Because a small case can accept 
fewer (and smaller) fans, it's more difficult to cool the system properly. To 
move the same amount of air, a smaller fan must spin faster than a larger 
fan, which generates more noise. The limited case volume makes it much 
harder to work inside the case, and makes it more difficult to route cables 
Determining Quality 
Of course, this begs the question, 
how does one tell great from good 
from bad? Discriminating 
among 
companies 
and brands is difficult for 
someone who doesn't know 
which 
companies 
have an 
established 
reputation for quality and reliabil-
ity, which purvey mostly junk, and 
which are too new to have a track 
record. All of the components 
and 
brands we recommend 
in this book 
are safe choices, but the proliferation 
of brands makes it easy to choose 
inferior 
components. 
If you must use components 
other 
than those we recommend, 
the best 
way to avoid inferior 
components 
is to do your homework. 
Visit the 
manufacturers' 
websites. A good 
website doesn't guarantee 
that the 
products are also good, but a poor 
website almost certainly means the 
products are also poor. Check 
online 
reviews of products you are consider-
ing, and visit discussion forums for 
those components. 
In the end, trust 
your own judgment. If a 
component 
appears cheap, it probably isn't reli-
able. If the documentation 
is sparse 
or isn't written in good English, that 
tells you something 
about the likely 
quality of the component 
as well. If 
the component 
has a much 
shorter 
warranty than similar 
components 
from other manufacturers, 
there's 
probably good 
reason. 
Finally, although 
price is not a per-
fect predictor of component 
quality, 
it's usually a very good 
indicator. 
The PC component 
business is ex-
tremely competitive, so if a product 
sells for much less than similar 
com-
peting products, it's almost 
certainly 
inferior. 
Fundamentals 
7 

Designing the Perfect PC 
Brian Bilbrey Comments 
Or possibly a jet engine. I have a 
server-grade 
tower system at my 
desk. It's reasonably 
quiet in opera-
tion, but when booting, before the 
fan regulation kicks in, it does 
sound 
a bit like a Boeing spooling up on 
the ramp. People down the hall have 
been known to come looking, 
"What 
was 
that?!?" 
to avoid impeding air flow. All other things being equal, a small PC will 
cost more, run slower, produce more heat and noise, or be less reliable 
than a standard-size PC (or possibly all of those). 
For most purposes, the best choice is a standard mini- or mid-tower case. 
A full-tower case is an excellent choice for a server, or for an office system 
that sits on the floor next to your desk. Choose a microATX or other small 
form factor case only if size is a high priority. 
Noise level 
Noise isn't the problem it was a few years ago. Back then, the constant 
demand for more performance had led to systems with 130W proces-
sors and 200W video cards. Better technology has shrunk the die sizes of 
processors and video GPUs and greatly reduced their power consump-
tion. With that reduction in power consumption comes a reduction in the 
amount of heat produced and the number and speed of the fans needed 
to cool the system. Nowadays, most budget and mainstream systems are 
reasonably quiet, although performance and extreme gaming systems 
may still sound like leaf blowers. 
Still, it's quite possible to build two systems with similar components and 
have one system twice as loud as the other. Throughout this book, when-
ever possible we choose the quietest available standard components. 
Even the loudest system we built—the extreme system—is quiet enough 
that most people will not find it intrusive, particularly if it's under a desk. 
Expandability 
Expandability is worth considering when you design a PC. For some sys-
tems, expandability is unimportant. You design the system for a particular 
job, install the components you need to do that job, and never open the 
case again except for routine cleaning and maintenance. For most general-
purpose systems, though, expandability is desirable. For example, if you 
need more disk space, you might prefer to add a second hard drive rather 
than replacing the original drive. You can't do that unless there's a vacant 
drive bay. Similarly, integrated video might suffice at first, but you may 
later decide that you need faster video. If the motherboard you used has 
no PCI Express expansion slot available for a video card, you're out of luck. 
The only option is to replace the motherboard. 
Keep expandability in mind when you choose components, so you won't 
paint yourself into any corners. Unless size constraints forbid it, choose a 
case that leaves plenty of room for growth. Choose a power supply that 
has sufficient reserve to support additional drives, memory, and perhaps 
a faster processor. Choose a motherboard that provides sufficient expan-
sion slots and memory sockets to allow for possible future expansion. 
Choose less flexible components only if you are certain that you will never 
need to expand the system. 
8 
Chapter 1 

Processor performance 
Most people worry too much about processor performance. Here's the 
truth. Midrange processors—those that sell for $ 150 (give or take $25)— 
are noticeably faster than $50 to $100 entry-level processors. Performance 
processors—those that sell for $300 (give or take $100)—are noticeably 
faster than mainstream processors. Not night-and-day different, but it is 
noticeable. The most expensive "extreme" processors, which sell for up to 
$1,000, are typically two to four times faster than midrange processors. 
For casual use—browsing the Web, checking email, word processing, and 
so on—choose a $60 to $75 "value" processor. For a general-purpose sys-
tem, choose a processor that sells for $ 150 to $200 in retail-boxed form. If 
you want a bit more processor horsepower for extreme gaming or other 
tasks and are willing to pay the price, a performance processor may be 
worth buying. It makes little sense to choose an extreme processor unless 
cost is no object and performance is critical. 
Video performance 
Video performance, like processor performance, usually gets more atten-
tion than it deserves. It's probably no coincidence that processors and 
video adapters are two of the most heavily promoted PC components. 
When you design your PC, be careful not to get caught up in the hype. If 
the PC will be used for intense 3D gaming or similarly demanding video 
tasks, you need a high-end video adapter (or multiple video adapters). 
Otherwise, you don't. 
Integrated video—a video adapter built into the motherboard—is the 
least expensive video solution and is perfectly adequate for most uses. 
The incremental cost of integrated video ranges from $0 to perhaps $10, 
relative to a similar motherboard without integrated video. The next step 
up in video performance is a standalone video adapter, which requires the 
motherboard to have a slot to accept it. Standalone video adapters range 
in price from $25 or so up to $600 or more. A $75 to $100 video adapter is 
sufficient to play most 3D games, particularly those that have been avail-
able for a year or more. 
More expensive video adapters provide incrementally faster 3D video per-
formance and may support more recent versions of Microsoft DirectX, both 
of which are of interest to serious gamers. A $ 150 to $200 video adapter suf-
fices to play even recent, demanding 3D games at reasonable resolutions 
and frame rates. 
Only rabid gamers buy the most expensive video adapters, and they get a 
lot less for their money than you might expect. A $600 video adapter, for 
example, isn't four times faster than a $150 video adapter. It may be only 
25% faster, which for most people isn't worth the extra cost. High-end 
video adapters also run hot and are generally equipped with dedicated 
cooling fans, which produce additional noise. 
When you design your PC, we recommend using integrated video unless 
you need the faster 3D performance a standalone video adapter can pro-
vide. If you choose integrated video, make sure the motherboard has a PCI 
Express xl 6 slot available in case you later decide to upgrade the video. 
Fundamentals 

Designing the Perfect PC 
Brian Bilbrey Comments 
Don't buy an ATA/IDE (now often 
called Parallel ATA, or PAT A) drive 
except to replace a drive in an older 
system that doesn't accept SATA 
drives. PATA is a dying 
standard. 
Disk capacity/performance 
A mainstream 7,200 RPM serial ATA (SATA) hard drive is the best choice for 
nearly any system. Such drives are fast, inexpensive, and reliable. The best 
models are also relatively quiet and produce little heat. When you design 
your system, use one of these drives unless you have good reason to do 
otherwise. 
Avoid 5,400 RPM or 5,900 RPM drives, which cost less than 7,200 RPM 
models but have noticeably poorer performance. The exception to that 
rule is when performance doesn't matter. For example, you may need to 
store huge amounts of data that is seldom accessed, in which case perfor-
mance may be less important than capacity and cost. Similarly, if you're 
using the drive in an external chassis for doing overnight backups, you 
probably don't care if the backup takes four hours to complete on a 5,400 
RPM drive versus only three hours on a 7,200 RPM drive. 
If you need very high disk performance, consider installing a solid-state 
drive (SSD). An SSD replaces the spinning platters of a hard drive with flash 
memory chips. Because memory chips are much more expensive than 
disk platters, SSDs cost much more per unit capacity than hard drives. 
SSDs are also much faster than hard drives, consume little power, produce 
little heat, and are completely silent. Unless you don't need much storage 
space, it's impractical to use SSD storage exclusively, but you can get the 
best of both worlds by using a relatively small SSD to store your operat-
ing system, applications, and working data and install one or more hard 
drives for cheap bulk storage. 
See Chapter 2 for specific component recommendations. 
Balanced Design 
Novice PC builders often ignore the important concept of balanced design. 
Balanced design means allocating your component budget to avoid bottle-
necks. If you're designing a gaming PC, for example, it makes no sense to 
spend $50 on the processor and $500 on the video card. The resulting system 
is nonoptimal because the slow processor is a bottleneck that prevents the 
expensive video adapter from performing to its full potential. 
The main enemy of balanced design is the constant hype of manufacturer 
advertising and enthusiast websites (which sometimes amount to the same 
thing). It's easy to fixate on the latest"must-have"component, even though its 
price may be much too high to justify. Many people just can't help themselves. 
Despite their best intentions, they end up spending $500 for a premium LCD 
display when a $200 model would have done just as well, or they buy a $400 
video adapter when a $150 adapter would suffice. If your budget is unlimited, 
fine. Go for the latest and best. But if you're building a system to a fixed bud-
get, every dollar you spend needlessly on one component is a dollar less you 
have to spend somewhere else, where it might make more difference. 
Balanced design does not necessarily mean giving equal priority to all system 
components. For example, we have built servers in which the disk arrays and tape 
backup drive cost more than $10,000 and the rest of the system components 
10 
Chapter 1 

totaled less than $2,000. A balanced design is one that takes into account the 
tasks the system must perform and allocates resources to optimize performance 
for those tasks. 
But balanced design takes into consideration more than simple performance. 
A truly balanced design accommodates non-performance issues such as phys-
ical size, noise level, reliability, and efficient cooling. You might, for example, 
have to choose a less expensive processor or a smaller hard drive in order to 
reserve sufficient funds for a quieter case or a more reliable power supply. 
The key to achieving a balanced design is to determine your requirements, 
lookdispassionately at the available alternatives, and choose accordingly.That 
can be tougher than it sounds. 
Designing a Quiet PC 
The ongoing PC performance race has had the unfortunate side effect of 
making PCs noisier. Faster processors use more power, which in turn requires 
larger (and noisier) power supplies. Faster processors also produce more heat, 
which requires larger (and noisier) CPU coolers. Modern hard drives spin faster 
than older models, producing still more noise and heat. Fast video adapters 
have their own cooling fans, which add to the din. While building a reasonably 
quiet PC that performs well is easier today, fast and powerful machines still 
need plenty of noisy moving air. 
Fortunately, there are steps you can take to reduce the amount of noise your 
PC produces. No PC with moving parts is completely silent, but significant 
noise reductions are possible. Depending on your requirements and budget, 
you can build a PC that is anything from quietly unobtrusive to nearly silent. 
The key to building a noise-reduced PC is to recognize the sources of noise 
and to minimize or eliminate noise at the source. 
The major sources of noise are typically the power supply, CPU cooler fan, and 
supplementary case fans. Minor sources of noise include the hard drive, chip-
set fan, video adapter fan, and optical drive. As you design your PC, focus first 
on major noise sources that can be minimized inexpensively, then minor noise 
sources that are cheap to deal with, then major noise sources that are more ex-
pensive or difficult to minimize, and finally (if necessary) minor noise sources 
that are expensive or difficult to fix. Use the following guidelines: 
Choose a low-power processor 
The amount of power consumed by the processor has a direct effect on 
the noise level of the system. The peak power consumption of mainstream 
processors ranges from about 30W to 140W.That power ends up as waste 
heat that must be exhausted from the case. Using a lower-power proces-
sor produces less waste heat, which in turn allows you to use a quieter 
CPU cooler, fewer and quieter case fans, and so on. Power consumption 
isn't necessarily proportional to processor performance. For example, one 
processor that draws 70W peak power may be faster than another that 
draws 130W. None of this is to say that there's anything wrong with choos-
ing a high-wattage processor, but doing so complicates cooling and noise 
issues. 
Fundamentals 

Designing the Perfect PC 
WHAT ARE DBS, ANYWAY? 
The following is a gross oversimplification, and we're sure 
we'll hear about it from people who know more than we do 
about sound, but here goes. 
Sound is measured and specified in deciBels—a tenth of a 
Bel—which is abbreviated dB. (Some components specify 
Bels; multiply by 10 to get dB.) Because humans perceive 
identical sound levels at different frequencies as having 
different loudness, various weighting schemes are used. The 
most common, A-weighting, is abbreviated as dB(A). There 
are also dB(B) and dB(C) scales, but those are not commonly 
used. 
A sound level of 0 dB is defined as the threshold of hearing, 
a sound level that is just barely perceptible in the absence of 
any other sound. Here are some reference points: 
• 
20 d B — a very quiet library or church; rural background 
noise at night; the quietest possible PC with moving 
parts 
• 
25 d B — a whispered conversation; a very quiet PC 
• 
30 dB—suburban background noise at night; a quiet 
PC 
• 40 d B — a quiet conversation; a standard PC 
• 
50 dB—normal household noise; a normal conversa-
tion at 1 meter; a loud PC 
• 60 dB—office conversation; a loud gaming PC or server 
The dB scale is logarithmic, which means that an increase of 
about 3 dB doubles the sound level. For example, if a power 
supply produces 30 dB and a CPU cooler also produces 30 
dB, running both at the same time doubles the sound level 
to 33 dB (not 60 dB). Doubling the sound level again by run-
ning four 30 dB devices simultaneously increases the overall 
sound level by 3 dB again, to 36 dB. Running 8 such devices 
doubles the sound level to 39 dB, 16 takes it to 42 dB, and 
so on. 
However, because of the way humans perceive sound, a 
1 dB difference is barely perceptible; a 3 dB difference is 
noticeable, but a sound must be about 10 dB louder to be 
perceived as "twice as loud." For example, if one computer 
produces 40 dB and another 30 dB, the first computer actu-
ally produces about 10 times the sound level of the second 
PC, but to human ears it "sounds" only twice as loud. 
PC components differ dramatically in sound levels. For 
example, a very quiet hard drive might produce 25 dB, while 
another model produces 30 dB or more. At idle, a standard 
400W power supply might produce 40 dB, a quieter model 
30 dB (half as'loud"), and a specialty quiet model only 20 
dB (half as"loud"again).The same differences existamong 
other noise-producing components, such as CPU coolers, 
supplemental case fans, optical drives, and so on. Merely by 
choosing the quietest standard PC components rather than 
noisier alternatives, you can reduce the noise level of your 
PC noticeably. 
Choose a quiet case 
Inexpensive cases are designed with little thought to noise abatement. 
Better cases incorporate numerous design features that reduce noise, in-
cluding large, slow-spinning exhaust fans, sound-absorbing composite 
panels, rubber shock mounts for drives that isolate vibration, and so on. 
We cover case considerations thoroughly in the next chapter. 
Choose a quiet power supply 
In most systems, the power supply is potentially the first or second largest 
noise source, so minimizing power supply noise is critical. Here are a few 
tips: 
• At the first level, choose a noise-reduced power supply, such as the 
models we recommend in the next chapter. Such power supplies cost 
little or no more than competing models of equivalent capacity and 
quality but are noticeably quieter. A system that uses one of these 
power supplies can be quiet enough to be unobtrusive in a normal 
residential environment. 
12 
Chapter 1 

Designing the Perfect PC 
• The next step down in noise level is a power supply that is specifically 
designed to minimize noise. These power supplies cost a bit more 
than comparable noise-reduced power supplies but produce as little 
as 18 dB at idle, and not much more under load. A system that uses 
one of these power supplies (and other similarly quiet components) 
can be nearly inaudible in a normal residential environment. You 
won't have any trouble recognizing any of these models, because all 
of them are advertised and promoted as"Quiet PC"or"Silent" models. 
• Finally, some power supplies use huge passive heatsinks rather than 
cooling fans. These power supplies, such as the FSP ZEN 400 (http:// 
www.fspgroupusa.com), have no moving parts, and the only noise 
they produce is a very slight buzz from the electronic components. 
Choose an efficient power supply 
Power supply efficiency has a direct bearing on system noise level. Every 
power supply requires higher input power than the output power it pro-
vides, and that power difference is converted to heat within the power 
supply. For example, if the system actually requires 200Wfrom the power 
supply, a 67% efficient power supply draws 300W of input power to pro-
vide that 200W of output power (200W/0.67 = 300W).That extra 100W is 
converted to heat within the power supply. An 85% efficient power sup-
ply requires only about 235W of input power to provide 200W of output 
power. The difference between 300W input and 235W input power trans-
lates to an extra 65W of heat within your system. The efficiency of main-
stream power supply models ranges from about 65% to 90% or higher. 
Choose a quiet CPU cooler 
As processor speeds have increased over the last few years, manufactur-
ers have gone from using passive heatsinks to using heatsinks with slow, 
quiet fans to using heatsinks with fast, loud fans. Current processors differ 
greatly in power consumption from model to model. At the lower end of 
the range—less than 50W—nearly any decent CPU cooler can do the job 
with minimal noise, including the stock CPU coolers bundled with retail-
boxed processors and inexpensive third-party units. At the middle of the 
range—50W to 90W—standard CPU coolers begin to produce intrusive 
noise levels, although specialty quiet CPU coolers can cool a midrange 
processor with little or no noise. At the upper end of the range, even the 
quietest fan-based CPU coolers produce some noise. Here are some tips 
to keep in mind when selecting a CPU cooler: 
• For a processor with low to moderate power consumption, try using 
the stock CPU cooler supplied with the retail-boxed processor. If it pro-
duces too much noise, install an inline resistor to reduce the voltage 
supplied to the fan, which reduces fan speed and noise. Resistor kits 
are sold by quiet-PC vendors such as FrozenCPU (ihttp://www.frozencpu. 
com), QuietPC USA (http://www.quietpcusa.com), and Endpcnoise.com 
(http://www.endpcnoise.com). 
The 80 PLUS Initiative 
The 80 PLUS initiative sets 
standards 
for power supply efficiency. A power 
supply that meets the basic 80 PLUS 
requirements must be at least 80% 
efficient at20%, 
50%, and 
100% 
load, and must have a power factor 
(PF) of at least 0.9 at 100% load. 
The 80 PLUS Bronze 
certification 
requires the power supply to be at 
least 85% efficient at 50% load and 
82% efficient at 20% and 100% 
load, 
with a PF of 0.9 or better at all three 
load levels. The 80 PLUS Silver and 
Gold certifications require the power 
supply to be at least 
85%/88%/85% 
efficien t or 87%/90%/87% 
efficien t, 
respectively, again with 
aPFofat 
least 0.9 at all three load levels. 
Less than half of the power 
supplies 
currently sold have any 80 PLUS 
certification. Less than 4% have the 
80 PLUS Gold certification, and 
about 
the same percentage 
have the 80 
Plus Silver certification. Roughly 
20% 
have the 80 PLUS Bronze certifica-
tion, and another 20% the basic 80 
PLUS 
certification. 
Fundamentals 
13 

Designing the Perfect PC 
For high-current processors, there are several alternatives. The CPU 
coolers that AMD and (particularly) Intel bundle with their retail-
boxed performance processors are much better than they were a few 
years ago. Even with a hot processor, a retail-boxed CPU cooler does a 
reasonably good job of cooling the processor with little noise. 
To minimize noise with any processor, install a Thermalright (http:// 
www.thermalright.com) or Zalman (http://www.zalmanusa.com) unit. 
For processors with low to midrange power consumption, some of 
these premium coolers can be run in silent (fanless) mode, which 
completely eliminates CPU cooler noise. 
MONITORING CPU TEMPERATURE 
Modern motherboards provide temperature sensors at 
important points such as the CPU socket.The motherboard 
reports the temperatures reported by these sensors to the 
BIOS. You can view these temperatures by running BIOS 
Setup and choosing the option for temperature reporting, 
which can usually be found under Advanced—»Hardware 
Monitoring, or a similar menu option. Alternatively, most 
motherboards include a monitoring utility—Intel's, for 
example, is called the Intel Active Monitoi — t h a t allows you 
to monitor temperatures from Windows rather than having 
to run BIOS Setup. 
CPU temperature can vary dramatically with changes in 
load. For example, a CPU that idles at 30° C may reach 50° C 
or higher when it is running at 100% capacity. A hot-running 
CPU may reach temperatures of 70° C or higher under load, 
which is perilously close to the maximum acceptable tem-
perature for that processor, so it is very important to verify 
that your CPU cooler and system fans are doing their jobs 
properly. 
An idle temperature of 30° C or lower is ideal, but that is not 
achievable with the hottest processors, which idle at 40° C or 
higher with any but the most efficient CPU coolers. In general, 
a CPU cooler that produces an idle temperature of 40° C or 
lower suffices to cool the CPU properly under load. 
If you want to verify temperature under load, run an applica-
tion that loads the CPU with intense calculations, ideally 
with lots of floating-point operations. Two such applications 
we have used are the SETI@home client (http://setiathome. 
ssl.berkeley.edu) and the Mersenne Prime client {http:// 
mersenne.org). 
Run the application for an hour to ensure 
the CPU has reached a steady-state temperature and then 
use the temperature monitoring application to view the 
temperature while the application is still running. 
CPU Coolers and Motherboard Compatibility 
If you choose an aftermarket CPU cooler, verify that it is physically compatible 
with 
your motherboard 
and case. Quiet CPU coolers often use very large heatsinks, 
which 
may conflict with protruding capacitors and other motherboard 
components. 
Most 
premium CPU cooler manufacturers 
post motherboard 
compatibility lists on their 
websites. It's just as important to verify that the CPU cooler fits your case. Some 
high-end CPU coolers are physically huge. Before you buy one of those, make sure 
the chassis structure won't prevent it from being installed, and make sure there's 
sufficient clearance between the motherboard 
and case cover that you'll be able to 
reinstall the cover with the CPU cooler in place. 
14 
Chapter 1 

Choose quiet case fans 
Most modern systems have at least one supplemental case fan, and some 
have several. The more loaded the system, the more supplemental cool-
ing you'll need to use. Use the following guidelines when selecting case 
fans: 
• Case fans are available in various sizes, from 60 mm to 200 mm. All 
other things being equal, a larger fan can move the same amount of 
air with less noise than a smaller fan, because the larger fan doesn't 
need to spin as fast. Of course, the fan mounting positions in most 
cases are of fixed size, so you may have little choice about which size 
fan(s) to use. If you do have a choice—for example, if the case has two 
or three fan positions of different size—use the largest fan that fits. 
• Case fans vary significantly in noise level, even for the same size and 
rotation speed. Many factors come into play, including blade design, 
type of bearings, grill type, and so on. In general, ball bearing fans are 
noisier but more durable than fans that use needle or sleeve bearings. 
• The noise level of a fan can be reduced by running it at a lower speed, 
as long as it moves enough air to provide proper cooling.The simplest 
method to reduce fan speed is to install an inline resistor to reduce 
the supply voltage to 7V. These are available from the sources listed 
earlier, or you can make your own with a resistor from Radio Shack or 
another electronics supply store. Some fans include a control panel, 
which mounts in an available external drive bay and allows you to 
control fan speed continuously from zero to maximum by adjusting a 
knob. Finally, some fans are designed to be controlled by the power 
supply or a motherboard fan connector. These fans vary their speed 
automatically in response to the ambient temperature, running at 
high speed when the system is heavily loaded and producing lots of 
heat, and low speed when the system is idle. 
• The mounting method you use makes a difference. Most case fans 
are secured directly to the chassis with metal screws. This transfers 
vibration directly to the chassis panels, which act as sounding boards. 
A better method is to use soft plastic snap-in connectors rather than 
screws. These connectors isolate vibration to the fan itself. Better still 
is to use the soft plastic snap-in connectors in conjunction with a 
foam surround that insulates the fan frame from the chassis entirely. 
The preceding six elements are the major steps required to quietize your PC. 
Once you minimize noise from those major sources, you can also take the fol-
lowing steps to reduce noise from minor sources. Some of these steps cost 
little or nothing to implement, and all contribute to quieting the PC: 
Put the PC on a mat 
Rather than putting the PC directly on your desk or the floor, put a sound-
deadening mat between it and the surface. You can buy special mats for 
this purpose, but we've used objects as simple as a couple of mouse pads, 
front and rear, to accomplish the same thing. The amount of noise reduc-
tion from this simple step can be surprisingly large. 
Fundamentals 

Designing the Perfect PC 
Silent PC Review 
Silent PC Review 
(http://www.silent-
pcreview.com) 
is an excellent source 
of information about quiet PC issues. 
The site includes numerous 
articles 
about reducing PC noise, as well as 
reviews of quiet PC components, 
a 
forum, and other resources. 
Choose a quiet hard drive 
Once you've addressed the major noise sources, hard drive noise may 
become noticeable, particularly during seeks. The best way to reduce 
hard drive noise is to choose a quiet hard drive in the first place. Seagate 
Barracuda and Samsung Spinpoint models are the quietest mainstream 
hard drives. If even those 7,200 RPM models are too noisy for your require-
ments, use a 5,400 or 5,900 RPM drive. If even those are too loud, install 
an SSD. 
Choose a video card with a passive heatsink 
All video adapter chipsets produce significant heat, but some video 
adapters use a passive heatsink rather than a fan-based cooler. If possible, 
choose a video adapter with a passive heatsink. 
Choose a motherboard with a passive heatsink 
The northbridge chip of modern chipsets dissipates significant heat. Most 
motherboards cool this chip with a large passive heatsink, but some use 
a fan-based cooler. Again, these coolers typically use small, fast fans that 
produce significant noise. If possible, pick a motherboard with a passive 
heatsink. 
Designing a Small PC 
At the beginning of the millennium, some forward-thinking PC builders 
and manufacturers began to design and build PCs that were smaller and/or 
more portable than traditional mini-tower systems. Small PCs have become 
extremely popular, and it's no wonder. These systems are small, light, easily 
portable, and fit just about anywhere. The two standards for small PCs, largest 
first, are: 
micro ATX PC 
A microATX PC is basically a cut-down version of a standard ATX PC. The 
microATX case and motherboard are smaller and provide less expandabil-
ity, but are otherwise comparable in features and functionality to a stan-
dard ATX system. microATX cases are available in three styles. Micro-tower 
cases resemble shrunken versions of standard mini- and mid-tower cases. 
Slimline cases are about the size and shape of a DVD player. "Cube" cases 
are typically 8"tall and roughly a foot wide and deep. The relatively small 
case capacity makes cooling more difficult and puts some restraints on 
the number and type of hard drives, expansion cards, and other peripher-
als you can install, but it is possible to build a reliable, high-performance 
PC in the microATX form factor. 
Mini-ITXPC 
The Mini-ITXform factor was pioneered by VIATechnologies and remained 
a niche standard for several years. Over the last year or two, mainstream 
motherboard and case manufacturers have introduced a wide range of 
Mini-ITX products—enough that we now consider Mini-ITX a mainstream 
technology. 
16 
Chapter 1 

Mini-ITX motherboards are 170 mm (6.7") square and are compatible with 
microATX and full ATX cases and power supplies. Of course, there's usu-
ally little point to installing a tiny motherboard in a large case, so most 
Mini-ITX systems are built in Mini-ITX cases, which accept only Mini-ITX 
motherboards. 
In the past, Mini-ITX systems were low-powered in every sense. They con-
sumed little electricity and used very low-performance processors. Most 
Mini-ITX systems used passive cooling and "wall-wart" power supplies, 
which eliminates fan noise and allows the system to be almost totally si-
lent. Mini-ITX was most appropriate for such "appliance" applications as 
small Linux servers, routers, and satellite DVR playback-only systems. 
That's all changed. Although you can still build an inexpensive, quiet, low-
power "appliance" Mini-ITX system—in fact, we'll do so as one of the proj-
ect systems in this book—you can also build a high-performance Mini-ITX 
system that matches all but the fastest desktop systems. Motherboards 
like the GIGABYTE GA-H55N-USB3 and the Intel BOXDH57JG use the most 
recent performance chipsets and accept mainstream and performance 
processors like the Intel Core ¡3/i5/i7 models. 
The main limitations of Mini-ITX systems all result from the small physical 
size of Mini-ITX cases. For example, Mini-ITX motherboards may have only 
one or two memory slots, rather than four or more, and only two SATA 
connectors, versus four, six, or more on standard motherboards. Mini-ITX 
motherboards simply aren't large enough to contain all the features and 
connectors present on standard microATX or full ATX motherboards. 
The small volume of Mini-ITX cases also puts strict limits on the size and 
number of drives you can install. For example, some mini-ITX cases accept 
only one 2.5" (notebook) hard drive and a slim optical drive. With some 
Mini-ITX case/motherboard combinations, you're limited to integrated 
video because there's no room (or slot) for a PCI Express video adapter. 
The small volume of a Mini-ITX case also limits the size and number of 
cooling fans. What fans are present must run at high speed to provide 
sufficient cooling, so a typical high-performance Mini-ITX system will be 
noticeably louder than an equivalent system built in a larger case. Finally, 
Mini-ITX motherboards are usually more expensive, sometimes signifi-
cantly so, than comparable microATX or full ATX motherboards. 
If you need to design a small PC, recognize that each step down from a standard 
mini-tower involves additional compromises in performance, cost, reliability, 
noise level, and other key criteria. Reducing case size limits the number and type 
of components you can install and makes it more difficult to cool the system 
effectively. It also makes it harder to quiet the PC. For example, small cases of-
ten use relatively loud power supplies. Because the power supply is proprietary, 
installing an aftermarket quiet power supply is not an option. Similarly, using a 
small case forces you to trade off performance against cooling against noise. For 
example, you may be forced to use a slower processor than you'd like, because 
the necessary CPU cooler for a faster processor is too large to fit in the available 
space or is louder than acceptable. 
Fundamentals 

Things to Know and Do Before You Start 
Missing Pieces 
Don't assume that every box con-
tains what it's supposed 
to. Before 
you begin the build, open each box 
and verify its contents against the 
packing list. Quite often, we open a 
new component 
box only to find that 
the driver CD, manual, cable, or some 
other small component 
that should 
have been included is missing. On 
one memorable 
occasion, we opened 
a new, shrink-wrapped 
video 
adapter 
box only to find that everything 
was 
present except the video 
adapter 
itself! 
Do As We Say... 
OK, we admit it. We almost never 
read the manuals, but then we can 
just about build a system 
blindfolded. 
Until you're proficient, reading the 
manuals 
before you proceed is the 
best way to guarantee 
that your new 
PC will, um, work. 
Don't Forget the Manuals 
While you're at it, download 
all of 
the documentation 
you can find for 
each component. 
Quite often, the 
detailed documentation 
intended for 
system builders is not included in the 
component 
box. The only way to get 
it is to download it. 
When it comes to designing small full-performance systems, our rule is to use 
a standard mini-tower case whenever possible. If that's too large, step down 
to a microATX case. If even a microATX system is too large, if and only if you are 
certain that the trade-offs are worth it, build a Mini-ITX system. 
Things to Know and Do Before You Start 
We've built many systems over the years, and we've learned a lot of lessons 
the hard way. Here are some things to keep in mind as you begin your project: 
Make sure you have everything you need before you start 
Have all of the hardware, software, and tools you'll need lined up and 
waiting. You don't want to have to stop in mid-build to go off in search of 
a small Phillips screwdriver or to drive to the store to buy a cable. If your 
luck is anything like ours, you won't find the screwdriver you need and the 
store will be closed. In addition to tools and components, make sure you 
have the distribution CDs for the operating system, service packs, device 
drivers, diagnostics utilities, and any other software you'll need to com-
plete the build. 
RTFM 
Read the fine manuals, if only the Quick Start sections. Surprisingly, while 
system manuals are notoriously awful, many component manuals are ac-
tually quite good. You'll find all sorts of hints and tips, from the best way 
to install the component to suggestions on optimizing its performance. 
Download the latest drivers 
Although PC component inventories turn over quickly, the CDs included 
with components usually don't contain the most recent drivers. Some 
manufacturers don't update their driver CDs very often, so the bundled 
drivers may be a year or more out of date, even if the component itself 
was made recently. Before you begin building a PC, visit the websites for 
each component and download its most recent driver and BIOS updates. 
(Bookmark the URLs so you can easily find updates later.) Unpack or unzip 
them if necessary, burn them to CD, and label the CD. You may choose to 
install drivers from the bundled CD—in fact, at times it's necessary to do 
so because the downloadable updates do not include everything that's 
on the CD—but you want to have those later drivers available so that you 
can update your system immediately. 
Ground yourself before touching components 
Processors, memory modules, and other electronic components—including 
the circuit boards in drives—are sensitive to static shock. Static electricity 
can damage components even if the voltage is too low for you to see or 
feel a static spark. The best way to avoid static damage to components is 
to get in the habit of grounding yourself before you touch any sensitive 
component. You can buy special antistatic wrist straps and similar devices, 
but they're really not necessary. All you need do is touch a metal object 
like the chassis or power supply before you handle components. 
18 
Chapter 1 

Things to Know and Do Before You Start 
Static Guard 
To minimize problems with static, wear wool or cotton clothing and avoid 
rubber-
soled shoes. Static problems increase when the air is dry, as is common 
in winter 
when central heating systems are in use. You can reduce or eliminate static with 
a spray bottle filled with water to which you've added a few drops of 
dishwashing 
liquid. Spritz your work area thoroughly immediately before you begin 
working. 
The goal is not to get anything wet, but simply to increase the humidity of the air. 
(Whateveryou 
do, avoid wetting the case or components 
themselves, especially the 
connectors and slots, which must be kept clean and dry at all times.) 
Keep track of the screws and other small parts 
Building a PC yields an incredible number of small pieces that need to be 
kept organized. As you open each component box, your pile of screws, 
cables, mounting brackets, adapters, and other small parts grows larger. 
Some of those you'll need, and some you won't. As we can attest, one 
errant screw left on the floor can destroy a vacuum cleaner. Worse, one 
unnoticed screw can short out and destroy the motherboard and other 
components. The best solution we've found is to use an egg carton or old 
ice cube tray to keep parts organized. The goal is to have all of the small 
parts accounted for when you finish assembling the PC. 
Use force when necessary, but use it cautiously 
Many books tell you never to force anything, and that's good advice as 
far as it goes. If doing something requires excessive force, chances are a 
part is misaligned, you have not removed a screw, or something similar. 
But sometimes there is no alternative to applying force judiciously. For 
example, drive power cables sometimes fit so tightly that the only way 
to connect them is to grab them with pliers and press hard. (Make sure 
all the contacts are aligned first.) Likewise, some combinations of expan-
sion card and slot fit so tightly that you must press very hard to seat the 
card. If you encounter such a situation, verify that everything is lined up 
and otherwise as it should be (and that there isn't a stray wire obstructing 
the slot). Then use whatever force it takes to do the job, which may be 
substantial. 
Check and recheck before you apply power 
An experienced PC technician building a PC does a quick scan of the new 
machine before performing the moke test by applying power to the PC (if 
you don't see any smoke, it passes the test). Don't skip this step, and don't 
underestimate its importance. Most PCs that fail the smoke test do so be-
cause this step was ignored. Until you gain experience, it may take several 
minutes to verify that all is as it should be—all components secure, all 
cables connected properly, no tools or other metal parts shorting any-
thing out, and so on. Once you are comfortable working inside PCs, this 
step takes 15 seconds, but that may be the most important 15 seconds of 
the whole project. 
A Snake in the Woodpile 
Some PCs use a variety of screws 
that look very similar but are in fact 
threaded differently. For example, 
the screws used to secure some case 
covers and those used to mount 
some disk drives may appear to be 
identical, but swapping 
them may 
result in stripped threads. If in doubt, 
keep each type of screw in a separate 
compartment 
of your 
organizer. 
A Screw Loose Somewhere 
After we build a system, we pick it up, 
shake it gently, and tilt it front-to-
back and side-to-side. If something 
rattles, we know there's a screw loose 
somewhere. 
Fundamentals 
19 

Things to Know and Do Before You Start 
This Probably Won't Happen 
to You 
Don't let this warning put you off 
building a PC. If you choose 
good 
components, 
assemble them care-
fully, and double-check 
every-
thing before you apply power, the 
probability of catastrophic 
failure 
is probably about the same as the 
probability you'll be hit by lightning 
or win the lottery. 
Cover Up 
The corollary to this rule is that you 
should always put the cover back 
on the case once the upgrade is 
complete and tested. Some believe 
that leaving the cover off improves 
cooling. Wrong. Cases do not depend 
on convection 
cooling, which is the 
only kind you get with the cover off. 
Cases are designed to direct cooling 
air across the major 
heat-generating 
components, 
processors and drives, 
but this engineering 
is useless if 
you run the PC uncovered. 
Replace 
the cover to avoid 
overheating 
components. 
Another good reason to replace 
the cover is that running a system 
without the cover releases 
copious 
amounts ofRF to the 
surrounding 
environment. An uncovered 
system 
can interfere with radios, 
displays, 
televisions, and other electronic 
components 
over a wide radius. 
Start small for the first boot 
The moment of greatest danger comes when you power up the PC for 
the first time. If the system fails catastrophically—which sometimes hap-
pens no matter how careful you are—don't smoke more than you have to. 
For example, the SOHO Server project system we built for this book uses 
four hard drives and two memory modules. When we built that system, 
we installed only one drive and one memory module initially. That way, 
if something shorted out when we first applied power, we'd destroy only 
one drive and memory module rather than all of them. For that reason, 
we suggest starting with a minimum configuration—motherboard, pro-
cessor, one memory stick, video, and one hard drive. Once you're satis-
fied that all is well, you can add your optical and other drives, additional 
memory, expansion cards, and so on. 
Leave the cover off until you're sure everything works 
Experts build and test the PC completely before putting the lid back on 
and connecting the external cables. Novices build the PC, reassemble the 
case, reconnect all the cables, and then test it. 
GOOD ADVICE FOR FIRST-TIME SYSTEM BUILDERS 
Ron Morse, one of our technical reviewers, has been building PCs for 20 years. 
He makes the following suggestions for first-time system builders: 
• Try to arrange a couple of hours when you can reasonably expect to be 
free of interruptions to build your first PC. It's a sequential process and you 
need to keep track of whatyou have (and haven't) done. 
• 
Building while this week's NASCAR crashfest or the home team's latest 
losing effort plays on the TV isn't a good idea, either. While there's nothing 
difficult about building a PC, it does take a certain level of concentration. 
I like to play music, but not Mahler or the Squirrel Nut Zippers, both of 
whom cause me to think too much about the music instead of what I'm 
supposed to be doing. 
• Most pro shops don't allow food or drink in the assembly area. It's a good 
rule for the home builder, too. In addition to the obvious concerns about 
spills and crumbs, condensation from the outside of a cold drink container 
can drip unnoticed into a sensitive area and residue from "finger food" can 
cause all sorts of problems by contaminating contacts or making small 
parts hard(er) to grasp and place. 
Pace yourself. Building a PC is amazingly simple...after it's finished. Getting 
there takes concentration and some physical dexterity. Plan to take short breaks 
at logical points during the build, then take them. 
20 
Chapter 1 

Things You Need to Have 
Things You Need to Have 
The following sections detail the items you should have at hand before you 
actually start building your new system. Make a checklist and make sure you 
check off each item before you begin. There are few things as frustrating as 
being forced to stop in mid-build when you belatedly realize you're missing a 
cable or other small component. 
Components 
Building a PC requires at least the following components. Have all of them 
available before you start to build the system. Open each component box and 
verify the contents against the packing list before you actually start the build. 
• Case and power supply, with power cord 
• Motherboard, with custom I/O shield, if needed 
• 
Processor 
• CPU cooler, with thermal compound or pad 
• Memory module(s) 
• Hard drive(s) and cable(s) 
• Optical drive, with data cable 
• Video adapter, unless embedded 
• Sound adapter, unless embedded 
• Network adapter, unless embedded 
• Any other expansion cards (if applicable) 
• Supplementary case fan(s) 
• Keyboard, mouse, display and other external peripherals 
• Screws, brackets, drive rails, and other connecting hardware 
Hand Tools and Supplies 
You really don't need many tools to build a PC. We built one PC using only a 
Swiss Army Knife, just to prove it could be done. Our basic PC building toolkit 
is a #1 Phillips screwdriver. It's a bit small for the largest screws and a bit large 
for the smallest, but we've built dozens of systems using no other tool. 
It's helpful to have more tools, of course. Needle-nose pliers are useful for set-
ting jumpers. A flashlight is often useful, even if your work area is well lit. A 5 
mm (or, rarely, 6 mm) nut driver makes it faster to install the brass standoffs 
that support the motherboard. A larger assortment of screwdrivers can also 
be helpful. 
Non-Fatal Attraction 
Don't worry about using 
magnetized 
tools. Despite the common 
warnings 
about doing so, we've used 
magne-
tized screwdrivers for years 
without 
any problem. They are quite 
handy 
for picking up dropped screws and so 
on. Use commonsense 
precautions, 
though, such as avoiding putting the 
magnetized 
tips near the flat surface 
of a hard drive or other 
magnetic 
media. 
Fundamentals 
21 

Things You Need to Have 
Use Some Protection 
It's a very bad idea to connect a PC 
directly to the Internet, and that's 
especially true for an 
unpatched 
system. Several of our readers have 
reported having anew 
system 
infected by a worm almost 
instantly 
when they connected 
to the Internet, 
intending to download 
patches 
and updates. Patch the new system 
before you connect it to the Internet, 
and never connect it directly to the 
Internet. Use a NAT 
gateway/router 
between any PC and your 
broadband 
modem. 
First Things First 
Pay close attention to the instruc-
tions that come with the driver. Most 
drivers can be installed with the 
hardware they support already in-
stalled. But some drivers, 
particularly 
those for some USB devices, need to 
be installed before the hardware is 
installed. 
You may also find it useful to have some Nylon cable ties (not the paper-covered 
wire-type twist ties) for dressing cables after you build the system. Canned air 
and a clean microfiber dust cloth are useful for cleaning components that you 
are migrating from an older system. A new eraser can be helpful for cleaning 
contacts if you mistakenly grab an expansion card by the connector tab. 
Software Tools 
In addition to hand tools, you should have the following software tools avail-
able when you build your system. Some are useful when you build the system, 
others to diagnose problems. We keep copies of our standard software tools 
with our toolkit. That way, we have everything we need in one place. Here are 
the software tools we recommend: 
Operating system distribution discs 
OS distribution discs are needed when you build a system, and may also 
be needed later to update system software or install a peripheral. We al-
ways burn copies of the distribution discs to CD-R or DVD+R and keep a 
copy with our toolkit. If you use Windows, remember to record the initial-
ization key, serial number, and other data you'll need to install the soft-
ware. Use a felt-tip permanent marker to record this data directly onto 
the disc immediately after you burn it. It also helps to record the same 
information on a small piece of paper so that you'll have it available while 
the disc is in the drive. 
Service packs and critical updates 
Rather than (or in addition to) updating Windows and Office online, 
download the latest service packs and critical updates and burn them to 
CD-R. In addition to giving you more control of the process, having these 
updates on CD-R means you can apply them even when the system has 
no Internet connection, such as when you're building it on your kitchen 
table. 
Major applications discs 
If your system runs Microsoft Office or other major applications that are 
distributed on CDs, keep a copy of those discs with your toolkit. Again, 
don't forget to record the serial number, initialization keys, and other re-
quired data on the disc itself and on a supplementary note (because it's 
really hard to enter that serial number onscreen while it's spinning in the 
optical drive). 
Driver CDs 
Motherboards, video adapters, sound cards, and many other components 
include a driver CD in the box. Those drivers may not be essential for in-
stalling the component—the Windows or Linux distribution CD may (or 
may not) include basic drivers for the component—but it's generally a 
good idea to use the driver CD supplied with the component (or an up-
dated version downloaded from the website) rather than using those sup-
plied with the OS, if any. 
22 
Chapter 1 

Things You Need to Have 
In addition to basic drivers, the driver CD may include supporting appli-
cations. For example, a video adapter CD may include a system tray ap-
plication for managing video properties, while a sound card may include 
a bundled application for sound recording and editing. We generally use 
the bundled driver CD for initial installation and then download and in-
stall any updated drivers available on the product website. Keep a copy 
of the original driver CD and a CD-R with updated drivers in your toolkit. 
Hard drive installation/diagnostic utility 
We're always amazed that so few people use the installation and diag-
nostic software supplied with hard drives. Perhaps that's because many 
people buy OEM hard drives, which include only the bare drive. Retail-
boxed drives invariably include a utilities CD. Most people ignore it, which 
is a mistake. 
Seagate, for example, provides DiscWizard installation software and 
SeaTools diagnostic software. If you're building a system, you can use the 
bootable floppy or bootable CD version of DiscWizard to partition, format, 
and test the new drive automatically. If you're adding a drive, you can use 
the Windows version of DiscWizard to install, prepare, and configure the 
new drive automatically. You can configure the new drive as a secondary 
drive, keeping the original drive as the boot drive. You can specify that the 
new drive be the sole drive in the system, and DiscWizard will automati-
cally migrate your programs and data from the old drive. Finally, you can 
choose to make the new drive the primary (boot) drive and make the old 
drive the secondary drive. DiscWizard does all of this automatically, saving 
you considerable manual effort. 
Driver Education 
Keep original driver CDs stored safely. 
They may be more valuable 
than 
you think. More than once, we've lost 
track of original driver CDs, 
thinking 
we could always just download 
the 
latest driver from the 
manufacturer's 
website. Alas, a company 
may go 
out of business, or its website may 
be down just when you 
desperately 
need a driver. Worse still, some 
com-
panies may charge for drivers that 
were originally freely 
downloadable. 
That's one reason we don't buy HP 
products. 
Hard Drive Diagnostics 
All hard drive makers provide installation and diagnostic 
utilities. If you buy an OEM 
hard drive or lose the original CD, you can download 
the utilities from the 
manufac-
turer's website. For obvious reasons, many of these utilities work only if a hard drive 
made by that manufacturer 
is installed. 
Diagnostic utilities 
Catch 22. Diagnostic utilities are of limited use in building a new system, 
because if the PC works well enough to load and run them, you don't 
need to diagnose it. Conversely, when you need to diagnose the PC, it's 
not working well enough to run the diagnostic utility. Duh. (Diagnostic 
utilities can be helpful on older systems, for example, to detect memory 
problems or a failing hard drive.) The only diagnostic utility we use rou-
tinely when building systems is a Knoppix Live Linux CD (http://www. 
knoppix.com). With Knoppix, you can boot and run Linux completely from 
the CD, without writing anything to the hard drive. Knoppix has superb 
hardware detection—better than Windows—and can be useful for diag-
nosing problems on a newly built system that refuses to load Windows. 
Test Your Memory 
Many system builders routinely run 
a memory diagnostic 
to ensure the 
system functions before installing 
the operating system. One excellent 
utility for this purpose is 
MEMTEST86 
(http://www.memtest86.com). 
It's 
free, self-boots from a floppy drive, 
or can be run in DOS mode from an 
optical boot disk. Best of all, it does 
a great job of testing the otherwise 
difficult-to-diagnose 
memory 
subsystem. 
Fundamentals 
23 

Troubleshooting 
Burn-in utilities 
PC components generally fail quickly or live a long time. If a component 
survives the first 24 hours, it's likely to run without problems for years.The 
vast majority of early failures are immediate, caused by DOA components. 
Something like 99% of the remaining early failures occur within 24 hours, 
so it's worth "burning in"a new system before you spend hours installing 
and configuring the operating system and applications. 
Many people simply turn on the system and let it run for a day or two. 
That's better than nothing, but an idling system doesn't stress all com-
ponents. A better way is to run software that accesses and exercises all of 
the components. One good (and free) ad hoc way to burn in a system is to 
compile the Linux kernel, and we sometimes use that method. We gener-
ally use special burn-in software, however. The best product we know of 
for that purpose is BurnlnTest from PassMark Software (http://www.pass-
mark.com). 
Troubleshooting 
Many first-time system builders are haunted by the question, "What if it doesn't 
work?"Or, worse still, "What if it goes up in flames the first time I turn iton?"Set 
your mind at ease. This isn't rocket surgery. Any reasonably intelligent person 
can build a system with a high degree of confidence that it will work normally 
the first time it is turned on. If you use good components and assemble them 
carefully, you're actually less likely to encounter problems with a home-built 
system than with a pre-built mail-order system or one off the shelf from your 
local superstore. 
Still, it can happen. So, while it would take a whole book to cover trouble-
shooting in detail, it's worth taking a few pages to list some of the most likely 
problems and solutions. Fortunately, it's easier to troubleshoot a newly built 
system than a system that's been in use for some time. Fewer things can go 
wrong with a new system. You can be certain that the system is not infected 
with a virus or malware, for example, and driver problems are much less likely 
on a new system because you will have all the latest drivers installed. 
The best time to troubleshoot is while you build the system. A good carpen-
ter measures twice and cuts once. Take the same approach to building your 
system, and you're unlikely to need any of this troubleshooting advice. As you 
build the system, and then again before you apply power for the first time, 
verify that all cables are oriented and connected correctly. Make sure expan-
sion cards, memory modules, the processor, and so on are fully seated, and 
that you haven't left a tool in the patient. Each project system chapter includes 
a final checklist. Verifying the items on that checklist eliminates about 99% of 
the potential problems. 
Possible problems fall into one of four categories, easy versus hard to trouble-
shoot and likely versus unlikely to occur. Always check the easy/likely prob-
lems first. Otherwise, you may find yourself replacing the video card before 
Contents May Settle During 
Shipping 
Shipping can be tough on a com-
puter. We always pop the cover of 
PCs that have been shipped, 
and 
often find something 
has been jarred 
loose. Our editor reports that when 
he shipped a PC to his parents, it ar-
rived with the video card 
completely 
out of its slot. Not good. 
Even worse, shipping can cause 
the CPU cooler to break loose. A 
heavy heatsink rattling around 
can 
do some serious damage 
to other 
components. 
If someone ships a 
system to you, always open it up and 
verify that everything is properly 
connected before you apply power to 
the system. 
24 
Chapter 1 

Troubleshooting 
you notice that the display isn't plugged in. After you exhaust the easy/likely 
possibilities, check the easy/unlikely ones, followed by the hard/likely ones 
and finally the hard/unlikely possibilities. 
Other than sheer carelessness—to which experienced system builders are 
more prone than novices—most problems with new systems result from one 
or more of the following: 
Cable problems 
Disconnected, misconnected, and defective cables cause more problems 
than anything else. The plethora of cables inside a PC makes it very easy 
to overlook a disconnected data cable or to forget to connect power to a 
drive. And the cables themselves cannot always be trusted, even if they 
are new. If you have a problem that seems inexplicable, always suspect a 
cable problem first. 
Configuration errors 
Years ago, motherboards required a lot more manual configuration than 
modern motherboards do. There were many switches and jumpers, all of 
which had to be set correctly or the system wouldn't boot. Modern moth-
erboards autoconfigure most of their required settings, but they may still 
require some manual configuration, either by setting physical jumpers on 
the motherboard or by changing settings in BIOS Setup. Motherboards 
use silkscreened labels near jumpers and connectors to document their 
purposes and to list valid configuration settings. These settings are also 
listed in the motherboard manual. Always check both the motherboard 
labels and the manual to verify configuration settings. If the motherboard 
maker posts updated manuals on the Web, check those as well. 
Incompatible components 
In general, you can mix and match modern PC components without wor-
rying much about compatibility. For example, any SATA hard drive or opti-
cal drive works with any SATA interface, and any ATX12V power supply 
is compatible with any ATX12V motherboard (although a cheap or older 
power supply may not provide adequate power). Most component com-
patibility issues are subtle. For example, if you install a 4 GB memory mod-
ule in your system, when you power it up the system may see only 2 GB 
because the motherboard doesn't recognize 4 GB memory modules prop-
erly. It's worth checking the detailed documentation on the manufactur-
ers'websites to verify compatibility. 
Dead-on-arrival components 
Modern PC components are extremely reliable, but if you're unlucky one 
of your components may be DOA. This is the least likely cause of a prob-
lem, however. Many novices think they have a DOA component, but the 
true cause is almost always something else—usually a cable or configura-
tion problem. Before you return a suspect component, go through the 
detailed troubleshooting steps described next. Chances are the compo-
nent is just fine. 
Here are the problems you are most likely to encounter, and what to do about 
them: 
Cables Are Commonplace 
Fortunately, most problems 
with 
defective cables involve data cables, 
and those are pretty easy to come by. 
For example, when we recently as-
sembled a new PC, the 
motherboard 
came with two SATA data cables. The 
hard drive came with another SATA 
data cable, and the optical drive with 
still another SATA data cable. That 
gave us four SATA data cables, only 
two of which we needed. The two 
extra cables went into our spares 
kit, where they'll be available if we 
need to swap cables to 
troubleshoot 
another system. This, incidentally, is 
another good reason to buy retail-
boxed drives, at least until you ac-
cumulate some spare cables. 
Fundamentals 
25 

Troubleshooting 
Swapping Power Supplies 
If you have a spare power 
supply— 
or can borrow one temporarily 
from 
another system—you 
might as well 
try it as long as you have the cables 
disconnected. 
A new power 
supply 
being DOA is fairly rare, at least 
among good brands, but as long as 
you have the original 
disconnected, 
it's not much trouble to try a differ-
ent one. 
Brian Bilbrey Comments 
I keep a spare, high-quality, 
decent-
capacity power supply on hand, 
awaiting the day the unit in the sys-
tem dies. It would have been 
handy 
a couple of months ago if I found I'd 
replaced that spare the last time I 
had to use it. The computer 
stayed 
offline until I bought a power 
supply 
at a local big-box store, for consider-
ably more money than I'd have paid 
if I'd ordered that spare online, before 
I needed it. Sigh. 
Problem: When you apply power, nothing happens. 
• Verify that the power cable is connected to the PC and to the wall recep-
tacle, and that the wall receptacle has power. Don't assume. We have seen 
receptacles in which one half worked and the other didn't. Use a lamp or 
other appliance to verify that the receptacle to which you connect the PC 
actually has power. If the power supply has its own power switch, make 
sure that switch is turned to the "On" or "1" position. If your local mains 
voltage is 110/115/120V, verify that the power supply voltage selector 
switch, if present, is not set for 220/230/240V. (If you need to move this 
switch, disconnect power before doing so.) 
• If you are using an outlet strip or UPS, make sure that its switch (if 
equipped) is on and that the circuit breaker or fuse hasn't blown. 
• If you installed a video adapter, pop the lid and verify that the adapter is 
fully seated in its slot. Even if you were sure it was seated fully initially— 
and even if you thought it snapped into place—the adapter may still not 
be properly seated. Remove the card and reinstall it, making sure it seats 
completely. If the motherboard has a retention mechanism, make sure 
the notch on the video card fully engages the retention mechanism. Ironi-
cally, one of the most common reasons for a loose video card is that the 
screw used to secure it to the chassis torques the card, pulling it partially 
out of its slot. This problem is rare with high-quality cases and video cards 
but is quite common with cheap components. 
• Verify that the 20- or 24-pin main ATX power cable and the 4-pin ATX12V 
(or 8-pin EPS12V) power cable are securely connected to the motherboard 
and that all pins are making contact. If necessary, remove the cables and 
reconnect them. Make sure the latch on each cable plug snaps into place 
on the motherboard jack. Also, if your video adapter requires supplemen-
tal power, make sure the appropriate power cable is connected to it. 
• Verify that the front-panel power switch cable is connected properly to 
the front-panel connector block. Check the silkscreen label on the mother-
board and the motherboard manual to verify that you are connecting the 
cable to the right set of pins. Very rarely, you may encounter a defective 
power switch. You can eliminate this possibility by temporarily connect-
ing the front-panel reset switch cable to the power switch pins on the 
front-panel connector block. (Both are merely momentary on switches, so 
they can be used interchangeably.) Alternatively, you can carefully use a 
small flat-blade screwdriver to short the power switch pins on the front-
panel connector block momentarily. If the system starts with either of 
these methods, the problem is the case power switch. 
• Start eliminating less likely possibilities, the most common of which is a 
well-concealed short circuit. Begin by disconnecting the power and data 
cables from the hard, optical, and floppy drives, one at a time. After you 
disconnect each, try starting the system. If the system starts, the drive you 
just disconnected is the problem. The drive itself may be defective, but it's 
far more likely that the cable is defective or was improperly connected. 
Replace the data cable, and connect the drive to a different power supply 
cable. 
26 
Chapter 1 

Troubleshooting 
• If you have expansion cards installed, remove them one by one. Remove 
all but the video adapter. If the motherboard has embedded video, tem-
porarily connect your display to it and remove the video card as well. At-
tempt to start the system after you remove each card. If the system starts, 
the card you just removed is causing the problem. Try a different card, or 
install that card in a different slot. 
• Remove and reseat the memory modules, examining them to make sure 
they are not damaged, and then try to start the system. If you have two 
memory modules installed, install only one of them initially. Try it in both 
(or all) memory slots. If that module doesn't work in any slot, the module 
may be defective. Try the other module, again in every available memo-
ry slot. By using this approach, you can determine if one of the memory 
modules or one of the slots is defective. 
• Remove the CPU cooler and the CPU. Check the CPU to make sure there 
are no bent pins. If there are, you may be able to straighten them using a 
credit card or a similar thin, stiff object, but in all likelihood you will have to 
replace the CPU. Check the CPU socket to make sure there are no blocked 
holes or foreign objects present. 
• Remove the motherboard and verify that no extraneous screws or other 
conductive objects are shorting the motherboard to the chassis. Although 
shaking the case usually causes such objects to rattle, a screw or other 
small object may become wedged so tightly between the motherboard 
and chassis that it will not reveal itself during a shake test. 
• If the problem persists, the most likely cause is a defective motherboard. 
Problem: The system seems to start normally, but the display remains black. 
• Verify that the display has power and the video cable is connected. If the 
display has a non-captive power cable, make sure the power cord is con-
nected both to the display and to the wall receptacle. If you have a spare 
power cord, use it to connect the display. Make sure that the correct in-
put is selected. Many displays have VGA, DVI, and/or HDMI connectors on 
them. Ordinarily, the display detects which input is receiving a video sig-
nal and selects it automatically. If that doesn't work, use the manual input-
select button on the display to select the active source. 
• Verify that the brightness and contrast controls of the display are set to 
midrange or higher. 
• Disconnect the video cable and examine it closely to make sure that no 
pins are bent or shorted. Note that the video cable on some analog (VGA) 
displays is missing some pins and may have a short jumper wire connect-
ing other pins, which is normal. Also check the video port on the PC to 
make sure that all of the holes are clear and that no foreign objects are 
present. 
• If you are using a standalone video adapter in a motherboard that has 
embedded video, make sure the video cable is connected to the proper 
video port. Try the other video port just to make sure. Most motherboards 
with embedded video automatically disable it when they sense a video 
Use New Thermal Goop 
Every Time 
Before you reinstall the CPU, always 
remove the old thermal 
compound 
and apply new compound. 
You can 
generally wipe off the old 
compound 
with a paper towel, or perhaps 
by 
rubbing it gently with your 
thumb. 
(Keep the processor in its socket while 
you remove the compound.) 
If the 
compound 
is difficult to remove, try 
heating it gently with a hair dryer. 
Never operate the system without the 
CPU cooler installed. 
Fundamentals 
27 

Troubleshooting 
Danger, Will Robinson 
All of the following steps 
assume 
that the power supply is adequate 
for the system configuration. 
This 
symptom may also occur if you use a 
grossly underpowered 
power 
supply. 
Worse still, doing that may 
damage 
the power supply, motherboard, 
and 
other 
components. 
card is installed, but that is not universally true. You may have to connect 
the display to the embedded video, enter BIOS Setup, and reconfigure the 
motherboard to use the video card. 
• Try using a different display, if you have one available. Alternatively, try 
using the problem display on another system. 
• If you are using a video card, make certain it is fully seated. Many combina-
tions of video card and motherboard make it very difficult to seat the card 
properly. You may think the card is seated. You may even feel it snap into 
place. That does not necessarily mean it really is fully seated. Look care-
fully at the bottom edge of the card and the video slot, and make sure the 
card is fully in the slot and parallel to it. Verify that installing the screw that 
secures the video card to the chassis did not torque the card, forcing one 
end up and out of the slot. 
• If your video card requires a supplemental power cable, be sure to con-
nect it and make sure it snaps into place. 
• If the system has PCI or PCIe expansion cards installed, remove them one 
by one. (Be sure to disconnect power from the system before you remove 
or install a card.) Each time you remove a card, restart the system. If the 
system displays video after you remove a card, that card either is defective 
or is conflicting with the video adapter. Try installing the PCI or PCIe card 
in a different slot. If it still causes the video problem, the card is probably 
defective. Replace it. 
Problem: When you connect power (or turn on the main power switch on the back 
of the power supply), the power supply starts briefly and then shuts off. 
• This is usually normal behavior. When you connect power to the power 
supply, it senses the power and begins its startup routine. Within a frac-
tion of a second, the power supply notices that the motherboard hasn't 
ordered it to start, so it shuts itself down immediately. Press the main 
power switch on the case and the system should start normally. 
• If pressing the main power switch doesn't start the system, you have prob-
ably forgotten to connect one of the cables from the power supply or 
front panel to the motherboard. Verify that the power switch cable is con-
nected to the front-panel connector block, and that the 20-pin or 24-pin 
main ATX power cable and the 4-pin ATX12V power cable are connected 
to the motherboard. Connect any cables that are not connected, press the 
main power switch, and the system should start normally. 
• If the preceding steps don't solve the problem, the most likely cause is a 
defective power supply. If you have a spare power supply, or can borrow 
one temporarily from another system, install it temporarily in the new sys-
tem. Alternatively, connect the problem power supply to another system 
to verify that it is bad. 
• If the preceding step doesn't solve the problem, the most likely cause is a 
defective motherboard. Replace it. 
28 
Chapter 1 

Problem: The display shows BIOS boot text, but the system doesn't boot and displays 
no error message. 
• This may be normal behavior. Restart the system and enter BIOS Setup 
(usually by pressing Delete or F1 during startup). Choose the menu op-
tion to use default CMOS settings, save the changes, exit, and restart the 
system. 
• If the system doesn't accept keyboard input and you are using a USB key-
board and mouse, temporarily swap in a PS/2 keyboard and mouse. If you 
are using a PS/2 keyboard and mouse, make sure you haven't connected 
the keyboard to the mouse port and vice versa. Of course, many mother-
boards no longer incorporate "legacy" PS/2 inputs, so skip this step if it 
doesn't apply. 
• If the system still fails to boot, run BIOS Setup again and verify all settings, 
particularly CPU speed, FSB speed, and memory timings. 
• If the system hangs with a DMI pool error message, restart the system and 
run BIOS Setup again. Search the menus for an option to reset the config-
uration data. Enable that option, save the changes, and restart the system. 
• If you are using an Intel motherboard, power down the system and reset 
the configuration jumper from the 1-2 (Normal) position to 2-3 (Config-
ure). Restart the system, and BIOS Setup will appear automatically. Choose 
the option to use default CMOS settings, save the changes, and power 
down the system. Move the configuration jumper back to the 1-2 posi-
tion and restart the system. (Actually, we routinely run the configuration 
option—when such an option is offered—and reset BIOS values to the 
defaults every time we first use a new motherboard, regardless of make, 
model, or chipset. It may not be absolutely required, but we've found that 
doing this minimizes problems.) 
• If you are still unable to access BIOS Setup, power down the system, dis-
connect all of the drive data cables, and restart the system. If the system 
displays a Hard Drive Failure or No Boot Device error message, the prob-
lem is a defective cable (more likely) or a defective drive. Replace the drive 
data cable and try again. If the system does not display such an error mes-
sage, the problem is probably caused by a defective motherboard. 
Problem: The monitor displays a Hard Drive Failure or similar error message. 
• This is almost always a hardware problem. Verify that the hard drive data 
cable is connected properly to the drive and the interface and that the 
drive power cable is connected. 
• Use a different drive data cable and connect the drive to a different power 
cable. 
• Connect the drive data cable to a different interface. 
• If none of these steps corrects the problem, the most likely cause is a de-
fective drive. 
Fundamentals 

Problem: The display shows a No Boot Device, Missing Operating System, or similar 
error message. 
• This is normal behavior if you have not yet installed an operating system. 
Error messages like this generally mean that the drive is physically in-
stalled and accessible, but the PC cannot boot because it cannot locate 
the operating system. Install the operating system. 
• If the drive is inaccessible, verify that all data and power cables are con-
nected properly. If it is a parallel ATA drive, verify that master/slave jumpers 
are set correctly and that the drive is connected to the primary interface. 
• If you upgrade your motherboard but keep your original hard drive (or 
use a utility to clone your original), your operating system installation 
may not have the drivers necessary to function with your new hardware. 
If you're upgrading your motherboard, chances are good that enough 
things are different that Windows won't be able to boot. You'll need to 
reinstall Windows. 
Problem: The system refuses to boot from the optical drive. 
• All modern motherboards and optical drives support the El Torito specifi-
cation, which allows the system to boot from an optical disc. If your new 
system refuses to boot from a CD, you can verify that the CD is bootable 
by booting it in another system. 
• Run BIOS Setup and locate the section where you can define boot se-
quence. The default sequence is often (1) hard drive, (2) optical drive, (3) 
USB boot device, and (4) network boot device. Sometimes, by the time the 
system has decided it can't boot from the hard drive, it "gives up" before 
attempting to boot from the optical drive. Reset the boot sequence to (1) 
optical drive, and (2) hard drive. We generally leave the system with that 
boot sequence. Most systems configured this way prompt you to "Press 
any key to boot from CD" or something similar. If you don't press a key, 
they then attempt to boot from the hard drive, so make sure to pay atten-
tion during the boot sequence and press a key when prompted. 
• Some high-speed optical drives take several seconds to load a CD, spin up, 
and signal the system that they are ready. In the meantime, the BIOS may 
have given up on the optical drive and gone on to try other boot devices. 
If you think this has happened, try pressing the reset button to reboot the 
system while the optical drive is already spinning and up to speed. If you 
get a persistent prompt to "press any key to boot from CD,"try leaving that 
prompt up while the optical drive comes up to speed. If that doesn't work, 
run BIOS Setup and reconfigure the boot sequence to put the USB boot 
device first and the optical drive second. You can also try putting other 
boot device options, such as a network drive or boot PROM, ahead of the 
optical drive in the boot sequence. The goal is to provide sufficient delay 
for the optical drive to spin up before the motherboard attempts to boot 
from it. 
48 Chapter 2 

• If none of these steps solves the problem, verify that all data cable and 
power cable connections are correct. If the system still fails to boot, re-
place the optical drive data cable. 
• If the system still fails to boot, disconnect all drives except the primary 
hard drive and the optical drive. If the system still fails to boot, the optical 
drive is probably defective. Try using a different drive. 
Problem: When you first apply power, you hear a continuous high-pitched screech 
or warble. 
• The most likely cause is either that one of the system fans has a defective 
bearing or that a wire is contacting the spinning fan. Examine all of the 
system fans—CPU fan, power supply fan, and any supplemental fans—to 
make sure they haven't been fouled by a wire. Sometimes it's difficult to 
determine which fan is making the noise. In that case, use a cardboard 
tube or rolled-up piece of paper as a stethoscope to localize the noise. If 
the fan is fouled, clear the problem. If the fan is not fouled but still noisy, 
replace the fan. 
• Rarely, a new hard drive may have a manufacturing defect or have been 
damaged in shipping. If so, the problem is usually obvious from the 
amount and location of the noise, and possibly because the hard drive 
is vibrating. If necessary, use your cardboard tube stethoscope to localize 
the noise. If the hard drive is the source, the only alternative is to replace it. 
Problem: You hear a repeating, alternating two-tone "siren" sound after the system 
has been powered on for a short period. 
• The sound is a warning that the CPU temperature is approaching dangerous 
levels and usually indicates there is not a good thermal bond between the 
CPU and the heatsink/fan (HSF) assembly. If you hear this warning, shut 
down the system immediately. Fortunately, the most common causes of 
this problem are easy to resolve. First, ensure the HSF assembly is prop-
erly mounted on the CPU and that all clips, screws, and retaining pins are 
fully seated and tight. If the warning persists, there may not be enough 
thermal paste between the CPU and HSF, or the paste may not be evenly 
distributed over the entire surface where the CPU and HSF meet. If the 
HSF came with a preapplied thermal pad, the pad may have been dam-
aged prior to assembly or the protective plastic foil that protects the pad 
during shipment may not have been removed. 
We've developed these troubleshooting procedures over many years and 
hundreds of systems, but if you work carefully while building your own new 
system, chances are you won't have to use any of them. About 99% of the 
new systems we build start up normally the first time we apply power. If this 
is your first build, your odds are probably even better because you'll probably 
pay even closer attention than we do to the details while you're building the 
system. 
Fundamentals 

Choosing and Buying 
O 
Components 
The components you choose foryour system determine its features, performance 
level, and reliability. How and where you buy those components determines how 
much the system costs. 
Sometimes it is a good idea to spend more for additional features or perfor-
mance, but often it is not. The trick is to figure out where to draw the line— 
when to spend extra money for extra features and performance, and when to 
settle for a less expensive component. Our years of experience have taught us 
several lessons in that regard: 
• Benchmarks lie. Buying PC components based solely on benchmark re-
sults is like buying a car based solely on its top speed. It's worse, actually, 
because no standards exist for how benchmarks measure performance, or 
what aspect of performance they measure. Using one benchmark, Com-
ponent A may be the clear winner, with Component B lagging far behind. 
With another benchmark, the positions may be reversed. When you select 
components for your new system, we suggest you regard benchmarks 
with suspicion and use them only as very general guidelines, if at all. 
• Performance differences don't matter if it takes a benchmark to show 
them. Enthusiast websites wax poetic about a processor that's 10% faster 
than its competitor or a video card that renders frames 5% faster than its 
predecessor. Who cares? A difference you won't notice isn't worth paying 
for. 
• It's easy to overlook the really important things and focus on trivialities. 
The emphasis on size and speed means more important issues are often 
ignored or at best given short shrift. For example, if you compare two hard 
drives, you might think the faster drive is the better choice. But the faster 
drive may also run noticeably hotter and be much louder and less reliable. 
In that situation, the slower drive is probably the better choice. 
• Integrated (or embedded) components are often preferable to stand-
alone components. Many motherboards include integrated features such 
as video, audio, and LAN adapters.The integrated video on modern moth-
erboards suffices for most purposes. Only hardcore gamers and others 
with special video requirements need to buy a separate video adapter. 
IN THIS CHAPTER 
Choosing Components 
Buying Components 
Final Words 
Ron Morse Comments 
Conventional 
wisdom 
is that a 
change 
in performance 
has to be 
on the order of 25% to 30% before it 
becomes 
immediately 
obvious. 
This 
doesn't mean that small 
improve-
ments aren't important, 
but it does 
mean you probably 
won't 
notice 
them until you realize that a job that 
used to take many minutes 
doesn't 
take quite as many minutes as it 
used to. 
33 

Bang for the Buck 
To find the sweet spot, just 
compare 
the price of a component 
to its per-
formance or capacity. For example, 
if one processor costs $ 175 and the 
next model up is 10% faster, it should 
cost at most 10% more. If it costs 
more than that, you've reached the 
wrong part of the 
price/performance 
curve, and you'll be paying a premi-
um for little additional 
performance. 
Similarly, before you buy a hard 
drive, divide the price by the capacity. 
At the low end, you may find that a 
small hard drive costs more per giga-
byte than a larger drive. At the high 
end, a very large drive probably 
costs 
significantly more per gigabyte 
than 
a medium-capacity 
model. The sweet 
spot is in the middle, where the cost 
per gigabyte is lowest. Make sure, 
though, that you compare apples to 
apples. Don't compare a 
quad-core 
or six-core processor to a dual-core 
processor, for example, or a 7,200 
RPM hard drive to an SSD 
model. 
Of course, all of that assumes 
that 
you care about bang for the buck. 
If you have the budget and perfor-
mance is more important to you 
than cost, by all means buy the 
$ 1,000 processor. You'll have the fast-
est system possible, which for a lot of 
people is no small thing. 
The best integrated audio—such as that on motherboards that use Intel 
and NVIDIA chipsets—is good enough for almost anyone. Integrated LAN 
adapters are more than good enough for nearly any desktop system. 
The advantages of integrated components are threefold: cost, reliability, 
and compatibility. A motherboard with integrated components costs 
little or no more than a motherboard without such components, which 
can save you $100 or more by eliminating the cost of inexpensive stand-
alone equivalents. Because they are built into the motherboard, integrat-
ed components are usually more reliable than standalone components. 
Finally, because the motherboard maker has complete control over the 
hardware and drivers, integrated components usually cause fewer com-
patibility issues and device conflicts. 
• Buying at the "sweet spot" is almost always the best decision. The sweet 
spot is the level at which the price/performance ratio is minimized—that 
is, where you get the most bang for your buck. For example, Intel sells a 
broad range of desktop processors, from $50 dual-core Celerons to $1,000 
six-core Core ¡7 processors. Dual-core Celeron processors are cheap, but 
slow. Six-core Core ¡7 processors are fast, but hideously expensive. There 
must be a happy medium. The sweet spot for processors is around $ 175 
(give or take $25) for a retail-boxed CPU. If you spend much less, you get 
less performance per dollar spent. If you spend much more, you get only 
a slight performance increase. This sweet spot has stayed the same for 
years. The same $175 buys you a faster processor every time Intel cuts 
prices, but that $175 processor has always been the bang-for-the-buck 
leader. 
• It's almost always worth paying more for better quality and reliability. If 
the specs for two components look very similar but one sells for less than 
the other, it's a safe bet that someone cut corners to reduce the price of 
the cheaper component. The cheaper component may use inferior ma-
terials, have shoddy build quality or poor quality control, or the manu-
facturer may provide terrible tech support or a very short warranty. If it's 
cheaper, there's a reason for it. Count on it. The best way to avoid the trap 
of poor-quality components is to be willing to pay a bit more for qual-
ity. The price difference between a mediocre product and a top-quality 
one can be surprisingly small. Throughout this book, we recommend only 
high-quality products.That's not to say that products we don't list are bad, 
but those we do recommend are good. 
• Brand names really do mean something, but not all brands are good ones. 
Brand names imply certain performance and quality characteristics, and 
most manufacturers take pains to establish and maintain those links in 
consumers'minds. Different brand names are often associated with differ-
ent quality and/or performance levels in a good/better/best hierarchy, in 
the same way that General Motors sells its inexpensive models as Chevro-
lets and its expensive models as Cadillacs. 
For example, ViewSonic makes several lines of LCD displays, including its 
high-end Pro Series, its midrange Graphics Series, and its entry-level Value 
Series. ViewSonic also maintains a separate brand name for its cheapest 
34 
Chapter 2 

products: OptiQuest. If you buy a Pro Series monitor, you know it's going 
to cost more than the lower-end models, but you also know it's going to 
have excellent performance and will likely be quite reliable. Conversely, if 
you buy an OptiQuest monitor, you know it's going to be cheap and not 
very good. A few manufacturers also have special high-end brand names, 
although that practice has declined as margins have eroded throughout 
the industry. 
• If you're on a tight budget, shop by brand name rather than by speci-
fications. For the same price, it's usually better to choose a component 
that has less impressive specifications but a better brand name rather 
than a component with better specifications but a poor brand name. For 
example, if you can't afford a high-end 24" Samsung LCD display, but a 
22" Samsung model with similar specifications or a Brand-X 24" display 
with similar specifications is within your budget, choose the 22" Samsung 
model. It may be a bit smaller than the Brand-X display, but the Samsung 
will almost certainly have better display quality and be more reliable. In 
other words, if you have to choose between better quality and higher per-
formance, choose quality every time. 
• Similarly, if you're choosing between two lines offered by a particular 
manufacturer, choose the better-quality model. For example, if a display 
manufacturer offers a 24" model from its entry-level line at about the 
same price as a 22" model from its premium line, choose the latter. You 
give up a bit of screen size, but display quality will be higher, and possi-
bly reliability as well. Conversely, if the manufacturer offers good/better/ 
best lines, you'll probably get optimum bang for the buck by choosing 
the midsize "better" model rather than the small "best" model or the large 
"good" model. 
In this chapter, we tell you what we've learned based on more than 20 years 
of experience buying PC hardware components. By necessity, the project sys-
tems in this book are built with specific components. The obvious problem 
with any such list of specific components is that new products are constantly 
introduced and older products discontinued. A product that is leading-edge 
when we proof the final galleys may be midrange by the time the book ar-
rives in bookstores and discontinued by the time you read it. Nor is this prob-
lem limited to printed books; even enthusiast websites can't keep up with the 
flood of new products. So, rather than a detailed discussion of such ephem-
eral details, this chapter focuses heavily on the important characteristics of 
hardware components—the things you need to understand to make good 
decisions. 
Fortunately, progress in PC components is generally evolutionary rather than 
revolutionary, and the quality level you can expect from any particular man-
ufacturer is pretty predictable. If we use, for example, a Seagate Barracuda 
7200.12 hard drive in one of the project systems, and that exact drive is no lon-
ger available when you start ordering parts for your own system, it's probably 
safe to assume that a similar 7200.12 model will do the job just as well. And if 
Seagate has by then introduced a 7200.13 series, it's very likely that those new 
models will be at least as fast and reliable as the earlier models. 
A Rose by Any Other Name 
It's not uncommon 
for several 
manufacturers 
to relabel identical or 
very similar products from the same 
Pacific Rim factory. For example, 
the factory that makes many of the 
cases thatAntec sells under its brand 
names also makes similar cases that 
are sold under other brand 
names 
such as Chieftec and Chenming. 
Con-
trary to web wisdom, that doesn't 
mean those similar products 
are 
identical to the Antec cases. Different 
companies 
can specify different 
levels of finish, quality control, and 
so on. Acasewith 
the Antec 
nameon 
it meets Antec's quality 
standards. 
An "identical"case 
with a different 
brand name may not be of the same 
quality. 
This practice is also common 
with 
power supplies. Many 
well-regarded 
brand-name 
power supplies are in 
fact manufactured 
by a 
company 
other than the one whose name they 
bear. For example, many Antec and 
PC Power & Cooling power 
supplies 
are actually made 
bySeasonic, 
which also sells power supplies 
under 
its own name. Once again, 
don't 
assume that two very similar 
power 
supplies are of equal quality 
simply 
because they were made by the 
same manufacturer. 
Seasonic-
manufactured 
power supplies that 
are branded by Antec, PC Power & 
Cooling, orSeasonic 
meet those 
companies' 
respective quality 
control 
standards. The same is not 
necessar-
ily true of a similar power supply with 
a different company's 
name on it. 
Choosing and Buying Components 
35 

With so many alternatives, it's easy to buy the right part from the wrong 
source. Accordingly, the last part of this chapter distills what we've learned 
about how and whereto buy PC hardware components. When you finish read-
ing this chapter, you'll have all the information you need to make the right 
buying decisions. 
Online Customer Product Reviews 
Most online computer product vendors, notably NewEgg, have active user review 
sections for the products they carry. We suggest you take those reviews with a grain 
of salt, if not a boatload. 
Here's the fundamental 
problem. Say 1,000 people buy a particular product 
from 
NewEgg. Of those 1,000 buyers, 900 are satisfied with the product, 90 are delighted, 
and 10 are unhappy. As any marketing executive will tell you, when someone 
loves 
a product, he'll tell a friend; when someone hates a product, he'll tell the whole 
Internet. 
And that's exactly what happens. All 10 unhappy 
buyers write one-star 
reviews. 
Maybe a tenth of the delighted buyers write four- or five-star reviews. And 
maybe 
1 % of the satisfied buyers write reviews, which are typically three, four, or five stars. A 
product that satisfied 99% of buyers ends up with 28 reviews, averaging 
a mediocre 
three stars. 
To make matters worse, some or all of those one-star reviews may not be the prod-
uct's fault at all. A rebate company 
may have been lax in fulfilling rebate requests, 
and many of the buyers who didn't get their rebate checks will take it out on the 
product. It's also common 
for buyers to blame a product for their own errors. For 
example, probably 99% of the motherboards 
returned to online vendors as defective 
are actually perfectly good. The buyer simply made a mistake such as forgetting to 
connect a cable or installing an incompatible 
processor or memory. 
So, our advice about online component 
reviews is not to take them too seriously. If 
a product has hundreds of reviews and a very high average rating, it's probably 
safe 
to assume that it's a good product. Conversely, if a product has hundreds of reviews 
and a bad to mediocre rating, it may indeed be a bad product, but it may also be a 
good product that's simply suffering from "piling on." (Believe it or not, many 
bad 
reviews are written by people who've never actually used the product; the same is 
true, but to a much lesser exten t, for good reviews.) Finally, if a product has rela-
tively few reviews (say, less than 50), the average rating, good or bad, is statistically 
meaningless. 
Enthusiast Website Product Reviews 
Conversely, some of the top-tier enthusiast websites are excellent sources of reliable 
product reviews, particularly for gaming-related 
components 
such as fast video 
adapters, high-end processors, premium memory, solid-state drives, and so on. They 
may tell you more than you ever wanted to know about the technical details of a 
product, and they may get excited about performance 
differences that are 
immate-
rial to you, but their reviews are generally unbiased and reliable. 
Two sites we trust are AnandTech 
(http://www.anandtech.com) 
and Tom's 
Hardware 
(http://www.tomshardware.com). 
54 Chapter 2 

Choosing Components 
The biggest advantage of building your own PC is that you can choose which 
components to use. If you buy a cookie-cutter system from Dell or HP, most 
of the decisions are made for you. You can specify a larger hard drive, more 
memory, or a different monitor, but the range of options is quite limited. Want 
a better power supply, a quieter CPU cooler, or a motherboard with built-in 
FireWireand enhanced RAID support?Tough luck. Those options aren't on the 
table. 
When you build from scratch, you get to choose every component that goes 
into your system. You can spend a bit more here and a bit less there to get ex-
actly the features and functions you want at the best price. It's therefore worth 
devoting some time and effort to component selection, but there are so many 
competing products available that it's difficult to separate the marketing hype 
from reality. 
The reality is that you get what you pay for—or perhaps we should say, you 
get no more than you pay for. If you're not careful, you can get much less than 
you pay for, whether by choosing the wrong components, or the wrong ven-
dor, or both. To avoid that problem, you need to educate yourself about what's 
important and what's not when it comes to choosing components. 
Still, we understand that many people will want specifics, so we'll do our best 
to provide them by naming names and offering advice. We don't doubt that 
some people will take issue with some of our recommendations and advice. 
We don't claim that the products we recommend are "the best"in any absolute 
sense, because we haven't tested every product on the market and because 
what's "best" is inherently subjective. What's "best" for us may be just "very 
good"from your point of view; however, it almost certainly won't be "terrible." 
So, keeping all of that in mind, the following sections describe the manufac-
turers we recommend for the various components you'll need to build your 
own PC. 
Case 
The case (or chassis) is the foundation of any system. Its obvious purpose is 
to support the power supply, motherboard, drives, and other components. 
Its less-obvious purposes are to contain the radio-frequency (RF) interference 
produced by internal components, to ensure proper system cooling, and to 
subdue the noise produced by the power supply, drives, fans, and other com-
ponents with moving parts. 
A good case performs all of these tasks well and is a joy to work with. It is 
strongly built and rigid. Adding or removing components is quick and easy. 
All the holes line up. There are no sharp edges or burrs. A bad case is painful 
to work with, sometimes literally. It may have numerous exposed razor-sharp 
edges and burrs that cut you even if you're careful. It is cheaply constructed of 
flimsy material that flexes excessively. Tolerances are very loose, sometimes so 
much so that you have to bend sheet metal to get a component to fit, if that is 
even possible. Using a cheap case is a sure way to make your system-building 
experience miserable. 
Choosing and Buying Components 55 

Depending on the case size and type, expect to pay at least $50 for a good 
basic case without a power supply, and $100 or more for that case with a good 
power supply. Case and power supply quality is one of the major areas for 
cost-cutting in mass-market systems, many of which use a case and power 
supply combo that would retail for half the price of decent components, or 
less. If you must economize on these components, we strongly recommend 
that you buy an inexpensive case without a power supply and install a good 
power supply. Using a cheap power supply almost guarantees problems—if 
not initially, then certainly as the system ages. 
Here are some important considerations when choosing a case: 
Build quality and price 
Build quality correlates closely to price. Better and more expensive cases 
are heavier, stiffer, and have no dangerous sharp edges or burrs. Panels 
are heavy-gauge and fit to tight tolerances, often with captive screws, and 
supplemental case fans are of good quality. One exception to the heavier-
is-better rule is portable gaming cases, which are often made from alu-
minum or a light alloy but are engineered to provide stiffness and tight 
tolerances. 
Size and type 
Mainstream cases are generally categorized as server, full-tower, mid-
tower, mini-tower, microtower, desktop, or slimline.There are also various 
special-purpose cases available that are optimized for specific purposes, 
such as media center/home theater cases and gaming cases. For maxi-
mum flexibility and expandability as well as better cooling, choose a large 
case. If size is a major consideration, choose the smallest case that will ac-
cept the motherboard that you want to use and has sufficient drive bays 
for all of the drives you want to install. 
Motherboard form factor compatibility 
Motherboards are available in numerous form factors, which differ in 
size and (sometimes) mounting hole positions. Fortunately, only three of 
those form factors are commonly used for desktop motherboards. From 
largest to smallest, these include: ATX (305 mm x 244 mm board size), 
microATX or nATX (244 mm x 244 mm) and Mini-ITX (170 mm x 170 mm). 
With very few exceptions, cases built to accept these form factors are 
backward-compatible. An A T X case can accept an A T X , |jATX, or Mini-ITX 
motherboard. A | j A T X case can accept a | j A T X or Mini-ITX motherboard, 
and a Mini-ITX case can accept only a Mini-ITX motherboard. 
A few motherboards designed for gaming systems or servers use the Ex-
tended ATX (EATX) form factor, which has a board size of 305 mm x 330 mm. 
These motherboards fit only EATX cases, which can also accept mother-
boards in any of the three most common form factors. 
56 Chapter 2 

Bundled power supply 
Many mainstream cases include a power supply, which may or may not 
be suitable for your purposes. Case quality and power supply quality 
generally go hand-in-hand. We've never seen a cheap case that included 
anything other than a junk power supply, and we've seldom seen a high-
quality case that included anything less than a midrange power supply. 
Expensive and special-purpose cases—particularly server and gaming 
cases—often do not include a power supply, on the assumption that 
you'll want to choose a power supply to fit your particular needs. Media 
center/home theater cases may or may not include a power supply. Un-
less you just happen to love a case that comes only with a bundled power 
supply, we recommend that you buy the case and power supply sepa-
rately. You may pay a few bucks more than you would for a case with a 
bundled power supply, but you'll also probably get a better power supply. 
Be wary of very small cases and bare-bones systems like those sold by 
Shuttle, Foxconn, MSI, and others that come with a bundled power supply. 
Some of these cases use power supplies with proprietary physical form 
factors, which means the only source for a replacement power supply is 
the original vendor. These proprietary power supplies may be extremely 
expensive or no longer available when your original power supply needs 
to be replaced. If you buy such a case, either make sure that it accepts 
industry-standard replacement power supplies or resign yourself to pay-
ing through the nose to replace the power supply when it inevitably fails. 
Front-panel connectors 
Most cases provide front-panel connectors for USB and audio. Some also 
provide connectors for FireWire and/or eSATA, which are used to connect 
external hard drives, camcorders, and similar devices. A few cases include 
a built-in front-panel card reader, which is useful for transferring files from 
a digital camera or camcorder. If a case you otherwise like lacks one or 
more front-panel connectors that you want, you can purchase a port ex-
tender that fits in an open external drive bay and provides the connectors 
you need. 
Case material 
Nearly all cases use some plastic, particularly for the front panel, but the 
frame should be of stiff, heavy-gauge steel or aluminum, as should the 
side and top panels. Steel is rigid but heavy. Aluminum frames can be 
as rigid as steel, but are much lighter. In fact, the first time UPS showed 
up with an aluminum case without a power supply installed, we picked 
up the shipping box and thought they'd forgotten to put the case in the 
box. All other things being equal, an aluminum case costs more than a 
similar steel case but provides similar rigidity. Some sources claim that 
aluminum cases provide superior cooling, but we've never been able to 
confirm these claims. We suggest that you choose a steel case unless sys-
tem weight is a major concern, such as for a LAN party gaming system or 
when building a stackable media center/home theater system. 
Choosing and Buying Components 57 

Cooling 
Inexpensive cases often make no special provisions for better cooling, and 
may even lack mounting positions for supplemental cooling fans. What 
fans and mounting positions they do include are often small—60 mm to 
80 mm. (Of course, small cases are limited in both the number and size of 
fan positions.) Better cases have multiple fan-mounting positions, usually 
of larger size—typically 90 mm up to 250 mm (!), depending on the size 
of the case—and may have fans already installed in some or all positions. 
Mid range cases usually include inexpensive fans, which are not the quiet-
est or most durable models available. Premium cases are often supplied 
without fans, on the theory that you'll want to choose your own fans, but 
those that have fans installed usually include midrange or better fans. 
Some high-end gaming cases include provisions for installing liquid cool-
ing, and a few of those have a radiator and tubing preinstalled. 
Because larger fans move more air at slower (and quieter) rotation speeds, 
we recommend that you choose a case with as many and as large fan 
mounting positions as possible. If you'll be running hot components, such 
as a gaming video card (or two) or an extreme processor, look for a case 
that includes ductwork designed to exhaust hot air from those compo-
nents directly to the outside of the case. 
Quiet PC technology 
Many premium cases include various quiet PC technologies, such as 
sound-deadening panels, vibration isolators in the drive bays, thermally 
controlled case fans, and so on. Although some of these features can be 
added via third-party products, if noise level is a major consideration we 
suggest that you purchase a case that's designed from the ground up to 
minimize noise. 
Recommended case brands 
There are many good case brands, but Antec (http://www.antec.com) stands 
out from the crowd. Antec offers a huge range of cases, from inexpensive basic 
cases to premium special-purpose cases, with or without bundled power sup-
plies. The bundled power supplies, most of which are actually made by Sea-
sonic, are generally excellent. Over the last decade, we've used Antec cases for 
probably 95% of the systems we've built, and we've never been disappointed. 
Cooler Master (http://www.coolermaster.com) is Antec's major competitor 
in the PC case segment. It's a well-respected brand that's particularly popu-
lar amongst gamers. Cooler Master offers a broad selection of case types and 
styles, although not quite as broad as Antec. The Cooler Master cases we've 
seen are similar to Antec cases in quality and features, although we generally 
prefer Antec's bundled power supplies. 
Lian Li (http://www.iian-ii.com) makes one or two entry-level cases but is pri-
marily known for its high-end cases, most of which use aluminum construc-
tion and sell for premium prices. Construction quality is excellent on every 
Lian Li case we've seen, and they're particularly popular for portable gaming 
systems and media center/home theater systems. Most Lian Li cases are sold 
without a power supply. 
58 Chapter 2 

Silverstone (http://www.silverstonetek.com) was originally best known for its 
media center/home theater cases but has since branched out to become a 
full-line case supplier, selling an extremely broad range of cases—everything 
from entry-level mini-tower cases to cube-style small form factor cases to super-
premium media center/home theater cases. We have limited experience with 
Silverstone cases, but all of those we've seen have been of excellent quality. 
Most Silverstone cases are sold without a power supply. 
Thermaltake (http://www.thermaltakeusa.com) cases are particularly popular 
among extreme gamers—including those who want a case designed from the 
ground up for liquid cooling—but Thermaltake also offers a complete range 
of general-purpose cases, including small form factor and media center/home 
theater cases. Construction quality is generally excellent. Most Thermaltake 
cases are sold without a power supply. 
Power Supply 
The power supply is one of the most important components in a PC, yet most 
people give it little consideration. In addition to providing reliable, stable, 
closely regulated power to all system components, the power supply draws 
air through the system to cool it. A marginal or failing power supply can cause 
many problems, some of which may be very subtle and difficult to trackdown. 
Most problems are not subtle, however. A poor or marginal power supply is 
likely to cause system crashes, memory errors, and data corruption and may 
fail catastrophically, taking other system components with it. 
Here are some important considerations when choosing a power supply: 
Form factor 
Unless you buy a case with a bundled power supply, the first thing to 
determine is which power supply form factor(s) will fit the case you've 
chosen. Full-tower cases and most mid- and mini-tower cases accept 
ATX12Vor ATX12V/EPS12V power supplies. Smaller cases, including most 
pATX cases, may accept only smaller power supplies that use the SFX12V, 
TFX12V, or a proprietary form factor. Mini-ITX cases accept Mini-ITX power 
supplies. 
Wattage rating 
Wattage ratings are not standardized, so you can't simply compare 
numbers. High-quality power supplies have wattage ratings speci-
fied at 40° C or 50° C. Cheap power supplies are often rated at 25° C or 
even 20° C, which unrealistically inflates their capabilities. For example, 
a power supply rated for 500W output at 20 °C may actually be able 
to deliver only 300W at the higher temperatures actually present in a 
working power supply. 
Size your power supply according to the system configuration, taking 
into account the wattage required by the processor and video adapter. 
The power draw of mainstream processors ranges from less than 30W 
to more than 130W. Video power draw ranges from just a few watts for 
Choosing and Buying Components 59 

most integrated video adapters to 150W or more for some high-end gam-
ing video adapters, and 400W or more for extreme gaming systems with 
dual or quad video adapters. 
Main power connector 
The original ATX specification and the ATX12V 1 .X specifications defined a 
20-pin main power connector, which provides power to the motherboard. 
The ATX12V 2.0 specification (and later versions) expanded the main pow-
er connector to a 24-pin version that is a superset of the original 20-pin 
connector. That is, the 20 original pins remain the same, and 4 additional 
pins have been added to one end of the connector. 
Most (but not all) current motherboards and power supplies have the 24-
pin connector. Many 24-pin power supplies use a split connector, which 
allows them to function as a 20-pin or 24-pin power supply, depending on 
which type your motherboard requires. Most 20-pin motherboards can 
accept the 24-pin connector directly simply by allowing the extra 4 pins 
to overhang the motherboard connector, but some motherboards have 
capacitors or other components that prevent a 24-pin plug from being in-
serted completely into the 20-pin socket. Sometimes it's possible to bend 
the interfering component slightly to provide clearance for the 24-pin 
power supply plug, but 24-to-20 pin adapter cables are readily available 
and a much safer solution. 
Even if you use a 20-pin motherboard, we recommend buying a 24-pin 
power supply. 
Supplemental power connectors 
Early PCs required only the main power connector to power the mother-
board and peripheral power connectors to power drives and other peripher-
als. As the power requirements of newer and faster processors and video 
adapters continued to climb, supplemental power connectors were add-
ed to power supplies to meet these larger power requirements. Modern 
power supplies provide the following supplemental connectors: 
+ 12Vpower connector 
All current ATX12V power supplies provide a four-pin (2x2) +12V 
power connector, which connects directly to the motherboard near 
the processor and provides power to the processor. 
Power supplies that meet both the current ATX12V and EPS12V stan-
dards provide at least one eight-pin (4x2) secondary+12V power con-
nector and, optionally, a tertiary +12V power connector that uses the 
same four-pin arrangement as the connector on a standard ATX12V 
2.X power supply. To ensure backward compatibility with ATX12V 
motherboards, most EPS12V power supplies implement the second-
ary eight-pin connector or connectors as a splittable pair of four-pin 
2x2 connectors, either of which may be used to provide processor 
power on an ATX12V motherboard. 
60 Chapter 2 

Most standard motherboards require only a single four-pin +12V power 
connector, which is provided by any current ATX12V power supply. 
You need concern yourself with this issue only if the motherboard you 
use requires additional +12V power connectors, which very few desk-
top boards do. 
PCIe power connector 
Most entry-level and midrange video adapters can be powered by 
the PCIe slot itself, but the very fast video adapters used in some gam-
ing systems may require much more power than the PCIe slot can 
provide. ATX12V 2.1 and later power supplies include one or more 
PCIe power connectors to provide additional power to the video 
adapter(s). These connectors plug directly into the video card, sup-
plying supplemental power beyond the power that is provided by 
the PCIe slot itself. 
The original PCIe power connector, defined in the ATX12 2.1 speci-
fication, is a six-pin (3x2) connector that must be capable of provid-
ing up to 75W of supplemental power to a video adapter. ATX12V 
2.2 defined an eight-pin PCIe power connector, which is capable of 
supplying another 150W to a video adapter. The eight-pin adapter 
is backward-compatible with the six-pin adapter, so a video adapter 
that requires a six-pin PCIe power connector can be powered by an 
eight-pin PCIe power connector. The converse is not true, because a 
video adapter that accepts an eight-pin PCIe power connector may 
draw more current than the six-pin PCIe power connector can supply. 
Current ATX12V power supplies provide at least one six-pin PCIe pow-
er connector. High-wattage power supplies may provide several PCIe 
power connectors (six-pin, eight-pin, or some combination thereof). 
For example, the PC Power & Cooling TurboCool 1200, a power supply 
popular among extreme gamers, provides three six-pin PCIe power 
connectors and three six/eight-pin PCIe power connectors. 
Other than gaming systems, very few systems require the PCIe power 
connector at all, so most builders need not concern themselves with 
the number or type of PCIe power connectors present on the power 
supply. If you are building an extreme gaming system, pay close at-
tention to the number and type of PCIe power connectors, particu-
larly if you plan to install two or more video cards. 
Peripheral power connectors 
All power supplies provide some or all of the following peripheral power 
connectors: 
Berg power connector 
Some current power supplies no longer include the obsolete four-pin 
Berg power connector. This connector was used to power floppy disk 
drives, which are now nearly extinct. (Of the few floppy diskdrives still 
available, most of them, including internal models, are USB-powered.) 
Choosing and Buying Components 61 

Choosing Components 
Ron Morse Comments 
Always check the box. Most of the 
time a product requiring a particular 
power connector or two will come 
with converter cables. The converter 
cables have Molex sockets on one 
end (Molex being sort of the Rosetta 
Stone of PC power connectors) 
and a 
plug for whatever the product 
needs 
on the other. 
If for some reason you encounter a 
device that needs a power 
connector 
that isn't already on your power 
sup-
ply or doesn't come with a converter, 
your local RadioShack 
store will 
almost certainly have whatyou 
need 
in stock. 
Absence of Berg connectors is no reason to reject a power supply. If 
for some reason you actually need a Berg connector, you can buy an 
inexpensive Molex-Berg adapter cable. Some power supplies that do 
not include Berg connectors include such an adapter cable in the box. 
Molex power connector 
All current power supplies still include the obsolescent Molex power 
connector. The Molex power connector was originally used to pow-
er ATA/IDE and earlier types of hard drives and is still used today to 
power case fans, front-panel lights, and some internal peripherals. 
SATA power connector 
The SATA power connector is the current standard for powering in-
ternal peripherals, primarily hard drives and optical drives. There are 
actually three types of SATA power connector. The 15-pin Standard 
SATA power connector is used for powering optical drives and 3.5" 
hard drives in desktop systems and is the type you'll find on any cur-
rent desktop power supply. 
The six-pin Slimline SATA power connector is used to power optical 
drives and 2.5" hard drives in notebook systems and some Mini-ITX 
and other small form factor systems. The nine-pin Micro SATA power 
connector is used to power 1.8" hard drives in notebook systems. If 
you need to install a peripheral that requires a Slimline or Micro SATA 
power connector in a desktop system, you can purchase a Standard-
to-Slimline or Standard-to-Micro SATA power adapter cable. 
For mainstream systems, nearly any current power supply provides 
enough SATA power connectors to power all of the drives. If you are 
building a server that will have many hard drives installed, make sure 
you have sufficient SATA power connectors for all of the hard drives 
and optical drives you plan to install. (We once built a tower system 
that contained 12 internal drives; we ran out of drive bays and SATA 
power connectors at the same time.) The length of the SATA power 
cables is seldom an issue unless you are building a full-tower system 
populated with a lot of drives. In that situation, pay careful attention 
to the lengths of the SATA power cables and the positions of the con-
nectors on the cables. 
Manufacturer 
Many power supply vendors don't actually manufacture power supplies, 
but simply relabel power supplies made by other companies. That's not 
necessarily a bad thing. For example, two of the most reputable power 
supply vendors, Antec and PC Power & Cooling, purchase most or all of 
their power supplies from other companies and rebrand them. Some first-
rate companies, notably Seasonic, manufacture and sell power supplies 
under their own name and also distribute power supplies to other com-
panies for relabeling. Still other companies do all three: manufacture and 
sell power supplies under their own brand names, manufacture power 
supplies for relabeling by other companies, and buy power supplies from 
other manufacturers and put their own brand names on them. 
44 
Chapter 2 

About the only way to determine which company actually made a partic-
ular power supply is to check the UL label and look up the manufacturer 
in a database. Here's one website that maintains such a list: 
http://www.jonnyguru.com/modules.php?name=NDArticles&file=print&nd 
ar_id=24 
Some power supply manufacturers produce only cheap power supplies. 
Some produce a wide range of models, from cheap to first-rate units. A 
few produce only high-quality power supplies. Among the manufacturers 
(as opposed to brand names) we've found to be consistently reliable are 
Channel Well (USA), FSP/Sparkle, Seasonic, and Win-Tact. 
Here are some less important things to consider when choosing a power 
supply: 
Modular power supply cables 
Many power supplies have fixed power cables. If you're building a system 
in a relatively large case, that's not a problem; there are plenty of places to 
tuck unused power cables out of the way. But in smaller systems, space is 
at a premium. The last thing you want is unused power cables cluttering 
up the available space, blocking air flow and interfering with fans. That's 
why some power supplies use modular cables. The cables that are always 
required—the main power cable, the +12V motherboard power cable, 
and perhaps one peripheral power cable—are permanently affixed to the 
power supply. You can connect optional cables, such as the PCIe power 
cable and additional peripheral power cables, only if you need them. 
There are several jacks on the power supply body that accept PCIe power 
cable(s) and additional peripheral power cables, allowing you to install 
only those cables you actually need. Most modular power supplies come 
with a good selection of optional cables, but if you need extra cables of 
a particular type you can usually buy them separately from the company 
that makes the power supply. 
All other things being equal, a power supply that provides modular cables 
is usually a bit more expensive than one that does not. More importantly, 
it is also a bit less reliable, at least in theory, because it uses plugs and jacks 
rather than soldered connections. On balance, we tend to use a modular 
power supply when we build a small system and a standard power supply 
when we build a full-size system, but the difference is not enough either 
way to make it a major decision factor. Treat modular power cables as a 
tiebreaker if you're choosing between two otherwise similar power sup-
plies. Otherwise, don't worry about them. 
Efficiency 
Typical power supplies of a few years ago had efficiencies around 70%, 
which meant that 100W of AC input was required to provide 70W of DC 
output, with the remaining 30W simply producing waste heat inside the 
power supply. Most current power supplies are rated at 80% or higher ef-
ficiency, and the most efficient exceed 90%.The issue is not simply wasted 
power and higher electricity bills; it's that waste heat. Heat is the enemy of 
PCs, and it's worthwhile to reduce waste heat whenever possible. 
Choosing and Buying Components 63 

The efficiency of any power supply varies with load. Efficiency is maxi-
mum at somewhere near the middle of its range. For example, a power 
supply that is accurately rated for 400W maximum wattage will be most 
efficient somewhere near 200W output, with efficiency gradually decreas-
ing as the load approaches either 0 % or 100%. That's why it's a mistake to 
buy too much power supply for your system. If your power supply is rou-
tinely operating at, say, 25% of rated wattage, the good news is that it'll 
probably last forever, but the bad news is that it's operating inefficiently. 
Conversely, it's a mistake to buy too little power supply. If your power sup-
ply routinely operates at 90% of rated capacity, it's also operating very 
inefficiently and will probably die an early death. 
Small differences in power supply efficiency may be significant if you're a 
corporation with a fleet of thousands of desktop or server PCs. Otherwise, 
give preference to the more efficient unit, but don't make it a deciding 
factor. 
Power-factor correction 
Power supplies of a few years ago typically had power factors of 67% or so. 
In essence, that means those power supplies drew 150% of their nominal 
maximum input power two-thirds of the time and zero power one-third 
of the time. For example, a power supply with a rated input of 300W and 
operating at full capacity would actually draw 450W for two out of every 
three cycles of the 60 Hz AC current, and 0W for the third cycle. In other 
words, it would draw 450W for 1/30th of a second and then no power for 
the following 1/60th of a second. That may seem a small difference from 
drawing 300W continuously, but it has major implications for businesses 
that must size their computer rooms'electrical infrastructure and UPSs for 
the maximum current draw rather than an average draw. 
Some years ago, power supplies with power-factor correction (PFC) start-
ed becoming more common. Most of these early PFC power supplies 
used passive PFC, which amounts to a simple coil that helps smooth out 
current draw. These units were able to improve power factors to 75% or 
more. A few current PFC power supplies use passive PFC, but most use ac-
tive PFC, which uses live electronic components to smooth current draw. 
A typical active PFC power supply improves the power factor to 90% or 
more, and the best reach 99%. For home use, PFC efficiency is a minor 
issue, but it's still worth choosing a power supply with a high PFC factor, 
if only because such power supplies are generally better-made than units 
with lower PFC factors. 
Use the following guidelines to choose a power supply appropriate for your 
system: 
• Above all, make sure the power supply you buy fits your case and has 
the proper connectors foryour motherboard and, if applicable, your video 
card(s). 
• Assuming honest wattage ratings (like those from the vendors we recom-
mend), for a typical entry-level system, install a 300Wor larger power sup-
ply. For a mainstream system, install a 400W or larger power supply. For a 
high-performance system, install a 500Wor larger power supply (possibly 
64 Chapter 2 

Choosing Components 
much larger). If you're installing multiple video adapters in an NVIDIA SLI 
(Scalable Link Interface) or AMD/ATI CrossFireX configuration, make sure 
to use a power supply that is certified for such use. 
Recommended power supply brands 
There are many good power supply brands, but Antec (http://www.antec. 
com), PC Power & Cooling (http://www.pcpower.com), and Seasonic (http:// 
www.seasonicusa.com) stand out from the crowd. All three companies offer a 
wide range of power supplies to fit various needs. 
Processor 
A few years ago, if we checked an online PC component vendor for desktop 
processors, there would have been maybe eight or nine Intel processors on of-
fer and about the same number of AMD processors. When we started working 
on this section, we checked the NewEgg desktop processor page. There were 
44 AMD processors available, ranging in price from $36 to $296, and 42 Intel 
processors, ranging in price from $41 to $1,000. That's a lot of options. How 
can AMD and Intel possibly make that many different processors? And how 
can anyone make the best choice among 86 processors ranging in price from 
$36 to $1,000? 
The short answer is that AMD and Intel really don't make all that many differ-
ent processors. They each make only a few significantly different models, but 
offer those models in various speeds and with different combinations of minor 
features. It's like buying a car. The base model may have a dozen options avail-
able, and by the time you total up all the available permutations, that base 
model can be ordered in thousands of different configurations. 
A particular processor series may be available in numerous models that vary in 
speed, number of cores, number of threads per core, amount of L3 cache, pow-
er consumption, and so on. There is also frequently pricing overlap between 
models from different processor series. For example, the day we checked, no 
less than four different Intel processors were selling for exactly the same price, 
$199.99. Table 2-1 lists them. 
Table2-1. Four $200 Intel processor models 
1 Model 
Cores 
Threads 
Speed 
L3 cache 
Process 
Socket 
Power 
I 
Core 2 Quad 
Q9300 
4 
4(1/core) 
2.5 GHz 
6 M B 
45 nm 
LGA775 
95W 
Core ¡5-660 
2 
4(2/core) 
3.33 GHz 
4 M B 
32 nm 
LGA1156 
73W 
Core ¡5-661 
2 
4(2/core) 
3.33 GHz 
4 M B 
32 nm 
LGA1156 
87W 
Core ¡5-750 
4 
4(1/core) 
2.66 GHz 
8 M B 
45 nm 
LGA1156 
95W 
As Intel was fully aware when it set the prices for these four processors, their 
overall performance is very similar. Will a quad-core processor with a slower 
clock speed but more L3 cache outperform a dual-core processor with a faster 
clock speed and less L3 cache, or vice versa? Will a dual-core processor that 
runs two threads per core outperform a quad-core processor that runs only 
Choosing and Buying Components 
47 

one thread per core, or vice versa? The answer to all of those questions is 
both yes and no, because the winner will be different for different applica-
tions. Some applications are clock speed-bound, while others are core-bound, 
thread-bound, or L3 cache-bound—or some combination of those factors. 
The upshot is that on average you get $200 worth of performance, whichever 
of these $200 processors you use. 
But what about the Core ¡5-660 and -661 models? They appear to be identical 
other than in power consumption. Why would anyone pick the -661 for the 
same price as the -660, when the only difference appears to be that the -661 
draws more power? Here's where we get into really minor differences: 
• The -660 and -661 both include integrated Intel HD Graphics, but the -660 
uses a basic graphics frequency of 733 MHz, while the -661 boosts that to 
900 MHz for faster video performance. 
• The -660 supports Intel Virtualization Technology for Directed I/O (VT-d), 
a memory-mapping technique that has both advantages and disadvan-
tages. The -661 does not support VT-d. 
• The -660 supports Intel Trusted Execution Technology, which is essentially 
hardware support for Digital Restrictions Management (DRM). The -661 
has no such support. 
As it happens, we wanted to use a processor in this price range for our main-
stream system. So which one did we choose, and how did we choose it? All 
four are excellent processors, but... 
• We first eliminated the Core 2 Quad Q9300 from consideration. It's based 
on older technology, but that's not necessarily a problem. We ruled out 
the Core 2 Quad because it uses the obsolescent Socket LGA 775, which 
would have limited our choice of motherboards and future upgrade/ 
repair options. 
• We next eliminated the Core ¡5-750. It's an excellent processor, and for 
some people would be the best choice of the four. However, it has the 
highest power consumption of the remaining candidates, and lacks inte-
grated video. 
• With the choice down to the Core ¡5-660 and -661, the decision becomes 
almost a toss-up. In return for its somewhat higher power consumption, 
the -661 provides faster integrated graphics. The -661 lacks VT-d (which 
we'd kind of like to have just on general principles), but it also lacks hard-
ware DRM, which we'd definitely prefer not to have. 
On that basis, we chose the Intel Core ¡5-661, but the truth is that any of the 
other three would have done nearly as well. 
Most people spend too much time dithering about which processor to install. 
The only really important decision is how much to spend. After you make that 
decision, it really comes down to the minor details. Here are the considerations 
for each of the processor price ranges: 
Chapter 2 

Embedded ($60 to $ 150, including motherboard) 
Although tiny motherboards with embedded processors have been avail-
able for years, they didn't really become mainstream items until Intel in-
troduced its Atom series of low-power processors. Although the Atom is 
certainly no speed demon, it is fast enough for appliance systems, and 
even as the foundation for small, quiet, low-power general-purpose sys-
tems, such as a bedroom, kitchen, or kids' room PC. Atom processors 
aren't available separately at retail vendors. Intel sells them in bulk to 
OEMs and systems integrators, who build motherboards or complete sys-
tems around them. 
Purchasing an Intel Atom processor means also buying the motherboard 
it's soldered onto. Most such motherboards include "integrated every-
thing," including video, audio, LAN, and often WiFi. Such motherboards 
sell for $60 to $150 or more, depending on their features, their quality, 
and the Atom model they include. A very small minority of those mother-
boards are nATX, and there are even one or two full ATX models available, 
but the vast majority are Mini-ITX boards, designed to fit the smallest 
cases. 
The Atom is available in single- and dual-core models at various clock 
speeds. The slowest single-core models are appropriate for an appliance 
system such as a network-attached storage (NAS) box or a Linux router. 
The faster dual-core Atom processors are fast enough that most people 
consider them suitable for light general use, such as checking email or 
browsing the Web. (Robert's den system is a passively cooled and near-
ly silent dual-core Atom Mini-ITX box running Linux, which he uses for 
checking web mail and looking up details on IMDb while we're watching 
videos.) 
Entry level (under $ 100) 
Our praise of the Intel Atom aside, these are the least expensive proces-
sors that are really suitable for a general-purpose PC. At the bottom of 
this range—sub-$60 processors—are the least expensive socketed AMD 
Sempron and Intel Celeron models. These processors are low-power in 
both senses, providing limited CPU performance while consuming 65W 
or less. They are single-core or very low-end dual-core, and are suitable if 
you need more performance than the fastest Atom processors can pro-
vide but don't need the performance of a more expensive processor. 
The $60 to $100 price range is the realm of low-end dual- and triple-core 
processors and a few of the least expensive quad-core units. AMD owns 
this market segment with its Athlon II and Phenom II series of two-, three-, 
and four-core processors. In this price range, AMD processors offer more 
cores, more threads, and more general bang for the buck than similarly 
priced Intel processors. Any of these processors is an excellent choice for 
an entry-level general-purpose system. 
Choosing and Buying Components 67 

Mainstream ($100 to $200) 
Although AMD offers many processors in this price range, Intel owns this 
market segment. Intel processors simply provide more bang for the buck 
than AMD processors in this price range—sometimes dramatically so. 
In the lower half of this price range, dual-core Intel Core ¡3-series proces-
sors consistently edge out comparably priced dual- and triple-core AMD 
Phenom and Athlon II processors for most applications. In the upper half 
of this price range, dual- and quad-core Intel Core ¡5-series processors 
outperform comparably priced quad- and hex-core AMD processors. 
Mainstream processors, particular those from the upper half of the price 
range, are the best choice for most systems. They are noticeably faster 
than entry-level processors and cost only a little more, while at the same 
time they are only a bit slower than performance processors. 
Performance ($200 to $400) 
With the exception of its fastest hex-core model, AMD no longer offers 
desktop processors in the $200 and higher price range.This is the realm of 
fast Core 2 Quad and Core ¡5 processors and midrange Core ¡7 processors. 
Performance processors are popular primarily among serious gamers, 
who are willing to spend extra money in return for the slight competitive 
edge that one of these faster processors provides. 
Extreme ($400+) 
This rarefied range is thinly populated by a few of the fastest Intel Core ¡7 
processors, up to and including $1,000+ processors. Extreme processors 
are favored by well-heeled gamers and by business users like real-time 
commodity traders, to whom literally a fraction of a second may mean the 
difference between a huge profit and a huge loss. These processors are 
faster than mainstream and performance processors (sometimes notice-
ably so). If performance is the top priority and cost is not an issue, choose 
an extreme processor. Otherwise, spend that extra money on extra mem-
ory, a better display, a faster video card, or a larger hard drive. Or just keep 
the money in your bank account. 
Also consider the following issues when you choose a processor: 
• Even a $75 processor is fast enough for typical general-purpose comput-
ing, such as reading email, browsing the Web, running office productivity 
applications, burning DVDs, watching YouTube videos, and so on. If you 
never load the system heavily, you won't notice much difference between 
that $75 processor and a more expensive model. 
• Budget processors are hampered not just by their lower clock speeds and 
smaller number of cores and threads, but by small caches, which cripple 
performance, particularly if you work with large data sets (e.g., rendering 
video). In such situations, the performance difference between a budget 
processor and even a mainstream processor (let alone a performance or 
extreme processor) can be like the difference between night and day. For 
example, Robert uses a fast quad-core processor to render video much 
Chapter 2 

faster than real-time. (That is, rendering a 10-minute video takes only a 
couple of minutes.) Rendering that same 10-minute raw video segment 
on a budget processor might take 10 or 15 minutes, which is a huge dif-
ference when you're actually sitting staring at the screen waiting for the 
render to finish. 
• Processors in the "sweet spot" range—$150 to $200 for a retail-boxed 
processor—usually represent the best bang for the buck. They're notice-
ably faster than budget processors for even moderately demanding ap-
plications, and are fast enough even for CPU-intensive tasks like casual 
video rendering. 
• Buy the processor you need initially, rather than buying a slower proces-
sor now and planning to upgrade later. Processor upgrades, both AMD 
and Intel, are a minefield of compatibility issues. 
Recommended processors 
For appliance systems, the Intel Atom is hard to beat. Intel, ASUS, and GIGABYTE 
all offer very good Mini-ITX motherboards with embedded Atom processors. 
Zotec offers excellent Atom motherboards, but they're very pricey (too much 
so, we think). 
For budget systems, dual-, triple-, or quad-core AMD Athlon II or Phenom 
processors in the sub-$100 range offer more cores, threads, and overall perfor-
mance than similarly priced Intel processors, although Intel sells a lot of Pentium 
E- and G-series processors in this price range due to its reputation for quality, 
compatibility, and reliability. 
For mainstream and higher systems, it's all Intel. We recommend choosing 
your processor according to your budget from among the broad range of Intel 
Core ¡3, Core ¡5, and Core ¡7 processors. 
Heatsink/Fan Units (CPU Coolers) 
Modern processors may consume from 25W to 130W or more. Nearly all sys-
tems deal with the resulting heat by placing a massive metal heatsink in close 
contact with the processor and using a fan to draw air through the heatsink 
fins. This device is called a heatsink/fan (HSF) or CPU cooler. 
Most AMD and Intel processors are available with or without a bundled CPU 
cooler. The bulk, OEM, or white-box form includes just the processor. The retail-
boxed form costs a few bucks more and includes the same processor with a 
bundled CPU cooler (and, usually, a longer warranty). 
Bundled CPU coolers have gotten much better over the years. Although after-
market units may provide better cooling and lower noise levels, the bundled 
CPU cooler is generally more than good enough to cool the CPU while keep-
ing noise down to an acceptable level. Gamers, overclockers, and others who 
run their processors hot may find an aftermarket CPU cooler worth the extra 
money, as may those who want to build the quietest possible system. For most 
other people, a retail-boxed processor with bundled CPU cooler is the best 
choice. 
Choosing and Buying Components 69 

Use the following guidelines when choosing an HSF: 
• Make certain the HSF is rated for the exact processor you use. An HSF that 
physically fits a processor may not be sufficient to cool it properly. By defi-
nition, a bundled HSF is rated for the processor it comes with. 
• Make sure the HSF is usable with your motherboard and case. Some HSFs 
are incompatible with some motherboards because clamping the HSF 
into position may crush capacitors or other components near the proces-
sor socket. Good third-party CPU coolers often list compatibility with spe-
cific motherboard models. Check the website. Premium CPU coolers are 
usually physically large. If you intend to purchase such a cooler, make sure 
your case has enough clearance between the motherboard and cover 
panel for the cooler to fit. 
• Pay attention to noise ratings. Some high-efficiency HSFs designed for use 
by overclockers and other enthusiasts have very noisy fans. Other HSFs 
are nearly silent. The best (and most expensive) third-party CPU coolers 
are both highly efficient and very quiet. Note that these coolers are often 
supplied without a fan, which you must purchase separately from among 
the models recommended for that specific cooler. 
• Use the proper thermal compound. When you install an HSF, and each 
time you remove and replace it, use fresh thermal compound to ensure 
proper heat transfer.Thermal compound is available in theform of viscous 
thermal "goop"and as phase-change thermal pads, which melt as the pro-
cessor heats up and solidify as it cools down. Make sure that the thermal 
compound you use is approved by the processor maker and, if applicable, 
the cooler maker. 
Recommended CPU cooler brands 
Unless you have good reason to do otherwise, buy a retail-boxed CPU with a 
bundled cooler. If you need high-performance cooling or an extremely quiet 
cooler, purchase a CPU cooler made by Arctic Cooling (http://www.arctic-
cooling.com), Scythe (http://www.scythe-usa.com), Thermaltake (http://www. 
thermaltakeusa.com), orZalman (http://www.zalmanusa.com). 
Motherboard 
The motherboard is the main logic board around which a PC is built. It is the 
center of the PC, in the sense that every system component connects to the 
motherboard, directly or indirectly. The motherboard you choose determines 
which processors are supported, how much and what type of memory the 
system can use, what type of video adapters can be installed, the speed of 
communication ports, and many other key system characteristics. 
Here are some important considerations when choosing a motherboard: 
CPU socket 
The fundamental characteristic of a motherboard is the CPU socket, be-
cause it determines which processors physically fit that motherboard. 
There are two types of sockets: 
Chapter 2 

Choosing Components 
Intel sockets 
The oldest of the current Intel sockets is the obsolescent Socket LGA 
77., also known as Socket T. Socket LGA 775 processors and mother-
boards are still widely available, and are likely to remain so through 
at least 2011 and into 2012. It's not necessarily a bad idea to build a 
new system around an obsolescent socket—prices on older gear are 
often excellent—as long as you're aware that it may be difficult or 
impossible to find a replacement motherboard or processor two or 
three years down the road. At worst, you may need to replace both 
the motherboard and the processor if one or the other fails. Socket 
LGA 775 motherboards accept dual-core Pentium processors, single-
and dual-core Celeron processors, and Core 2 Duo and Core 2 Quad 
processors. 
Intel's current entry-level/mainstream socket is LGA 17i , also known 
as Socket H. With this socket, Intel moved functions formerly per-
formed by the separate northbridge section of the chipset onto the 
processor chip itself, which accounts for the need for almost 400 more 
pins than LGA 775. The high-speed Direct Media Interface (DMI) link 
formerly used to link the northbridge and southbridge sections of the 
chipset is now implemented within the processor package, as are the 
QuickPath Interconnect (QPI) formerly used to connect the processor 
to the I/O hub (southbridge), a PCI Express 2.0 x16 link for commu-
nication with a graphics adapter, and a dual-channel DDR3 memory 
controller. In effect, LGA 1156 moves all of the high-bandwidth func-
tions formerly performed by a separate northbridge onto the proces-
sor itself and leaves only the former southbridge chipset functions on 
the separate southbridge chip, now called the Platform Controller Hub 
(PCH). Socket LGA 1156 motherboards accept Core ¡3, Core ¡5, and 
Core ¡7 processors. LGA 1156 processors and motherboards are likely 
to remain Intel's mainstream desktop solution for the next few years. 
Intel's current performance socket is Socket LGA 136t, also known 
as Socket B. Like LGA 1156, LGA 1366 uses an external southbridge 
chip for USB and other communications functions, and incorporates 
a DDR3 memory controller on the processor (triple-channel DDR3, in 
this case). The major difference between LGA 1156 and LGA 1366 is 
that the latter moves PCI Express off the processor chip, using a QPI 
link to communicate with a separate partial northbridge chip that sup-
ports video and other PCI Express communications. Socket LGA 1366 
motherboards currently accept only Core ¡7 and Xeon (workstation/ 
server) processors. LGA 1366 processors and motherboards are likely 
to remain Intel's performance desktop solution for the next few years. 
AMD sockets 
Like Intel, AMD has three current processor sockets, but in AMD's case 
the three sockets are actually just very minor variations of one socket. 
In fact, the 940-pin Sockets AM2 and AM2+ and the 941-pin Socket 
Choosing and Buying Components 
53 

Choosing Components 
r A 
i Catch 22! 
i 
Motherboards 
sold at retail may not 
' 
have the most recent BIOS version. 
i 
This is not usually a problem, be-
i 
cause you can download 
and install 
1 
the most recent BIOS update 
once 
i 
you have your new system up and 
i 
running. 
i 
It becomes a major problem, 
though, 
1 
if the processor you buy for that 
, 
motherboard 
is not supported 
by 
i 
the older BIOS. Your system 
won't 
1 
boot because the old BIOS 
doesn't 
recognize the processor, and you 
i 
can't update the BIOS to recognize 
i 
the processor because your system 
' 
won't boot. 
Arrrrrghhhh! 
You might think you could avoid this 
i 
problem by checking the 
motherboard 
i 
web page for a detailed list ofsup-
1 
ported processors. The problem 
with 
i 
this is that the product page 
almost 
i 
always lists supported 
processors 
1 
for a motherboard 
with the latest 
i 
BIOS update installed. The best way 
i 
to avoid this problem is to buy your 
1 
motherboard 
from a 
high-volume 
dealer so that you'll get fresh stock. 
AM3 are pin-compatible physically, although a processor designed 
for one of those sockets will not necessarily operate in one of the 
other sockets. 
Socket AM2 dates from May 2006, when it replaced Sockets 754 and 
939 for Sempron and Athlon processors. Socket AM2 is characterized 
by its support for DDR2 memory, HyperTransport 2.0 operating at 
1.0 GHz, and one power plane to drive both cores and the Integrated 
Memory Controller (IMC). 
Although Socket AM2 processors have been discontinued, Socket 
AM2 motherboards are physically and electrically compatible with 
current Socket AM2+ and AM3 processors. Note, however, that us-
ing a later processor in an AM2 motherboard requires a BIOS update 
that may or may not be available from the manufacturer, and the old 
motherboard will not be able to take advantage of additional features 
supported by the newer processor. Although Socket AM2 mother-
boards may be available new for some time to come, don't buy one. 
Socket AM2+ is a transitional socket. The two major upgrades from 
Socket AM2 are the addition of HyperTransport 3.0 operating at 2.6 
GHz and split power planes, one of which powers the CPU cores and 
the other the IMC. Socket AM2+ motherboards can use AM2, AM2+, 
or AM3 processors, assuming that a suitable BIOS is available, and are 
often promoted as "Socket AM3-Ready," although they are limited to 
using DDR2 memory. Socket AM2+ motherboards are widely avail-
able and likely to remain so for some time to come. 
Socket AM3 is AMD's current mainstream socket. Socket AM3 differs 
from AM2+ in that it supports processors that use either DDR2 or 
DDR3 memory. 
If you intend to build an AMD-based system, buy a Socket AM2+ or 
(preferably) a Socket AM3 motherboard. 
Supported CPU types 
Just because a CPU physically fits the socket on a motherboard doesn't 
mean that CPU is compatible with that motherboard. Two issues affect 
compatibility: 
VRM support 
Voltage Regulator Modules (VRMs) on a motherboard supply power 
to the processor. VRMs are rated to deliver specific maximum current. 
If a particular processor draws more current than the VRMs can pro-
vide, that processor cannot be used on that motherboard. 
BIOS compatibility 
Even if a particular motherboard is compatible in every respect with 
a particular processor, that processor cannot be used in that moth-
erboard if the BIOS does not support that specific processor model. 
Even an apparently trivial difference between a supported processor 
and a new model may be enough to make that new model unusable 
without a BIOS update. 
54 
Chapter 2 

Form factor 
Like cases, motherboards are available in numerous form factors, the 
most popular of which are full ATX, |jATX, and Mini-ITX. Although Mini-
ITX motherboards are physically compatible with |jATX and ATX cases 
and |jATX motherboards with ATX cases, it seldom makes sense to install 
a smaller form factor motherboard in a larger case. A |jATX motherboard 
generally costs about as much as a similar full ATX motherboard, and Mini-
ITX motherboards are often actually more expensive than similar |jATX 
and ATX boards. Using a smaller motherboard than the case can accept 
simply gives up memory and expansion slots, communications ports, and 
other potentially valuable features for no reason. It may also cause prob-
lems with cables that are too short to reach the smaller motherboard. 
Memory slots 
Every motherboard includes one or more memory slots, but the number 
and type of these slots differ, as follows: 
Number 
Typical ATX motherboards provide slots for four memory modules. 
|jATX boards usually provide two or four slots. Mini-ITX boards pro-
vide one or two slots. All other things being equal, it's better to have 
more memory slots than fewer, for three reasons. First, the number of 
memory slots (and the maximum capacity of each) puts a hard limit 
on the amount of memory that can be installed. Second, it may be 
less expensive—sometimes much less expensive—to install a given 
amount of memory using more smaller modules rather than fewer 
larger modules. For example, if you intend to install a total of 8 GB of 
memory, the price of four 2 GB memory modules may be much less 
than the price of two 4 GB modules. Third, if you decide to upgrade 
your system in mid-life, it's easier and cheaper to add memory mod-
ules than to remove and discard the current modules and replace 
them with all new modules. 
Type and capacity of modules supported 
Current desktop motherboards use one of four types of memory 
modules: 240-pin DDR2-SDRAM DIMM, 240-pin DDR3-SDRAM DIMM, 
200-pin DDR2-SDRAM SO-DIMM, or 240-pin DDR3-SDRAM SO-DIMM. 
The SO-DIMM modules are actually notebook memory, but they are 
used by a few Mini-ITX motherboards. Mainstream ATX, |jATX, and 
Mini-ITX motherboards accept either 240-pin DDR2 or DDR3 DIMMs. 
A few hybrid Socket AM2+/AM3 motherboards accept either 240-pin 
DDR2 or DDR3 DIMMs, but only one type at a time. 
Just because a memory slot physically accepts a memory module 
doesn't mean that module is compatible with that motherboard. The 
chipset and/or BIOS may limit the module capacity. For example, al-
though a 4 GB DDR2-SDRAM module may be physically identical to a 
2 GB module, a particular motherboard may support 2 GB modules, 
but not 4 GB modules. If you install the 4 GB module, the results are 
unpredictable. The system may fail to boot. More likely, it will boot 
normally, but will recognize the 4 GB module as only 2 GB. If the BIOS 
Choosing and Buying Components 73 

is limiting module capacity, updating the BIOS may allow the system 
to recognize the larger memory modules. If the chipset is limiting 
module capacity, there's no fix. 
Note that the maximum memory module capacity (and the maxi-
mum overall memory) supported by a motherboard may depend 
on the number of memory slots occupied and/or the speed of that 
memory. For example, a particular motherboard may support 8 GB of 
total memory in the form of two 4 GB modules, but not in the form 
of four 2 GB modules. Similarly, a motherboard may allow all four of 
its memory slots to be populated with slower memory, but only two 
slots with faster memory. 
Before you purchase a motherboard, make sure it supports the spe-
cific memory configuration you want to use. Check the detailed 
motherboard specifications web page and also use one or more of 
the memory configurator pages provided by Crucial, Kingston, and 
other memory vendors. 
Expansion slots 
Most motherboards include expansion slots, which you can populate with 
expansion cards to provide functions that the motherboard does not. For 
example, if you purchase a motherboard that provides only USB 2.0 com-
munication ports, you can later upgrade your system by installing a USB 
3.0 expansion card. Most current motherboards provide some mix of PCI 
and PCI Express (PCIe) slots. 
PCI 
The older PCI standard defines one specific set of physical and elec-
tronic requirements for a PCI expansion slot, so any current PCI ex-
pansion card can be used in any current PCI slot (assuming that the 
case puts no constraints on the physical height or length of the card). 
In June 2010, Intel announced that it was retiring the PCI specifica-
tion in favor of PCI Express. PCI expansion cards and motherboards 
with PCI slots are likely to remain available for sometime to come, but 
development of new PCI products has now largely ended, and future 
products will all be PCI Express. 
PCI Express 
The newer PCIe standard defines the physical and electronic charac-
teristics of a connector that may be used individually (called PCIe 1x) 
or may be concatenated into a single combined 4x, 8x, or 16x PCIe 
connector to provide correspondingly higher bandwidth. 
PCI Express is now used universally for video adapter cards, but as 
of mid-2010 PCI expansion cards still greatly outnumber PCI Express 
expansion cards, despite the fact that PCI Express is superior and has 
been available for years. Until now, most expansion card makers have 
adopted an if-it-ain't-broke-don't-fix-it attitude. With Intel's depreca-
tion of the PCI standard, we expect that to change, with more and 
Chapter 2 

more PCI Express expansion cards becoming available over the com-
ing months and years and PCI expansion cards becoming increasingly 
hard to find. 
Communications ports 
All motherboards provide various communications ports. Most still pro-
vide at least one legacy serial port and parallel port, although these ports 
are now often present only as header-pin sets on the motherboard rather 
than as physical connectors on the rear I/O panel. If you need to use them, 
you'll need to install a cliffhanger bracket (usually supplied with the retail-
boxed motherboard) to extend the ports out to an expansion slot cover. 
Beyond these legacy ports, current motherboards may provide some or 
all of the following communication ports: 
USB 2.0 
All current motherboards provide multiple USB 2.0 ports, both as phys-
ical connectors on the rear I/O panel and as header-pin sets that can 
be extended to the front-panel connectors. Most current peripherals— 
from keyboards and mice to speakers, printers, scanners, and digital 
cameras—use the USB 2.0 interface, so it's important to have enough 
for your needs. (Of course, you can always add a USB hub, but that 
increases costs and desktop clutter.) Look for a motherboard with at 
least six USB 2.0 ports; eight or more is better. 
USB 3.0 
The most recent USB standard, USB 3.0, will eventually replace USB 
2.0, just as USB 2.0 eventually replaced USB 1.0 and USB 1.1 .The raison 
d'etre for USB 3.0 is speed. USB 2.0 has a nominal data rate of 480 Mb/s 
(60 MB/s) and typical real-world throughput (after protocol overhead) 
of 25 MB/s. For most peripherals, that's more than fast enough, but it's 
marginal for such high-speed peripherals as external hard drives. 
USB 3.0 has a nominal raw data rateof4Gb/s (500 MB/s) and real-world 
throughput of about 400 MB/s, fast enough even for external hard 
drives and solid-state drives. USB 3.0 is also backward-compatible with 
devices that use earlier USB standards, although those devices still 
run at the lower data rates for which they were designed. 
Eventually, USB 3.0 ports will be ubiquitous, but for now most 
motherboards do not provide any USB 3.0 ports at all. Those that do 
generally provide only one or two, in combination with several USB 
2.0 ports. As devices that need the higher speed of USB 3.0 and chip-
sets that support USB 3.0 become more common, more motherboards 
will start including USB 3.0 ports. For now, we consider USB 3.0 sup-
port a nonissue. If you later need USB 3.0, it will be easy enough to 
buy an inexpensive USB 3.0 PCI Express adapter card and install it in 
your system. 
eSATA 
Many current motherboards provide eSATA ports, sometimes as in-
ternal connectors, sometimes on the rear I/O panel, and sometimes 
both. These ports are used primarily to connect external hard drives 
Choosing and Buying Components 75 

Choosing Components 
DIYeSATA 
You can use eSATA even if your 
motherboard 
doesn't explicitly sup-
port it. The only real differences be-
tween an eSATA port and a standard 
internal SATA port are the physical 
connectors and the signal 
voltage. 
If you need to connect an eSATA 
device and you have no eSATA ports, 
you can "convert"a 
standard 
internal 
SATA port by buying an eSATA cliff-
hanger bracket. The bracket installs 
in place of an expansion 
slot cover 
and has a cable that you 
connect 
to one of the standard SATA ports 
on your motherboard. 
The jack on 
the cliff hanger bracket accepts a 
standard eSATA cable to connect the 
external device. 
The only difference between this DIY 
eSATA and a real eSATA port is the 
lower signaling voltage on the DIY 
eSATA port, which limits the total 
cable length to one meter (about 40 
inches), versus two meters with a real 
eSATA port. 
and hard drive docking stations, both of which are common backup 
devices. If you use or plan to use eSATA devices, you'll want at least 
one or two eSATA ports available on the motherboard you choose. 
IEEE-1394 (FireWire) 
Some motherboards—particularly "media" series models—include 
one or two IEEE-1394 (FireWire) ports, usually as a physical connector 
on the rear I/O panel and perhaps a second port as header pins on the 
motherboard. These ports may be IEEE-1394a (FireWire 400), which 
has a maximum data rate of 400 MB/s, or IEEE-1394b (FireWire 800), 
which has a maximum data rate of 800 MB/s. 
FireWire is a declining standard. It's still widely used in some specialty 
markets (notably, camcorders), but it is being displaced by eSATA 
and USB 3.0. If you need FireWire to support your camcorder or oth-
er device, look for a motherboard that provides one or two FireWire 
ports. If a motherboard you otherwise like has no FireWire ports, you 
can add them easily by installing an inexpensive PCI or PCI Express 
FireWire expansion card. 
Use the following guidelines when choosing a motherboard: 
• For a general-purpose system, choose a pATX motherboard, unless you 
need the additional expansion slots available on a full ATX model. For a 
small system, use a pATX motherboard. For a really small system, use a 
Mini-ITX motherboard. (Note that Mini-ITX motherboards often cost sig-
nificantly more than pATX models with similar features and quality, so use 
Mini-ITX only if you really need it.) 
• For an Intel-based system, choose a Socket LGA 1156 or a Socket LGA 1366 
motherboard that is compatible with your choice of processor. Avoid 
Socket 775 (Socket T) motherboards, which are obsolescent. For an AMD-
based system, choose a Socket AM3 motherboard if it is compatible with 
your chosen processor; otherwise, choose a hybrid Socket AM2+/AM3 
model. Avoid Socket AM2 and Socket AM2/AM2+ models. 
• Make sure the motherboard supports the exact processor you plan to 
use. Just because a motherboard supports a particular processor family 
doesn't mean it supports all members of that family. You can find this in-
formation on the motherboard maker's website or in the release notes to 
the BIOS updates. It's also important to know exactly what revision of the 
motherboard you have, because processor support may vary by mother-
board revision level. 
• Make sure the motherboard supports the type and amount of memory you 
need. Do not make assumptions about how much memory a motherboard 
supports. Check the documentation to find out what specific memory con-
figurations are supported. 
• Before you choose a motherboard, checkthe documentation and support 
that's available for it, as well as the BIOS and driver updates available. Fre-
quent updates indicate that the manufacturer takes support seriously. 
58 
Chapter 2 

Choosing Components 
Recommended motherboard brands 
For systems with Intel processors, we recommend Intel (http://www.intel.com), 
GIGABYTE (http://www.gigabyte-usa.com), and ASUS (http://usa.asus.com) 
motherboards. For AMD processors, we prefer GIGABYTE and ASUS. All three 
of these companies offer top-notch motherboards, in everything from basic 
vanilla units to feature-laden, high-performance boards. Intel tends to be a 
bit "stodgier" than the other two, emphasizing stability over performance and 
features, but the differences are small in any case. (If it's any indication, most of 
our own systems use Intel motherboards.) 
If cost is a major consideration, we recommend ASRock (ihttp://www.asrock. 
com) motherboards. Originally spun off from ASUS in 2002 to compete with 
low-end motherboard makers, ASRock has developed a reputation for inexpen-
sive motherboards with very good quality, stability, and feature sets. Recently, 
ASRock has introduced higher-end motherboards as well. 
Memory 
The only real decisions are how much memory to install, what size and type of 
modules to use, and what brand to buy. Consider the following factors when 
choosing memory modules (DIMMs): 
• For budget systems, install no less than 512 MB per core, and at least 1 GB 
total. (For a single-core budget system, install 1 GB or more; for a dual-core 
system, 1 GB or more; for a triple-core budget system, 1.5 GB or more; and 
for a quad-core budget system, 2 GB or more.) For mainstream systems, in-
stall 2 GB or 4 GB, with a minimum of 512 MB/thread and 1 GB per core. For 
performance systems, workstations, and multimedia/graphics systems, in-
stall 4 GB or more, with a minimum of 512 MB/thread and 1 GB per core. 
If you're running a 64-bit operating system, increase these recommended 
amounts by 50% to 100%. 
• Memory manufacturers such as Crucial (http://www.crucial.com), Kingston 
(http://www.kingston.com), Corsair (http://www.corsairmemory.com), and 
Mushkin (http://www.mushkin.com) provide online memory zonfigurators 
that allow you to enter the brand and model of your motherboard and 
return a list of compatible memory modules. Before you buy memory, use 
these configurators to make sure the memory you order is compatible 
with your particular motherboard. 
• For motherboards that use 240-pin DDR2 memory, buy DDR2 memory 
modules of at least the speed required by your motherboard/processor 
combination. DDR2 memory is available in PC2 3200, PC2 4200, PC2 5300, 
PC2 6400, and PC2 8000 variants. Choose the fastest modules that do 
not sell at a significant price premium over slower modules. Once again, 
choose modules that support fast CAS latency timings only if they cost 
little or no more than modules with standard timings. 
• For higher performance, install DIMMs in matched pairs or triplets to en-
able dual- or triple-channel memory operation. 
DDR2 Versus DDR3 
If your motherboard 
supports 
both 
DDR2 and DDR3 memory 
modules, 
install DDR3 for higher 
performance 
and ease of future memory 
upgrades. 
Choosing and Buying Components 
59 

Choosing Components 
Ron Morse Comments 
This needs to be emphasized. 
With 
the trend toward 64-bit 
operating 
systems and more than 4 GB of in-
stalled RAM, problems related to this 
are becoming 
more 
common. 
• It's generally less expensive to buy a given amount of memory in fewer 
modules. For example, if you are installing 4 GB of memory, two 2 GB 
DIMMs will probably cost less than four 1 GB DIMMs. Using fewer but 
larger DIMMs also preserves memory slots for future expansion. However, 
the largest-capacity modules often sell at a substantial premium. For ex-
ample, a 4 GB DIMM may cost five times as much as a 2 GB DIMM, rather 
than only twice as much. 
• Verify the memory configurations supported by your motherboard. For 
example, a particular motherboard may support 2 GB DIMMs, but not 4 
GB DIMMs. Similarly, one motherboard may support 2 GB DIMMs in all 
four of its memory slots, but another may support 2 GB DIMMs in only two 
of its four slots. Check the motherboard documentation to determine the 
memory configurations your chosen motherboard supports. 
• Non-parity memory modules provide no error detection or correction. 
ECC modules detect and correct most memory errors but are slower and 
more expensive than non-parity modules. Use ECC memory if you install 
more than 8 GB of memory and the motherboard supports ECC memory. 
For 8 GB or less, use non-parity modules. 
Recommended memory brands 
There are many good memory vendors. Some, such as Corsair, Mushkin, OCZ, 
and Patriot, are well-known names among extreme gamers and other enthu-
siasts. But Crucial (http://www.crucial.com) and Kingston {http://www.Kmgs-
ton.com) are the two top-tier desktop memory vendors whose products we've 
used almost exclusively for the last decade or more. Both offer a broad line 
of memory and memory-related products at competitive prices, from budget 
modules to high-performance premium modules. Other than from lightning 
strikes, catastrophically blown power supplies, and similar misfortunes, we 
don't recall ever having a memory module from either company fail in use. 
Kingston is a packager: it buys memory chips from other companies and 
builds modules with those chips. Crucial (actually, Micron Technology) is fully 
vertically integrated. Sand goes in one side of its plants, and finished memory 
modules come out the other side. Because we have found Crucial memory to 
be utterly reliable and competitively priced, and because we like the idea of a 
company building (and controlling) its products from start to finish, we order 
Crucial memory whenever possible. 
Floppy Disk Drive (FDD) 
You probably don't need an FDD in your new system. Few current mother-
boards provide the traditional FDD interface, so old-style FDDs are no longer 
usable. If you need FDD support to transfer data from old floppies, buy an 
inexpensive external USB floppy drive. If for some reason you want an internal 
FDD, buy an internal USB model, which connects to a set of USB header pins 
on the motherboard. If you need to boot from the FDD—for example, to run a 
classic computer game—configure the boot sequence section of BIOS Setup 
to put the FDD first, where it will be listed as a USB Mass Storage Device. 
60 
Chapter 2 

Recommended FDD brands 
If you need an FDD, any brand is fine. 
Hard Drive 
It's easy to choose a good hard drive. Hitachi, Samsung, Seagate, Toshiba 
(notebook drives only), and Western Digital produce drives at similar price 
points for any given size and type of drive. 
Compatibility is not an issue for hard drives. Hard drives are plug-and-play de-
vices. Any recent hard drive will coexist peacefully with any other recent hard 
drive or optical drive, regardless of manufacturer. 
Use the following guidelines when you choose a hard disk: 
• Hard drives are available in standard ATA ('arallel AT or 'A': ) and Serial 
AT/ ( 47 ) interfaces. PATA drives are obsolescent and are suitable only 
for upgrading older systems that lack SATA interfaces. For a new system, 
choose a drive that supports the SATA 3.0 Gb/s interface. A few newer 
premium models support the more recent SATA 6.0 Gb/s interface, but 
even the fastest hard drives are incapable of saturating a SATA 3.0 Gb/s 
interface, so the SATA 6.0 Gb/s interface is really just marketing hype. 
• Although it's tempting to buy the highest-capacity drive available, high-
capacity drives often cost more per gigabyte than midrange drives, and 
the highest-capacity drives are often slower than midrange models. 
Decide what performance level and capacity you need, and then buy a 
drive that meets those requirements. Typically, you can choose the model 
based on cost per gigabyte. However, you may need to buy the largest 
drive available despite its higher cost per gigabyte and slower perfor-
mance, simply to conserve drive bays and SATA ports. 
• Choosea 7,200 RPM SATA drive for a general-purpose system. 10,000 RPM 
drives cost more than 7,200 RPM models, are not all that much faster, and 
are much noisier and hotter-running than 7,200 RPM models. 
• Get a model with larger buffer/cache if it doesn't cost much more. Some 
drives are available in two versions that differ only in buffer size. One 
might have a 16 MB buffer and the other a 32 MB buffer. It's worth paying 
a few extra dollars for the larger buffer. 
Recommended hard drive brands 
We've used many desktop hard drives from all four companies that currently 
make them, not to mention drives from another dozen or two companies that 
have fallen by the wayside over the years. We usually install Seagate (http:// 
www.seagate.com) drives, because they are fast, quiet, cool-running, reli-
able, and competitively priced. Western Digital (http://www.wdc.com) went 
through a very bad patch a few years ago, with high out-of-the-boxand in-use 
failure rates. For years, we wouldn't even consider installing a Western Digital 
drive. Fortunately, Western Digital has since addressed its quality problems 
and now produces reliable models across the full range of capacities and per-
formance levels. We still seldom use Western Digital drives, though, because 
Choosing and Buying Components 79 

they generally cost more than comparable Seagate models. Samsung (http:// 
www.samsung.com) produces a much narrower range of drives than Seagate 
or Western Digital, but the drives Samsung does offer are competitive with 
comparable units from Seagate and Western Digital. Like Samsung, the last 
member of the Big Four, Hitachi (http://www.hitachi.com), produces a relative-
ly narrow range of models. After being burned by the fiasco several years ago 
when Deskstar drives were dropping like proverbial flies, we never installed 
another Hitachi drive, so we can't comment on their current quality. 
Enterprise-Versus Consumer-Grade Drives 
If you peruse the hard drive section of an online vendor's store, you may be puzzled 
to find two similar drives from the same manufacturer 
selling for very different 
prices. For example, we just checked NewEgg and found a I TB Seagate 
Barracuda 
7200.12 for $75 and a I TB Seagate Barracuda ES.2 for $ 160. The capacities are iden-
tical, as are the rotation rates and cache sizes. So why the huge difference in price? 
The 7200.12 is a "consumer-grade"drive 
and the ES.2 is an 
"enterprise-grade"drive. 
Obviously, the ES.2 must be a better drive, right? Well, it depends on how you define 
better. The ES.2 isn't faster or more durable than the 7200.12. The ES.2 does have a 
longer warranty—five 
years versus three—but 
it really isn't any less likely to fail than 
the 7200.12. 
The real difference is in the firmware. Consumer-grade 
drives like the 7200.12 
have firmware designed on the assumption 
that they're the only hard drive in the 
computer. Accordingly, 
their firmware has very aggressive error-recovery 
routines, 
which may cause the drive to time out for anything from a few milliseconds 
to (in 
extreme cases) a minute or more. Enterprise-grade 
drives like the ES.2 have 
firmware 
designed on the assumption 
that the drive will be running in a RAID, with parity data 
available on other physical drives in the system. Accordingly, 
the ES.2 has much less 
aggressive 
error-recovery routines, because it can assume it will have help from other 
drives in recovering errors. 
Basically, then, the consumer-grade 
drive is much better at recovering errors without 
assistance, but is therefore more likely to time out, which is a Very Bad Thing for a 
drive that's operating as part of an array. The enterprise-grade 
drive needs a little 
help from its friends to recover from errors, but is therefore very unlikely to time out 
during error recovery. In an enterprise RAID setup, having a drive time out is very 
nearly as bad as having a drive fail completely, so the higher price of enterprise-
grade drives is well worth paying. For a home or small-office system, including 
one 
with a RAID, we think the consumer-grade 
drives are the better choice. 
Solid-State Drive (SSD) 
Solid-state drives serve the same purpose as hard drives—mass storage—but 
are purely electronic devices. Rather than storing data on spinning disk platters, 
an SSD stores data in flash memory. All but the least expensive SSDs are faster 
than the fastest hard drives—sometimes much faster. (In fact, the fastest SSDs 
can saturate a SATA 3.0 Gb/s interface, which is the real reason that motherboard 
makers are beginning to introduce models with SATA 6.0 Gb/s ports.) 
SSDs are simultaneously reliable and unreliable: reliable in the sense that they 
have no moving parts and are much less subject to shock damage than rotat-
ing drives, and unreliable in the sense that SSDs are inherently consumable 
Chapter 2 

Choosing Components 
items. We know the idea of "using up" an SSD sounds odd, but that is in fact 
what happens. The nature of flash memory is that the individual cells used to 
store data survive for only so many write cycles. Once a cell exceeds that num-
ber of writes, it is no longer usable. 
Manufacturers implement various firmware schemes to load-level their drives, 
and recent operating systems (such as current Linux distributions and Win-
dows 7) include support for TRIM, a technology that maximizes the usable life 
of an SSD. 
But, inevitably, a heavily used SSD begins to lose both capacity and perfor-
mance as time passes. Used improperly, an SSD may begin to show perfor-
mance degradation after only a few weeks or even days of use. With TRIM 
enabled, that same drive will provide excellent performance for months or 
even years of use. 
It's difficult for us to write authoritatively about SSDs, because right now the 
entire market segment is in a state of flux. Better drives are released literally 
every month, and strides are being made in improving both performance and 
sustainability. If you buy an SSD now, just be aware that you're buying into a 
rapidly developing technology. Anything you buy now will inevitably be re-
placed by a better, larger, faster, and more durable model for the same price 
soon after you buy it. 
So, is buying an SSD now a sucker bet? Not at all. The best current models are 
blazingly fast and quite durable, assuming they're not abused. Although an 
SSD is often the only drive in a notebook system, we think the best way to use 
SSDs in a desktop system is as a boot/system/working data drive in a system 
that also has one or more standard hard drives for bulk data storage. 
If you browse the SSD section of an online component vendor's site, the first 
thing you'll notice is that SSDs have small capacities and high prices. At a time 
when 1 TB desktop hard drives are mid range in capacity and sell for well under 
$100, a typical SSD stores from 32 GB to 256 GB and sells for anywhere from 4 
to 10 times as much. 
Other than price, there are several considerations when choosing an SSD: 
Capacity 
All other things being equal, SSDs typically sell for about the same amount 
per GB across the line. For example, if a particular model of SSD is avail-
able in 32, 64, 128, and 256 GB capacities, each step up typically doubles 
the price. That's because the vast bulk of the cost of an SSD is in the flash 
memory. Doubling capacity requires twice as much flash memory, and so 
doubles the price. 
We think the best strategy is first to determine how much space you need 
for your operating system, applications, and working data, then to add a 
bit extra for growth and buy an SSD of that capacity. When we did that, we 
settled on a 128 GB model for Robert's primary system, mainly because 
he does a lot of video editing, which involves manipulating many multi-
gigabyte files. For most people, a 32 GB SSD will suffice. 
Read, but Don't Write 
Reading from an SSD does 
nothing 
to degrade it. Read all you want. But 
every write to the drive causes very 
slight degradation, 
which adds up 
over time. Does that mean an SSD 
is essentially a read-only device? Of 
course not. Write to your SSD 
when 
you need to, but avoid 
unnecessary 
writes. The biggest offenders in that 
regard are the Windows paging file 
and the Linux swap area. Always 
put 
these on a hard drive, not on your 
SSD. 
Ron Morse Comments 
Windows users installing the 64-bit 
version of either Vista or Windows 7 
will probably want to use a 64 GB or 
larger SSD for their system drives. 
Choosing and Buying Components 
63 

Choosing Components 
Ron Morse Comments 
SSDs are available from an 
astonish-
ing number of vendors. Once 
you've 
identified the device you want, a little 
careful shopping 
can save you a pile. 
When checking the prices of SSDs, 
however, be sure you're 
compar-
ing the same model. A retailer may 
advertise, for example, a 
"Kingston 
SSD," but without checking 
you 
won't know if it's offering the better-
performing 
"V+" model at an attrac-
tive price or one of the 
mainstream 
"V" models at a higher price than 
you would pay for the same device 
elsewhere. 
The state of the art for SSDs is chang-
ing rapidly, and it is not 
uncommon 
to find a manufacturer 
or vendor 
slashing prices on its current offer-
ings in preparation 
for the arrival 
of new models. A new-stock 
but 
"discontinued"device 
can be an ex-
ceedingly good buy. If you shop large 
e-tailers like NewEgg, 
Amazon.com, 
and Frys.com, be sure to check the 
"specials"on 
their websites before 
going on to the main SSD 
section. 
Cell type 
Two types of flash memory are used in SSDs. Single-level eel, (SLC) mem-
ory is faster and can sustain many more write cycles than multi-level cell 
(MLC) memory, but it also costs much more. SLC memory is widely used 
in enterprise-class SSDs, some of which can store 1 TB or more and cost 
as much as a good used car. A few premium consumer-grade SSDs also 
use SLC memory. They are generally of very low capacity, and cost about 
four times as much per GB as drives of comparable capacity that use MLC 
memory. For most people, the additional speed of an SLC drive will be 
much less important than the higher price. A good MLC drive is so much 
faster than any hard drive that the faster-still SLC drive will seem a minor 
improvement. 
Memory speed 
There are large differences in speed between the least expensive and 
most expensive MLC SSDs, because fast flash memory chips cost more 
than slow ones. The least expensive SSDs use very slow flash memory 
chips, and may have read and write data transfer rates that are slower than 
a standard desktop hard drive. A similar SSD that uses the fastest avail-
able flash memory chips may have data transfer rates two or three times 
higher than the fastest hard drives. 
Recommended SSD brands 
SSDs have been available for years as niche products in the laptop/notebook 
market, so as they become increasingly mainstream there's some history to 
judge them by. It would be useless for us to recommend specific models, be-
cause that information would be out of date long before you saw it. We can, 
however, recommend two vendors who have a history of producing SSDs that 
have been very competitive on price, quality, and performance. The first, un-
surprisingly, is Intel (http://www.intel.com), which over the years has produced 
a series of excellent SSDs. We have no doubt that whichever models Intel of-
fers when you're ready to buy your own SSD will be equally competitive. Our 
second recommended manufacturer is Crucial (http://www.crucial.com), a 
company that knows as much about memory as any other on the planet. We 
suggest you start your search with what those two companies have to offer 
and use them as standards to which to compare competing offerings. 
Optical Drive 
With the exception of Blu-ray drives, optical drives are a mature product cat-
egory and have become commoditized. Hobbyists continue to debate their 
finer points, but the truth is that one $20 DVD-ROM drive or $30 DVD writer is 
much like any other. 
Every system needs at least one optical drive, if only for loading software, but 
for most desktop systems the only decisions you need to make are whether 
you need Blu-ray support and whether to buy a read-only drive or a writer 
(burner). For some small systems, the physical dimensions of the drive may 
64 
Chapter 2 

be critical. Many small cases accept standard optical drives, but Mini-ITX and 
other very small cases may require a slimline optical drive and may limit the 
depth of the drive. 
Unless there's good reason to do otherwise, install a DVD writer in any system 
you build. Saving $10 by installing a read-only DVD-ROM drive instead of a 
DVD writer often turns out to be a poor economy, given the additional flex-
ibility the writer provides. 
If you need Blu-ray support, you can choose among three types of drives: 
Blu-ray writers 
Blu-ray writers can read and write Blu-ray discs, DVDs, and CDs. Write 
speeds for CD-R/RW and DVD±R/RW discs are typically a bit slower than 
those of standard DVD writers. Blu-ray writers can write to single-layer (25 
GB) or dual-layer (50 GB) write-once (BD-R) or rewritable (BD-RE) discs. 
Write speeds for BD-R discs are typically 8X, 10X, or 12X, which means it 
takes about 8 to 12 minutes to write a full BD-R/SL disc and twice that for 
a BD-R/DL disc. BD-RE discs are written at 2X, which means it may take 
about 50 minutes to write a full BD-RE/SL disc, and twice that for a BD-RE/ 
DLdisc. 
Blu-ray writers are still niche products, primarily because the drives and 
discs are expensive relative to DVD writers and media. On a per-byte basis, 
BD-R discs are nearing price parity with DVD±R discs, which is to say that 
a BD-R/SL disc has roughly six times the capacity of a DVD±R/SL disc and 
costs roughly six times as much. BD-RE/SL discs are considerably more ex-
pensive, but may make sense in some applications. BD-R/DL and BD-RE/DL 
discs are extraordinarily expensive and should be used only if there is no 
alternative. 
If you install a Blu-ray writer, we recommend that you also install a stan-
dard DVD writer. Use the expensive Blu-ray writer only to read or write 
Blu-ray discs, and use the cheap DVD writer for reading and writing stan-
dard DVDs and CDs, to save wear and tear on the expensive drive. In fact, 
we might go further and install three drives in the system: a Blu-ray writer 
that we'd use only for burning BD-R/RE discs; a Blu-ray reader that we'd 
use for reading Blu-ray discs; and a standard DVD writer that we'd use for 
everything else. 
Blu-ray combo drives 
Blu-ray combo drives read Blu-ray discs, DVDs, and CDs, and can write 
DVDs and CDs (but not Blu-ray discs). Installing a Blu-ray combo drive 
makes no sense unless you happen to need this particular combination 
of features in a system that has room for only one optical drive, or you're 
short of ports. Otherwise, install two drives: a standard DVD writer and a 
read-only BD-ROM drive. The total cost will be the same or less, the indi-
vidual drives are likely to have better specifications than the combo drive, 
and if the reader outlives the writer (as is likely) you can replace just the 
$30 writer when it fails instead of replacing the $100 combo drive. 
Choosing and Buying Components 83 

Choosing Components 
BD-ROM drives 
BD-ROM drives read Blu-ray discs and standard DVDs, but cannot write 
discs. Because of higher component costs and licensing fees, BD-ROM 
drives typically cost three to four times as much as DVD-ROM drives. The 
least expensive models typically have 4X BD-ROM read speeds and 2 MB 
caches, which suffices for watching or ripping movies. More expensive 
models typically offer 8X, 10X, or 12X BD-ROM reads and 4 MB or larger 
caches, but unless you need additional read speed there's little reason to 
spend more money. 
A 
; 
Burnout 
1 
If you write a lot of discs, expect to replace the burner frequently. Drives that are used 
1 
primarily or solely to read discs often last for years, even under fairly heavy use. Burn-
ing discs frequently is hard on DVD writers, which in our experience seldom last for 
\ 
more than 1,000 to 1,500 burns. (We've never tested a Blu-ray writer to destruction 
i 
because we can't afford that many discs.) 
Furthermore, although 
this sounds very odd and we have no explanation 
for the 
phenomenon, 
burners seem to age even sitting unused on the shelf. Several times, 
\ 
we've installed anew burner that had been sitting unused in the box for a year or 
more, only to find that it died an early death. 
Finally, a word about interfaces. Every type of optical drive is available in exter-
nal form. All external optical drives provide a USB 2.0 interface, and some also 
provide an IEEE 1394 (FireWire) and/or eSATA interface. Internal optical drives 
are available in old-style ATAPI and SATA interfaces, with the exception of Blu-
ray drives, which are nearly all SATA. 
Ordinarily, this isn't an issue. ATAPI is obsolescent going on obsolete, so it's 
usually a no-brainer to choose a SATA optical drive. The one exception is if 
you're building a system around a tiny motherboard that has a limited number 
of SATA interfaces and an ATA interface that would otherwise go unused. In 
that case, you may need all of the SATA ports for hard drives, so you may have 
no choice but to install an ATAPI optical drive. If you do that, make sure to use 
a UDMA ATA cable rather than a standard cable. 
Recommended optical drive brands 
Years ago, we recommended Plextor optical drives. They were built like tanks 
and (given high-quality blanks) produced perfect burns every time. As an ex-
periment, we once burned through an entire spindle of 100 DVD+R discs, one 
after the other, and scanned the resulting discs. The first disc we burned was 
nearly perfect, as we expected. But the hundredth disc—written when the 
Plextor drive had been burning discs continuously for hours—was also nearly 
perfect, which we didn't expect. 
No other drive we torture-tested this way came even close to the Plextor. Most 
started producing bad discs after they'd burned only a few discs at this 100% 
duty cycle. More than a few simply died partway into the spindle. 
Ron Morse Comments 
Cheap capacitors degrade when not 
charged. 
66 
Chapter 2 

Choosing Components 
Alas, those days are long gone. Plextor still sells competent optical drives, but 
the optical drive market has changed dramatically. When Plextor sold $200+ 
DVD burners in competition with lesser brands that sold for a third of that, 
there was room in the budget to build those drives to an extremely high stan-
dard. Nowadays, no one would buy a $200 DVD burner. Plextor now has to 
compete with $25 units and price its drives at $40 or $50, so there's simply no 
longer anything but mediocre DVD burners available. 
For standard optical drives, we recommend ASUS (http://usa.asus.com), Lite-
On (http://us.liteonit.com), and Samsung (http://www.samsung.com). For Blu-
ray burners, we recommend Pioneer (http://www.pioneerelectronics.com). 
Backup Hardware 
With typical desktop hard drives storing 1 TB or more, the thought of backing 
up a computer can be pretty intimidating. Maintaining proper backups is not 
quick, easy, or cheap. Nor is it optional, at least if you care at all about your 
data. Because it's so much trouble to maintain proper backups, most people's 
solution to protecting their data is simply to ignore the problem and hope 
nothing bad ever happens. Inevitably, they're disappointed. 
Like anything with moving parts, any hard drive will eventually fail. If you're 
lucky, you'll get at least some warning when your hard drive is about to fail. 
But don't count on that. All too often, hard drives fail like light bulbs—fine 
one moment and dead the next. If all of your data is on that hard drive and 
you have no backups, you might as well kiss your data goodbye. Yes, it's pos-
sible that some of your data may be recoverable, but—as many people have 
learned to their regret—that recovery may come at a cost of hundreds or even 
thousands of dollars. 
The only solution is to back up your system regularly and maintain multiple 
copies of your data, including at least one off-site copy. Then, when the worst 
happens, you'll have lost only the data you created or modified since your last 
backup. 
Developing and implementing a backup strategy is beyond the scope of this 
book, but whatever backup procedure you use will obviously require hard-
ware to make the copies. Disregarding tape drives, which are too expensive for 
a home or small office system, there are several practical alternatives. 
Optical discs 
A DVD+R disc stores about 4.4 GB, which for many people is sufficient for 
routine backups, and requires only a few minutes to write and verify. The disc 
costs only $0.25 or so and is small, light, and portable. Disc wallets that hold 
from 16 to 100 or more discs are readily available, and you can carry the wallet 
with you when you leave the house. 
Obviously DVD+R isn't a workable solution for a full backup of a large hard 
drive, which might require hundreds of discs, but it offers more than enough 
capacity to store most people's primary working data, such as email, docu-
ments, digital photographs, and so on. We use DVD+R discs as a supplement, 
writing all of our working data to one every Sunday. 
Discs Matter 
Although 
it's impossible to burn 
good 
discs with a poor burner, it's very pos-
sible to burn poor discs with a good 
burner. All you need to do is feed 
low-quality blank discs to the good 
burner, and you'll get rotten results. 
We could write an entire book (well, 
at least an entire chapter) about disc 
quality. 
Fortunately, we don't have to write 
all that, and you don't need to read 
it. If you want top-quality 
burns, 
use top-quality discs. The best discs 
available are made by Taiyo-Yuden 
(http://www. t-yuden.com). They cost 
more than inferior discs, but they're 
worth it if what you're burning to the 
disc matters to you. If you can't get 
TYdiscs, buy Verbatim 
(http://www. 
verbatim.com) 
discs. 
Incidentally, although 
the practice 
isn't as widespread as it was a few 
years ago, TY discs are 
sometimes 
counterfeited. You can avoid that risk 
by buying from a reputable 
autho-
rized TY dealer. If you find spindles of 
"Taiyo Yuden" discs on eBay selling at 
a discount, it's a pretty safe bet that 
they're fakes. 
Choosing and Buying Components 
67 

USB flash drives 
USB flash drives are another popular choice for backing up data. Their primary 
advantages are small size and—because they have no moving parts—high 
durability. Robert once overlooked a USB flash drive in the watch pocket of his 
jeans. After being run through the washing machine and dryer, it worked as 
well as ever. In an even more extreme case, one of our readers reported acci-
dentally running over a USB flash drive with his car. The case was crushed, but 
he was able to plug in the drive and read the data from it. True grit. 
You have to make a trade-off when you choose a USB flash drive: capacity 
versus speed versus cost. Pick any two. Current models range from 1 GB to 
256 GB in capacity. The fastest USB flash drives use memory fast enough to 
sustain USB 2.0 transfer rates (about 25 to 30 MB/s) for both reads and writes. 
The slowest have real-world write speeds of only 2 or 3 MB/s. And the price of 
a USB flash drive correlates directly to both capacity and speed. 
Ideally, youd probably like a USB flash drive with huge capacity and stunning 
speed. Alas, the price of such a drive would be more than you're likely to want 
to pay. For example, Kingston offers a 256 GB flash drive (rated at only 12 MB/s 
for writes) that sells for $850. Economic realities mandate that the fastest flash 
drives are available only in small capacities—typically 1 to 4 GB—while the 
largest flash drives are available only with pedestrian write speeds. 
We find the lower write speeds of high-capacity flash drives acceptable, be-
cause we use flash drives in the same way we use DVD+R discs: for quick daily 
or weekly backups of our working data sets. For example, it takes 6 or 7 min-
utes to write and verify a 4 GB backup set to a DVD, which corresponds closely 
to a USB flash drive with a write speed of about 10 MB/s. In effect, the USBflash 
drive is equivalent to a miniature stack of DVDs. 
Several manufacturers offer USB flash drives that are specifically designed to 
back up Windows (and, usually, Mac) systems. These drives contain special 
backup software that backs up changed files automatically. You just plug the 
drive into a USB port, and it automatically runs the backup. 
Among those, our favorite is the new Lexar Echo SE Backup Drive (http:// 
www.lexar.com/echo/echo_se.html), which is available in 16,32,64, and 128 GB 
models. Lexar rates these drives as supporting "up to" 10 MB/s writes, which 
raised a red flag for us. Ordinarily, the rated write speed of a USB flash drive 
is unrealistically high because it's achievable only when writing a single large 
file. When writing many small files, the actual write speed plummets, often to 
half or less the rated speed. 
We tested a 32 GB Lexar Echo SE by writing a data set of 1,363 files and direc-
tories totaling 4,100 MB. The write completed in 6:42 (402 seconds), for a sus-
tained data transfer rate of about 10.2 MB/s, better than advertised. We next 
wrote a single 4,100 MB compressed archive file, expecting even faster results. 
For the first few hundred MB, the Echo SE indeed ran faster, at about 13 MB/s. 
However, it completed the 4,100 MB write in 6:39 (399 seconds), just three 
seconds faster than the same-sized collection of small files, and with an iden-
tical write speed. Lexar has obviously done something effective to optimize 
this drive for real-world backups of many smaller files, and we recommend the 
Lexar Echo SE Backup drive without qualification. 
Chapter 2 

External hard drives 
As useful as DVD+R discs and USB flash drives are for routine partial backups, 
they have neither the capacity nor the speed for full backups of a system with 
a large hard drive or drives. For that, the only practical solution is to back up to 
another hard drive. 
The mainstream solution is to use external hard drives, which are available from 
numerous manufacturers—including drive manufacturers Hitachi, Samsung, 
Seagate, Toshiba, and Western Digital, as well as many other vendors—in ca-
pacities from 20 GB to 3 TB. The smallest units use 2.5" 5,400 RPM notebook 
hard drives, are powered by the USB cable, and fit in your shirt pocket. The 
highest-capacity units use 5,400 or 7,200 RPM desktop hard drives, and are still 
small enough to be easily portable. 
If you decide to use an external hard drive (or, better, multiple drives) for back-
ing up, pay close attention to the interface(s) it offers. Units are available for 
USB 2.0, USB 3.0, FireWire, eSATA, and various combinations thereof. The vast 
majority of external hard drives currently in use are connected to USB 2.0 
ports, which is fine if you have only a few GB to back up but is much too slow 
for doing routine backups of large data sets. If you routinely do backups of 100 
GB or more, an eSATA or USB 3.0 model is a much better choice because the 
data-transfer rate is limited only by the speed of the hard drives. 
Most external hard drives include backup software for Windows. The first time 
you use the drive, you simply plug it in, power it up, and allow the software to 
install on Windows. The software does a full backup of your Windows system. 
(If you're using USB 2.0, this initial backup may well take overnight to finish.) 
When the backup completes, you can shut down the drive, disconnect it, and 
take it with you when you leave the house. When you reconnect the drive to 
your system, it automatically scans for new and changed files and does a quick 
differential backup of only those files. Most external drives can be used with 
more than one computer to maintain separate backups for each. 
Among the many USB 2.0 external drives available, we recommend the 
Seagate Free Agent series {http://www.seagate.com). They're available in ca-
pacities from 240 GB to 3 TB, and the bundled software is excellent. If you have 
a USB 3.0 port available and need a fast, high-capacity external drive, choose 
one of the Western Digital My Book models (http://www.wdc.com). 
But, before you buy an external drive, read on. 
Removable hard drive bays 
External hard drives are convenient, but the problem is that you really need 
at least two or three of them to maintain an adequate set of backups. Each 
time you buy an external hard drive, you're paying for the external enclosure 
and the backup software. If you can get along with only two or three external 
drives, that cost premium is not outrageous. But if you need more, the cost 
starts to mount up. (Robert, for example, routinely uses more than a dozen 
external drives, both for backups and for archiving data off our disk arrays and 
into deep storage.) 
Choosing and Buying Components 87 

One good solution to this problem is to install a removable hard drive bay in 
your system. Such bays fit into an external 5.25"drive bay and are connected to 
a standard SATA data cable and power cable. The front of the removable drive 
bay has an opening that accepts a standard 3.5"desktop hard drive, which you 
can just slide in and out as needed. (You will have to enable AHCI in your BIOS 
and operating system if you want to hot-swap drives.) 
Removable hard drive bays have several advantages. They accept standard 
desktop hard drives, which are inexpensive (relative to external drives) and 
appear to the computer as just another hard drive. Because the drives use the 
SATA interface, they are as fast as an internal drive. Because the removable 
drive bay accepts any standard SATA hard drive, you can recycle older hard 
drives that you've retired when upgrading a system. And, when you leave 
home, it's much easier to carry a bare hard drive in a plastic shell or wallet than 
it is to disconnect and haul an external hard drive around with you. (Be careful 
when removing a hard drive; depending on how hot-running the drive is and 
how long it's been running, it may be too hot to touch.) 
We've used several models of removable drive bays, but our favorite is the Antec 
Easy SATA (http://www.antec.com). It just works, and at $20 or so, there's no 
reason not to install one. 
Hard drive docking stations 
Hard drive docking stations are similar conceptually to removable hard drive 
bays, but they are external devices rather than internal. Like removable drive 
bays, docking stations use the SATA/eSATA interface, and so support hot-
swapping. 
A typical hard drive docking station holds one or two 3.5"desktop hard drives 
or 2.5"notebook hard drives vertically in a plastic or metal base, is powered by 
a wall wart, and connects to the computer with an eSATA cable(s). The hard 
drives are exposed and can be inserted or removed simply by sliding them 
into or out of the docking station. (Once again, for hot-swapping you'll need 
to enable AHCI in your BIOS and operating system.) 
The disadvantage of a hard drive docking station versus a removable drive 
bay is that the docking station adds desktop clutter. The advantage is that 
the docking station is the most cost-efficient way of using removable hard 
drives. For example, the hard drive docking station we recommend, the SYBA 
SD-ENC50020 (http://www.syba.com), sells for about $25 and holds two hard 
drives simultaneously. 
Video Adapters 
The video adapter, also called a graphics adapter, renders video data provided 
by the processor into a form that the monitor can display. Many motherboards 
include embedded (integrated) video adapters. You can also install a stand-
alone video adapter, also called a 'ideo card or graphics cat , in a PCI Express 
expansion slot. Keep the following in mind when choosing a video adapter: 
Chapter 2 

• Unless you run graphics-intensive games, 3D graphics performance is un-
important. Any recent video adapter is more than fast enough for busi-
ness applications and casual gaming. Even integrated video, let alone any 
current standalone video adapter, is fast enough to support the 3D require-
ments of the Windows Aero Glass interface. 
• Choose integrated video unless there is good reason not to. Integrated video 
adds little or nothing to the price of a motherboard, and generally suffices 
for anyone except hardcore gamers or those with other special video re-
quirements. Make sure any motherboard you buy allows integrated video 
to be disabled and provides a PCI Express slot, though. That way, you can 
upgrade the video later if you need to by installing a separate video card. 
• Make sure that the video adapter you choose (or the integrated video 
on your motherboard) provides the type of video output connector you 
need. Nearly all displays provide a 15-pin analog (DSUB) VGA connector. 
All but the least expensive displays also provide a DVI connector, which 
may be analog, digital, or hybrid. Some displays provide an HDMI connec-
tor, which may or may not be HDCP-enabled. 
• If you plan to use dual displays, make sure that your integrated video or 
video adapter supports dual displays, and that it provides the type of vid-
eo connectors you need for both displays. Note that some video adapters 
provide one analog and one digital video connector, but allow only one 
of those to operate at a time. The most flexible choice is a card with dual 
DVI-I hybrid video connectors, which support both analog and digital dis-
plays, or dual HDMI connectors. 
• If you need a 3D graphics adapter, don't overbuy. A $400 video adapter 
is faster than a $100 adapter, but nowhere near four times faster. As with 
other PC components, the bang-for-the-buck ratio drops quickly as the 
price climbs. If you need better 3D graphics performance than integrated 
video provides but you don't have much in the budget for a video adapt-
er, look at "obsolescent" 3D video adapters—those a generation or two 
out of date. If you buy an older adapter, make sure the level of DirectX it 
supports is high enough to support the games you play. 
• Make sure that the adapter you choose has drivers available for the op-
erating system you intend to use. This is particularly important if you run 
Linux, BSD, or another OS with limited driver support. 
• In any case, but particularly if you will use a large, high-resolution display, 
make certain the video adapter and its drivers support the native resolu-
tion of the display. For example, if the highest resolution supported by 
your video adapter is 1920x1080, you will not be pleased with the image 
quality from that adapter on your expensive new 30"2560x1600 display. 
• If you want to use dual displays, it simplifies matters to install a video card 
that has two identical video outputs (preferably digital) and connect it to two 
identical displays. It's often possible to configure a mixed environment—for 
example, one integrated video output and one video output from a sepa-
rate video adapter driving two dissimilar displays—but doing so makes 
configuring the system more complex. 
Choosing and Buying Components 89 

Choosing Components 
Ron Morse Comments 
But note that screen 
elements, 
especially text, displayed on a 
high-resolution 
display will be 
smaller than the same elements on a 
lower-resolution 
display. This isn't a 
problem for applications 
that let you 
adjust the size of things within the 
application window, but 
applications 
that depend upon system fonts can 
be rendered unusable because the 
text is too small to read 
comfortably, 
especially if you're older or have less-
than-perfect 
vision. 
Both Windows and Linux let you 
compensate 
to a certain degree with 
settings that make everything 
larger 
by a given percentage 
(I use 115% on 
my 1920x1200 
display, but that isn't 
a perfect solution. I can now read 
the text and the application 
menus, 
but some applications just can't cope 
with the altered system settings 
and 
don't draw the contents of their own 
windows properly 
anymore.) 
Yet another 
trade-off. 
Recommended video adapter brands 
Our first recommendation is to use integrated video unless you have good rea-
son to do otherwise. ATI, Intel, and NVIDIA integrated video are all excellent, 
and more than sufficient for most purposes. 
If you need a standalone video adapter, consider models from ASUS (http:// 
usa.asus.com), EVGA (http://www.evga.com), GIGABYTE (http://www.giga-
byte-usa.com), Sapphire (http://www.sapphiretech.com), VisionTek (http:// 
www.visiontek.com), or XFX (http://www.xfxforce.com). All of those companies 
build video adapters around chipsets produced by ATI or NVIDIA, or both. The 
video adapter market is extremely competitive, so price is usually an excellent 
guideline to performance, features, and quality. 
If you simply need a bit more 3D horsepower than integrated video provides, 
look for an adapter in the $25 to $50 range from any of these manufacturers, 
using either an ATI or NVIDIA chipset. The $50 to $100 range covers entry-level 
3D gaming adapters, the fastest of which are sufficient for all but the most 
intense 3D games. If you're seriously interested in 3D gaming, you probably 
know more than we do about gaming graphics adapters. If not, spend some 
time on AnandTech (http://www.anandtech.com) and Tom's Hardware (http:// 
www.tomshardware.com) before you plunk down money for a video adapter. 
Display 
The good news is that nowadays buying a bad display takes some serious ef-
fort. If you stick to good brand names, the chances that you'll get a bad display 
are very close to zero. The display business is extremely competitive, and bad 
vendors simply don't stay in business for long. The competitive nature of the 
business also means you don't have to worry much about over-paying for a 
display. Doing a bit of price shopping for the models you're interested in just 
about guarantees you'll get a good display at a good price. 
Here's what to look for when you shop for a display: 
Resolution 
Resolution is the number of pixels (dots) that make up the image, speci-
fied as the number of columns by the number of rows. For example, a 
display whose resolution is listed as 1920x1080 uses a rectangular matrix 
of 1,920 columns in 1,080 rows. Such a display has a total of 1,920x1,080 
pixels, or 2,073,600 pixels. Resolution of current desktop displays ranges 
from 1024x768 to 2560x1600. All other things being equal, higher resolu-
tion is better because at any given screen size it produces a sharper image 
and finer detail. 
Blu-ray/HDTV 
If you intend to watch Blu-ray discs or other 1080P HDTV material on your system, 
choose a display with at least 1920x1080 
resolution. 
72 
Chapter 2 

C h o o s i n g C o m p o n e n t s 
Aspect ratio 
The aspect ratio of a display is calculated simply by dividing the number 
of columns by the number of rows. For example, a 1024x768 display has 
an aspect ratio of 1024/768 = 1.33:1 and a 2560x1600 display has an as-
pect ratio of 2560/1600 = 1.6:1. Rather than using such fractional num-
bers, aspect ratios are usually converted to whole numbers by multiplying 
both sides by an appropriate factor. For example, the 1.33:1 aspect ratio is 
normally multiplied by 3 to give a stated aspect ratio of 4:3, and the 1.6:1 
aspect ratio is normally multiplied by 10 to give a stated aspect ratio of 
16:10. (Of course, it could also be stated as 8:5 with equal accuracy, but 
apparently marketers like larger numbers.) 
Until a few years ago, most computer displays used aspect ratios similar to 
those of older television sets, typically 4:3 or 5:4. Such displays are often 
referred to as "square," even though they're really not. However, they are 
nearly as tall as they are wide, in contrast to modern widescreen displays, 
most of which are, like modern televisions, much wider than they are tall. 
Although some people prefer "square" displays, the market is shifting 
quickly to widescreen models. As of mid-2009, the number of widescreen 
displays available outnumbered square displays by about two to one, and 
as of mid-2010 that ratio had increased to about three to one. "Square" 
displays are a dying breed. 
Screen size 
Screen size is simply the diagonal measurement of the screen. Current 
desktop displays range from 17" to 30" diagonally. There are two schools 
of thought about screen size. One argues that you should buy the largest, 
highest-quality display that you can afford and have space for. The other 
argues that two or more smaller displays are more useful than a single 
larger display. If you choose the latter route, make sure that your video 
adapter and drives support multiple displays. 
All three of these characteristics are interrelated in real-world displays. Various 
standards—official, unofficial, and semi-official—exist that tie these charac-
teristics together. Table 2-2 lists important desktop display standards in order 
of increasing total display resolution. 
Table 2-2. Desktop 
display 
standards 
1 Name 
Display size and type 
Resolution 
AR 
Megapixels 
I 
W X G A + 
17"and 19" widescreen 
1440X900 
16:10 
1.296 
SXGA 
17"and 19" square 
1280X1024 
5:4 
1.310 
"900P" 
20" widescreen 
1600X900 
16:9 
1.440 
W S X G A + 
22" widescreen 
1680X1050 
16:10 
1.764 
UXGA 
20"and 21"square 
1600X1200 
4:3 
1.920 
1080P 
21"through 27" widescreen 
1920X1080 
16:9 
2.073 
W U X G A 
23"through 28" widescreen 
1920X1200 
16:10 
2.304 
W Q X G A 
30" widescreen 
2560X1600 
16:10 
4.096 
Choosing and Buying Components 
73 

Beyond the basics, here are some other factors to consider: 
Interface(s) 
Displays may provide one or several interfaces. A few inexpensive mod-
els provide only a DB-15 analog (VGA) connector. Most displays provide 
both a DB-15 and a Digital Visual Interface (DVI) connector, which may be 
analog-only (DVI-A), digital-only (DVI-D), or hybrid analog/digital (DVI-I). 
Some displays provide a High-Definition Multimedia Interface (HDMI), 
which is compatible with DVI-D but also includes the audio signal on the 
same connector. If your video adapter has a DVI-D or DVI-I connector and 
your display has an HDMI connector, or vice versa, you can purchase an 
adapter cable that will allow the two to function together. 
If you intend to watch copy-protected content (such as Blu-ray movies) 
on your display, make sure at least one of the DVI or HDMI connectors 
includes High-bandwidth Digital Content Protection (HDCP) support. 
Brightness and contrast 
A bright display is important, particularly if your viewing environment 
is well lit, and also to give you some reserve as the display backlight-
ing gradually dims with usage. Brightness is specified in nits (candellas/ 
square meter, or cd/m2).The least-expensive displays may be rated at only 
200 nits. Better displays are generally rated at 250 to 300 nits, and a few 
high-end or specialty displays may be rated at 400 nits or more. We con-
sider a display rated at 250 nits or more to be sufficient. 
Contrast specifies the ratio between the luminances of the brightest 
white and darkest black the monitor can display, and is determined by 
panel type and quality as well as backlight intensity. A monitor with high 
contrast can display very dark shadows and very bright highlights simul-
taneously and shows gradation in both the shadows and the highlights. 
Inexpensive displays have contrast ratios as small as 300:1, and some 
high-end or specialty displays are rated as high as 10,000,000:1. 
Unfortunately, contrast specifications are essentially useless. Different 
display makers use different methods to calculate them.Two comparable 
displays from different makers may have identical actual contrasts, and yet 
one manufacturer may rate its display at 500:1 and the other at 1,000:1. As 
far as we know, each manufacturer is consistent. For example, if one ASUS 
display is rated at 500:1 and another at 1,000:1, it's safe to assume that the 
latter display has superior contrast. 
Response time 
Fast response time is important to avoid smearing and other artifacts dur-
ing fast-motion video segments, particularly with 3D computer games. 
Typical displays have 4 millisecond (ms) or 5 ms response times, which are 
sufficient for anything other than extreme gaming. Premium models and 
those targeted at gamers typically have 2 ms to 3 ms response times, with 
a few models at less than 2 ms. Inexpensive displays and very large dis-
plays may have slower response times, typically 6 msto 10 ms, but some-
times 20 ms or more. For general use, we consider a response time of 10 
Chapter 2 

ms or less adequate. If you watch a lot of HD video, look for a model rated 
at 5 ms or less. If you're heavily into extreme gaming, look for a model 
rated at 3 ms or less. 
Backlighting 
LCD displays backlight the image one of two ways: 
CCRT 
Most displays use old cathode ray tub (CCRT) illumination. CCRTs are 
similar to fluorescent tubes and are subject to failure and to gradual 
dimming overtime. 
LED 
Some premium displays substitute white LEDs for the CCRTs. Entry-
level LED models—which are still more expensive than CCRT models— 
are sdge-i , with LEDs along the edges of the panel. More expensive 
full-fiela LED displays use a large numbers of LEDs behind the entire 
surface of the panel. 
LED backlighting has several advantages. First, LEDs do not burn out 
or dim noticeably over time (a typical LED might dim to 50% of its 
original brightness after 50 years of constant use). Second, LEDs can 
be significantly brighter than CCRTs, which allows higher contrast and 
a brighter image.Third, full-field LED displays can greatly increase the 
dynamic contrast range of the image by selectively illuminating only 
some of the LEDs in the array. In brighter image areas, all LEDs are lit; 
in dimmer areas, only a fraction of the LEDs are lit. 
We consider CCRT displays acceptable for almost any purpose. Rather 
than spending money on LED backlighting, we'd spend it on a larger or 
higher-resolution CCRT display—for now, at least. Currently, about 10% 
of all LCD displays use LED backlighting. As the technology becomes less 
expensive, we expect it to replace CCRTs entirely. 
Minor features 
We suggest you choose your display based on the factors we've already 
discussed. If those aren't sufficient to narrow down your choice to one dis-
play, it's time to start looking at less important factors. Taken individually, 
all of these "extra" features may be minor, but taken as a group they may 
be enough to swing your decision to one particular model. 
Some displays include built-in speakers, which are at best mediocre but 
may be good enough for your purposes (if only to reduce desktop clutter). 
Some displays also include a built-in microphone that's useful for Skype 
and similar VoIP services. Although it is less common than it was a few 
years ago, a few displays include a built-in webcam, which is useful for 
Skype or recording YouTube videos. Finally, to reduce desktop clutter, a 
few displays include a built-in USB 2.0 hub. Note that some of these are 
passive hubs, and may not have sufficient power for many USB devices. 
Others are powered USB hubs and work just the same as any other USB 
hub. 
Choosing and Buying Components 93 

Choosing Components 
Brian Bilbrey Comments 
/ continue to use my Creative PCI 
audio card, because often the newest 
motherboard 
has good support in 
Linux for everything but the audio. 
When PCI is gone, whatever shall I 
do? 
Recommended display brands 
Our opinion, confirmed by our readers and colleagues, is that ASUS (http:// 
usa.asus.com), NEC (http://www.necdisplay.com), Samsung (http://www. 
samsung.com), and ViewSonic (http://www.viewsonic.com) make the best dis-
plays available. Their displays, particularly midrange and better models, pro-
vide excellent image quality and are quite reliable. You're likely to be happy 
with a display from any of these first-tier manufacturers. One up-and-coming 
display manufacturer that we've heard lots of good things about is Hanns.G 
(http://www.hannsg.com/us). Its displays are generally a bit less expensive than 
comparable models from the top-tier makers, but have competitive specifica-
tions. Most Hanns-G owners we've spoken with are extremely pleased with 
their displays. 
Audio Adapter 
Audio adapters, also called sound cards, are almost a dead breed. Integrated 
audio is more than good enough for nearly any purpose. Consider buying a 
separate audio adapter only if you are building an extreme gaming rig, a me-
dia center/home theater system that will connect to a professional-level sound 
system, or a professional audio/video-production system. Even for those pur-
poses, chances are you'll find integrated audio sufficient, so try it before you 
buy a separate audio adapter. 
Internal audio adapters are available to fit PCI slots or PCI Express slots. Be-
fore you buy an internal audio adapter, make sure you have an available slot 
of the proper type. External audio adapters, intended primarily for notebook 
systems, connect to the computer via USB. 
Recommended audio adapter brands 
Unless you have good reason to do otherwise, use the integrated mother-
board audio. For extreme gaming, choose a Creative Labs (http://us.creative. 
com) Xi-Fi card or an Auzentech (http://www.auzentech.com) Xi-Fi card with 
the features and specifications you need. Some gamers and media center/ 
home theater system-builders prefer ASUS (http://usa.asus.com) Xonar series 
sound cards. If you're an audiophile or do serious audio/video production, 
choose an M-AUDIO (http://www.m-audio.com) adapter with the features and 
specifications you need. 
Speakers 
Computer speakers span the range from $10 pairs of small satellites to $500+ 
sets of five speakers that are suitable for home theater systems. Personal pref-
erence is the most important factor in choosing speakers. 
Speakers that render a Bach concerto superbly are often not the best choice 
for playing a first-person shooter game. For that matter, speakers that one 
person considers perfect for the Bach concerto (or the game), another person 
may consider mediocre at best. For that reason, we strongly suggest that you 
attempt to listen to speakers before you buy them, particularly if you're buying 
an expensive set. 
76 
Chapter 2 

Speaker sets are designated by the total number of satellite speakers, followed 
by a period and a "1 "if the set includes a subwoofer (also called a low-frequency 
emitter, or LFE). Speaker sets are available in 2.0 (front left/right satellites), 2.1 
(front left/right satellites and a subwoofer), and 5.1 (front/back and left/right 
satellites, a front-center satellite, and a subwoofer) configurations. 
Other than configuration, the main specification for a speaker set is the watt-
age of the various speakers. That value should be provided as RMS wattage 
but is sometimes specified as the much higher peak wattage value. Don't fall 
prey to wattage overkill. Just a few watts per satellite is sufficient to produce 
uncomfortably loud sound, and a 100W subwoofer can literally rattle the walls. 
The advantage of high wattage ratings is that such speakers have a wide dy-
namic range with full sound quality. A high-wattage speaker may typically ac-
tually use only a few watts, but when a very loud transient (such as a gunshot 
in a game or a crescendo in a concert) occurs, the high-power amplifier has 
sufficient power to accurately reproduce that sound at the proper high vol-
ume. A less expensive speaker with a lower-power amplifier has to strain to 
reproduce such transients, and will do so at lower sound quality and volume 
than the more capable speaker. 
The price of a speaker set doesn't necessarily correspond to the number of 
speakers in the set or their wattage. Both speaker (driver) quality and amplifier 
quality are important. There are inexpensive 5.1 speaker sets with relatively 
high wattage—which use cheap drivers and cheap amplifiers—and some 
low-wattage 2.0 or 2.1 sets that cost a bundle but provide top-notch sound. 
We recommend that you decide on the number of speakers according to your 
needs and your budget. Buy a 5.1 set only for serious gaming or media center/ 
home theater use; otherwise, buy the best 2.0 or 2.1 set you can afford. If you 
have $75 to spend, for example, you're better off buying a good 2.1 speaker set 
than a cheesy 5.1 set. (Barbara uses a 2.0 M-AUDIO studio monitor set on her 
primary computer; Robert uses a 2.1 Logitech Z-series set on his.) 
Recommended speaker brands 
Altec-Lansing (http://www.alteclansing.com), Creative (http://us.creative.com), 
and Logitech (http://www.logitech.com) all offer speaker sets in all three 
configurations in a range of prices, from $15 2.0 sets to 5.1 sets that cost sev-
eral hundred dollars. All of them offer excellent value in their price ranges, 
although we admit to a preference for Logitech. At the high end, M-AUDIO 
(http://www.m-audio.com) offers premium-quality 2.0 and 2.1 sets and has an 
excellent reputation with audiophiles. 
Keyboards 
The best keyboard is a matter of personal preference. A keyboard we really 
like, you may dislike intensely, and vice versa. Ultimately, your own preferenc-
es are the only guide. 
Keyboards vary in obvious ways—layout, size, and style—and in subtle ways 
like key spacing, angle, dishing, travel, pressure required, and tactile feedback. 
People's sensitivity to these differences varies. Some are keyboard agnostics 
Choosing and Buying Components 95 

who can sit down in front of a new keyboard and, regardless of layout or tactile 
response, be up to speed in a few minutes. Others have strong preferences 
about layout and feel. If you've never met a keyboard you didn't like, you can 
disregard these issues and choose a keyboard based on other factors. If love 
and hate are words you apply to keyboards, use an identical keyboard for at 
least an hour before you buy one for yourself. 
That said, here are several important characteristics to consider when you 
choose a keyboard: 
• Keyboards are available in two styles, the older straight keyboard and the 
modern ergonomic style. Some people strongly prefer one or the other. 
Others don't care. If you've never used an ergonomic keyboard, give one 
a try before you buy your next keyboard. You may hate it—everyone does 
at first—but then again, after you've used it for an hour or so you may 
decide you love it. 
• The position of the alphanumeric keys is standard on all keyboards other 
than those that use the oddball Dvorak layout. What varies, sometimes 
dramatically, is the placement, size, and shape of other keys, such as shift 
keys (Shift, Ctrl, and Alt), function keys (which may be across the top, 
down the left side, or both), and cursor control and numeric keypad keys. 
If you are used to a particular layout, purchasing a keyboard with a similar 
layout makes it easier to adapt to the new keyboard. 
• Most current keyboards use the USB interface natively and are supplied 
with an adapter for those who need to connect them to a PS/2 keyboard 
port. We use mostly USB keyboards, but it's a good idea to have at least 
one PS/2 keyboard available (or a PS/2 adapter) for those times when Win-
dows shoots craps and won't recognize USB devices. 
• Some keyboards provide dedicated and/or programmable function keys 
to automate such things as firing up your browser or email client, or to 
allow you to define custom macros that can be invoked with a single key-
stroke. These functions are typically not built into the keyboard itself, but 
require loading a driver. To take advantage of those functions, make sure 
a driver is available for the OS you use. 
• The weight of a keyboard can be a significant issue for some people. The 
lightest keyboard we've seen weighed just over a pound, and the heavi-
est nearly eight pounds. If your keyboard stays on your desktop, a heavy 
keyboard is less likely to slide around. Conversely, a heavy keyboard may 
be uncomfortable if you work with the keyboard in your lap. 
• Some manufacturers produce keyboards with speakers, scanners, and 
other entirely unrelated functions built in. These functions are often clum-
sy to use, fragile, and have limited features. If you want speakers or a scan-
ner, buy speakers or a scanner. Don't get a keyboard with them built in. 
• Wireless keyboards are ideal for presentations, TV-based web browsing, 
or just for working with the keyboard in your lap. Wireless keyboards use 
a receiver module that connects to a USB port or the PS/2 keyboard port 
on the PC. The keyboard and receiver communicate using either radio 
frequency (RF) or infrared (IR). IR keyboards require a direct line of sight 
Chapter 2 

Choosing Components 
between the keyboard and receiver, while RF keyboards do not. Most IR 
keyboards and many RF keyboards provide limited range—as little as five 
feet or so—which limits their utility to working around a desk without 
cables tangling. Any wireless keyboard you buy should use standard AA, 
AAA, or 9V alkaline or NiMH batteries rather than a proprietary battery 
pack. 
Recommended keyboard brands 
Logitech (http://www.logitech.com) and Microsoft (http://www.microsoft.com) 
both produce a wide range of excellent keyboards, one of which is almost 
certainly right for you. Even their basic models are well built and reliable. The 
more expensive models add features such as RF or Bluetooth wireless connec-
tivity, programmable function keys, and so on. 
Mice 
Choosing a mouse is much like choosing a keyboard. Personal preference is 
by far the most important consideration. If possible, try a mouse before you 
buy it. 
Use the following guidelines when choosing a mouse: 
• Mice are available in various sizes and shapes, including small mice in-
tended for children, notebook-sized mice, the formerly standard "Dove 
bar" size, the mainstream ergonomic mouse, and some oversized mice 
that have many buttons and extra features. Most people find standard-
sized mice comfortable to use for short periods, but if you use a mouse for 
longer periods small differences in size and shape often make a big differ-
ence in comfort and usability. Although oversized mice provide attractive 
features and functions, people with small hands may find such mice too 
large to use comfortably. Pay particular attention to mouse shape if you 
are left-handed. Although asymmetric ergonomic mice are often claimed 
to be equally usable by left- and right-handers, many lefties find them un-
comfortable and resort to right-handed mousing. Some manufacturers, 
including Logitech, produce symmetric ergonomic mice. 
Ron Morse Comments 
/ have to put in a plug for the guys at 
Unicomp, who still make the classic 
IBM Model "M" keyboards 
to IBM's 
original design and 
specifications 
(http://pckeyboards.stores.yahoo. 
net/keyboards.html). 
They're heavy so they don't 
move 
around and have the same key spac-
ing and "touch" as the IBM Selectric 
typewriter. They're built like tanks 
(mine has been in daily use since 
1994). 
No other keyboard has the glorious 
tactile response of the Model "M," 
and there is absolutely no 
ambigu-
ity about whether a keystroke has 
registered or not. Not to mention 
the wonderful dicky noise that tells 
everyone in the room you're gettin' 
'erdone. 
Unicomp sells a number of styles and 
sizes starting at about $70, 
including 
customized 
models for point of sale 
or other special purposes. 
There's 
even a Linux model (no, you 
don't 
have to build it yourself). They also 
sell the same keyboards 
with quiet, 
rubber dome key switches 
instead 
of the traditional "buckling 
spring" 
design for use in quiet 
environments. 
Unicomp keyboards can be ordered 
with either the mini-DIN (PS/2) or 
USB interface. 
Small Hands, Big Mouse 
Don't assume that hand size and mouse size are necessarily related. For example, 
Barbara, who has small hands, prefers the Microsoft IntelliMouse Explorer, which is 
an oversized mouse. She found that using a standard or small mouse for long peri-
ods caused her hand to hurt. Changing 
to a large mouse solved the problem. 
• Get a wheel mouse. Although some applications do not support the 
wheel, those that do are the ones most people are likely to use a great 
deal—Microsoft Office, Internet Explorer, Firefox, and so on. Using the 
wheel greatly improves mouse functionality by reducing the amount of 
mouse movement needed to navigate web pages and documents. Mice 
with a tilt-wheel allow you to scroll vertically and horizontally. 
Choosing and Buying Components 
79 

Choosing 
Components 
• Standard two-button mice (three, counting the wheel) suffice for most 
purposes. However, five-button mice are ideally suited to some applica-
tions, such as games and web browsing. For example, the two extra but-
tons can be mapped totheBackand Forward browser buttons, eliminating 
a great deal of extraneous mouse movement. 
• Mice have cords ranging in length from less than 4 feet to about 9 feet. A 
short mouse cord may be too short to reach the system, particularly if it is 
on the floor. If you need a longer mouse cord, purchase a PS/2 keyboard or 
USB extension cable, available in nearly any computer store. 
• Consider buying a cordless mouse. The absence of a cord can make a sur-
prising difference. 
Recommended mouse brands 
Logitech (http://www.logitech.com) and Microsoft (http://www.microsoft.com) 
both produce a wide range of excellent optical mice, in corded and cordless 
models. One of them is almost certainly right for you. Even their basic models 
are well built and reliable. The more expensive models have more features, 
are more precise, and are probably more durable. We use both Logitech and 
Microsoft mice on our personal systems. 
Buying Components 
We've bought a boatload of PC components over the last 25 years, for our-
selves and on behalf of employers and clients. In the following sections, we'll 
tell you what we learned along the way. 
Buying Guidelines 
Until the early 1990s, most computer products were bought in computer spe-
cialty stores. Retail sales still make up a significant chunk of computer product 
sales—although the emphasis has shifted from computer specialty stores to 
local "big-box" retailers like Best Buy, Fry's, Walmart, and Costco—but online 
resellers now account for a large percentage of PC component sales. 
Should you buy from a local brick-and-mortar retailer or an online reseller? We 
do both, because each has advantages and disadvantages. 
Local retailers offer the inestimable advantage of instant gratification. Unless 
you're more patient than we are, when you want something, you want it Right 
Now. Buying from a local retailer puts the product in your hands instantly, in-
stead of making you wait for FedEx to show up. You can also hold the product 
in your hands, something that's not possible if you buy from an online reseller. 
Additionally, local retailers have a big advantage if you need to return or ex-
change a product: if something doesn't work right, or if you simply change 
your mind, you can just drive back to the store rather than dealing with the 
hassles and cost of returning a product to an online reseller. 
Online resellers have the advantage in breadth and depth of product selection. 
If you want the less expensive OEM version of a product, for example, chances 
are you won't find it at local retailers, most of which stock only retail-boxed 
Mouse Alternatives 
Consider using a trackball or touch-
pad, particularly if you 
experience 
hand pain when using a mouse. 
80 
Chapter 2 

Choosing 
Components 
products. If an online reseller stocks a particular manufacturer's products, it 
will tend to stock the entire product line, whereas local retailers often pick 
and choose only the most popular items in a product line. Of course, the pop-
ular products are usually popular for good reasons. Online resellers are also 
more likely to stock niche products and products from smaller manufacturers. 
Sometimes, if you must have a particular product, the only option is to buy it 
online. 
Online resellers usually advertise lower prices than local retailers, but it's a mis-
take to compare only nominal prices. When you buy from a local retailer, you 
pay only the advertised price plus any applicable sales tax. When you buy from 
an online retailer, you pay the advertised price plus shipping, which may end 
up costing you more than buying locally. 
Although online resellers may have a lower overall price on a given compo-
nent, it's a mistake to assume that this is always the case. Local retailers fre-
quently run sales and rebate promotions that cut the price of a component 
below the lowest online price. For example, we bought a spindle of 100 discs 
on sale from a local retailer for $19.95 with a $10 instant rebate and a $20 mail-
in rebate. After the cost of the stamp to mail in the rebate form, they paid us 
$9.68 to carry away those 100 discs, which is pretty tough for an online reseller 
to match. 
In particular, local retailers are usually the best place to buy heavy, bulky, or 
fragile items, such as monitors, cases, UPSs, and so on. Local retailers receive 
these items in pallet loads, which makes the cost of shipping an individual 
item almost nothing. Conversely, online resellers have to charge you, directly 
or indirectly, for the cost of getting that heavy item to your door. 
Whether your purchase your PC components from a local brick-and-mortar 
store or a web-based retailer, here are some guidelines to keep in mind: 
• Make sure you know exactly what you're buying. For example, a hard 
drive may be available in two versions, each with the same or a similar 
model number but with an added letter or number to designate different 
amounts of cache. Or a hard drive maker may produce two models of the 
same size that differ in price and performance. Always compare using the 
exact manufacturer model numbers. Before you buy a product, research 
it on the manufacturer's website and on the numerous independent 
websites devoted to reviews. We usually search Google with the product 
name and "review" in the search string. 
• Vendors vary greatly. Some we trust implicitly, and others we wouldn't 
order from on a bet. Some are always reliable, others always unreliable, 
and still others seem to vary with the phases of the moon. We checkhttp:// 
www.resellerratings.com, which maintains a database of customer-reported 
experiences with hundreds of vendors. 
• The list price or suggested retail price (SRP) is meaningless. Most com-
puter products sell for a fraction of the SRP, others sell for near the SRP, 
and for still others the manufacturer has no SRP but instead publishes an 
estimated selling price (ESP). To do meaningful comparisons, you need to 
know what different vendors charge for the product. Fortunately, there 
- A 
1 Use Tax 
1 
Ah, but you don't have to pay sales 
. 
tax when you buy online, right? Well, 
i 
maybe. In most jurisdictions, 
you're 
1 
required by law to pay a use tax 
in lieu of sales tax on 
out-of-state 
i 
purchases. Most people evade use 
1 
taxes, of course, but that free ride is 
coming to an end. States faced with 
i 
increasing budget problems, 
which 
1 
is to say all of them, are starting to 
clamp down on people who buy 
i 
from online resellers and don't pay 
1 
use tax. States are using 
data-mining 
techniques to coordinate with one 
i 
another and with credit card 
compa-
1 
nies and online retailers to uncover 
' 
unpaid use taxes. If you don't pay use 
i 
taxes, one day soon you're likely to 
1 
hear from the auditdivision 
of your 
state department of revenue, 
asking 
i 
what those credit card charges 
were 
1 
for and why you didn't report the use 
' 
taxes due on them. Count on it. 
Choosing and Buying Components 
81 

are many services that list what various vendors charge. We use http:// 
www.pricescan.com,http://www.pricewatch.com, http://www.pricegrabber. 
com, and http://www.froogle.com. These services may list 20 or more dif-
ferent vendors, and the prices for a particular item may vary dramatically. 
We discard the top 25% and the bottom 25% and average the middle 50% 
to decide a reasonable price for the item. 
• Many components are sold in retail-boxed and OEM forms. The core com-
ponent is likely to be similar or identical in either case, but important details 
may vary. For example, processors are available in retail-boxed versions 
that include a CPU cooler and a three-year warranty. They are also avail-
able as OEM components (also called tray packaging or vhitebo ) that do 
not include the CPU cooler and have only a 90-day warranty. OEM items 
are not intended for retail distribution, so some manufacturers provide 
no warranty to individual purchasers. OEM components are fine, as long 
as you understand the differences and do not attempt to compare prices 
between retail-boxed and OEM. 
• The market for PCs and components is incredibly competitive and mar-
gins are razor-thin. If a vendor advertises a component for much less than 
other vendors, it may be a "loss leader." More likely, though, particularly if 
its prices on other items are similarly low, that vendor is cutting corners, 
whether by using your money to float inventory, by shipping returned 
products as new, by charging excessive shipping fees, or, in the ultimate 
case, by taking your money and not shipping the product. If you always 
buy from the vendor with the rock-bottom price, chances are you'll waste 
a lot of time hassling with returns of defective, used, or discontinued 
items and dealing with your credit card company when the vendor fails 
to deliver at all. Ultimately, you're likely to spend more money than you 
would have by buying from a reputable vendor in the first place. 
• The actual price you pay may vary significantly from the advertised price. 
When you compare prices, include all charges, particularly shipping 
charges. Reputable vendors tell you exactly how much the total charges 
will be. Less reputable vendors may forget to mention shipping charges, 
which could be very high. Some vendors break out the full manufacturer 
pack into individual items. For example, if a retail-boxed hard drive in-
cludes mounting hardware, some vendors will quote a price for the bare 
drive without making it clear that they have removed the mounting hard-
ware and charge separately for it. Also be careful when buying products 
that include a rebate from the maker. Some vendors quote the net price 
after the rebate without making it clear that they are doing so. 
• Some vendors charge more for an item ordered via their 800 number 
than they do for the same item ordered directly from their website. Some 
others add a fixed processing fee to phone orders. These charges reflect 
the fact that taking orders on the Web is much cheaper than doing it by 
phone, so this practice has become common. In contrast, some of our fa-
vorite vendors do not even provide telephone order lines. 
Chapter 2 

Choosing 
Components 
• It can be very expensive to ship heavy items such as UPSs and printers 
individually. This is one situation in which local big-box stores like Best 
Buy have an advantage over online vendors. The online vendor has to 
charge you for the cost of shipping, directly or indirectly, and that cost can 
amount to $50 or more for a heavy item that you need quickly. Conversely, 
the big-box stores receive inventory items by the truckload or even via 
railcar shipments, so the cost to them to have a single item delivered is 
quite small. They can pass that reduced cost on to buyers. If you're buy-
ing a heavy item, don't assume that it will be cheaper online. Check your 
local Best Buy or other big-box store: you may find that it actually costs 
less there, even after you pay sales tax. And you can carry it away with you 
instead of waiting for FedEx to show up with it. 
• Most direct resellers are willing to sell for less than the price they adver-
tise. All you need to do is tell your chosen vendor that you'd really rather 
buy from them, but not at the price they're quoting. Use lower prices you 
find with the price comparison services as a wedge to get a better price. 
But remember that reputable vendors must charge more than the fly-by-
night operations if they are to make a profit and stay in business. If we're 
ordering by phone, we generally try to beat down our chosen vendor a 
bit on price, but we don't expect them to match the rock-bottom prices 
that turn up on web searches. Of course, if you're ordering from a web-
only vendor, dickering is not an option, which is one reason why web-only 
vendors generally have better prices. 
• Using a credit card puts the credit card company on your side if there is a 
problem with your order. If the vendor ships the wrong product, a defec-
tive product, or no product at all, you can invoke chargeback procedures 
to have the credit card company refund your money. Vendors who live 
and die on credit card orders cannot afford to annoy credit card compa-
nies, so they tend to resolve such problems quickly. Even your threat to 
request a chargeback may cause a recalcitrant vendor to see reason. 
• Some vendors add a surcharge, typically 3%, to their advertised prices if 
you pay by credit card. Surcharges violate credit card company contracts, 
so some vendors instead offer a similar discount for paying cash, which 
amounts to the same thing. Processing credit card transactions costs 
money, and we're sure that some such vendors are quite reputable, but 
our own experience with vendors that surcharge has not been good. We 
always suspect that they discourage using credit cards because their 
business practices result in a relatively high percentage of chargeback 
requests. 
• Good vendors allow you to return a defective product for replacement or 
a full refund (often less shipping charges) within a stated period, typically 
30 days. Buy only from such vendors. Nearly all vendors exclude some 
product categories, such as notebook computers, monitors, printers, and 
opened software, either because their contracts with the manufacturer 
require them to do so or because some buyers commonly abuse return 
periods for these items, treating them as "30-day free rentals." Beware of 
the phrase "All sales are final."That means exactly what it says. 
A Cunning Plan 
Nearly all retailers refuse to refund 
your money on opened 
software, 
DVDs, etc. and will only 
exchange 
the open product for a new, sealed 
copy of the same title. One of our 
readers told us how he gets 
around 
that common 
policy: he returns the 
open software in exchange for a new, 
sealed copy of the same 
product, 
keeping his original receipt. He then 
returns the new, sealed copy for a 
refund. That's probably 
unethical 
and maybe 
illegal for all we know, 
but it does work. Recently, 
though, 
some stores, including Best Buy, 
have begun annotating 
the original 
receipt when you make an 
exchange. 
Oh, well. It was too good to last. 
Choosing and Buying Components 
83 

• Check carefully for any mention of restocking fees. Many vendors who 
trumpet a "No questions asked money-back guarantee" mention only in 
the fine print that they won't refund all your money—they charge a re-
stocking fee on returns. We've seen fees as high as 30% of the purchase 
price. These vendors love returns, because they make a lot more money 
if you return the product than if you keep it. Do not buy from a vendor 
that charges restocking fees on exchanges (as opposed to refunds). For 
refunds, accept no restocking fee higher than 10% to 15%, depending on 
the price of the item. 
• If you order by phone, don't accept verbal promises. Insist that the reseller 
confirm your order in writing, including any special terms or conditions, 
before charging your credit card or shipping the product. If a reseller balks 
at providing written confirmation of its policies, terms, and conditions, 
find another vendor. Most are happy to do so. If you're ordering from a 
vendor that uses web-based ordering exclusively, use a screen-capture 
program or your browser's save function to grab copies of each screen as 
you complete the order. Most vendors send a confirming email, which we 
file in our "Never Delete"folder. 
• File everything related to an order, including a copy of the original ad-
vertisement, the email (or faxed or written) confirmation provided by the 
reseller, copies of your credit card receipt, a copy of the packing list and 
invoice, and so on. We also jot down notes in our PIM regarding telephone 
conversations, including the date, time, telephone number and exten-
sion, person spoken to, purpose of the call, and so on. We print a copy of 
those to add to the folder for that order. 
• Make it clear to the reseller that you expect them to ship the exact item 
you have ordered, not what they consider to be an "equivalent substi-
tute." Require that they confirm the exact items they will ship, including 
manufacturer part numbers. For example, if you order an EVGA 512-P3-
N871-AR GeForce 9800 GTX+ graphics card with 512 MB of RAM, make 
sure the order confirmation specifies that item by name, full description, 
and EVGA product number. Don't accept a less detailed description such 
as "graphics card,""EVGA graphics card,"or even "EVGA 9800 GTX graphics 
card." Otherwise, you may get less than you paid for—a lesser GeForce 
card, a card with a slower processor or less memory, or even a card with a 
GeForce processor made by another manufacturer. 
• Verify warranty terms. Some manufacturers warrant only items purchased 
from authorized dealers in full retail packaging. For some items, the war-
ranty begins when the manufacturer ships the product to the distribu-
tor, which may be long before you receive it. OEM products typically have 
much shorter warranties than retail-boxed products—sometimes as short 
as 90 days—and may be warranted only to the original distributor rather 
than to the final buyer. Better resellers may "endorse the manufacturer 
warranty" for some period on some products, often 30 to 90 days. That 
means that if the product fails, you can return the item to the reseller, who 
will ship you a replacement and take care of dealing with the manufactur-
er. Some resellers disclaim the manufacturer warranty, claiming that once 
they ship the item dealing with warranty claims is your problem, even if 
Chapter 2 

Choosing 
Components 
the product arrives DOA. We've encountered that problem a couple of 
times. Usually, mentioning phrases like "merchantability and fitness for 
a particular purpose" and "revocation of acceptance" leads them to see 
reason quickly. We usually demand that the reseller ship us a new replace-
ment product immediately and include a prepaid return shipping label if 
they want the dead item back. We don't accept or pay for dead merchan-
dise under any circumstances, and neither should you. 
• Direct resellers are required by law to ship products within the time pe-
riod they promise. But that time period may be precise (e.g., "ships within 
24 hours") or vague (e.g., "ships within three to six weeks"). If the vendor 
cannot ship by the originally promised date, it must notify you in writing 
and specify another date by which the item will ship. If that occurs, you 
have the right to cancel your order without penalty. Make sure to make 
clear to the reseller that you expect the item to be delivered in a timely 
manner. Reputable vendors ship what they say they're going to ship when 
they say they're going to ship it. Unfortunately, some vendors have a nas-
ty habit of taking your money and shipping whenever they get around 
to it. In a practice that borders on fraud, some vendors routinely report 
items as "in stock" when in fact they are not. Make it clear to the vendor 
that you do not authorize them to charge your credit card until the item 
actually ships, and that if you do not receive the item when promised you 
will cancel the order. 
Even if you follow all of these guidelines, things may go wrong. Even the best 
resellers sometimes drop the ball. If that happens, don't expect the problem 
to go away by itself. If you encounter a problem, remain calm and notify the 
reseller first. Good resellers are anxious to resolve problems. Find out how the 
reseller wants to proceed, and follow their procedures, particularly for labeling 
returned merchandise with an RMA number. 
If you seem to have reached a dead end with the vendor, explain one last time 
why you are dissatisfied and ask them to resolve the problem. Tell them that 
unless they resolve the matter you will request a chargeback from your credit 
card company. Mail-order and Internet vendors live and die on credit card rev-
enue, so maintaining a good relationship with the credit card companies is 
critically important to them. Finally, but only as a last resort, contact your bank 
or credit card issuer and request a chargeback. Be prepared to provide a full 
explanation of the problem with documentation. 
Recommended Sources 
The question we hear more often than any other is, "What company should I 
buy from?" When someone asks us that question, we run away, screaming in 
terror. Well, not really, but we'd like to. Answering that question is a no-win 
proposition for us, you see. If we recommend a vendor and that vendor treats 
the buyer properly, well that's no more than was expected. But Thor forbid 
that we recommend a vendor who turns around and screws the buyer. 
So, which online resellers do we buy from? Over the years, we've bought from 
scores of online vendors, and our favorites have changed. For the last decade or 
so, our favorite has been NewEgg (http://www.newegg.com). NewEgg offers an 
Loot, Pillage, and Burn 
Thor? Yes, it's true. Robert the Red 
is of Viking extraction. On 
govern-
ment forms, he describes 
himself 
as "Viking-American." 
And no, he 
doesn't wear a funny helmet. Except 
among 
friends. And he hasn't pil-
laged anything in months. Years, 
maybe. In fact, he's not 
absolutely 
certain what pillaging is, although it 
does sound like fun. 
Choosing and Buying Components 
85 

Final Words 
Russian Dolls 
One of our readers told us the story 
of ordering a USB thumb drive from 
Amazon. It arrived in its retail blister-
packed card, which was wrapped in 
bubble-wrap, 
which was inserted in a 
padded envelope, which was placed 
in a box filled with packing 
peanuts, 
which was placed in a larger box, 
also filled with packing peanuts. By 
the time our reader actually 
found 
the thumb drive, he'd forgotten 
why 
he ordered it. 
Another Cunning Plan 
If you buy from a local retailer, open 
the box from the bottom rather than 
the top. If you need to return a non-
defective item, that makes it easier 
to repackage 
the product with the 
manufacturer's 
seals intact, which 
keeps the retailer happy and can help 
you avoid restocking fees. 
extraordinarily good combination of competitive prices, wide product selec-
tion, good customer support, timely shipping, and fair return or replacement 
policies. We know of no other direct vendor that even comes close. 
NewEgg's prices aren't always rock-bottom, but they generally match those 
of any other vendor we're willing to deal with. NewEgg runs daily specials 
that are often real bargains, so if you're willing to consider alternatives and to 
accumulate components over the course of a few weeks, you can save a fair 
amount of money. NewEgg ships what it says it's going to ship, when it says it's 
going to ship it, and at the price it agreed to ship it for. If there's a problem, it's 
rectified. It's hard to do better than that. 
In the last year or two, we've started ordering some computer components 
from Amazon (http://www.amazon.com). Amazon's selection is not as wide 
as NewEgg's for most items, but its prices are excellent. Amazon generally 
ships quickly, and we consider it on a par with NewEgg for hassle-free order-
ing. Packaging is one area where Amazon has an advantage over NewEgg. Al-
though NewEgg has recently taken steps to improve its packaging, in the past 
we have received components from NewEgg that were damaged in shipping. 
Conversely, Amazon's attitude is apparently that nothing succeeds like excess. 
In the past, Amazon over-packaged, to put it mildly. So much so that it's re-
ceived complaints about all the packaging material that needs to be recycled. 
Fortunately, Amazon has responded to these complaints and now uses sane 
packaging. 
All of that said, if you buy from NewEgg or Amazon and subsequently your 
goldfish dies and all your teeth fall out, don't blame us. All we can say is that 
NewEgg and Amazon have always treated us right. Things can change over-
night in this industry and, while we don't expect NewEgg or Amazon to take a 
sudden turn for the worse, it could happen. 
As for local retailers, we buy from—in no particular order—Best Buy, Target, 
Office Depot, OfficeMax, and our local computer specialty stores, depending 
on what we need and who happens to have advertised the best prices and 
rebates in the Sunday ad supplements. Walmart, which used to sell only as-
sembled PCs, has recently started stocking PC components such as ATI video 
adapters, so we'll add Walmart to our list as well. 
Final Words 
We've done our best in this chapter to tell you how to choose components 
for your new system and where and how to buy them. The specific compo-
nents you need differ according to the type of system you plan to build. We 
describe how to make component-specific decisions in the "project system" 
chapters later in the book. So, before you actually start ordering components, 
you might want to read some (or all) of those chapters. 
When the components arrive, restrain yourself. Don't start building your sys-
tem before the FedEx truck even pulls out of your driveway, particularly if this 
is your first system build. Read or re-read the relevant project chapter first. 
86 
Chapter 2 

One thing you should do immediately, though, is check the contents of the 
boxes that were just delivered. Verify what you ordered against the packing 
list and invoice, and verify what's actually in the box against those documents. 
Usually everything will be right, but if you have components coming from dif-
ferent sources, you don't want to wait a week or two before finding out that an 
early shipment was wrong or incomplete. 
Take it a step further. Once you've verified that everything is correct with 
the order, start opening the individual component boxes. Look for a pack-
ing list in the front of the manual, and make sure that you actually received 
everything that was supposed to be in the box. It's not uncommon for small 
parts—mounting hardware, cables, driver CDs, and so on—to be missing. If 
that happens, call the vendor immediately and tell them what's missing from 
your order. 
At this point, you should have everything you need to start building your new 
PC. It's kind of like being a kid again, on Christmas morning. 
Choosing and Buying Components 105 

3 
Building a Budget PC 
w 
IN THIS CHAPTER 
Determining Functional Requirements 
Hardware Design Criteria 
Component Considerations 
Building the Budget System 
Final Words 
We define a budget system as one that seeks the maximum bang for the mini-
mum buck, offering good component quality, reasonable performance, and 
high reliability. A budget PC uses good-quality components throughout, but 
those components fall on the low end of the performance range. They may 
even be a generation or two out of date. That's not necessarily a bad thing, 
though: last year's models are every bit as good this year as they were 12 
months ago, and you can save a lot of money if you don't insist on the very 
latest components. 
In pursuit of low prices, we don't hesitate to buy components that are discon-
tinued and on sale. There are few disadvantages to doing so. Discontinued 
products nearly always carry the full manufacturer warranty and function as 
well as they did when they were the latest and greatest products available. 
Judicious shopping can easily knock $50 or more off the total cost of a budget 
system. That's nothing to sneeze at when your total budget is only a few hun-
dred dollars. 
In this chapter, we'll design and build the perfect budget PC. 
Inexpensive doesn't have to mean cheap. The myth persists that you can't save 
money building your own PC, particularly a budget system. In fact, it's easy to 
match the price of a mass-market commercial system with a home-built sys-
tem that uses higher-quality components. Of course, you could instead match 
the quality level of a mass-market commercial system by buying the cheapest 
components available and save a few bucks by doing so, but we don't recom-
mend doing that. We think there are good reasons to build inexpensive systems, 
but no reasons at all to build cheap systems. 
89 

Determining Functional Requirements 
We began by sitting down to think through our own requirements for a bud-
get PC. Here's the list of functional requirements we came up with: 
Reliability 
Reliability is important for a budget PC, just as it is for any computer. Al-
though our limited budget may force us to make minor compromises in 
reliability—such as using a lower-capacity power supply than we might 
otherwise choose—we'll still keep reliability firmly in mind as we select 
components. When we're forced to choose—as we inevitably will b e — 
among performance, capacity, or features versus reliability, we'll always 
favor the latter. 
Adequate performance 
In order to be useful, a budget PC must perform adequately. Cheap 
consumer-grade PCs are often obsolete the day they're unpacked. Most 
of them have slow processors, insufficient memory, small hard drives, 
and very poor integrated video. That's simply not good enough. For our 
budget PC, we'll aim for a performance level that matches that of a main-
stream or performance PC manufactured a year to 18 months earlier. That 
means we'll need a processor in the 2.5+ GHz class (or a slightly slower 
dual-core model), at least 2 GB of memory, a 7,200 RPM hard drive of 
reasonable capacity, and either fast integrated video or an inexpensive 
standalone video adapter. 
Usable peripherals 
Cheap consumer-grade PCs always scrimp on peripherals. A typical cheap 
mass-market system is bundled with a $2 mouse, a $3 keyboard, a $3 set 
of speakers, a $20 DVD drive, and a $75 monitor, none of which are good 
for anything but the trash bin. We can do better than that, even within the 
constraints of our tight budget. We'll have to spend an extra $5 here and 
$20 there, but we'll end up with solid, usable peripherals that are likely to 
last for the life of the system. 
Noise level 
There's little room in the budget for special quiet components, but that 
doesn't mean a budget PC must necessarily be noisy. We'll choose the qui-
etest components available in our price range, always giving price and re-
liability high priority, but keeping noise level in mind as well. For example, 
two hard drives may be priced identically, but one may be literally twice as 
loud as the other. The same is true of other components, such as cases and 
power supplies. By choosing carefully, we can build a budget PC that is 
much quieter than a similar but noisier configuration that costs the same. 
Chapter 2 

Hardware Design Criteria 
Hardware Design Criteria 
With the functional requirements determined, the next step was to establish 
design criteria for the budget PC hardware. Here are the relative priorities we 
assigned for our budget PC. Your priorities may, of course, differ. 
As you can see, this is a well-balanced system. Price and reliability are our top 
concerns, with everything else secondary. Here's the breakdown: 
Price is the 900-pound gorilla for a budget system. We set our target cost 
for this system at $350 excluding external peripherals and software ($500 
with the keyboard, mouse, speakers, and display), and we'll try very hard 
to stay within that budget. That's the same budget figure we used in the 
previous editions, but this time we'll get a lot more computer for our 
money. With a $350 budget, we plan to spend roughly 50%—split about 
equally—on the motherboard, processor, and memory, 25% on the case 
and power supply, and 25% on the optical and hard drives. 
Reliability 
Reliability is as important as price. An unreliable system is not worth 
having. To get that reliability, we'll use good brand-name components 
throughout. 
Size is unimportant, so we'll pay it no mind. As it turns out, the best case 
for our purposes is a standard mid-tower unit. 
Noise level 
We'd like a quiet system, but we don't have any extra money to spend to 
reduce noise. We'll do what we can to choose the quietest possible in-
expensive components, but otherwise we'll let the chips fall where they 
may. 
Expandability 
Expandability is unimportant. If we do upgrade this system, say three 
years down the road, chances are we'll be swapping components out 
rather than adding them. 
Processor performance 
Processor performance is moderately important for our budget PC, both 
initially and to ensure that the system will have enough horsepower to 
run new software versions without requiring a processor upgrade. We'd 
have loved to use a quad-core processor in this system, but there's simply 
no room in the budget. We can only afford to spend perhaps $60 on the 
processor, which limits our choices to AMD or Intel single- or dual-core 
budget processors. 
Price 
* * * * i ? r 
Reliability 
* * * * i ? r 
Size -kikikikik 
Noise level -k-kikikik 
Expandability 
-kikikikik 
Processor performance -k-k-kikik 
Video performance -k-kikikik 
Disk capacity/performance -k-k-kikik 
Building a Budget PC 
91 

Component Considerations 
Shipping Coal to Newcastle 
Incidentally, shipping cases is expen-
sive. You can often save $20 or more 
if you can find a suitable case locally 
or a model online that includes free 
shipping. 
Video performance 
2D video quality is important for our budget system, because it deter-
mines display clarity and sharpness for the browsers, office suites, and 
similar applications that this system will run. A budget system is not 
intended for serious gaming, so 3D video performance is relatively un-
important. Still, we'd like enough video horsepower for at least casual 3D 
gaming, so we'll choose a motherboard with fast integrated video, such as 
the NVIDIA GeForce 8200. Just to keep our options open, we'll make sure 
our motherboard provides a PCI Express x16 video slot. That way, if after 
a couple of years we need faster video, we can install a $50 PCI-E video 
adapter, which by then will be as fast or faster than the fastest video cards 
available today. 
Disk capacity/performance 
Disk capacity and performance are moderately important for the budget 
system. A small, slow hard drive can noticeably degrade system perfor-
mance. Fortunately, fast hard drives of reasonably large capacity are rela-
tively inexpensive. Rather than spending $30 on a small, slow hard drive, 
we'll spend an extra $15 or $20 for a mainstream 7,200 RPM drive with 
mid range capacity. 
Component Considerations 
With our design criteria in mind, we set out to choose the best components 
for the budget PC system. The following sections describe the components we 
chose, and why we chose them. 
Case and Power Supply 
Antec NSK-4482 Mid-Tower Case (http://www.antec.com) 
It's easy to spend too little on the case and power supply for a budget system. 
When we searched NewEgg for computer cases with power supplies, we found 
more than 100 products for $50 or less. We wouldn't use any of those on a bet. 
Cheap cases are bad enough: things don't fit properly, and they're full of burrs 
and sharp edges that make working on them dangerous. But cheap power sup-
plies are worse. It's simply not possible to build a reliable system using a cheap 
power supply. Even a budget system deserves a top-quality power supply, al-
though a low-wattage unit—something in the 350W range—is sufficient. 
Unfortunately, the price of a decent case and power supply has risen signifi-
cantly over the last few years, probably because of the financial crisis and the 
decline of the U.S. dollar relative to Pacific Rim currencies. A couple of years 
ago, models suitable for a budget system sold in the $65 to $75 range. Equiva-
lent cases now sell in the $90 to $100 range, which takes a larger bite out of 
our budget. 
In that price range, we think the Antec NSK-4482 is the best choice. It's very 
attractive, and the bundled EarthWatts 380 power supply is perfectly accept-
able. Other suitable cases in that price range are the ThermalTake Element T 
and the Antec NSK-3480. 
92 
Chapter 3 

Component Considerations 
Processor and CPU Cooler 
A M D Athlon II X2 240 (http://www.amd.com) 
We'd like a triple- or quad-core processor, but with only about $60 allocated 
to the processor, our choices are realistically limited to single- and dual-core 
"value"processors. Intel sells several models in this price range, butdollar-for-
dollar in value processors, AMD models offer more bang for the buck than 
Intel models. At the time we purchased the processor for this system, the $60 
retail-boxed AMD Athlon II X2 240 Regor dual-core processor was clearly the 
best processor for the money. Built on the 45 nm process, with two cores run-
ning at 2.8 GHz and maximum power consumption of 65W, this was the ideal 
processor for our budget system. Of course, by the time you order your $60 
processor it'll almost certainly be a faster model, but even this $60 value pro-
cessor is no slouch in terms of performance. 
We could actually have bought the 240 Regor processor for $53 rather than 
$60, but that would have been an OEM model rather than a retail-boxed mod-
el. That extra $7 bought us both a 3-year warranty (versus a 30-day warranty 
on the OEM model) and a reasonably quiet and effective CPU cooler. Given the 
choice, it's almost always better to buy a retail-boxed processor than an OEM 
model. 
Even though it's a budget processor, the performance of the 240 Regor is rea-
sonably good.Table 3-1 shows the overall performance of our budget proces-
sor compared to the processors used in the other project systems in this book, 
and, for reference, benchmarks for several processors in older but still useful 
systems we have around the house (RBT indicates systems used by Robert, 
and BFT indicates Barbara's system). For comparison, we've also included the 
three primary desktop systems we were using when we wrote this book. 
Table 3-1. Relative processor 
performance 
I System 
Processor 
CPU Mark score 
I 
Extreme system 
Intel Core ¡7X980 
10,140 
Current office desktop system (RBT) 
Intel Core2 Quad Q9650 
4,583 
Mainstream system 
Intel Core ¡5 661 
3,170 
Media center system 
Intel Core ¡3 530 
2,714 
Current den system (RBT) 
Intel Core2 Duo E6750 
1,663 
Budget and home server systems 
AMD Athlon II X2 240 
1,640 
Current office desktop system (BFT) 
Intel Core2 Duo E6400 
1,263 
Appliance/nettop system 
Intel Atom D510 
666 
(Older system) 
Intel Pentium 43.80 GHz 
638 
(Older system) 
AMD Athlon 644000+ 
628 
(Older system) 
Intel Celeron 540 
493 
(Older system) 
Intel Pentium 43.00 GHz 
488 
(Older system) 
AMD Sempron 3100+ 
449 
Figures Lie and Liars Figure 
There's really no way to assign a 
single number to quantify the overall 
performance 
of a processor. Two 
different processors 
with very similar 
benchmark 
scores may have 
notice-
ably different performance, 
depend-
ing on what you test. One may, for 
example, excel in rendering video but 
lag badly on another type of task, 
while the other is exactly 
opposite. 
We always take benchmark 
numbers 
with a (very large) grain of salt. 
That said, the Passmark 
CPU 
Mark 
score is a widely accepted metric for 
overall processor performance, 
so we 
include those one-number 
scores to 
give you an idea of how the budget 
processor holds up against the 
competition. 
Building a Budget PC 
93 

Although the Core ¡7 processor we're using in the extreme system is more than 
six times faster than our budget processor, the performance of the budget 
processor holds up very well in comparison to that of two of our current pri-
mary systems, both of which were high-performance systems when they were 
built. (We were stunned to see just how well that Core2 Quad held up; we 
built that system almost two years earlier as an Extreme System and, with a 
CPU Mark score considerably higher than some current Core ¡7 processors, the 
Core2 Quad still nearly qualifies for that designation.) 
The Core ¡3, which qualifies as a low-mainstream processor, is nearly twice 
as fast as our budget processor, but it also costs twice as much. And the 240 
Regor budget processor is more than twice as fast as the Intel Atom D510, 
which itself is faster than processors like the Intel Pentium 4 and Celeron and 
the AMD Athlon 64and Sempron, all of which are still in use in tens of millions 
of systems. 
If you can afford to spend a bit more for the processor, consider something 
like the triple-core AMD Athlon II X3 435 Rana. An extra $15 or so buys you a 
50% performance boost in processor performance over the 240 Regor, tak-
ing you into the low-mainstream processor class. (Of course, other than for 
processor-bound tasks, 50% faster processor performance doesn't translate 
into 50% faster system performance, but it does provide noticeably snappier 
response times.) 
Motherboard 
ASRock K10N78M-PRO (http://www.asrock.com) 
The 240 Regor is a Socket AM3 processor, so the first selection criterion for a 
motherboard in the $60 range was Socket AM3 compatibility, which either 
a hybrid Socket AM2+/AM3 model or a pure Socket AM3 model provides. (A 
hybrid motherboard can use either a Socket AM2+ or a Socket AM3 processor; 
an AM3 motherboard can use only a Socket AM3 processor.) Note that socket 
compatibility is only a first-cut criterion. Just because a motherboard supports 
Socket AM3 processors doesn't necessarily mean it supports the specific Socket 
AM3 processor you want to use. 
We'd prefer to use a first-tier motherboard from GIGABYTE or ASUS, both of 
which offer Socket AM3 motherboards in this price range. Unfortunately, 
budget motherboards from first-tier makers are feature-light. For example, 
they may offer only 100BaseT (100 megabit/second) networking rather than 
lOOOBaseT (1,000 Mb/s, or gigabi ), and their integrated video is several gen-
erations out of date. So we narrowed things down by looking for a suitable 
motherboard made by ASRock, a second-tier motherboard manufacturer that 
is famed for its first-tier quality. We found several ASRock candidates in the $55 
to $65 range. 
Narrowing things further, we wanted integrated video in the NVIDIA GeForce 
8200 or ATI RADEON HD 3200 class, either of which provides excellent 2D dis-
play quality and has enough 3D horsepower to use for casual gaming. (Boards 
with integrated RADEON HD 4200 sell for a few dollars more, and you might ex-
pect they'd outperform the GeForce 8200/RADEQN 3200 boards, but they don't. 
Chapter 2 

The next real step up from the 8200/3200 boards are ones with integrated 
RADEON HD 3300, and those were selling for $85 or so when we bought our 
motherboard.) We also want a PCI Express xl 6 slot in case we want to upgrade 
the graphics at some point. 
We would prefer DDR3 memory for its faster transfers, but in practical terms 
overall system performance will be very similar with DDR2 memory. At the 
time we ordered components for this system, DDR2 and DDR3 memory mod-
ules of the same capacity were selling for about the same price, but DDR3 
motherboards were still selling for a $15 or more premium over comparable 
DDR2 motherboards, so we decided that a DDR2 motherboard was the better 
choice. 
Among the motherboards that met our requirements and sold for about $60, 
the best choice was the ASRock K10N78M-Pro. Although it lacks bells and 
whistles, it has exactly the feature set we wanted: NVIDIA GeForce 8200 in-
tegrated video with support for DX10 (gaming graphics), a PCI Express x16 
slot for future video upgrades, four SATA 3.0 Gb/s ports (with software RAID 
0/1/5/10 support), good 5.1 audio, an integrated lOOOBaseT network adapter, 
six USB 2.0 ports, and so on. At about $60, the ASRock K10N78M-Pro was a 
perfect fit for our budget system. 
The final step, which you ignore at your peril, is to verify that the selected 
motherboard is compatible with your processor. We visited the ASRock 
K10N78M-Pro web page and located the processor compatibility list. We had a 
bad moment when we didn't find our 240 Regor retail-boxed processor (mod-
el ADX240OCGQBOX) in the motherboard compatibility list, so we visited the 
AMD web page for the ADX240OCGQBOX and found that the OEM version 
of that product had a significantly different product code, ADX2400CK23GQ. 
That product code did appear in the compatibility list. Since the OEM and retail-
boxed versions of that processor are actually identical, we knew the retail-
boxed 240 Regor would be compatible with our K10N78M-Pro motherboard. 
Furthermore, the compatibility list said the 240 Regor was compatible with 
all BIOS versions, so we knew we wouldn't get stuck with an earlier BIOS that 
wouldn't boot with our processor. 
Memory 
Crucial CT2KIT12864AA667 2 GB Kit (1 GB x 2) (http://www.crucial.com) 
The budget system in the preceding edition was equipped with a single-core 
processor and 512 MB of RAM. Although that was sufficient for snappy per-
formance with Linux or Windows XP, it was marginal for Vista. Windows 7 re-
source requirements are at least as high as those of Vista, so if you plan to run 
Windows 7 on your budget system, you'll want at least 1 GB per core, for a total 
of 2 GB. That's assuming you're running 32-bit Windows 7. If you plan to run 
the 64-bit version, double the memory requirements. 
When we ordered the parts for this system, we found that our $60 budget 
for memory was sufficient to buy 2 GB, either as two 1 GB DIMMs or as one 2 
GB DIMM. We'd have preferred to install 4 GB, but, at $95 or so, a pair of 2 GB 
Building a Budget PC 

Component Considerations 
1 
DIMMs would have busted our budget. We plan to run Linux, which will be 
happy with 2 GB, but if we planned to run Windows 7 wed try very hard to 
come up with an extra $40 or so to expand the memory to 4 GB. 
Which brings up another issue. The ASRock K10N78M-Pro motherboard sup-
ports dual-channel memory operation but has only two DIMM slots. For best 
memory performance, both of those slots need to be occupied, but of course 
that leaves no free slots for future upgrades. If we were installing 4 GB of mem-
ory there wouldn't be any real decision, as one 4 GB DIMM costs more than 
twice as much as two 2 GB DIMMs. But installing only 2 GB of memory gives us 
the option of installing just one 2 GB DIMM (about $50 when we were ordering 
parts) and thereby sacrificing some memory performance, or installing two 
1 GB DIMMs (about $25 each) and thereby giving up a free memory slot for 
future expansion. You pays your money and you takes your choice. 
Video Adapter 
Integrated NVIDIA GeForce 8200 
The NVIDIA GeForce 8200 video integrated on the ASRock motherboard pro-
vides excellent 2D display quality and reasonably good 3D performance for 
casual gaming and similar tasks. The ASRock motherboard includes a PCI Ex-
press x16 video adapter slot, so if necessary we can upgrade the video down 
the road by installing an inexpensive PCIe video adapter. We don't expect that 
to be necessary, but if we decide we need more video horsepower than the 
GeForce 8200 provides, even a $30 standalone video adapter is likely to be 
more than sufficient. 
Hard Disk Drive 
Seagate Barracuda 7200.12 ST3500418AS 500GB 
0h ttp://www.seagate.com) 
If we were attempting to cut costs to the bone, we might have chosen a low-
capacity hard drive. But when we bought our components, 80 GB drives were 
selling for $30, versus $45 for the 500 GB Seagate. We decided it made sense 
to spend the extra $ 15 to jump from 80 GB to 500 GB. That additional cost is 
significant for a system with a base budget of $350, but the extra $ 15 buys us 
more than six times as much disk space. Even on a budget system, we'd soon 
be cramped with only 80 GB of disk space. 
We've been using Seagate hard drives almost exclusively for many years and 
have always found them to be fast, quiet, cool-running, reliable, and competi-
tively priced. (Our contacts at data recovery firms also run Seagate drives in 
their personal systems, which we think speaks volumes.) If for some reason 
you prefer another brand, Samsung and Western Digital would be our second 
choices. 
Family Matters 
We actually ended up installing 4 
GB of memory in this system. Just as 
we were about to build the system, 
Barbara's sister, Frances, called 
to say her desktop PC was 
having 
problems. We originally thought it 
would require only a power 
supply 
replacement, but when we popped 
the lid we realized that the system 
was four years old. That's getting 
perilously close to the design life of a 
PC, so we decided to turn our 
budget 
system into a new system for Frances. 
Chances are she'll use the new 
system for another four years, so we 
decided it made sense to install 4 GB 
of memory and be done with it. 
96 
Chapter 3 

Component Considerations 
Optical Drive 
ASUS DRW-24B1 ST DVD writer (http://www.asus.com) 
DVD burners are so inexpensive nowadays that it makes little sense to save $5 
by installing a read-only DVD-ROM drive. If nothing else, you'll want the writer 
to back up your system. Among the many inexpensive DVD writers available, 
we chose the ASUS DRW-24B1 ST for its combination of features, performance, 
reliability, and price. Similar models from LiteOn or Samsung are also good 
choices. 
Keyboard and Mouse 
Logitech Deluxe 250 Desktop (http://www.logitech.com) 
Personal preference outweighs all else when choosing a keyboard and mouse. 
So many personal factors determine usability that no one can choose the 
"best" keyboard and mouse for someone else. 
That said, we had to pick a "budget" keyboard and mouse for our budget sys-
tem. We wanted something in the sub-$20 range that included a decent key-
board and a reliable optical mouse. Our favorite among inexpensive keyboard/ 
mouse combos is the Logitech Deluxe 250 Desktop, for which we paid $17. If 
you prefer Microsoft keyboards and mice, the Microsoft Basic White Value Pack 
2.0 or the Microsoft Wired Desktop 400 is also a good sub-$20 choice. 
Speakers 
Logitech LS11 (http://www.logitech.com) 
Even a budget system needs a decent set of speakers, but we can realistically 
spend no more than $15 on speakers. In that price range, we recommend the 
Logitech LS 11 2.0 speaker set. Note, however, that many LCD displays include 
built-in speakers, which adds little or nothing to their price and can eliminate 
some desktop clutter. Display speakers are generally small and produce only 
0.5W to 1W per channel. That's acceptable for most uses, including watching 
videos and so on. The $15 standalone units provide somewhat better sound 
but about the same wattage. We opted for speakers embedded in the display 
for our budget system. 
Rachel Head Comments 
Neatly recouping 
the extra $ 15 spent 
on the hard drive! 
Display 
19": 
ASUS VW193TR (http://www.asus.com) 
ASUS VH196T 
ASUS VH198T 
Hanns.G HW191APB (http://www.hannsg.com) 
20": 
ASUS VH202T-P 
Building a Budget PC 
97 

Component Considerations 
Hanns.G HZ201HPB 
Samsung P2050 (http://www.samsung.com) 
ViewSonic VX2033wm (http://www.viewsonic.com) 
In the preceding edition, we allocated $ 120 to the display and recommended 
three 17" CRT models from NEC, Samsung, and ViewSonic. Nowadays, $120 
buys you a lot more display. The entry level for LCD displays is now a 19" 
1440x900 model. (There are smaller displays available, but they generally cost 
the same as a 19" model, if not more.) Basic models suitable for a budget sys-
tem cost $110 to $130. In the $130 to $160 range, you can buy a 20" model 
with 1600x900 resolution, a nice step up. You're likely to be happy with any of 
the models listed above, or their successors. Note that some models include 
speakers and others do not. 
Matching Displays to Video Adapters 
In the past, gamers tended to choose only those LCD 
displays 
that had the fastest response times, because many 
mainstream 
displays had response times too slow to provide 
high-quality 
gaming 
video. That's less of an issue nowadays, 
because all but 
the least expensive LCD displays are fast enough to provide at 
least reasonable gaming 
response. 
Serious gamers also choose displays with native 
resolutions 
that match the optimum video adapter settings for their 
systems. For example, a gaming 
rig may be able to display 3D 
games at 2560x1600 
resolution, but only at unacceptably 
slow 
frame rates. Rather than use such a high-resolution 
display, a 
gamer might use a 1600x1050 display, at which resolution the 
frame rates are acceptably 
fast. 
The ASRock K1ON78M-PRO 
motherboard's 
integrated 
NVIDIA 
GeForce 8200 video supports resolutions up to 1920x1200 
on 
the DVI video output and is more than fast enough to provide 
excellent 2D video quality at its highest resolution. But if you 
plan to do any 3D gaming 
with your budget system, be aware 
that for many 3D games the GeForce 8200 will not be fast 
enough to drive a high-resolution 
display at anything near full 
resolution with usable frame rates. 
If you don't want to install a faster video adapter—and 
perhaps 
a faster processor as well—the 
alternatives are to use less 
demanding 
game settings, accept lower frame rates, or run at 
lower than nominal resolution, which may cause 
blockiness 
and other video artifacts. With resource-intensive 
3D 
games, 
you may have to make all three of these compromises, 
and 
even then performance 
maybe 
unacceptable. 
Still, a budget 
system isn't designed for serious 3D gaming, and this system 
as configured can play many less demanding 
3D games 
with 
acceptable 
performance. 
Component Summary 
Table 3-2 summarizes our component choices for the budget system. Not 
counting shipping, sales tax, or software, the total for the budget system came 
to $351. With display, the budget system cost $475, give or take. Not bad for a 
fully equipped system. We could have made small economies here and there 
to reduce the price further. For example, we might have saved $25 by buy-
ing a really cheap case (although we'd still have installed a $40 Antec Earth-
Watts 380 power supply, or something similar). We could have saved $10 on 
the motherboard by accepting less capable integrated video and another $20 
by using a slow single-core processor. Substituting a smaller hard drive might 
have saved us another $15, and we could have cut maybe $5 from the total by 
using a DVD-ROM drive rather than a DVD writer. All told, we might have got-
ten the cost of our budget system down into the $300 range, but we feel that 
would have been a false economy. 
98 
Chapter 3 

Building the Budget System 
Table 3-2. Bill of materials for budget 
I Component 
Product 
I 
Case 
Antec NSK-4482 Mid-Tower Case 
Power supply 
Antec Earth Watts 380W (bundled) 
Motherboard 
ASRock K10N78M-PR0 
Processor 
AMD Athlon IIX2 240 
CPU cooler 
(Bundled) 
Memory 
Crucial CT2KIT12864AA667 2 GB Kit (1 GB x 2) 
Video adapter 
(Integrated NVIDIA GeForce 8200) 
Hard disk drive 
Seagate Barracuda 7200.12 ST3500418AS (500GB) 
Optical drive 
ASUS DRW-24B1ST DVD writer 
Keyboard and mouse 
Logitech Deluxe 250 Desktop 
Speakers 
Logitech LS11 (or embedded display speakers) 
Display 
(See text) 
Reality Check 
When Barbara's sister Frances's system—the 
budget 
system 
from the preceding edition of this book—failed 
after more than 
four years of heavy use, it caught us at a bad time. We could 
have fixed her system, but at four years old it was nearing the 
end of its design life anyway. We didn't have any suitable spare 
systems sitting around, and we weren't quite ready to build this 
budget system. Frances needed a system quickly, so she asked 
us to look at the systems Costco had on offer and pick one out 
for her. 
The least expensive desktop system on the Costco website was 
a Dell Inspiron 570, for $499.99 plus tax and shipping. For $ 150 
more, the Inspiron 570's general specifications matched 
those 
of our budget configuration 
almost exactly, except that it had 4 
GB of RAM rather than 2 GB and included a Windows 7 license. 
Making 
those two changes 
would have increased our total cost 
by about $ 130, just $20 short of the Dell price. So why bother? 
Because the two systems are only superficially similar. Granted, 
both have exactly the same processor and the same or similar 
hard drives, but otherwise the Dell system has 
lower-quality 
components. 
Our system has a better case and power supply, a 
higher-quality 
motherboard, 
top-notch memory, a faster opti-
cal drive, and a better keyboard, mouse, and 
speakers. 
Also, paying 
$90 or so for a Windows 
7 license would be a 
waste. Frances has been using Linux for years and has no 
desire to use (orpay for) Windows. So, our system costs 
about 
$110 less and is built with higher-quality 
components. 
That's 
a 
no-brainer. 
Building the Budget System 
Figure 3-1 shows the major components of our budget system. The Antec NSK-
4482B case is at the upper left, with the ASRock K10N78M Pro motherboard to 
its right. In the foreground, left to right, are the Crucial 4 GB memory kit, the 
ASUS DRW-24B1 ST DVD writer, the 500 GB Seagate Barracuda hard drive, and 
the AMD Athlon IIX2 240 Regor processor. 
Building a Budget PC 
99 

Building the Budget System 
It's As Easy As 2,1,3 
Although 
by necessity we 
describe 
building 
the system in a 
particular 
order, you don't need to follow 
that 
exact sequence 
when you 
build 
your own system. Some 
steps—for 
example, installing 
the 
processor 
and memory 
before installing 
the 
motherboard 
in the case—should 
be 
taken in the sequence 
we 
describe, 
because doing otherwise 
makes 
the 
task more difficult or risks 
damaging 
a component. 
But the exact 
sequence 
doesn't matter for most steps. As you 
build your system, it will be 
obvious 
when sequence 
matters. 
Figure 3-H. Remove 
the two 
thumbscrews 
that secure the top panel 
Figure 3-1. Budget system 
components, 
awaiting 
construction 
Before you proceed, make sure you have everything you need. Open each box 
and verify the contents against the packing list. Once you're sure everything is 
present and accounted for, it's time to get started. 
Preparing the Case and Installing Drives 
The first step in building any system is always to make sure that the power 
supply is set to the correct input voltage. Some power supplies, including the 
Antec EarthWatts 380, set themselves automatically. Others must be set man-
ually using a slide switch to select the proper input voltage. Bundled power 
supplies are nearly always set properly by default, if applicable, but there are 
rare exceptions, so it's always a good idea to verify the input voltage setting 
before you proceed. 
- A 
. 
i Avoid Fireworks 
' 
i 
If you connect a power supply set for 230V to a 115V receptacle, no harm is done. 
1 
The PC components 
will receive only half the voltage they require, and the system 
i 
won'tboot. 
But if you connect a power supply set for II5V 
to a 230V receptacle, 
the 
i 
PC components 
will receive twice the voltage they're designed 
to use. If you plug in 
i 
1 
the system, that overvoltage 
will destroy it instantly in clouds of smoke and showers 
1 
. 
ofsparks. 
To begin preparing the case, remove the two thumbscrews that secure the top 
panel, as shown in Figure 3-2. 
100 
Chapter 3 

Building the Budget System 
After you remove both thumbscrews, slide the top panel slightly toward the 
rear, as shown in Figure 3-3, and then lift it off. 
With the top panel removed, lift the left side panel straight up and remove it, 
as shown in Figure 3-4. Remove the right side panel in the same manner. Put 
the top panel and both side panels safely aside, where they won't be scratched 
while you are building the system. 
Figure 3-5. Remove 
the screw that secures 
the side of the 3.5" 
Figure 3-8. Remove 
the two screws 
that secure the bottom of the 
internal drive bay to the 5.25" drive bay above it 
3.5" internal drive bay to the front of the 
chassis 
Figure 3-3. Slide the top panel to the rear to release it 
Figure 3-4. Remove 
the side panels and set them safely 
aside 
The next step is to remove the internal 3.5"drive bay, which is secured by three 
screws. One screw, shown in Figure 3-5, secures the internal 3.5" drive bay to 
the 5.25"drive bay above it.Two other screws, one visible in Figure 3-6, secure 
the bottom front of the internal 3.5"drive bay to the inside front of the chassis. 
Remove all three of those screws. (You may find it easier to remove the two 
lower screws if you turn the case on its side temporarily.) 
Building a Budget PC 
101 

Building the Budget System 
Figure 3-7. Slide the 3.5" internal drive bay 
slightly toward the rear of the case and lift 
it out 
After you remove all three screws, slide the drive bay slightly toward the rear 
of the chassis to free the locking tabs and lift the drive bay clear of the chassis, 
as shown in Figure 3-7. 
A 
; 
1 Fragile Connectors 
1 
i 
Be extremely careful when you remove and replace the internal 3.5" drive bay. When 
i 
1 
this bay is removed, the panel ends of the front-panel 
connector 
wires are visible, 
i 
including 
those for the power switch. The fine-gauge 
wires connect 
to 
tinypinson 
i 
the backs of the switches, and somehow 
we managed 
to pull the power switch wire 
i 
1 
loose from the power 
switch. 
1 
We didn't discover that until we were connecting 
the power switch wires to the 
i 
motherboard, 
so we had to remove the internal 3.5"drive 
bay to repair the 
connec-
i 
tion. The pins on the power and reset switches are tiny and fragile, so it would be 
1 
quite possible 
to snap them off entirely by putting 
tension on the wires connected 
to 
1 
. 
them. You have been 
warned. 
Place the drive bay on a flat surface, right-side up. Slide your hard drive into 
the drive bay, with the rear (data and power connector side) of the hard drive 
toward the rear of the drive bay. Slide the drive forward and backward until 
two of the screw holes in the hard drive align with the holes in the rubber 
grommets on the drive bay. When the drive is correctly aligned, the rear of 
the drive should protrude slightly from the rear of the drive bay, as shown in 
Figure 3-8. 
Figure 3-8. Slide the hard drive into the internal drive bay and secure it with four hard drive 
mounting 
screws 
102 
Chapter 3 

Building the Budget System 
The parts bag includes special screws designed to mount hard drives in this 
bay. These screws (two of them fully visible in Figure 3-8) are threaded for 
only part of their length. The unthreaded portion is supported by the silicone 
grommet, which isolates the drives to reduce noise and vibration. Insert four 
of these screws, two per side, and tighten them finger-tight plus a quarter turn 
or so. Do not overtighten the screws, or you'll eliminate the benefits of the 
grommets. 
If you have more than one hard drive to install, repeat these steps for the other 
drives. If you're installing two drives, leave at least one unoccupied mounting 
slot between them to improve ventilation. 
After you install the hard drive or drives in the bay, slide the drive bay back into 
position, as shown in Figure 3-9. Make sure the locking tabs and slots on the 
two drive bays latch into position as you slide the bay into place. Also note the 
slot on the center-front edge of the drive bay (visible at the bottom of Figure 
3-9), which mates with a corresponding metal tab on the chassis. 
Once the drive bay is correctly positioned, maintain slight pressure on it toward 
the front of the case to force the side screw holes into alignment. Reinsert and 
tighten the screw that secures the internal 3.5"drive bay to the 5.25"drive bay 
above it. Then reinstall the two screws that secure the bottom of the internal 
3.5"drive bay to the chassis. 
The next step is to install the optical drive. To begin, use your fingers from in-
side the case to press outward on the top plastic bezel cover until it snaps free, 
as shown in Figure 3-10. 
If you have a second 5.25" device to install (such as the Antec Easy SATA hard 
drive docking station), you'll need to prepare a second 5.25" drive bay. To do 
so, use a screwdriver to twist the metal RF shield (behind the plastic bezel cov-
er) back and forth until it snaps free. 
Using both thumbs, slide the optical drive into the drive bay, as shown in Fig-
ure 3-11. If it binds, pull the drive out slightly and reseat it. Press the drive bezel 
flush with the case bezel. 
Figure 3-3. Slide the internal drive bay 
back 
into place and secure it with the three 
screws you removed 
earlier 
,-A 
i Sharp Edges 
i 
Be careful when removing 
the metal 
1 
RF shield, and be careful working 
in 
i 
that drive bay later. Snapping 
the 
i 
metal RF shield free leaves a sharp 
1 
burr on the top edge of the 
remain-
. 
ing RF shield. 
Figure 3-10. Working from inside the case, press the top plastic 
Figure 3-11. Slide the optical drive into the drive bay until its bezel 
drive bay bezel until it snaps 
out 
is flush with the case 
bezel 
Building a Budget PC 
103 

Building the Budget System 
Locate the optical drive mounting screws in the parts bag. These screws are 
the most finely threaded in the bag. Use at least four screws (two per side) to 
secure the optical drive to the chassis, as shown in Figure 3-12. Tighten the 
screws finger-tight plus maybe a quarter turn. (It's difficult to overtorque these 
screws because their heads are quite shallow. Your screwdriver will lose its grip 
before you can overtighten them.) 
Note the shorter screw slot at the top-front position in Figure 3-12. Using a 
screw in that position prevents the drive from sliding back into the case more 
than a tiny fraction of an inch. We actually used six screws—one at the rear 
on each side and two at the front on each side—but if you use only one front 
screw per side, install it in that shorter slot position. 
Nearly every case we've ever used, including the Antec NSK-4482, comes with 
a generic I/O shield. The generic shield never matches the motherboard I/O 
panel, so you'll need to remove the stock I/O shield and replace it with the one 
supplied with the motherboard. 
To remove the I/O shield, use a tool handle to press from outside the case until 
the I/O shield pops loose, as shown in Figure 3-13. Be careful with your fin-
gers: I/O shields are made of thin metal and may have edges sharp enough to 
cut you. Don't worry about damaging the generic I/O shield supplied with the 
case. You can discard or recycle it. 
Figure 3-1H. Use at least four screws (two per side) to secure the 
optical drive to the chassis 
Figure 3-13. Remove the I/O shield supplied with the case 
A 
Avoid Brute Force 
Be careful not to bend the I/O shield 
while seating it. The template holes 
need to line up with the external port 
connectors on the motherboard 
I/O 
panel. If the template is even slightly 
bent, it may be difficult to seat the 
motherboard 
properly. 
Like all motherboards, the ASRock K10N78M-PRO comes with a custom I/O 
shield that matches the motherboard I/O panel. Before you install the custom 
I/O shield, compare it to the motherboard I/O panel to make sure the holes in 
the I/O shield correspond to the connectors on the motherboard. 
Once you've done that, press the custom I/O shield into place. Working from 
inside the case, align the bottom, right, and left edges of the I/O shield with the 
matching case cutout. When the I/O shield is positioned properly, press gently 
along the edges to seat it in the cutout, as shown in Figure 3-14. It should snap 
into place, although getting it to seat properly sometimes requires several at-
tempts. It's often helpful to press gently against the edge of the template with 
the handle of a screwdriver or nut driver. 
104 
Chapter 3 

Building the Budget System 
After you install the I/O shield, carefully slide the motherboard into place, 
making sure that the back panel connectors on the motherboard are firmly 
in contact with the corresponding holes on the I/O shield. Compare the posi-
tions of the motherboard mounting holes with the standoff mounting posi-
tions in the case. One easy method is to place the motherboard in position and 
insert a felt-tip pen through each motherboard mounting hole to mark the 
corresponding standoff position beneath it. Alternatively, you can simply look 
down through the motherboard mounting holes to determine which chassis 
positions need to have standoffs installed and then mark those positions with 
a felt-tip pen, as shown in Figure 3-15. 
Seeing the Light 
If you simply look at the mother-
board, it's easy to miss one of the 
mounting holes in all the clutter. We 
generally hold the motherboard 
up 
to a light, which makes the mounting 
holes stand out distinctly. 
Figure 3-14. Install the I/O shield supplied with the motherboard 
Figure 3-15. Locate and mark the proper positions for standoffs to 
be installed 
The ASRock K1ON78M-PRO motherboard has six mounting holes. Some cases 
are shipped with several standoffs already installed, but the Antec NSK-4482 
has no standoffs preinstalled. So, we need to install standoffs in all six of the 
positions required by the motherboard. 
Install brass standoffs for each motherboard mounting hole. Although you 
can screw in the standoffs using your fingers or needlenose pliers, it's much 
easier and faster to use a 5 mm nut driver, as shown in Figure 3-16. Tighten 
the standoffs finger-tight, but do not overtighten them. It's easy to strip the 
threads by applying too much torque with a nut driver. 
A 
Avoid Grounding Problems 
If your case comes with preinstalled 
brass standoffs, make 
absolutely 
certain that each standoff 
matches 
a motherboard mounting hole. If 
you find one that doesn't, remove it. 
Leaving an "extra" standoff in place 
may cause a short circuit that may 
damage the motherboard 
and/or 
other components, or at least cause a 
boot failure. 
Also, if you use a case that uses 
stamped raised areas in the mother-
board tray instead of standoffs, be 
aware that some motherboards 
may 
fail to boot in such cases because 
the raised areas ground parts of the 
motherboard 
that were not intended 
to be grounded. 
Figure 3-18. Install a brass standoff at each marked position 
Building a Budget PC 
105 

Building the Budget System 
Pen and Paper 
Another method we've used to 
verify that all standoffs are properly 
installed is to place the 
motherboard 
flat on a large piece of paper and use 
a felt-tip pen to mark all the mother-
board mounting holes on the paper. 
We then line up one of the marks 
with the corresponding 
standoff and 
press down until the standoff 
punc-
tures the paper. We do the same with 
a second standoff to align the paper, 
and then press the paper flat around 
each standoff. If we've installed the 
standoffs properly, every mark will 
be punctured, and there will be no 
punctures where there are no marks. 
Once you've installed all the standoffs, do a final check to verify that (a) each 
motherboard mounting hole has a corresponding standoff, and (b) no stand-
offs are installed that don't correspond to a motherboard mounting hole. As a 
final check, we usually hold the motherboard in position above the case and 
look down through each motherboard mounting hole to make sure there's a 
standoff installed below it. 
Populating the Motherboard 
With the case prepared, the next step is to populate the motherboard by in-
stalling the processor, CPU cooler, and memory. To begin, place the mother-
board on a firm, flat surface. Place the pink antistatic foam supplied with the 
motherboard between it and the work surface to protect the motherboard 
against physical or static electricity damage. 
Locate the metal cam lever on the side of the processor socket. In its closed posi-
tion, along the edge of the processor socket, this lever applies pressure to lock 
the processor pins into the socket. In its open position, with the lever vertical 
relative to the socket, that pressure is released, allowing a processor to be insert-
ed or removed without damaging the pins. Press the cam lever slightly outward 
(away from the socket) to release it from the plastic latches that secure it, and 
then lift the lever, as shown in Figure 3-17, to the full vertical position. 
Open the processor box and remove the hard plastic shell that contains the 
processor. Touch the chassis or power supply to ground yourself before you 
open that plastic shell and touch the processor itself. Be careful when open-
ing the inner packaging. More than once, we've had the plastic shell give way 
suddenly and ended up with the processor dropping into our laps (or flying 
across the room...). 
Open the inner package carefully and remove the processor from the anti-
static foam bed upon which it rests. Orient and align the processor with the 
processor socket. The socket has an arrow on one corner that corresponds to 
an arrow on one corner of the processor. Make sure these arrows are aligned, 
and then simply drop the processor into the socket, as shown in Figure 3-18. 
Figure 3-1/. Release the cam lever from the processor socket and 
lift it up 
Figure 3-18. Orient and align the processor properly with the 
socket and then drop it into place 
106 
Chapter 3 

Building the Budget System 
The processor should seat flush with the socket without any pressure being 
applied. Never press down on the processor, or you may bend the proces-
sor pins and ruin it. If the processor doesn't drop into the socket freely, it's not 
aligned properly. Realign it and try again until it drops easily into the socket 
and seats completely. 
Once the processor is seated properly, press the metal cam lever downward 
toward the socket and snap it into position under the plastic locking tab on 
the socket, as shown in Figure 3-19. You should feel some resistance on the 
lever as the cam clamps the processor pins into the socket. If you feel any more 
than very slight resistance, release the pressure, verify that the processor is 
correctly seated, and try again. 
After you install the processor, the next step is to install the CPU cooler. Before 
you install the cooler, examine the bottom of the heatsink to verify that the 
patch of thermal compound is present and undamaged. 
The CPU cooler clamps to the processor socket with two metal brackets that fit 
over plastic tabs on opposite sides of the processor socket. One of the brackets 
is free-floating. The other has a latching lever that cams the CPU cooler into 
tight contact with the processor. You can place either bracket over either tab, 
but it's easier to use the latching bracket on the tab nearest the edge of the 
motherboard, where there's more room to maneuver. 
Locate the latching bracket on one side of the CPU cooler. Tilt that side of the 
CPU cooler slightly up from the processor surface, and hook the free-floating 
bracket over the black plastic tab on the edge of the processor socket, as 
shown in Figure 3-20. Make sure the hole in the bracket catches the tab, and 
then lower the other side of the CPU cooler until its base is in full contact with 
the processor. (You may have to use your finger to hold the bracket in place.) 
A Penny Saved Is a Hundred 
Dollars Wasted 
If you ever remove and replace the 
processor, don't attempt to reuse 
the thermal compound. Rub off any 
compound 
present on the processor 
surface and the heatsink base—if it's 
tenacious you can warm it slightly 
with a hair dryer—and 
then polish 
both the processor surface and the 
heatsink base with a clean paper 
towel to remove all traces of the 
old compound. Apply new thermal 
compound 
according to the instruc-
tions supplied with it. (We generally 
use Antec Silver thermal 
compound, 
which is inexpensive and effective.) 
Figure 3-13. Press the cam lever down and snap it into place under 
Figure 3-HO. Hook the free-floating metal bracket over the black 
the plastic locking tab on the processor socket 
plastic tab on the processor 
socket 
Making sure that the first bracket remains connected and maintaining finger 
pressure to keep the CPU cooler in position, press the second (cammed) brack-
et into position over the second tab, as shown in Figure 3-21. 
Building a Budget PC 
107 

Building the Budget System 
Verify that both brackets are secured over both tabs, and then press the black 
plastic cam lever down until it latches to lock the CPU cooler to the processor 
socket, as shown in Figure 3-22. 
Figure 3-21. Press the latching bracket into position over the 
Figure 3-22. Press the black plastic cam lever on the CPU cooler 
second tab 
down until it latches to secure the CPU cooler to the processor 
socket 
Ordinarily, we make a point of connecting the CPU cooler fan to the mother-
board fan power header pins immediately after installing the CPU cooler, lest 
we forget to do so. With this motherboard and CPU cooler, though, there's a 
slight problem. The length of the CPU fan cable and the location of the CPU 
fan power connector on the motherboard make it easier to install the memory 
modules before connecting the fan. 
To install the memory modules, open the DIMM locking brackets on both sides 
of both memory sockets, as shown in Figure 3-23. 
Touch the chassis or power supply to ground yourself before you handle the 
memory modules. Align one DIMM with the memory slot nearest the proces-
sor, as shown in Figure 3-24. Make sure the keying notch on the contact edge of 
the memory module aligns with the keying tab in the socket and that the two 
sides of the memory module fit into the slots on the vertical sides of the memory 
slot. 
Align the memory module and the slot, with the DIMM vertical relative to the 
slot and both sides of the DIMM aligned with the vertical slots in the socket. 
Using both thumbs, press straight down on the memory module until it seats, 
as shown in Figure 3-25. 
Before you install the second memory module, make sure the first module 
is fully seated and latched. The metal contacts on the base of the memory 
module should be concealed by the memory socket, and the plastic latch-
ing tabs on the memory socket should snap into place to latch the module 
into position, as shown in Figure 3-26. If the metal contacts on the base of the 
memory module are visible, the DIMM is not fully seated. Remove it, realign it, 
and reseat it. If the latching tabs are not seated in the notches on the memory 
module, it's possible that the module is not seated completely, but sometimes 
those latching tabs don't snap into position even if the module is seated properly. 
108 
Chapter 3 

Building the Budget System 
If the metal contacts on the base of the module are not visible and the DIMM 
otherwise appears to be fully seated, simply use finger pressure to snap the 
latching tabs into position. 
Figure 3-23. Open the DIMM locking tabs on both sides of both 
memory 
sockets 
Figure 3-24. Align the memory module with the socket 
Figure 3-25. Press straight down on both sides of the memory 
module until it seats completely in the socket 
With the memory installed, you can now connect 
power to the CPU fan. This connector is keyed by plas-
tic tabs on the cable connector and the motherboard 
header-pin set to prevent it from being connected in-
correctly. Align the cable connector with the header 
pins and press the cable connector onto the header 
pins, as shown in Figure 3-27. 
The motherboard is now prepared. Place it aside for 
now. Use the antistatic foam under the motherboard 
to make sure it's not damaged by static electricity. 
Figure 3-28. Verify that the memory module is latched into position 
Figure 3-2/. Connect the CPU fan power cable to the CPU fan 
header pins 
Building a Budget PC 
109 

Building the Budget System 
Installing the Motherboard 
Installing the motherboard is the most time-consuming step in building the 
system because there are so many cables to connect. It's important to get all 
of them connected right, so take your time and verify each connection before 
and after you make it. 
One Last Time 
Do a final check to make sure there's 
a brass standoff installed for each 
mounting hole, and that no brass 
standoff is installed where there is no 
mounting 
hole. 
Seating and securing the motherboard 
To begin, slide the motherboard into the case, as shown in Figure 3-28. Care-
fully align the back panel I/O connectors with the corresponding holes in the 
I/O shield, and slide the motherboard toward the rear of the case until the 
motherboard mounting holes line up with the standoffs you installed earlier. 
Before you secure the motherboard, verify that the back panel I/O connec-
tors mate properly with the I/O shield, as shown in Figure 3-29. The I/O shield 
has metal tabs that ground the back panel I/O connectors. Make sure none of 
these tabs intrude into a port connector. An errant tab at best blocks the port, 
rendering it unusable, and at worst may short out the motherboard. Use a 
flashlight or other bright light to make sure you can see any problem clearly. 
Figure 3-28. Slide the motherboard into position 
Figure 3-23. Verify that the back panel connectors mate cleanly 
with the I/O shield 
Less Power 
People sometimes ask us why we 
don't use power screwdrivers. The 
answer is because they're large, 
they're clumsy, and the batteries are 
always dead when we want to use 
them. Worse still, we once watched 
someone crack a motherboard 
by 
overtorquing the mounting 
screws 
with a power screwdriver. A clutched 
driver eliminates that objection, but 
we still find power screwdrivers too 
clumsy to use, even when we're build-
ing many identical systems on an ad 
hoc production line. 
After you position the motherboard and verify that the back panel I/O con-
nectors mate cleanly with the I/O shield, insert a screw through one mounting 
hole into the corresponding standoff, as shown in Figure 3-30. You may need 
to apply some pressure to align the motherboard mounting holes with the 
standoffs until you have inserted two or three screws. 
If you have trouble getting all the holes and standoffs aligned, insert two 
screws in opposite corners but don't tighten them completely. Use one hand 
to press the motherboard into alignment, with all holes matching the stand-
offs. Then insert one or two more screws and tighten them completely. Finish 
mounting the motherboard by inserting screws into all standoffs and tighten-
ing them. 
110 
Chapter 3 

Building the Budget System 
Figure 3-30. Install screws in all six mounting holes to secure the motherboard 
With high-quality products like the Antec case and the ASRock motherboard, 
all the holes usually line up perfectly. With cheap products, that's often not 
true. At times, we've been forced to use only a few screws to secure the mother-
board. We prefer to use all of them, both to physically support the motherboard 
and to make sure all of the grounding points are in fact grounded, but if you 
simply can't get all of the holes lined up, just install as many screws as you can. 
Connecting power to the motherboard 
With the motherboard installed and secured, the next step is to connect pow-
er to the motherboard. In the bundle of cables coming from the power sup-
ply, locate the ATX12V cable. Depending on the power supply, this cable may 
be labeled ATX12V, CPU Power, or something similar. It uses a four-pin (2x2) 
keyed connector with two 12VDC wires (yellow) and two ground wires (black) 
diagonally opposite in the connector body. (The Antec power supply actually 
provides two of these connectors; use one and tuck the other aside.) 
Align the ATX12V cable connector with the motherboard ATX12V jack. One side 
of the cable connector has a plastic latch that snaps over a protruding ledge on 
the motherboard connector. Make sure those are oriented properly relative to 
each other and then press the cable connector into the motherboard socket, as 
shown in Figure 3-31. Make sure the connectors mate and latch. 
The next step is to connect the 24-pin ATX main power connector to the 
motherboard. Locate the main power cable from the bundle coming out of 
the power supply and route that cable to the front edge of the motherboard. 
Like the ATX12V connector, the ATX main power connector is keyed and has a 
latch. Orient the cable connector properly relative to the motherboard socket 
and press the connector into place, as shown in Figure 3-32. Make absolutely 
sure that the connectors mate and latch. 
Building a Budget PC 
111 

Building the Budget System 
Figure 3-31. Connect the ATX12Vpower 
cable (CPU power) to the 
motherboard 
Figure 3-32. Connect the 24-pin ATX main power connector to the 
motherboard 
Connecting front-panel I/O ports 
The next step is to connect the front-panel audio and USB ports. Locate the 
front-panel audio cable.This cable has two connectors, one labeled HD AUDIO 
and the other AC'97. This motherboard provides an HD audio connector, so 
we'll leave the AC'97 connector unused. The audio header pin set is located at 
the far back corner of the motherboard, colored lime. This connector is keyed 
with a missing pin on the motherboard header-pin set and a blocked hole on 
the cable connector. Orient the HD audio cable connector properly, making 
sure that the missing pin corresponds to the blocked hole, and press the cable 
connector onto the header-pin set, as shown in Figure 3-33. 
The front-panel USB cable supports two front-panel USB ports. This cable 
connects to either of the two sets of USB header pins (color-coded blue) lo-
cated in the front corner of the motherboard near the expansion slots. Like 
the audio connector, the USB connector is keyed with a missing pin on the 
motherboard header-pin set and a corresponding blocked hole on the cable 
connector. Align and orient the USB cable connector properly relative to the 
motherboard USB header-pin set, and press the cable connector onto the 
header pins, as shown in Figure 3-34. 
Figure 3-33. Connect the front-panel HD audio cable to the 
motherboard 
Figure 3-34. Connect the front-panel USB cable to the motherboard 
112 
Chapter 3 

Connecting front-panel switch and indicator cables 
The next step is to connect the front-panel switch and indicator cables to the 
motherboard. Before you begin connecting front-panel cables, examine the 
cables. Each is labeled to indicate its purpose. Match those labels with the front-
panel connector pins on the motherboard to make sure you connect the correct 
cable to the appropriate pins. Once you determine the proper orientation for 
each cable, connect it as shown in Figure 3-35. 
Figure 3-35. Connect the front-panel switch and indicator cables 
Keep the following guidelines in mind as you connect the front-panel cables: 
• Although Intel hasdefineda standard front-panel connector blockand uses 
that standard for its own motherboards, few other motherboard makers ad-
here to that standard. Accordingly, rather than providing an Intel-standard 
monolithic connector block that would be useless for motherboards that 
do not follow the Intel standard, most case makers, including Antec, pro-
vide individual one-, two-, or three-pin connectors for each switch and 
indicator. 
• Not all cases have cables for every connector on the motherboard, and 
not all motherboards have connectors for all cables provided by the case. 
• The power switch and reset switch connectors are not polarized and can 
be connected in either orientation. 
• LED connectors are polarized and should be connected with the ground 
wire and the signal wire oriented correctly. Most cases use a common wire 
color—usually black, although sometimes white or green—for ground, 
and a colored wire for signal. 
• The power LED connector is often problematic, as it is for this system. 
There are two types of power LED connector. The first has two pins. The 
second has three pins, but only two wires, with the middle pin unused. 
Building a Budget PC 

Building the Budget System 
Advice from Brian Bilbrey 
I prefer to use a knife tip to gently 
release (not break off) the plastic tab 
holding one of the end pins in the 
cable connector body in place, then 
slide that pin out and move it to the 
center location. Then I can install the 
connector onto the header with the 
empty location hanging 
out in space. 
Which Is Which? 
On systems with several hard drives, 
we use a felt-tip pen to label both 
ends of each SATA data cable to 
make it easier to determine 
which 
cable connects to which drive. For 
this system, with only one hard 
drive, that's not necessary. We also 
used cables with different 
connector 
shells, making it immediately 
obvi-
ous which cable connects to which 
drive. 
A motherboard may provide either or both types of power LED connec-
tor, and a case may provide either or both types of power LED cable. The 
ASRock K10N78M-PRC) motherboard provides only a two-pin power LED 
connector. The Antec NSK-4482 case provides only a three-pin power LED 
cable. That leaves us with two options. We took the easy way out by sim-
ply leaving the power LED disconnected. If you want your power LED to 
function, use a sharp knife or diagonal cutters to carefully cut the power 
LED cable connector lengthwise, dividing it into two single-wire connec-
tors. Connect each of those separately to the two power LED pins on the 
motherboard. 
• The power LED connectors on some motherboards are dual-polarized 
and can support a single-color (usually green) power LED or a dual-color 
(usually green/yellow) LED. The Antec NSK-4482 case and the ASRock 
K10N78M-PRC) motherboard both support only a single-color power LED. 
If you are using a different case and motherboard that support a dual-
color power LED, check the case and motherboard documentation to de-
termine where and how to connect the power LED cable. 
When you're connecting front-panel cables, try to get it right the first time, but 
don't worry too much about getting it wrong. Other than the power switch 
cable, which must be connected properly for the system to start, none of the 
other front-panel switch and indicator cables is essential, and connecting 
them wrong won't damage the system. 
Connecting drive power and data cables 
We're in the final stretch now. All that remains is to connect a few cables. To be-
gin, connect two SATA data cables to SATA ports 0 and 1 on the motherboard, 
as shown in Figure 3-36. We'll use one of these cables for the optical drive and 
the other for the hard drive. 
Locate an available SATA power cable in the cable bundle coming from the 
power supply and connect it to the power connector on the optical drive. 
SATA power (and data) cables use an L-shaped key on the connector body to 
prevent installing the cables backward. Make sure the L is oriented properly 
on the cable and drive, and then press the connector into place, as shown in 
Figure 3-37. Press the connector firmly straight in until you're sure the con-
nector is fully seated. Do not apply any sideways pressure or torque to the 
connector. 
Locate the free end of SATA data cable 1 and press the connector onto the op-
tical drive data connector, as shown in Figure 3-38. Once again, make sure the 
L key is oriented properly on the cable and drive, and then press the connector 
firmly straight in until the connector is fully seated. 
Locate a SATA power cable in the cable bundle coming from the power supply. 
You can use a second SATA power connector on the same cable you connected 
to the optical drive or one of the separate cables with a SATA power connector. 
Make sure the L key is oriented properly on the cable and hard drive, and then 
press the SATA power connector into place, as shown in Figure 3-39. Press the 
connector straight in without applying any sideways pressure, and make sure 
the cable connector mates firmly with the drive connector. 
114 
Chapter 3 

Building the Budget System 
Locate the free end of SATA data cable 0 and press the connector onto the 
hard drive data connector, as shown in Figure 3-40. 
Figure 3-38. Connect the SATA data cables for the hard drive and 
optical drive to motherboard SATA ports 0 and 1 
Figure 3-3/. Connect a SATA power cable to the optical drive 
Figure 3-40. Connect SATA data cable 0 to the hard drive 
Building a Budget PC 
115 

Final Assembly Steps 
Congratulations! You're almost finished building the system. Only a couple of 
final steps remain to be done, and these won't take long. 
First, connect the supplemental case fan. 
The Antec NSK-4482 has one rear-mounted 120 mm supplemental fan.To en-
able it, connect a four-pin Molex connector from the power supply to the con-
nector on the fan, as shown in Figure 3-41. 
Figure 3-41. Connect power to the rear case fan 
The final step in assembling the system is to dress the cables. That simply 
means routing the cables away from the motherboard and other components 
and tying them off so they don't flop around inside the case. Chances are that 
no one but you will ever see the inside of your system, but dressing the cables 
has several advantages other than making the system appear neater. First and 
foremost, it improves cooling by keeping the cables from impeding air flow. It 
can also improve system reliability. More than once, we've seen a system over-
heat and crash because a loose cable jammed the CPU fan or case fan. 
After you've completed these steps, take a few minutes to double-check ev-
erything. Verify that all cables are connected properly, that all drives are se-
cured, and that there's nothing loose inside the case. It's a good idea to pick 
up the system and tilt it gently from side to side to make sure there are no 
loose screws or other items that could cause a short. Also, check one last time 
that the power supply is set for the correct input voltage. Use the following 
checklist: 
Chapter 3 

Final Words 
• Power supply set to proper input voltage (if applicable) 
• No loose tools or screws (tilt and shake the case gently) 
• Heatsink/fan unit properly mounted; CPU fan connected 
• Memory module(s) fully seated and latched 
• Front-panel switch and indicator cables connected properly 
• Front-panel USB cable connected properly 
• Hard drive data cable connected to drive and motherboard 
• Hard drive power cable connected 
• Optical drive data cable connected to drive and motherboard 
• Optical drive power cable connected 
• All drives secured to drive bay or chassis, as applicable 
• Expansion cards (if any) fully seated and secured to chassis 
• Main ATX power cable and ATX12V power cable connected 
• Casefan(s) installed and connected (if applicable) 
• All cables dressed and tucked 
Once you're certain that all is as it should be, it's time for the smoke test. Leave 
the cover off for now. Unlike many power supplies, the Antec Earth Watts has 
a separate rocker switch on the back that controls power to the power supply. 
By default, it's in the "0"or off position, which means the power supply is not 
receiving power from the wall receptacle. Ensure the rocker switch is off, then 
connect the power cable to the wall receptacle and then to the system unit. 
Next, flip the power supply switch to the "V'or on position. Press the main 
power button on the front of the case, and the system should start up. Check 
to make sure that the power supply fan, CPU fan, and case fan are spinning. 
You should also hear the hard drive spin up. At that point, everything should 
be working properly. 
Final Words 
This system assembled easily and quickly. If we hadn't had to shoot images, it 
probably would have taken us about 20 minutes to build. A first-time system 
builder should be able to assemble this system in an hour or so, and certainly 
over the course of an evening. 
We're extremely happy with this system, or perhaps we should say that Barbara's 
sister is extremely happy with it. Although it cost only $350 excluding the 
display and software, many people would be happy with this system as their 
only system. It's slower than the fastest current systems, but it's more than fast 
enough for casual use, including even light gaming. It's also quiet enough that 
we wouldn't hesitate to use it in our den, living room, or bedroom. 
False Starts 
When you turn on the rear power 
switch, the system will come to life 
momentarily 
and then die. That's 
normal behavior. When the power 
supply receives power, it begins to 
startup. It quickly notices that the 
motherboard 
hasn't told it to start, 
though, so it shuts down again. All 
you need to do is press the front-
panel power switch and the system 
will start normally. 
Building a Budget PC 
117 

Although we didn't thinkabout it until we'd already given the system to Barbara's 
sister, with some minor additions such as a larger hard drive or drives this would 
also make an excellent poor man's media center system. The system is quiet 
enough to be unobtrusive in a typical den or home-theater room, and the black 
micro-tower case won't clash visually with most AV setups. The processor and 
video are both fast enough to deal with full 1080p HD video via the DVI output, 
and the system has slots available if you want to add a tuner card or cards. 
All in all, this turned out to be a perfect budget PC. 
Chapter 3 

Building a Mainstream 
System A 
A mainstream system is one that seeks balance at a reasonable price point. A 
mainstream system uses top-quality (but midrange in terms of performance) 
components throughout, because that is where you find the best value for your 
dollar. What differentiates a mainstream system from a budget PC is that the for-
mer makes fewer compromises. Whereas price is always a very high priority for a 
budget PC, it is less important for a mainstream system. If spending more money 
yields better performance or reliability, or adds desirable features, a mainstream 
system gets those extra dollars, whereas a budget PC probably doesn't. 
Relative to the budget PC, the mainstream system gets more expensive compo-
nents, particularly where they pay off in additional performance, convenience, or 
data safety. Typically, it will have a better motherboard, a faster processor, more 
memory, more disk storage, better external peripherals, and additional features. 
Considered individually, the incremental cost of better components is usually 
quite small. But taken collectively, the difference adds up fast. Depending on 
which components you choose, a mainstream system may cost 50% to 100% 
more than a budget system.That extra money buys you higher performance now 
and later, and extends the period between upgrades. If a budget PC will meet 
your needs for 12 to 18 months without upgrades, a mainstream system may suf-
fice for 24 to 36 months or longer, depending on the demands you put on it. 
IN THIS CHAPTER 
Determining Functional Requirements 
Hardware Design Criteria 
Component Considerations 
Building the Mainstream System 
Final Words 
In this chapter, we'll design and build the perfect mainstream system. 
A Sheep in Wolf's Clothing 
Many consumer-grade 
systems, particularly 
those sold in of-
fice superstores 
and big-box stores and by some large 
OEMs, 
masquerade 
as mainstream 
systems but are really budget 
PCs 
with a few extra bells and whistles. These PCs have faster CPUs, 
more memory, and larger hard drives—components 
whose 
specifications 
are easily visible—but 
use the same 
low-end 
motherboards, 
cheap cases, and marginal 
power 
supplies 
found in their less expensive 
budget 
lines. 
And the "upgrades" 
those systems include are often less signifi-
cant than you might expect from the description. 
For 
example, 
that larger hard drive may be available 
in two models, one with 
an 8 MB buffer and the other with a 32 MB buffer. The latter 
model may cost $8 more. Guess which modelyou'll 
find in that 
consumer-grade 
system? Or a system may be advertised 
as 
having 
a RADEON 
HD 5570 video adapter. What isn't 
adver-
tised is that that adapter uses slower memory 
and runs at a 
lower clock speed than the retail-boxed 
model you can buy. 
True mainstream 
systems, at least as we define them, are a 
vanishing 
breed. Marketers 
believe that spending 
$5 more on a 
better power supply or $10 more on a better motherboard 
will 
only boost the price of their systems, making 
them 
uncompeti-
tive with other brands, without increasing 
sales volume 
or 
profit. From their point of view, buyers are too ignorant 
to ap-
preciate the difference between cheap components 
and 
good 
components 
that cost only slightly more. Unfortunately, 
they're 
usually right. Of course, the best answer to that is to build your 
own mainstream 
system from top-notch 
components. 
119 

Determining Functional Requirements 
Determining Functional Requirements 
First, we sat down to think through our own requirements for a mainstream 
system. Here's the list of functional requirements we came up with: 
Reliability 
First and foremost, the mainstream system must be reliable. We expect 
it to run it all day, every day, for years, without complaint. The key to reli-
ability is choosing top-quality components: particularly the motherboard, 
memory, hard drive, and power supply. These components don't need to 
be the largest or fastest available, but they do need to be of high quality. 
Balanced performance 
A mainstream system is a jack of all trades and master of none. We expect 
it to perform any task we might give it at least competently, if not better. 
But, because this is not a cost-no-object system, we need to balance com-
ponent performance against price. For example, we expect this system to 
be capable of serious number crunching, but the fastest processors cost 
more than we can justify for this system. Accordingly, we'll aim for a bal-
anced design that allows the system to do most things very well and ev-
erything else at least acceptably well. 
Noise level 
Most mainstream systems are used in environments where noise is an 
issue. Accordingly, we'll design this system for quiet operation, but we 
won't spend much extra money to do so. That means, for example, that 
we'll choose the hard drive, case, and power supply based on noise level, 
but we won't spend $50 extra to replace the stock CPU cooling fan with a 
silent unit or $100 extra for a fanless power supply. Our goal is a quiet PC, 
not a silent PC (if there can truly be such a thing). 
Price 
Reliability 
* * * * i i r 
Size 
Noise level 
* * * * i i r 
Expandability 
-k-kikikik 
Processor performance -k-k-kikik 
Video performance -k-kikikik 
Disk capacity/performance -k-k-kikik 
Hardware Design Criteria 
With the functional requirements determined, the next step was to establish 
design criteria for the mainstream system hardware. Here are the relative pri-
orities we assigned for our mainstream system. Your priorities may, of course, 
differ. 
As you can see, this is a well-balanced system. Other than expandability and 
video performance, which are relatively unimportant, all of the other criteria 
are of similar priority. Here's the breakdown: 
Price 
Price is moderately important for this system, but value is more so. We 
won't attempt to match the low price of commercial systems built with 
low-end components, but we won't waste money, either. If spending a bit 
more noticeably improves performance, reliability, or usability, or if it adds 
features we want, we won't begrudge the extra cost. 
120 
Chapter 4 

Reliability 
Reliability is very important. A mainstream system that is not built for reli-
ability is not worth building. We'll also allocate some of the budget to a 
top-notch UPS to protect the system from power glitches and outright 
failures. 
Size is important because this system must fit in Barbara's already crowd-
ed office, so we don't want the system to be any larger than it needs to 
be to do its job. So, although we will not compromise other criteria in ex-
change for smaller size, we will choose the smallest case that meets other 
system requirements. 
Noise level 
Noise level is at least moderately important for nearly any mainstream 
system, and is very important for this particular mainstream system. Our 
goal is to build a quiet PC at little or no incremental cost rather than to 
build a "silent" PC using expensive special components. Accordingly, 
when we choose components we'll keep noise level in mind, but we won't 
pay much extra for a marginally quieter component. We'll choose the qui-
etest possible standard case and power supply, use large, slow-moving 
fans, use silicone-grommet hard drive mounts, and so on. 
Expandability 
Expandability is relatively unimportant for most mainstream systems, in-
cluding this one. Fewer than 5 % of commercial mainstream systems are 
ever upgraded, and those upgrades are usually of a minor nature, such as 
adding memory or replacing a video card or hard drive. Self-built main-
stream systems are more likely to be upgraded, but even with these the 
upgrades are unlikely to require more than perhaps a spare drive bay or 
two, an expansion slot, or a couple of available memory sockets. We'll 
choose a case, power supply, and motherboard that are adequate to sup-
port such minor upgrades. 
Processor performance 
Processor performance is important for a mainstream system, both ini-
tially and to ensure that the system can run new software versions with-
out requiring a processor upgrade. Mainstream dual- and quad-core 
processors—which is to say $150 to $175 Intel Core ¡5 models and AMD 
Phenom IIX4 models—are the"sweet spot"in price/performance ratio, so 
that's what we'll use. These will give us roughly twice the performance of 
a budget system, but without getting into the performance price range. 
Video performance 
3D graphics performance is important for a mainstream system only if 
you intend to use it to run 3D games. Otherwise, integrated video suf-
fices. In particular, current-generation integrated video is good enough 
even for casual gaming. 2D video quality is important for any mainstream 
system, because it determines display clarity and sharpness for browsers, 
office suites, and similar 2D applications. AMD and Intel integrated video 
both provide excellent 2D quality and reasonably good 3D performance. 
Building a Mainstream System 

Component Considerations 
To future-proof the system, we'll choose a motherboard that provides a 
PCI Express x16 video card slot. That way, we can always add an inexpen-
sive or mid range video adapter if we need better 3D performance or other 
features not supported by the integrated video. 
Disk capacity/performance 
Even though it will connect to a network that has several terabytes of avail-
able storage, disk capacity and performance are relatively important for 
this system because Barbara prefers to work locally, using network drives 
only for backing up. Fortunately, with fast 1 TB and larger hard drives cur-
rently selling for $100 or less, it's easy and inexpensive to accommodate 
any reasonable disk storage requirements. We'll start by installing a 1 TB 
drive, with the intention of adding drives from time to time as necessary 
to extend the life of the system. 
- A 
Your Mileage May Vary 
Although 
we tested the configu-
ration we used to build our own 
mainstream 
system, we did not test 
permutations 
with the listed alterna-
tives. Those alternatives are simply 
the components 
we would 
have 
chosen had our requirements 
been 
different. That said, we know of no 
reason the alternatives we list should 
not work perfectly. 
Component Considerations 
With our design criteria in mind, we set out to choose the best components for 
the mainstream system. The following sections describe the components we 
chose, and why we chose them. 
Case and Power Supply 
Antec Mini PI 80 pATX case (http://www.antec.com) 
With a mainstream budget, we can afford a nice case and a premium power 
supply. There are literally scores of mainstream cases available, so it might 
seem that choosing just one would be an overwhelming task. As it turned 
out, though, we were able to narrow down the choices dramatically based on 
some non-negotiable spousal requirements. This mainstream system would 
become Barbara's new main office system, and she had some very firm ideas 
about what constituted an acceptable case. 
First and foremost, Barbara's office is directly across the hall from the master 
bedroom. She has very sharp hearing and is a light sleeper, so even slight com-
puter noise coming from the next room can keep her awake. We decided to 
consider only cases that incorporated Quiet PC technology, such as silicone-
grommet hard drive mounts, sound-deadening panels, large (and quiet) cool-
ing fans, and so on. 
The available space limited us to a mini-tower pATX case, which narrowed the 
selection significantly. Because the system will reside under her desk, Barbara 
insisted on front-panel USB (for her MP3 players), audio (for her headphones 
and headset), and eSATA (for her external hard drives) ports. Nearly all main-
stream cases provide front-panel USB and audio ports, of course, but relatively 
few provide a front-panel eSATA port. Although we'll install only a DVD writer 
initially, Barbara wanted at least two 5.25"external drive bays because she may 
later decide to install a Blu-ray BD-ROM drive. Finally, Barbara specified one 
subjective requirement: this system will reside in her office, and she insisted 
that it be attractive. 
122 
Chapter 5 

Taken together, the objective requirements narrowed the field from hundreds 
of cases to a handful. Applying Barbara's subjective attractiveness require-
ment narrowed the candidates to only one case, the Antec Mini PI 80. 
The Mini PI 80 ships sans power supply, which means we can install any power 
supply that fits our needs and budget. We wanted a reliable, high-quality power 
supply rated at 450W to 550W, with high energy efficiency, active power-factor 
correction, and low noise. We'd budgeted $65 to $85 for the power supply. We 
found several units that met those requirements, including the Antec Earth-
Watts EA-500D Green, the Corsair CMPSU-450VX and CMPSU-550VX, and the 
Seasonic SS-500ET. Any of those models would bean excellent choice, but our 
familiarity and comfort level with Antec power supplies led us to choose the 
Antec EarthWatts EA-500D Green. 
Motherboard 
Intel DH55TC (http://www.intel.com) 
Intel motherboards set the standards by which we judge all other mother-
boards for construction quality, stability, and reliability. For our mainstream 
system, we chose the rock-solid Intel DH55TC, which is a Socket LGA 1156 
board that's based on Intel's mainstream H55 chipset. In fact, we liked this 
board so much that we ended up also using it for our media center system. 
(As Barbara commented, you know you're a True Geek when you have a list of 
favorite motherboards.) 
It's not that the DH55TC has more features or better performance than its 
competition. In this class of motherboards, feature sets are similar and per-
formance differences from board to board are too small to matter. It's that the 
DH55TC Just Works. For example, unlike some competing boards, the DH55TC 
works flawlessly with the integrated video that actually resides on the Core ¡5 
processor. And although an attractive motherboard isn't necessarily a good 
one, this motherboard exhibits Intel's traditional high construction quality and 
close attention to fit and finish. That gives us some confidence that the things 
we can't see were also done right. 
We settled on the DH55TC by our usual process of elimination. We needed a 
HATX (or Mini-ITX) board to fit the Antec Mini PI 80 case. We'd already decided 
to use an Intel Core ¡5 processor, so we needed a Socket LGA 1156 board. Al-
though we plan to install only a 4 GB memory kit initially, we'd like at least two 
spare memory slots to allow easy future expansion, and we'd like the mother-
board to support at least 8 GB of memory. 
In terms of I/O ports, we need at least one 10OOBaseT Ethernet port to connect 
to our network. Barbara has lots of USB devices, so we wanted at least six or 
eight USB ports. We needed at least one eSATA port—preferably front-panel 
for Barbara's external hard drives—and two would be better. Although we in-
tend to use integrated video, we wanted at least one PCI Express xl 6 2.x slot in 
case we later decide to install a standalone video adapter. Finally, we wanted a 
board that cost less than $100. 
Building a Mainstream System 

Component Considerations 
Other excellent alternatives among the Intel-based boards we looked at 
include the ASRock H55M Pro, the ASUS P7H55-M, and the GIGABYTE GA-
H55M-UD2H. If you intend to use an AMD processor, consider an ASRock 
880GM-series board, an ASUS M4A785T-series board, or a GIGABYTE GA-
880GM-series board. 
Processor 
Intel Core ¡5-661 (http://www.intel.com) 
Intel Core ¡3-550 
When Intel introduced the Core i5-6xx series processors in January 2010, our 
first impression was that they were superb mainstream processors, but signifi-
cantly overpriced. At $200, the Core i5-66x processors were not competitive 
with the less costly AMD Phenom II x4 quad-core models, let alone the $200 
Phenom II x6 1055T hex-core processor. 
Priced at $150 or so, the dual-core, quad-thread Core i5-6xx series processors 
might well have knocked AMD out of the mainstream processor market. But 
$200 was simply too high a price. That's nothing new for Intel, which often 
prices new processor models well behind AMD on the price/performance 
curve. Unfortunately for AMD, Intel traditionally also reduces processor prices 
significantly as production ramps up. Because these new Intel models are pro-
duced with a 32-nanometer process, die sizes (and production costs) are ac-
cordingly much lower than those of AMD's older-technology processors. That 
gives Intel lots of headroom to reduce prices and put the squeeze on AMD, 
making this series of processors one to watch. 
Then, in late May 2010, Intel introduced the fastest model to date of its Core 
¡3 series, the $150 Core ¡3-550, which is only slightly slower than the Core ¡5-
6xx series processors and offers significantly more bang for the buck. With the 
Core ¡3-550 selling for $150, it made no sense at all to pay $200 for the Core ¡5-
661. However, if one thing is always true about processor pricing, it's that both 
Intel and AMD will adjust their prices to whatever level is required to maximize 
their profits while staying competitive both with each other and within their 
own product lines. By the time this book is available in bookstores, we expect 
the Core ¡3-550 to sell in the $125 range and the Core ¡5-660/661 in the $150 
range, which will make either of them a good choice. 
On that basis, we actually installed an Intel Core ¡5-661 processor in our main-
stream system. We chose the Core ¡5-661 in particular rather than another 
Core ¡5 model because we think the -661 has the best combination of features 
for a general-purpose mainstream system. In particular, the -661 has the best 
integrated video performance of any current Core ¡5 model. (Conversely, if we 
had been building a mainstream corporate system, we'd probably have cho-
sen the Core ¡5-660, which gives up some video performance but has security 
and management features that the-661 lacks.) 
There are obviously alternatives to the Core ¡5-661. For the same price, you can 
buy the Core ¡5-750, which is based on the older 45-nanometer process but has 
twice as many cores as the -661 (although each of those cores is single-threaded, 
versus dual-threaded in the-661) and twiceas much L3 cache (although the-750 
124 
Chapter 5 

Component Considerations 
does not include integrated video). For some applications—notably video en-
coding, Photoshop, and other heavily threaded applications—the quad-core 
-750 is faster than the dual-core 6xx series processors. For many productivity 
applications, the multithreading and Turbo Boost mode of the -661 makes it 
as fast as or faster than a comparably priced quad-core single-threaded pro-
cessor. If you prefer an AMD processor, choose whichever AMD Phenom II X4 
model is selling for about $150 when you order the parts for your system. 
Whichever processor you choose, order the retail-boxed model rather than 
the OEM model. The retail-boxed models cost a few bucks more than the 
OEM models, but they have a longer warranty and also bundle a CPU cooler. 
Bundled CPU coolers have improved dramatically over the last few years. Both 
AMD and Intel bundled coolers are efficient and very quiet. Unless you're an 
extreme gamer or overclocker, or if you're trying to build the quietest possible 
system, we see no reason to install an aftermarket CPU cooler. 
Memory 
Crucial CT2KIT25664BA1339 PC3-10600 4 GB Memory Kit (2 GBx2) 
(,http://www.crucial.com) 
We normally install 1 GB of memory per core for multicore processors, or 512 
MB to 1 GB per thread for multithreaded processors.The Intel Core ¡5-661 pro-
cessor has two cores, each of which runs two threads, so we decided to install 
4 GB of system memory. (Barbara will run 32-bit Ubuntu on this system, which 
like all 32-bit operating systems recognizes only 3 to 3.5 GB of memory, so 
there's no point to installing more than 4 GB.) 
The Intel DH55TC motherboard has four memory slots and supports dual-
channel memory operation, which requires memory modules to be installed 
in pairs for best performance. Installing a pair of 2 GB modules, for a total of 
4 GB, leaves two memory slots available for future expansion. If Barbara later 
decides to install 64-bit Ubuntu (or another 64-bit OS), we can populate those 
two free memory slots with a pair of 4 GB modules, boosting total system 
memory to 12 GB. That should suffice for the expected lifetime of this system. 
The Intel DH55TC supports DDR3-1066 (PC3-8500) and DDR3-1333 (PC3-
10600) memory. Although faster memory improves overall system perfor-
mance slightly, it's not worth paying a big premium for it. However, on the 
day we ordered memory for this system, the PC3-10600 4 GB memory kit was 
actually selling for a couple bucks less than the PC3-8500 4 GB kit. Hmmm. 
There are dozens of memory brands available, although all of them actually 
use memory chips produced by a small number of manufacturers, of which 
Micron/Crucial is one. Some of those brands—such as Corsair, OCZ, and Patriot— 
specialize in high-performance memory and have good reputations among 
gamers and other extreme PC enthusiasts. But for more than 20 years, we've 
used Crucial and Kingston memory almost exclusively, and have never had 
cause to regret that decision. 
Brian Jepson Comments 
Oddly, Mac OS X can address quite a 
bit more of RAM even with the 32-bit 
kernel. But even the 32-bit kernel 
supports 64-bit binaries, so it's pos-
sible that userspace apps are the only 
ones that will have access to all that 
memory. I think there's a bit more to 
this story, but I don't know 
enough 
about it to say for sure (I have 8 GB in 
my Mac running a 32-bit kernel). 
Building a Mainstream System 
125 

Component Considerations 
The 7200.11 Firmware Issue 
Although Seagate drives 
through 
the years have been 
remarkably 
reliable, Seagate did run into a major 
problem with its 7200.11 series. That 
problem, caused by a firmware bug, 
was initially reported as affecting 
only the 1.5 TB 7200.11 model but 
ultimately was found to affect all 
7200.11 models. Seagate 
responded 
quickly with a firmware update, but 
unfortunately 
the fix came too late 
for some people, who ended up with 
bricked drives. 
The resulting mess caused a fire-
storm. As the saying goes, "Make a 
customer happy and he'll tell a friend; 
make a customer unhappy and he'll 
tell the whole Internet."And 
that's ex-
actly what happened. Although 
only 
a small percentage 
of7200.11 
users 
actually experienced the problem, 
the 7200.11 drives—particularly 
the 
1.5 TB models—ended 
up with a bad 
reputation, far worse than they actu-
ally deserved. Unfortunately, 
some 
of that mud stuck to other, perfectly 
innocent, Seagate models, 
including 
the 7200.12. 
For what it's worth, Robert runs four 
1.5 TB Barracuda 
7200.11 drives 
in his current main 
system—and 
has done so since before those 
drives were officially 
available 
for purchase—with 
no 
problems 
whatsoever. 
Video and Sound Adapters 
Integrated Intel HD Graphics and Intel High-Definition Audio 
Intel integrated video has always provided excellent 2D image quality, but its 
3D graphics performance has always, to put it politely, been rather anemic. 
Of course, no serious gamer would even consider using integrated video 
of any type, but integrated ATI or NVIDIA video was at least fast enough to 
play undemanding 3D games with minimum settings at reasonable frame 
rates. Under similar circumstances, Intel integrated video often provided only 
single-digit frame rates and was totally unsuited to playing any but the least 
demanding 3D games. 
Intel addressed the performance problems when it introduced the Core ¡5 pro-
cessors, which integrated video on the processor rather than using a separate 
video chipset on the motherboard. The 2D display quality remained top-notch, 
but Intel integrated 3D graphics performance went from also-ran to leading 
the pack. You still won't find any serious gamers using integrated graphics, but 
the new Intel HD graphics provide at least playable performance for many cur-
rent 3D games, assuming reasonable resolution and other settings. 
Because the integrated graphics are now on-processor (although not on-die), 
the actual 3D graphics performance varies from model to model. One of the 
major reasons we chose the Intel Core ¡5-661 processor rather than one of the 
other Core ¡5-6xx models is that the -661 integrated graphics, running at 900 
MHz, are the fastest available in the Core ¡5 lineup. In conjunction with the In-
tel DH55TC motherboard, the Core ¡5-661 processor provides resolution up to 
1600x1200 and support for analog, DVI-D, and HDMI displays, including dual 
displays. That's an excellent fit for our mainstream system, providing all the 
capabilities we might need. 
The DH55TC motherboard also includes the Intel High Definition Audio sub-
system, with support for eight-channel sound (5.1 plus two independent multi-
streaming audio channels). Barbara will use either her current M-AUDIO 2.0 
speaker set or a Logitech 2.1 speaker set on this system, for either of which the 
integrated audio is more than sufficient. 
Hard Disk Drive 
Seagate Barracuda 7200.12 ST31000528AS (1TB) (http://www.seagate.com) 
A mainstream system needs a mainstream hard drive, and you can't get much 
more mainstream than a Seagate Barracuda 7200.12 SATA drive. Although the 
7200.12 is available in capacities as low as 160 GB, with the 1 TB model selling 
for $70 you can't save much money by choosing a smaller model. All of the 
7200.12 models are reliable, fast, cool-running, and quiet. 
The Samsung Spinpoint F3 and the Hitachi Deskstar are other good choices 
in this price and capacity range. The Western Digital Caviar Black is also an 
excellent drive. The only reasons we don't recommend it are that it sells for 
about a 25% premium over the other three drives, and is also louder and 
hotter-running. 
126 
Chapter 5 

Component Considerations 
Optical Drive 
ASUS DRW-24B1 ST DVD writer (http://www.asus.com) 
Most mainstream systems need only a DVD writer. Among the many inexpen-
sive DVD writers available, we chose the ASUS DRW-24B1ST. Similar models 
from LiteOn or Samsung are also good choices. 
If you need to read Blu-ray discs and you have two external 5.25" drive bays, 
install a separate BD-ROM drive. The ASUS BR-04B2T is a good choice, as is the 
LiteOn ¡HOS104-08. If you have only one external 5.25"drive bay and need a 
combo DVD writer and Blu-ray reader, install the ASUS BC-08B1ST, the LiteOn 
¡HES208-08, or the Samsung SH-B083L/BSBP. If you need to write BD-R/RE 
discs, install the Pioneer BDR-205BKS. 
Backup Hardware 
Antec Easy SATA hard drive docking station (ihttp://www.antec.com) 
The only practical way to back up systems with a terabyte or more of disk stor-
age is to use external or removable hard drives. Optical discs simply hold too 
little and are much too slow.Tape drives are simply too expensive. 
We have used and continue to use external hard drives, but many of those 
use slow 5,400 or 5,900 RPM drives, and having multiple units means paying 
repeatedly for the enclosure. Better is something that uses bare 7,200 RPM 
hard drives, which are inexpensive and fast. That means a hard drive docking 
station, either internal or external. 
The type of interface is also an issue. USB 2.0 has real-world throughput of 
25 to 30 MB/s, which means it can take 10 hours or more to transfer 1 TB. An 
eSATA interface is bound only by the sustained data transfer rates of the hard 
drives themselves. In our testing, we were able to transfer data from our inter-
nal 7,200 RPM Seagate Barracuda to an eSATA docking station using a similar 
drive at sustained rates of about 100 MB/s, three to four times faster than a 
USB external drive. At that speed, routine daily partial backups take only a few 
minutes to complete. 
We've used and can recommend both the Antec Easy SATA hard drive dock-
ing station and the SYBA SD-ENC50020. The Antec unit fits into an external 
5.25" drive bay and allows you to slide standard 3.5" SATA hard drives in and 
out. The SYBA unit is an external stand that holds two 2.5"or 3.5" hard drives, 
which connect via two supplied SATA cables to eSATA ports on your system. 
The SYBA unit is rare in that it supports faster native SATA transfers rather than 
the slower bridged transfers more common with external eSATA docking sta-
tions. Either unit costs about $25, and both provide very fast transfers. 
We chose the Antec Easy SATA hard drive docking station for this system, but 
the SYBA SD-ENC50020 would bean equally good choice. Either of these units 
is a good way to recycle older SATA hard drives (run tests first to make sure 
they're not on their last legs). These units are an inexpensive way to main-
tain good backups even if you don't have any spare hard drives sitting around 
gathering dust, though. Hard drives are inexpensive enough now that it's no 
Building a Mainstream System 
127 

Component Considerations 
great hardship to purchase three or four mid-capacity drives and devote them 
to backup. When your main hard drive fails, or a virus/malware takes over your 
system, you'll be glad you did. 
Keyboard and Mouse 
Logitech Cordless Desktop S520 Keyboard/Mouse Combo (http://www. 
logitech.com) 
Personal preference outweighs all else when choosing a keyboard and mouse. 
So many personal factors determine the usability of a keyboard—straight ver-
sus ergonomic, layout, key size, cup depth, angle, stroke length, corded versus 
cordless, and so on—that no one can choose the "best" keyboard for someone 
else. The same is true, to a lesser extent, for a mouse. 
That said, we had to pick a "mainstream" keyboard and mouse for our main-
stream system. This will be Barbara's new main office desktop system. She 
wanted a cordless mouse, and didn't care if the keyboard was wired or cord-
less. (Barbara doesn't do online banking or other high-security tasks on this 
system; otherwise, she would have insisted on a wired keyboard.) She gener-
ally prefers the feel of Logitech keyboards and mice to similar models from 
Microsoft, but was willing to consider Microsoft. We decided something in the 
$50 range would be suitable. 
She ended up choosing the Logitech Cordless Desktop S520 Keyboard/Mouse 
Combo, but the Microsoft Wireless Media Desktop 3000 came in a close sec-
ond. Of course, there are literally hundreds of keyboard and mouse models 
available, priced from under $10 to several hundred dollars, so your choice will 
likely be different than Barbara's. 
We've used literally hundreds of different keyboards and mice over the years, 
from dozens of manufacturers, and we keep coming back to Logitech and 
Microsoft models. Both companies produces dozens of models, one of which is 
almost certainly suitable for you. Even the least expensive Logitech and Microsoft 
models are of reasonably good quality, but you'll probably be happier if you 
limit your selection to models that cost at least $30 or $35. 
Speakers 
Logitech Z523 2.1 speaker system (http://www.logitech.com) 
M-AUDIO Studiophile AV 30 2.0 speaker system (ihttp://www.m-audio.com) 
A mainstream system deserves a good set of speakers, but we can realistically 
spend no more than $100 on ours. In the preceding edition, we chose the Log-
itech Z-2300 2.1 speaker system, which then sold for about $100. The Z-2300 
was head-and-shoulders above similarly priced competitors, both in sound 
quality and in output power. Alas, Logitech apparently realized it was leaving 
money on the table, because the Z-2300 currently sells for $ 150 or more. 
We think the best current choices in the under-$100 range are the Logitech 
Z523 if you want a 2.1 speaker system and the M-AUDIO Studiophile AV 30 
if you prefer a 2.0 speaker system. The Z523 is an excellent general-purpose 
Ron Morse Comments 
Here's the question: Is your data 
worth 
$200? 
128 
Chapter 5 

Component Considerations 
set, suitable for anything from listening to music or watching videos to gam-
ing. With 9.5W per channel on the satellites and 21W to the subwoofer, it's 
much less powerful than the 200W Z-2300 (40W per channel plus a 120W sub-
woofer), but the Z523 is still powerful enough to produce uncomfortably loud 
sound. The two-way AV 30 set offers 15W per channel and a flatter frequency 
response curve from low base to high treble, with sufficient dynamic range to 
produce accurate sound even for classical music. Gamers will probably prefer 
the Z523, while anyone who mostly listens to music or watches videos will 
probably prefer the AV 30. 
Of course, if your budget extends to the $150 Z-2300 2.1 set, you can have 
the best of both worlds. At 120W RMS for the subwoofer and 40W RMS for 
each satellite, the Z-2300 can rattle the walls when you're gaming, but at low-
er volume it's also fine for listening to anything from classical music to DVD 
soundtracks. The satellites do a good job on the midrange and highs, and the 
subwoofer provides excellent bass response for this price level. 
TheTHX-certified Z-2300 speakers are solidly built, and are attractive enough 
to use in your living room or den. The subwoofer includes an 8" long-throw 
woofer and the built-in amplifier. The satellites each use one 2.5" midrange/ 
tweeter driver and are brushed aluminum with removable grilles. The Z-2300 
includes a wired remote with volume control, mute button, and headphone 
jack. 
Display 
ASUS VW246H (http://www.asus.com) 
ASUSMS228H 
Samsung 2494SW (http://www.samsung.com) 
Samsung EX2220X 
ViewSonic VX2433wm (http://www.viewsonic.com) 
ViewSonic VX2250wm-LED 
With a higher budget for the mainstream system, we can spend half again 
as much on the display as we did for the budget system. The sweet spot for 
mainstream displays is $200, give or take $25 or $30, which is likely to remain 
true for some time to come. There are literally dozens of displays available in 
that price range, including many models from top-tier manufacturers such as 
ASUS, Samsung, and ViewSonic. 
That price buys you a 24"fluorescent-backlit display with 1920x1080 (Full HD) 
resolution, fast response, and excellent image quality. If you're willing to step 
down to a 22" display, you can choose from among several models with LED 
backlighting, which provides even better display quality and has an essentially 
unlimited lifetime. (LEDs don't burn out; after 50 years or so, they dim to about 
half their original brightness.) 
Building a Mainstream System 
129 

Building tUe Mainstream System -A 
Assembly Order 
Although 
by necessity we describe 
building the system in a particular 
order, you don't need to follow that 
exact sequence when you build 
your own system. Some 
steps—for 
example, installing the processor 
and memory before installing the 
motherboard 
in the case—should 
be 
taken in the sequence we describe, 
because doing otherwise makes the 
task more difficult or risks 
damag-
ing a component. 
Other steps, such 
as installing the CPU cooler after 
you install the motherboard 
in the 
case, must be taken in the order we 
describe, because completing 
one 
step is a prerequisite for complet-
ing another. But the exact 
sequence 
doesn't matter for most steps. As you 
build your system, it will be obvious 
when sequence 
matters. 
With so many good models at similar prices, it's difficult to narrow things 
down to just one. For a standard display, we think you'll be happy with the 
ASUS VW246H, the Samsung 2494SW, or the ViewSonic VX2433wm (which 
was Robert's actual choice). For an LED-backlit display, we recommend the 
ASUS MS228H, the Samsung EX2220X, or the ViewSonic VX2250wm-LED. 
Component Summary 
Table 4-1 summarizes our component choices for the mainstream system. 
Table 4-1. Bill of materials for mainstream system 
Component 
Product 
Case 
Antec Mini P180 micro-tower case 
Power supply 
Antec EarthWatts EA-500D Green 
Motherboard 
Intel DH55TC 
Processor 
Intel Core ¡5-661 or Intel Core ¡3-550 
CPU cooler 
(Bundled with retail-boxed CPU) 
Memory 
Crucial CT2KIT25664BA1339 PC3-10600 4 GB Memory Kit 
Video adapter 
(Integrated) 
Sound adapter 
(Integrated) 
Hard disk drive 
Seagate Barracuda 7200.12 ST31000528AS (1TB) 
Optical drive 
ASUS DRW-24B1ST DVD writer 
Backup hardware 
Antec Easy SATA hard drive docking station 
Keyboard and mouse 
Logitech Cordless Desktop S520 Keyboard and Mouse Combo 
Speakers 
Logitech Z523 2.1 speaker system 
M-AUDI0 Studiophile AV 30 2.0 speaker system 
Display 
(See text) 
Building the Mainstream System 
Figure 4-1 shows the major components of the mainstream system. The Antec 
EarthWatts EA-500D Green power supply is to the right of the Antec Mini P180 
case, sitting atop the Intel DH55TC motherboard, with the Core ¡3-550 pro-
cessor. The Antec Easy SATA hard drive docking station is to the far left, with 
Crucial 4 GB memory kit to its right. Front and center is the Sony/Optiarc DVD 
writer, with the Seagate Barracuda hard drive atop it. 
Before you proceed, make sure you have everything you need. Open each box 
and verify the contents against the packing list. 
130 
Chapter 4 

Building the Mainstream System 
Figure 4-1. Mainstream system components, 
awaiting 
construction 
Preparing the Case 
Among the scores of models of computer cases we've used over the years, the 
Antec Mini PI 80, along with other members of the PI 80 family, is our favorite. 
Despite (or, more probably, because of) the 120 mm rear fan and the 200 mm 
(!) top fan, the Mini PI 80 is also one of the quietest cases we've ever used. 
But if you've never used anything other than standard computer cases, the 
Antec P180-series cases take some getting used to. The first thing you'll no-
tice is the dual-chamber setup, with the power supply located in a separate 
chamber at the bottom of the case. Rather than having the various cables from 
the power supply simply hanging loose down into the main chamber, where 
you can route, connect, and dress them as needed, with the P180 you have to 
make some decisions about which cables you want to run where. 
There are two options, which will become obvious when you look inside the 
open case. First, you can route cables from the power supply up through the 
bulkhead that separates the two chambers. Second, you can route power 
supply cables along the outside of the motherboard tray (below the mother-
board, once it's installed) and route them back into the main chamber through 
various cutouts. 
The advantage to this more complex cable-routing setup is that you end up 
with a very clean build, with much less cable clutter, which in turn means bet-
ter cooling and easier upgrades and repairs.The disadvantage is that you have 
to think things through beforehand, and you may end up having to go back 
and reroute one or more cables that you overlooked the need for initially be-
fore you finally get it right. On balance, we prefer this cable-routing method, 
but there's no question that it takes some getting used to. 
Building a Mainstream System 
131 

Building tUe Mainstream System -A 
The exact cable routing you end up with will depend on the specific mother-
board, power supply, and drives you use. For example, one power supply may 
have a main ATX power cable that's long enough to route outside the main 
chamber and bring back in through a cutout, while a different power supply 
with a shorter main ATX power cable may require you to run that cable up 
through the bulkhead that divides the chambers. 
Similarly, although the Mini PI 80 has three external 5.25" drive bays, one is 
located at the top of the case (in the main chamber) and the other two at the 
bottom (in the power supply chamber). But the top 5.25" drive bay is depth-
constrained (by the body of the top 200 mm fan) to accept drives no deeper 
than 170 mm. 
The upshot is that most current optical drives will fit the top bay, but some 
(notably some Blu-ray drives) must be mounted in one of the bottom bays. 
That may seem odd at first, but this system is most likely to be sitting on a 
desk, where having the optical drive in the lower part of the case is actually 
more convenient. 
To get started preparing the case, remove the top and bottom thumbscrews 
from the right side panel, as shown in Figure 4-2. (Note the protective plastic 
film on the side panel; to prevent scratches, leave this film in place until you 
finish the build.) 
Slide the right side panel back about an inch and lift it free of the chassis, as 
shown in Figure 4-3. Set the panel aside in a safe place. 
Figure 4-H. Remove 
the top and bottom thumbscrews 
from the 
Figure 4-3. Slide the right side panel back an inch or so and 
right side panel 
remove it 
Remove the two screws that secure the left side panel to the chassis, as shown 
in Figure 4-4. Lift the side panel free and put it aside in a safe place. 
As with most cases, the Antec Mini PI80 comes with an I/O shield installed, 
which fits no motherboard known to man. Press in on the outside of the I/O 
shield, as shown in Figure 4-5, until it snaps free. Discard the I/O shield. 
132 
Chapter 4 

Building the Mainstream System 
Figure 4-4. Remove 
the two screws 
that secure it, and then re- 
Figure 4-5. Remove and discard the I/O shield supplied 
with the 
move the left side panel 
case 
Installing the Power Supply 
The next step is to install the power supply in the lower chamber. To begin, 
remove the parts box, as shown in Figure 4-6, and set it aside. This box con-
tains screws, spare cable ties, drive rails for the 5.25" drive bays, an adapter 
to secure a 3.5" drive in a 5.25" bay, and a bezel for a 3.5" drive that requires 
external access. 
Release the cable wraps that secure the power supply cables into bundles. 
Extend and sort out the various cables, and leave them hanging loose for now. 
Working from inside the case, slide the power supply into position, as shown 
in Figure 4-7. 
Figure 4-8. Remove 
the parts box and set it aside 
Figure 4-/. Slide the power supply into 
position 
Building a Mainstream System 
133 

Building tUe Mainstream System 
Autosensing Versus Accident-
Waiting-to-Happen 
TheAntec EarthWatts EA-500D is 
autosensing, which means it adjusts 
itself automatically to accom-
modate 115VAC or 230V.AC utility 
power. Many power supplies must 
be set manually using a slide switch 
to select the proper input voltage. 
Before you proceed further, check 
the back of your power supply for an 
input voltage selector switch. If one 
is present, make certain it's set for the 
correct input voltage. 
If you connect a power supply set for 
230V to a 115Vreceptacle, no harm is 
done. The PC components 
will receive 
only half the voltage they require, 
and the system won't boot. But if you 
connect a power supply set for 115V 
to a 230Vreceptacle, 
the PC compo-
nents will receive twice the voltage 
they're designed to use. If you power 
up the system, that overvoltage will 
destroy it instantly in clouds of smoke 
and showers of sparks. 
-
A 
Bottoms Up 
The Antec EarthWatts EA-500D power supply we used has a fan at the back of the 
unit and a grill at the front of the unit, with the top and the bottom solid sheet metal. 
Some power supplies have a fan on the bottom of the unit. If your power supply 
is like that, mount it inverted, with the fan facing up. When the power supply is 
installed, the bottom is nearly in contact with the bottom of the case, with only thin 
antivibration/sound-deadening 
pads separating the power supply case from the 
bottom of the case. 
Installing a bottom-vented power supply oriented normally will cause it to overheat. 
Inverting it allows the fan/vent to vent upward (where there is clearance), and will 
have no effect on the power supply. However, mounting 
the power supply inverted 
may make it awkward to insert the AC power cable or use the rear switch. 
Arrange the power supply cables neatly outside the right side of the case for 
the moment. Make sure none of the cables are trapped between the power 
supply and the chassis. Slide the power supply around until the four screw 
holes in the power supply align with the corresponding holes in the case. Drive 
the four provided screws to secure the power supply to the case, as shown in 
Figure 4-8. 
You may want to preroute some of the power supply cables at this point, just 
to get them out of the way. If so, decide which power cables you want to route 
on the outer right side of the chassis, and which cutouts you want to route 
them through. (These cables will, of course, be covered when you reinstall the 
case cover.) Run those cables through the captive cable wrappers and the ap-
propriate cutouts into the upper chamber, as shown in Figure 4-9. For now, 
don't tighten the cable wrappers. 
Figure 4-8. Secure the power supply to the case with four screws 
Figure 4-8. Route cables along the outer right side of the chassis 
and through the cutouts 
134 
Chapter 4 

Building the Mainstream System 
Try, Try Again 
Figure 4-9 shows Barbara routing the Main ATX power cable and a Molex cable that 
we intended to use to power the rear and top case fans. We laterdecided 
to run only 
the Main ATX power cable through that cutout. We ran a SATA power cable (for the 
optical drive) that also provided a Molex connector (for the case fans) through a 
cutout above the one visible in the figure. 
For the time being, we won't route the cables through the bulkhead that sepa-
rates the upper and lower chambers. It's easy to do that last, after the mother-
board is installed, and keeping those cables out of the upper chamber makes 
it much easier to complete the motherboard installation. 
Mounting the Optical Drive and Hard Drive 
The Antec Mini P180 has two removable hard drive cages. The upper cage can 
hold three hard drives, mounted vertically and secured directly to the cage via 
screws driven through soft bushings. The lower cage can hold two hard drives, 
mounted with screws through soft bushings to removable drive trays. 
Video Card Versus Drive Cages 
If you intend to install a long video 
adapter card or other expansion 
card 
in your system, measure 
carefully. 
With the lower hard drive cage in-
stalled, there's room for a card that's 
at most 9.5" (241 mm) long. Even 
then, the card may interfere with the 
data and/or power cables for the 
hard drive. 
Removing 
the lower drive cage 
increases clearance to more than 14", 
even if you install a 
supplemental 
fan at the front of the cage area. 
(The longest video adapter 
card 
we've ever seen was less than 12".) Of 
course, doing that also costs you two 
hard drive bays. 
Fans Versus Drive Bays 
The Antec Mini PI 80 provides two positions for mounting 
120 
mm supplemental 
fans, one in front of each of the hard drive 
cages. The problem is, if you install a fan, you can't reinstall that 
drive cage. In other words, installing one of the 
supplemental 
fans costs you two or three hard drive positions, depending 
on 
the cage position in which you mount that fan. Installing two 
supplemental fans would cost you both removable hard drive 
cages and all five hard drive positions. (Although we suppose you 
could mount a hard drive or two in the lower 5.25" drive bays.) 
Numerous 
user reviews on NewEgg, Amazon, and other sites 
comment negatively about this aspect of the Mini PI 80, but the 
reality is that Antec did not intend these supplemental 
fan posi-
tions to be used except in extraordinary 
circumstances. 
Many 
people are concerned about their hard drives running too hot 
without supplemental 
fans, butyou really don't need 
supple-
mental fans to cool the hard drive(s). With just the two 
standard 
case fans, our system ran cool and nearly silent. Running 
with 
the standard fan configuration 
for several hours, the tempera-
ture of our Seagate hard drive never exceeded 32° C (89.6° F). 
Antec intended those supplemental 
fan positions to be used 
in two circumstances. 
First, if you're running a very hot video 
adapter, you can remove the lower hard drive cage and install 
a 120 mm supplemental 
fan to cool the video card. Second, if 
you're running a very hot processor, you can remove the upper 
hard drive cage and install a 120 mm supplemental 
fan in that 
position to cool the processor. If you're running both a hot video 
card and a hot processor, you should probably use a different 
case. 
Antec says, and we agree, that the supplemental 
cooling 
fans 
are seldom needed, and that installing them if they're really not 
needed will simply increase the noise level of the system. 
Even if you intend to install only one hard drive in your system, remove both 
drive cages. Like most pATX cases, the Antec Mini PI 80 has very limited work-
ing room. It's easier to install the motherboard and make connections to it 
with both drive cages removed. To begin removing the drive cages, remove 
the thumbscrews, as shown in Figure 4-10. 
Use a flat-blade screwdriver or similar tool to snap the pull rings free of their 
retaining clips and use the pull-rings to pull the drive cages straight out of the 
chassis, as shown in Figure 4-11. 
Building a Mainstream System 
135 

Building tUe Mainstream System -A 
Figure 4-10. Remove the thumbscrews 
that secure the drive cages 
Figure 4-11. Pull the drive cages straight out of the chassis 
The Antec Mini P180 manual claims that the parts box concealed on the right 
side of the upper 3.5" drive cage contains screws, spare grommets, standoffs, 
and so on. We'd already located those in the white cardboard box in the lower 
chamber, so we wondered what we'd find in that parts box. Figure 4-12 shows 
its contents. Yep, absolutely nothing. 
Still, keep that parts box in mind. Once you finish assembling the system, you'll 
have lots of leftover screws and other parts that you might need later. Ordinar-
ily, we store those in a plastic bag taped to the floor of the case. The parts box 
is a neater way to store small spare parts. 
Now, decide which drive cageyou want to use. Directions follow for using either. 
To install a hard drive in the lower drive cage, place the cage on a flat surface 
and remove one of the drive trays by squeezing both spring clips and sliding 
the drive tray out of the cage, as shown in Figure 4-13. 
Figure 4-12. The parts box on the upper drive cage is a good place 
to store excess small parts 
Figure 4-13. Squeeze both spring clips and slide the drive tray out 
of the lower drive cage 
Place your hard drive inverted (circuit-board side up) on your work surface. Place 
the drive tray inverted on top of the drive, with the spring clip ends of the drive 
tray toward the data and power connector end of the hard drive. Align the drive 
136 
Chapter 4 

Building the Mainstream System 
tray so that the mounting holes in the hard drive are visible through the grom-
mets in the drive tray. Locate the special hard drive mounting screws in the parts 
box. (One of these screws is visible at the lower center of Figure 4-14.) Drive four 
of these screws through the grommets and into the drive, as shown in Figure 
4-14. Tighten the screws only finger-tight plus perhaps a quarter turn. Over-
tightening the screws reduces the isolation benefits of the grommets. 
Orient the drive tray so that the solid base of the tray will be on the bottom 
when the drive cage is reinstalled. Slide the drive tray into the drive cage and 
press straight in until both spring clips snap into place, as shown in Figure 4-15. 
Figure 4-14. Secure the hard drive to the drive tray by driving four 
Figure 4-15. Slide the drive tray into the drive cage until the spring 
of the special hard drive mounting screws through the grommets 
clips snap into place 
We're running neither a hot video adapter nor a hot processor, so we decided 
to leave both drive cages installed. We're only installing one hard drive, at least 
for now, so we decided to install it in the upper removable drive cage, leav-
ing the more accessible lower cage available for easier later upgrades. If you 
decide to use the upper hard drive cage, you'll find it a bit harder to install the 
drive(s) because they're unsupported and more difficult to keep aligned until 
you drive in a couple of screws to secure them. 
Place the drive cage on its side and use one hand to support the drive and 
line up the top two screw holes in the drive with the holes in the grommets. 
Drive in two of the special screws (visible in Figure 4-16) to keep the drive in 
position. Invert the drive cage to place the unsecured side of the drive on top, 
as shown in Figure 4-16. Nudge thedrive backand forth until one of the screw 
holes aligns with a grommet hole and drive in that screw. Repeat that process 
with the fourth screw. 
Once the hard drive is installed in the drive cage, set both drive cages aside for 
now. We'll reinstall the drivecages after we install and connect the motherboard. 
The next step is to install the optical drive. Antec recommends installing it, if 
possible, in the top 5.25" external drive bay. To begin, use your index fingers 
to grasp the sides of the plastic drive bezel and twist it until it snaps out, as 
shown in Figure 4-17. 
Figure 4-18. Use four of the special hard 
drive screws to secure the hard drive 
directly to the upper drive cage 
Building a Mainstream System 
137 

Building the Mainstream System 
Insert the tip of a flat-blade or Phillips screwdriver in the hole in the center of 
the steel RF shield inside the drive bay and twist it back and forth, as shown in 
Figure 4-18, until the metal plate snaps free. 
Figure 4-1/. Snap out the top 5.25" drive bay bezel 
Figure 4-18. Twist the metal RF shielding plate until it snaps free 
Locate two drive rails and four optical drive mounting screws in the parts box. 
Stand the optical drive on its side on your work surface, and align one of the 
drive rails with the mounting holes in the side of the optical drive. Position the 
drive rail so that it is about centered vertically on the side of the optical drive, 
with thefrontof the metal spring tabflush with the front bezel of thedrive. In-
sert two screws to secure the drive rail to the optical drive, as shown in Figure 
4-19. Repeat this procedure to install the second drive rail. 
Position the optical drive in the drive bay and slide it into the drive bay, as 
shown in Figure 4-20, until the spring clips on both drive rails snap into place. 
Verify that the front bezel of the drive is seated flush with the front bezel of 
the case. 
Figure 4-18. Use two screws to secure the drive rail to the optical 
drive 
Figure 4-HO. Slide the optical drive into the bay and press until 
both spring clips on the drive rails snap into place 
Chapter 4 

Building the Mainstream System 
If the drive refuses to slide all the way into the bay, verify that the top fan as-
sembly isn't preventing it from doing so, as shown in Figure 4-21. The top ex-
ternal 5.25"drive bay accepts drives with a maximum depth of 170 mm (about 
6.7"). The Sony Opticarc DVD writer shown in the image clears by about 5 mm. 
Even if your drive seats completely, check out the back of the drive to make 
sure the fan doesn't interfere with the data or power connectors on the back 
of the drive. 
e 
Figure 4-21. Verify that the top fan assembly doesn't interfere with the optical drive 
If your drive does not seat completely, or if the top fan structure interferes 
with the power or data connectors on the drive, your only options are to use a 
different optical drive or to mount that drive in one of the lower 5.25"external 
drive bays. 
Note the cutout in the motherboard tray, visible in Figure 4-21 just below the 
top fan and to the left of the drive connectors. We'll use that cutout to route 
the SATA power cable and data cable to the optical drive. 
Preparing the Motherboard 
The next step is to prepare the motherboard by installing the processor, CPU 
cooler, and memory. Despite the fact that some case and motherboard manu-
als suggest installing these components after the motherboard has been in-
stalled in the case, it's easier and often safer for the motherboard to mount the 
processor, cooler, and memory first. 
To begin, locate the processor socket. Ground yourself by touching the power 
supply, and then release the chrome metal socket lever by pressing it down 
and away from the socket body. Once it's free of the catch on the socket body, 
lift the lever to the straight vertical position, which also raises the load plate to 
its fully open position, exposing the socket. Snap out the black plastic socket 
Building a Mainstream System 
139 

Building tUe Mainstream System -A 
cover and store it with the other small parts in the parts box. If you ever re-
move the processor from the socket, replace the socket cover to protect the 
fragile socket contacts. 
Open the processor package. Once again, ground yourself to the power sup-
ply or chassis frame before you touch the processor itself. Snap off the black 
plastic processor cover and set it aside. Store the processor cover later for pos-
sible future use. 
Pin 1 on the processor is indicated by the gold triangle visible on the lower-left 
corner of the processor in Figure 4-22. Pin 1 on the socket is indicated by a bev-
eled corner on the socket body. The processor and socket are further keyed 
by two notches on the outer edge of the processor to accommodate the two 
corresponding posts on the inside edge of the socket. Make sure pin 1 on the 
processor and the socket are aligned and that both keying notches are aligned 
with the corresponding posts, and then drop the processor straight into the 
socket, as shown in Figure 4-22. 
Leave the socket lever in the fully open (vertical) position as you lower the load 
plate into the closed position, as shown in Figure 4-23. 
Lower the processor lever slightly, which cams the load plate into locked posi-
tion. Make sure that the notch on the front of the load plate mates with the 
shoulder screw cap, as shown in Figure 4-24. 
Continue lowering the processor lever (which takes noticeable pressure) and 
snap it into place under the latch on the load plate, as shown in Figure 4-25. 
Examine the surface of the processor carefully. If there are any fingerprints, 
dust, or other contaminants present, use a clean paper towel to polish the sur-
face of the processor, as shown in Figure 4-26. 
Remove the CPU cooler from the processor box and examine the bottom of 
the cooler. The gray patches visible in Figure 4-27 on the copper bearing sur-
face of the cooler are phase-change thermal compound. (Phase-change is just 
a fancy way to say that the stuff melts each time the processor heats up and 
solidifies when the processor cools down.) The thermal compound ensures 
good heat transfer between the surface of the processor and the base of the 
heatsink. 
If any of those patches are missing or damaged, carefully rub the remaining 
patches off the copper surface and replace them with an approved thermal 
paste. If you ever have to remove and replace the processor, don't reuse the 
existing thermal compound. Rub off any remaining residue from both the pro-
cessor surface and the heatsink base, and replace it with new thermal com-
pound. (We keep a tube of Antec Silver thermal compound on hand for just 
this purpose.) 
The CPU cooler mounts to the motherboard using four push-posts with twist 
locks. The tips of the posts protrude a few millimeters on the back side of the 
motherboard, so you can't install the CPU cooler with the motherboard on a 
hard surface. We simply tilted the motherboard slightly while mounting the 
cooler to give clearance for the posts. 
140 
Chapter 4 

Building the Mainstream System 
Figure 4-22. Align the processor 
with the socket and then drop the 
processor into the socket 
Figure 4-24. Lower the processor lever to cam the load plate into 
locked position 
a clean paper towel 
jß 
I ^ m H 
SSlR 
Figure 4-23. Lower the load plate into the closed position 
Figure 4-25. Close the processor lever completely and snap it into 
the latch on the load plate 
Figure 4-2/. Verify that the thermal compound 
is present and 
undamaged on the base of the heatslnk 
Building a Mainstream System 
141 

Building tUe Mainstream System -A 
Ron Morse Comments 
The Intel-supplied CPU cooler uses 
a variable-speed fan with a four-
pin power connector. The system 
controls the fan's operating 
speed 
(and the amount of noise it makes) in 
concert with the operating tem-
perature of the CPU. Make sure you 
connect the CPU fan to the four-pin 
header on the motherboard 
labeled 
"CPU FAN." 
To install the CPU cooler, align the tips of its four posts with the four mounting 
holes in the motherboard. The four mounting posts/holes form a square, so you 
can orient the CPU cooler in any of the four possible positions and still mount it 
successfully. We recommend positioning the CPU cooler so that the power cable 
for the CPU fan reaches the connector on the motherboard with minimum cable 
slack. Once you have the four posts and holes aligned, press down firmly on one 
post, as shown in Figure 4-28, until you feel it snap into place. 
After you have snapped all four posts into place, you need to lock them. The top 
of each CPU cooler post has an arrow to indicate which direction to turn it to 
lock the post into place. Figure 4-28 shows the cap of a CPU post before it has 
been twisted to the locked position. You can use your fingers to turn the posts 
to the locked position, but it's easier to use a flat-blade screwdriver, as shown in 
Figure4-29. Lockallfourofthe posts. Figure4-30 shows a cap in locked position. 
The final step in installing the CPU cooler is to connect the CPU fan power 
cable to the CPU fan power header pins on the edge of the motherboard, as 
shown in Figure 4-31. Make sure the keys on the connector bodies match, and 
then slide the connector onto the pins until it seats. 
Figure 4-28. Align the CPU cooler posts with the motherboard 
mounting holes and press down on the tops of the posts until 
they snap into position 
Figure 4-23. Turn the cap of each CPU cooler post in the direction 
of the arrow to lock it into place 
Figure 4-30. A CPU cooler post cap in locked position 
Figure 4-31. Connect the CPU fan power cable to the CPU fan 
power header pins 
142 
Chapter 4 

Building the Mainstream System 
With the processor and CPU cooler installed, the next step is to install the 
memory modules. To begin, open all eight of the memory slot latches by piv-
oting them outward and down, away from the memory slots, as shown in Fig-
ure 4-32. 
The DH55TC motherboard has four memory slots that accept 240-pin DDR3 
memory modules. These slots are arranged in two channels, each of which 
accepts two DIMMs. Channel A is the pair of slots nearest the processor, and 
Channel B the two slots nearest the main ATX power connector (visible at the 
bottom left of Figure 4-33). The blue slot is DIMM 0 for each channel, and the 
black slot is DIMM 1. 
If you are installing a matched pair of memory modules, install them in the two 
blue (DIMM 0) slots. If you are installing four DIMMs in two matched pairs that 
differ from each other, install the larger matched pair in the two blue (DIMM 0) 
slots and the smaller matched pair in the black (DIMM 1) slots. (Obviously, if all 
four DIMMs are identical it doesn't matter which DIMM goes in which slot.) If 
you are installing three DIMMs comprising a matched pair and one odd DIMM, 
install the matched pair in the two blue (DIMM 0) slots, and the third DIMM in 
either black (DIMM 1) slot. 
In any case, install the DIMMs that will occupy the slots nearest the processor 
first and workforward toward the edge of the board. Before touching a DIMM, 
ground yourself by touching the power supply or chassis frame. Hold the first 
DIMM vertically over the appropriate slot. Align both edges of the DIMM with 
the slots in the vertical posts on the sides of the DIMM slot. DDR3 DIMMs are 
keyed with an off-center notch on the bottom (contact) edge of the DIMM. 
Make sure this notch aligns with the corresponding post in the slot, and then 
slide the DIMM into position, as shown in Figure 4-33. 
Figure 4-32. Open the memory slot latches 
Figure 4-33. Holding the DIMM vertically, align it with the slot and 
key and slide it into position 
Once the DIMM is aligned properly, seat it by placing one thumb on each 
side of the DIMM and pressing down firmly until you feel it snap into place, 
as shown in Figure 4-34. Although it's better to seat the DIMM by pressing on 
both ends simultaneously, if you can't get the DIMM to snap into place this 
way, you can press down first on one end and then the other until it seats com-
pletely. Repeat this procedure to install any remaining DIMMs. 
Building a Mainstream System 
143 

Building tUe Mainstream System -A 
Verify that the DIMM is fully seated, as shown in Figure 4-35. If the DIMM is seat-
ed properly, none of the contacts on the bottom edge of the module should 
be visible, and the DIMM latching posts should snap up into the latched posi-
tion. (If the module is fully seated but the DIMM latching posts remain open, 
manually close them to engage the notches on the edges of the DIMMs.) 
Figure 4-34. Use both thumbs to press down firmly until the DIMM 
snaps into place 
Figure 4-35. Verify that the DIMMs are fully seated and the latch-
ing posts are in the latched position 
Figure 4-38. Leaving out the I/O shield 
doesn't greatly increase the open area of 
the Antec Mini P180 case 
Installing the Motherboard 
With the motherboard populated, the next step is to install it in the case. 
Ordinarily, wed have already compared the I/O shield with the motherboard's 
back-panel I/O port to make sure they matched and then installed the I/O 
shield in the case. 
We started to do it that way for this system, but we immediately ran into a 
problem. There is so little clearance for the DH55TC motherboard that we sim-
ply couldn't fit the motherboard into the case with the I/O shield installed. 
Well, we suppose we could have, but doing that would have required remov-
ing and reinstalling the rear case fan. That we could have done at the cost 
of a few extra minutes'work, but it also appeared that we'd have to remove 
and replace the shelf that supports the two internal hard drive cages, and that 
shelf is riveted. 
As we sat there considering our alternatives, our gaze settled on the rear of the 
Mini P180 case, shown in Figure 4-36 with the motherboard already installed. 
Hmmm. Four expansion slot covers that are mostly holes, and a good-sized 
grill to ventilate the expansion slots. A 120 mm fan grill. And that's not even 
counting the honking huge 200 mm fan grill at the top rear of the case. This 
area of the Antec Mini PI 80 is mostly open to the air anyway, and we con-
cluded that the small additional gap produced by leaving out the I/O shield 
wouldn't noticeably affect air flow, cooling, or noise level. So, for the first time 
since Intel introduced the ATX form factor in 1995, we decided to build a sys-
tem without installing the I/O shield. (Later testing showed that both the pro-
cessor and hard drive were running very cool, so we have no concerns about 
omitting the I/O shield.) 
Ii:miiiiriiiliiiii[|iiril[.f 
' P** 2GB J RXB PC3-1 
PROOUCT OF U S 
144 
Chapter 4 

Building the Mainstream System 
With that decision made, building the system suddenly became a lot easier. 
Of course, if you use a different case or motherboard, you may have sufficient 
clearance with the I/O shield in place. Or you may not. 
The Intel DH55TC motherboard has eight mounting holes. The Antec Mini 
PI80 case comes with six standoffs preinstalled, so the first step in installing 
the motherboard is to determine which, if any, of the standoffs are incorrectly 
positioned and which motherboard mounting holes need additional stand-
offs installed. To answer those questions, temporarily lower the motherboard 
into position, as shown in Figure 4-37, and note the locations that require 
standoffs. 
As it turns out, all six of the preinstalled standoffs in the Antec Mini PI 80 corre-
spond to mounting holes in the Intel DH55TC motherboard.Two motherboard 
mounting holes have no corresponding standoffs, so we installed standoffs in 
both of those positions, as shown in Figure 4-38. 
Figure 4-3/. Place the motherboard In position to determine the 
locations where standoffs need to be installed 
Once all standoffs are installed, again lower the mother-
board into position and make a final check that a stand-
off is installed for each motherboard mounting hole 
and that no extra standoffs are present. From the parts 
box, locate the small plastic bag labeled "Motherboard 
only"and remove eight motherboard mounting screws. 
Position the motherboard so that at least one standoff 
is visible through a mounting hole and partially drive 
a motherboard mounting screw into that standoff. Re-
align the motherboard as needed to line up the other 
mounting holes with their corresponding standoffs, and 
drive screws into each standoff, as shown in Figure 4-39. 
Tighten all screws finger-tight plus about a quarter turn. 
Do not overtighten the screws, or you risk cracking the 
motherboard. 
Figure 4-38. Install any missing standoffs needed to support the 
motherboard 
Figure 4-38. Drive screws into all eight standoffs to secure the 
motherboard 
Building a Mainstream System 
145 

Building tUe Mainstream System -A 
More Power 
Many power supplies 
(including 
the EA-500D) provide two ATX12V 
connectors. Some 
high-current 
processors draw more + 12VDC than 
one ATX12Vconnector 
can supply. 
Motherboards 
designed for those 
processors have either two of the 
four-pin connectors or one eight-pin 
connector that will accept two four-
pin cables. 
Connecting power to the motherboard 
The next step is to connect the ATX12V power cable to the motherboard. This 
cable has a 2x2 keyed connector with two black (ground) wires and two yel-
low (+12V) wires, and includes a latch. The Antec EarthWatts EA-500D power 
supply labels these connectors "P2," but other power supplies may label them 
"CPU" or "ATX 12V." 
Locate the ATX12V cable bundle coming out of the power supply and route 
that cable up the outside of the case on the righthand side to the cutout at the 
top of the motherboard tray. Pass one of the ATX12V connectors into the top 
chamber of the case and connect it to the motherboard, as shown in Figure 
4-40. Make sure the keying on the plug and socket match properly, and then 
press the connector down until the latch snaps into place. 
If you haven't already done so, locate the 24-pin main ATX power connector 
cable coming out of the power supply, and route it up the outside of the case 
(on the right) to the cutout nearest the main ATX power connector at the front 
edge of the motherboard. Align the plug with the socket, making sure the key-
ing matches. Press down firmly on the plug, as shown in Figure 4-41, until you 
feel it seat completely in the socket and the latch engages. 
Connect the ATX12V power cable to the motherboard 
4-41. Connect the main ATX power cable to the motherboard 
Connecting front-panel ports, switches, and indicators 
The Antec Mini P180 case provides front-panel ports for USB, HD or AC'97 au-
dio, and eSATA. Oddly, neither the Mini P180 case nor the Intel Media Series 
motherboard provides an IEEE 1394/FireWire port—or perhaps those are sim-
ply indications of the declining importance of FireWire for desktop systems in 
an environment where eSATA is commonplace and USB 3.0 will soon become 
so. It wouldn't surprise us at all if the next HD camcorder we buy has eSATA 
and/or USB 3.0 ports instead of FireWire. 
To begin connecting the front-panel ports, locate the front-panel audio cable. 
This cable has two connectors—one for HD audio and one for AC'97 audio— 
to accommodate motherboards with either type of audio connector. Our 
motherboard provides an HD audio connector, so that's what we'll use. Locate 
146 
Chapter 4 

Building the Mainstream System 
the front-panel HD audio header-pin set, toward the rear corner of the mother-
board, near the expansion slots. The header-pin set is keyed with a missing pin 
that corresponds to a blocked hole on the cable connector. Orient the cable 
connector and header pins so that the keying matches, and then press the 
cable connector onto the header pins, as shown in Figure 4-42. 
In addition to six rear-panel USB ports, the Intel DH55TC motherboard in-
cludes three sets of header pins that each provide two USB ports, for a total of 
12 USB ports. The center USB header-pin set also includes special support for 
an internal embedded USB (eUSB) solid-state drive. 
We don't expect to install an SSD in this system, and if we did it would be 
one that uses a standard SATA interface. Even so, with more USB ports on the 
motherboard than we have places to connect them, we decided to use one of 
the remaining two USB header-pin sets. One of those sets is located near the 
front corner of the motherboard, in close proximity to the front-panel switch 
and indicator pins. To make it easier to install the latter, we decided to use the 
second USB header-pin set, located just to the rear of that first set. 
Like the front-panel audio connectors, the USB cable connector and header-
pin set are keyed with a blocked hole and missing pin, respectively. (The USB 
key pin is different from the audio key pin, to make sure you can't accidentally 
connect a USB port to the audio header pins, or vice versa.) 
To make the connection, orient the front-panel USB cable plug to align its 
blocked hole with the missing pin on the USB header-pin set. Slide the cable 
connector down onto the header pins, as shown in Figure 4-43, until it seats 
completely. 
eUSB? 
Embedded USB SSDs are not used 
in general-purpose 
PCs. They were 
designed to replace 1.8" hard drives 
in embedded, ruggedized, and mil-
spec systems, where they serve as the 
only mass storage device. eUSB SSDs 
generally use expensive SLC memory 
and have capacities in the 500 MB to 
16 GB range. A 1 GB eUSB SSD may 
cost $35, a 4 GB model $ 125, and a 
16 GB model $500. 
Next up are the front-panel switch and indicator cables: namely, the power 
and reset switches, the hard drive activity LED, and the power LED. Figure 
4-44 shows the pinouts for these switches and indicators on the Intel DH55TC 
motherboard. (Actually, this is an Intel standard, used by all recent Intel mother-
boards and most motherboards from other makers.) 
Figure 4-42. Connect the front-panel audio cable HD audio con-
nector to the FP audio header-pin set 
Figure 4-43. Connect the front-panel USB cable connector to the 
USB header-pin set 
Building a Mainstream System 
147 

Building tUe Mainstream System -A 
Hard Drive 
Activity LED 
Single-
colored 
Power LED 
Dual-
colored 
Power LED 
A 
Reset 
Switch 
Power 
Switch 
t 
No 
J Connection 
Figure 4-44. Intel DH55TC front-panel switch and indicator pinouts (image courtesy of 
Intel Corporation) 
We'll connect three of those cables to the monolithic connector block mapped 
in Figure 4-44.The one exception is the power LED, because Intel provides two 
adjacent pins for that connection, while the Antec Mini PI80 case provides 
a three-position/two-pin power LED cable that does not fit this block. Fortu-
nately, the Intel DH55TC motherboard provides an alternative three-position/ 
two-pin motherboard connector that the Antec cable fits. That connection is 
shown at the bottom center of Figure 4-45 as a blue/white cable connected 
to the pin set labeled PWR LED. Connect the power switch cable and reset 
switch cable to the monolithic connector block, as shown in Figure4-45. Polar-
ity doesn't matter for switches, so you can install the cable connector in either 
direction. Connect the HDD LED cable to the appropriate pins, making sure 
to observe polarity. (The red wire is positive and the white wire is ground.) If 
you connect this cable backward, no harm is done, but the HDD LED won't 
function. 
Locate the blackfront-panel eSATA cable, and connect it to one of the red eSATA 
motherboard ports as shown in Figure 4-46. It doesn't matter which one. Make 
sure the L-shaped key in the cable connector and motherboard connector 
mate, and then press the cable connector down firmly until it seats. 
Figure 4-45. Connect the front-panel switch and indicator cables 
148 
Chapter 4 
Figure 4-48. Connect the front-panel eSATA cable 

Installing the Antec Easy SATA Docking Station 
The next step is to install the Antec Easy SATA hard drive docking station. At first 
glance, it might seem that installing the Easy SATA presents a resource-allocation 
conflict. The Intel DH55TC motherboard provides two eSATA-enabled ports. 
The front-panel eSATA port that we just connected uses one of those eSATA 
motherboard ports, leaving us with only one available. 
But the Antec Easy SATA unit requires two more motherboard SATA connec-
tors. One of those connects to the Easy SATA using a standard SATA data cable. 
The second connects via the captive cable (shown in Figure 4-47) to the exter-
nal eSATA port on the front bezel of the Easy SATA unit. So it appears that we 
need a total of three eSATA motherboard ports, one more than we have. 
Figure 4-4/. Power and data connectors on the rear of the Antec Easy SATA hard drive 
docking station 
At this point, we wondered exactly what the difference was between the red 
eSATA motherboard ports and the black standard SATA motherboard ports. The 
connectors appear identical except for color, and they accept the same cables. 
We examined the ports closely to see if there were any physical differences—for 
example, different pin lengths to support hot-plugging—but could see no dif-
ferences at all. 
So we asked one of our technical contacts at Intel, who explained it all to us. 
The only difference between the red eSATA motherboard connectors and the 
black standard SATA motherboard connectors is the signal level. The red con-
nectors use a slightly higher signaling voltage to allow using the longer cables 
supported by the eSATA specification. The higher voltage on the red ports 
won't harm standard SATA devices, and eSATA devices work properly on the 
black ports if the cable lengths are kept short. So, as it turned out, we didn't 
have a problem at all. We connected the two red eSATA motherboard ports to 
the eSATA jacks on the Mini PI 80 case and the front bezel of the Antec Easy 
SATA unit. We then used a standard black SATA motherboard port to connect 
the removable drive bay portion of the Easy SATA. 
Building a Mainstream System 

Building tUe Mainstream System -A 
To install the Antec Easy SATA hard drive docking station, follow the same pro-
cedure described in the section about mounting the optical drive to remove 
the plastic bezel and steel RF shielding plate from one of the lower 5.25"drive 
bays. Attach drive rails to each side of the Easy SATA frame, as shown in Figure 
4-48. Both rails should be positioned as shown, using the upper set of screw 
holes in the Easy SATA frame and with the front edge of the spring clips flush 
with the front bezel. 
Locate one of the SATA power cables from the power supply cable bundle, and 
feed it through the lower 5.25"external drive bay and out the front of the case. 
Match the L-shaped keys on the power cable connector and the Easy SATA 
power connector, and press the power cable connector onto the Easy SATA 
power connector, as shown in Figure 4-49. 
Figure 4-48. Attach drive rails to both sides of the Antec Easy 
Figure 4-48. Connect power to the Easy SATA unit 
SATA hard drive docking station 
Feed a standard SATA data cable through the lower drive bay and connect it to 
the data connector on the Easy SATA unit, as shown in Figure 4-50. 
Make sure the SATA power cable and both SATA data cables will feed through 
the drive bay opening and into the lower interior chamber, and then slide the 
Antec Easy SATA unit into the drive bay, as shown in Figure 4-51. 
Figure 4-50. Connect a standard SATA data cable to the Easy 
SATA data 
connector 
Figure 4-51. Slide the Easy SATA unit into the drive bay 
150 
Chapter 4 

Building the Mainstream System 
Although the Easy SATA frame slides in and out of the bay easily, you may have 
to use some pressure to force the frame rails to snap into the latched position. 
Note in Figure 4-52 that the spring clips are still in the unlatched position, tight 
against the side of the Easy SATA frame rather than projecting out into the 
thumb holes. To get the frame to seat and latch, we had to withdraw it an inch 
or two and then slide it quickly into place. Make sure these spring clips latch, 
or the first time you attempt to remove a hard drive from the frame the whole 
frame will slide out of the case. 
Locate the two SATA data cables in the lower chamber at the rear of the Easy 
SATA and feed them up through the hole in the sliding door of the interior 
bulkhead, as shown in Figure 4-53. (The thumbscrew can be loosened if you 
need to slide that door aside temporarily to route cables.) 
Figure 4-5H. Press the Easy SATA frame into the drive bay until the 
spring clips snap into place 
Figure 4-53. Route the two SATA data cables from the Easy SATA 
through the bulkhead and into the upper 
chamber 
The black captive SATA data cable from the Easy SATA unit feeds the eSATA 
port on the front of the unit. Because that port may be used to connect an 
external eSATA device with a long cable, we want to connect the black cap-
tive cable to our one remaining motherboard eSATA port, as shown in Figure 
4-54. (Yes, it's bass-ackwards that we've now connected two black SATA cables 
to our two red motherboard SATA ports and we're about to connect red SATA 
cables to our black motherboard SATA ports. Oh, well.) 
The standard SATA data cable from the Easy SATA unit feeds the removable 
drive bay, which in terms of required signal strength is the same as any internal 
SATA device. That means we can connect it to any of the four standard SATA 
ports on the motherboard. We reserved SATA 0 and SATA 1 ports for our hard 
drive and optical drive, so we decided to connect the Easy SATA data cable to 
the next available SATA port, SATA 2. 
Match the L-shaped keys on the cable connector and motherboard connector, 
and then press the cable connector into place, as shown in Figure 4-55. Make 
sure the cable connector seats fully, and that the cables you connected previ-
ously are still seated. 
Building a Mainstream System 
151 

Building tUe Mainstream System -A 
:.u l l ; 
P V r r l l e i . 
i1 
•A R f l T , L E L 
P 0 3 T 
Figure 4-54. Connect the black captive SATA data cable from the 
Figure 4-55. Connect the standard SATA data cable from the Easy 
Easy SATA unit to the one remaining motherboard eSATA port 
SATA unit to one of the standard SATA motherboard 
ports 
Connecting Power and Data Cables to the 
Optical Drive and Hard Drive 
We're in the home stretch now. All that remains is to connect the power and 
data cables to the optical drive and hard drive, and do a bit of neatening up.To 
begin, locate a SATA power cable that also includes a Molex connector. Route 
that cable up the exterior rig ht side of the case, a nd pass a SATA power con nec-
tor through the cutout at the top of the case, nearest the optical drive. Make 
sure the keying on the cable connector and optical drive connector match up, 
and then press the SATA power cable connector firmly onto the optical drive 
power connector, as shown in Figure 4-56. 
Pass a standard SATA data cable through the same cutout you used for the 
power cable, and then connect the SATA data cable to the optical drive, as 
shown in Figure 4-57. 
Run the SATA data cable down the outside of the case on the right, and pass it 
through the cutout nearest the motherboard SATA connectors. Make sure the 
keying on the cable and motherboard connector match, and then press the 
cable connector onto the motherboard connector, as shown in Figure 4-58. 
Make sure the cable connector seats completely. 
Slide the hard drive cage back into the chassis and secure it by reinstalling the 
thumbscrew. Route a SATA power cable to the hard drive, and connect it, as 
shown in Figure 4-59. 
Connect a standard SATA data cable to the hard drive, as shown in Figure 4-60. 
Route the hard drive data cable to the motherboard SATA port area and con-
nect the SATA data cable to a motherboard SATA port, as shown in Figure 4-61. 
(Yes, we got tired of using all black and red SATA data cables, so we fished out 
a silver one for the hard drive.) 
152 
Chapter 4 

Building the Mainstream System 
Figure 4-58. Connect 
a SATA power cable to the optical drive 
Figure 4-58. Connect 
the SATA data cable from the optical drive to 
a motherboard 
SATA 
port 
Figure 4-80. Connect 
a standard 
SATA data cable to the hard drive 
Figure 4-5/. Connect 
a standard 
SATA data cable to the optical 
drive 
Figure 4-58. Connect 
a SATA power cable to the hard drive 
Figure 4-81. Connect 
the hard drive SATA data cable to a mother-
board SATA 
port 
Building a Mainstream System 
153 

Building tUe Mainstream System -A 
Finally, route a SATA power cable to the hard drive and connect it, as shown 
in Figure 4-62. At this point, the system is complete except for some minor 
cleanup. 
Even though we've built several systems with Antec P180-series cases, we're 
always surprised when we finish one and see how neat the cabling is. Figure 
4-63 shows the finished mainstream system, with almost no cable mess. Well, 
we do plan to do something about that CPU fan power cable and perhaps tuck 
the SATA power cables to the optical drive and hard drive into the hard drive 
cage, but otherwise there's no cable dressing remaining to be done inside the 
main chamber. 
Figure 4-82. Connect 
a SATA power cable to the hard drive 
Figure 4-83. The interior of the mainstream 
system, seconds 
after 
we finished connecting 
cables 
154 
Chapter 4 

Building the Mainstream System 
Of course, when Robert was a teenager, he tried to fool his mother, who had 
told him to clean up his room. He simply piled everything in the closet, which 
worked well until she opened the closet door. Figure 4-64 shows that bed-
room closet for our mainstream system—the rats'nest of cabling on the exte-
rior right side of the case. Fortunately, it's not as bad as it looks. 
Note that unused Molex power connector hanging loose near the QA PASS 
label. We left that there to remind us to connect power to the case fans. Do so 
now, as shown in Figure 4-65. 
To dress the messy side of the motherboard tray, first feed any excess cabling 
back from the main chamber to this side of the tray. Gather and bundle the 
cables, and secure them using the captive cable ties and the spare cable ties 
from the parts box. 
Building a Mainstream System 
155 

Building tUe Mainstream System -A 
False Starts 
When you turn on the rear power 
switch, the system will come to life 
momentarily 
and then die. That's 
normal behavior. When the power 
supply receives power, it begins to 
startup. It quickly notices that the 
motherboard 
hasn't told it to start, 
though, so it shuts down again. All 
you need to do is press the front-
panel power switch and the system 
will start normally. 
Final Assembly Steps 
Congratulations! You're almost ready to put the side panels back on the case 
and declare the system finished. 
Before you do that, take a few minutes to double-check everything. Verify that 
all cables are connected properly, that all drives are secured, and that there's 
nothing loose inside the case. If your power supply is not autosensing, check 
one last time to verify that it is set to the correct input voltage. It's a good idea to 
pick up the system and tilt it gently from side to side to make sure there are no 
loose screws or other items that could cause a short. Use the following checklist: 
• Power supply set to proper input voltage (if applicable) 
• No loose tools or screws (shake the case gently) 
• CPU cooler properly mounted; CPU fan connected 
• Memory modules fully seated and latched 
• Front-panel switch and indicator cables connected properly 
• Front-panel I/O cables connected properly 
• Hard drive data cable(s) connected to drive(s) and motherboard 
• Hard drive power cable(s) connected 
• Optical drive data cable connected to drive and motherboard 
• Optical drive power cable connected 
• All drives secured to drive bay or chassis, as applicable 
• Expansion card(s) (if any) fully seated and secured to chassis 
• Main ATX power cable and ATX12V power cable connected 
• Top and rear case fans connected 
• All cables dressed and tucked 
Once you're certain that all is as it should be, it's time for the smoke test. Leave 
the cover off for now. Connect the power cable to the wall receptacle and then 
to the system unit. Unlike many power supplies, the Antec unit has a separate 
rocker switch on the back that controls power to the power supply. By default, 
it's in the "0"or off position, which means the power supply is not receiving 
power from the wall receptacle. Move that switch to the "1" or on position. 
Press the main power button on the front of the case, and the system should 
start up. Check to make sure that all fans are spinning. You should also hear 
the hard drive spin up. At that point, everything should be working properly. 
At this point, the system is ready to roll. Turn it off, replace the side panels, and 
strip off any remaining protective plastic film. Move the system to where you 
plan to use it, connect the display and other external peripherals, fire it up, 
install your operating system and applications, and restore your data to the 
new system. 
156 
Chapter 4 

Final Words 
Other than the minor issue with the I/O shield and a couple of false starts rout-
ing cables, this system went together easily. Not counting the time needed to 
shoot the images, it took us about 30 minutes from start to finish. A first-time 
system builder should be able to assemble this system in an evening with luck, 
and certainly over a weekend. 
We're very pleased with our new mainstream system. Despite the numerous 
large vents and fan grills, the system is extremely quiet—enough so that it's in-
audible in a normal room when we're sitting only a couple of feet away. We set 
both the top and rear fans to slow initially, using the fan switches on the rear 
of the case. At that speed, we can't hear them at all, and they seem to provide 
sufficient cooling. After running for more than an hour, the CPU temperature 
and hard drive temperature were both under 40° C, which speaks well of both 
the Antec case and the stock Intel CPU cooler. 
We installed Windows 7 and Ubuntu Linux 10.04, both of which installed and 
ran with no problems. Performance-wise, this system "feels" fast (noticeably 
faster than the budget system, which itself is no slouch). It's also rock-solid 
stable, as we proved by running the Passmark burn-in utility for 72 hours with-
out a single glitch. We can't ask for much more. 
Building a Mainstream System 

Building an Extreme 
t 
System 
% 
In the first two editions of this book, we built systems designed to provide top 
performance for 3D games. We were planning on doing the same for this new 
edition, until we talked with several friends who are heavily into gaming. They 
all told us that, although gaming PCs are still used by many gamers, they are 
rapidly declining in popularity, with most gamers shifting to gaming consoles. 
So, for this edition we decided that rather than building yet another dedicated 
gaming system, we'd instead build an extreme system. An extreme system is 
one in which one or more functions—processor and memory performance, 
video performance, hard disk performance or capacity, noise level, and so 
on—are optimized for top performance, sometimes at the expense of other 
functions. 
A gaming system is, of course, one form of extreme system, but there are others. 
For gamers, 3D graphics performance is critical, but for some extreme systems 
they don't matter much, if at all. Robert, for example, is doing increasingly 
more video production, which can place extreme demands on a system. For 
that purpose, processor performance and hard drive capacity and perfor-
mance are critical, but even integrated video is perfectly acceptable. 
One of our correspondents provides an even more striking example of an un-
usual extreme system. He produces high-resolution CGI graphics videos as a 
hobby(!), and he's built his own small render farm of several extreme systems 
configured in a Beowulf cluster. Those systems run headless, so video is liter-
ally zero priority. They have small standard hard drives, are built in ordinary 
mini-tower cases, and look like nothing special. But they're extreme systems, 
all the same. Each has a high-performance processor and dual high-end vid-
eo adapters (which function as floating-point operations accelerators), and 
each spends all its time rendering individual CGI frames. (When his wife com-
mented about how much he was spending on PC components, he told her 
she should be thankful he hadn't bought a cabin cruiser, as one of their friends 
had just done.) 
We had to pick one extreme system configuration to build for this chapter, 
and we figured we might as well make it actually useful to us, so we elected to 
build an extreme video production and scientific number-crunching system 
for Robert, one with a very powerful processor, fast memory, and a ton of hard 
disk storage. Along the way, we'll point out alternatives you might choose to 
configure your own extreme system for your own purposes. 
IN THIS CHAPTER 
Determining Functional Requirements 
Hardware Design Criteria 
Component Considerations 
Building the Extreme System 
Final Words 
159 

Determining Functional Requirements 
Determining Functional Requirements 
We began by sitting down to think through the project. Here's the list of func-
tional requirements we came up with: 
Extreme processor/memory performance 
Video editing/rendering and scientific number crunching are both largely 
processor-bound operations, so raw processor performance is critical.That 
means we'll want a processor with as many cores and threads as possible, 
running at the highest possible clock speed. For both of these primary ap-
plications, memory performance is also critical. In fact, within reason, the 
amount of main memory is less important than its performance, so we'll 
want the fastest memory we can get, with the lowest possible latency. 
High-performance, high-capacity mass storage 
Scientific number crunching, at least of the sort Robert does, is not disk-
intensive, but serious video editing and rendering requires not just ex-
treme disk capacity but extreme performance as well. The fastest current 
high-capacity SATA hard drives have sustained transfer rates of about 
100 MB/s, so reading or writing a 3 GB video file might take 30 seconds, 
a significant amount of time when you're working interactively. We need 
something better than individual hard drives. 
Top-notch 2D video 
Although 3D graphics performance is a nonissue, we'll need a large, high-
resolution display—at least full 1080p for viewing and editing HD video, 
and 1920x1200 or higher would be better. We also need a video adapter 
capable of driving that display. 
Price 
-k-kikikik 
Reliability 
* * * * i i r 
Size -kikikikik 
Noise level -kikikikik 
Expandability 
-k-k-kikik 
Processor performance 
*
*
*
*
* 
Video performance -kikikikik 
Disk capacity/performance 
*
*
*
*
* 
Hardware Design Criteria 
With the broad-brush functional requirements determined, the next step was 
to establish design criteria for the extreme system hardware. Here are the rela-
tive priorities we assigned for the extreme system. 
Here's the breakdown: 
Price 
Price is important for this system only in the sense that we don't want to 
spend money needlessly. Our goal is to build, within reason, the fastest 
system possible without getting into workstation-class components (and 
prices). We'd like to keep the cost of this system to $3,500 or so, excluding 
software and external peripherals, but we'll go higher if necessary. 
Reliability 
Reliability and stability are very important for this system, but we don't 
need to do anything special to guarantee them, since no extreme system 
is built with cheap components. We'll use only top-quality components— 
particularly for the motherboard, memory, and power supply—which to-
gether will ensure high reliability. We'll also make sure the case we use is 
160 
Chapter 5 

very well ventilated and has sufficient fans to ensure the system will be 
cool-running. We'll also install a professional-grade online uninterruptible 
power supply, which will protect the system from power glitches. 
Size is unimportant. All that matters is that the system fits on or under 
Robert's desk. 
Noise level 
Noise level is unimportant, although we neither want nor expect this sys-
tem to sound like a chainsaw. The system will sit in Robert's office, very 
close to an actively cooled 2 kVA true UPS, whose cooling fans are louder 
than any noise this system could produce. 
Expandability 
Expandability is relatively important. Although this system will be loaded 
to start with, we definitely want room to grow. In particular, we want room 
for additional hard drives. We'll start with four 2 TB hard drives, but we'd 
like enough drive bays to enable us to add several more drives. Also, we 
may decide at some point to install a high-performance video adapter 
(or two), not because we'll use this system for 3D gaming, but as math 
coprocessors. For that reason, we'll use a motherboard that provides two 
PCI Express video slots. 
Processor performance 
Processor (and memory) performance ties with diskcapacity/performance 
for top priority in this system. Robert will use this system to edit and ren-
der video interactively, which demands high processor performance, and 
to run scientific software that operates on relatively small data sets but is 
calculation-intensive. (When Robert starts a run around dinnertime on his 
current Intel Core2 Quad extreme system, that run sometimes is not com-
plete when he sits down at his desk first thing the next morning.) 
We actually thought about building a multiprocessor Xeon workstation 
system, but a quick check of prices quickly disabused us of that notion. 
Comparing processor benchmarks, we learned that the fastest current 
Intel Extreme processor was more than twice as fast as Robert's current 
Core2 Quad, which means that a run that currently takes 12 hours or more 
should complete in 5 or 6 hours on a new system built around an Intel 
Core ¡7 Extreme processor. That's certainly fast enough, and allows us to 
keep the system cost within reason. 
Video performance 
Video performance, in the sense of 3D graphics speed, is completely un-
important for our extreme system. We don't game, and all of our real work 
is 2D only, so any video adapter that provides sharp, clear 2D display will 
be perfectly suitable for our needs. Even integrated video would suffice, 
although we'd still want a PCI Express x16 slot for a possible future up-
grade. In fact, we want two such slots, just to cover us in the unlikely event 
that we'll ever want to install a pair of high-performance video adapters. 
Building an Extreme System 

If that statement sounds strange, it's not that we think it even remotely 
possible that we'll suddenly become PC gaming enthusiasts. We want 
those slots because fast video adapters can be used for more than just 
rendering 3D graphics at blazing speed. They can also be used as very 
high-performance math coprocessors, with the main CPU offloading 
heavy-duty number crunching to them. For now, the main CPU of this sys-
tem will do the number crunching, but we wanted to leave the dual video 
adapter option open as a possible future alternative to a very expensive 
processor upgrade. 
Disk capacity/performance 
Disk capacity and performance tie with processor performance for top 
priority in this system. Capacity is crucial, because video editing and ren-
dering simply eats disk space. Even a relatively small project may consume 
100 GB or more of disk space, counting the original digital video files, ed-
ited clips, various work files, rendered clips in various formats, and so on. 
Disk performance is also critical, because digital video files (particularly 
HD files) are big. When we're working interactively with multi-gigabyte 
files, the time required to read and write those files becomes significant, 
so the faster the disk subsystem is, the better. 
Our first thought was to use RAID 10 to increase disk subsystem perfor-
mance. The obvious problem with RAID 10 is that only half the actual disk 
space is available to the system, so four 2 TB drives would provide only 4 
TB of available disk space. The less obvious problem with RAID 10 is that 
while it's faster than a single drive, it's not all that much faster. Instead of 
waiting 30 seconds for that file to load, we might have to wait 25 seconds. 
That's not much of an improvement in exchange for giving up half our 
disk space. 
The obvious solution would be to use solid-state drives. Unfortunately, we 
wanted at least 8 TB of disk space. Installing 8 TB of SSDs would have cost 
at least $25,000, and that's if we bought the cheap ones. We decided that 
a hybrid disk subsystem made sense, with a single, fast SSD as the boot/ 
system/working-data drive, and several 2 TB hard drives to provide mass 
storage. Installing an SSD large enough to hold our working data sets will 
give us the best of both worlds. 
Component Considerations 
With our design criteria in mind, we set out to choose the best components 
for our extreme system. The following sections describe the components we 
chose, and why we chose them. 
Chapter 3 

Case and Power Supply 
Antec Dark Fleet DF-85 (http://www.antec.com) 
Antec CP-850 850W power supply 
The extreme system is destined to become Robert's new main office desktop 
system, and our first requirement for the case was that it have lots of drive 
bays. Initially, the system will have six drives—an SSD boot drive, four 2TB data 
drives, and an optical drive—but for future expansion we wanted a case that 
provided room for at least four more hard drives. Obviously, cooling efficiency 
is important for such a heavily loaded system, so we also wanted a case that 
made provision for lots and lots of fans. 
There were literally a dozen or more cases available from Antec, Cooler Mas-
ter, ThermalTake, and other good companies that met our broad requirements, 
most of them server and gaming cases. So, we decided we could give more 
weight than usual to appearance. Based on how Robert wanted his new system 
to look, we quickly narrowed down the candidates to two finalists: the Antec 
Twelve Hundred, shown in Figure 5-1, and the Cooler Master HAF X, shown in 
Figure 5-2. Both have the pseudo-Victorian mechanical "steampunk"styling that 
appeals to Robert. Their features are similar and the Twelve Hundred was $30 
cheaper, but Robert preferred the styling and red illumination of the HAF X. 
It was a close call, but Robert finally decided on the Cooler Master HAF X. He 
was literally in the process of ordering a HAF X from NewEgg when he received 
an email from our contact at Antec announcing the launch of the Dark Fleet 
DF-85 case, shown in Figure 5-3. Now that's steampunk. The DF-85 wasn't yet 
available in retail channels when we started building this system, but Antec 
was kind enough to send us an evaluation sample that we suspect was literally 
from the first pallet off the boat. 
Component Considerations 
Building an Extreme System 
163 

Component Considerations 
Feature-wise, the DF-85 is easily a match for theTwelve Hundred or the HAF X. 
With no less than 14 drive bays and 7 standard fans, expandability and cooling 
are not issues. Four of the nine 3.5" hard drive bays are hot-swappable, as is 
the 2.5"SSD bay at the top of the case. That makes it very easy for us to remove 
those drives and take them along with us when we leave the house for an ex-
tended period. Instant offsite backup. 
The DF-85 is one of several Antec case models that accepts Antec's proprietary 
oversize CPX form factor power supplies. Why would we want a power supply 
that's too large physically to fit in any but a few Antec case models? Because 
it costs more to make something smaller without reducing its functionality. 
Although Antec produces standard ATX power supplies with high wattage 
ratings, they're more expensive than a CPX power supply with a similar watt-
age rating and other specifications. For example, the Antec CP-850 CPX power 
supply we chose for this system sells for about $ 110. Standard ATX form factor 
power supplies of comparable quality and wattage, including Antec models, 
sell for $150 to $300. By making CPX power supplies physically larger, Antec is 
able to produce them at lower cost for the same quality. 
An 850W power supply is probably overkill, even for a system with a 130W 
processor and six drives, but this system may in the future have anything up 
to a dozen drives, so we wanted enough power in reserve. Some power sup-
plies are very inefficient below 50% load, so they waste electricity when lightly 
loaded. Fortunately, the CP-850 is rated at 80%+ efficiency from a 25% load to 
100% load, so we're not giving up any efficiency by running it with a lighter 
load initially. 
Motherboard 
Intel Extreme Series DX58SO (http://www.intel.com) 
An extreme system requires an extreme motherboard. AMD no longer produc-
es extreme processors, so we knew we'd use a high-end Intel Core ¡7 processor 
for this system. The fastest chipset available for Core ¡7 processors is the Intel 
X58, so we immediately narrowed our motherboard search to models based 
on that chipset. 
There's no getting around it: X58 motherboards are expensive, not least be-
cause the X58 chipset itself is expensive. And, just as a Cadillac that sells for 
twice the price of a Chevy costs a lot less than twice as much to produce, man-
ufacturers price high-end motherboards at a premium larger than the cost dif-
ference justifies. Still, if you want the best possible performance, there's no 
alternative to paying the price for an X58 motherboard. 
Well, within reason. Although this is an extreme system, the budget wasn't 
unlimited. On that basis we ruled out the most expensive models, many of 
which were priced at $300 or more—for a bare motherboard—and one of 
which sold for $700! And that one wasn't even gold-plated. We also ruled out 
the cheesy models from second- and third-tier manufacturers, some of which 
were priced at $ 150 or less. A junk motherboard with a premium chipset is still 
a junk motherboard. 
164 
Chapter 5 

Component Considerations 
We decided to look for motherboards priced in the $200 to $300 range. We 
found more than a dozen models from first-tier manufacturers including 
ASUS, GIGABYTE, and Intel, most of which were near the upper end of our 
price range. We spent hours studying and comparing the detailed specifica-
tions of each of these boards on the manufacturers'websites, and concluded 
that most of the boards in the upper part of our price range had justified their 
higher prices by adding generally useless bells and whistles, such as USB 3.0 
or SATA 6 Gb/s support. 
Assuming all essential features are present, what matters to us—and what 
should matter to you—is performance, construction quality, and reliability. 
Performance is a given with any decent X58 motherboard: differences among 
these boards are so small that they can be ignored. The construction qual-
ity and reliability of any first-tier motherboard should be excellent, although 
Intel-branded boards have always had the edge in those respects. 
At first glance, we almost ruled out the Intel DX58SO. That would have been 
a big mistake. Although it was on the low end of our price range, at first we 
were concerned that the DX58SO was a bit light on features compared to the 
other boards. 
For example, the DX58SO has only four memory slots rather than the six slots 
present on the competing boards. Because the X58 supports triple-channel 
memory, the Intel board is limited to one triple-channel memory bank versus 
two banks on competing boards. In practice, that means almost nothing, as 
the Intel board can be equipped with 12 GB of memory operating in triple-
channel mode. We're unlikely ever to need more than 12 GB of memory on this 
system, so the additional memory slots are of no real benefit. 
This system will have six drives installed—an SSD boot/system drive, four hard 
drives, and an optical drive—so we need at least six SATA ports.That turns out 
not to be an issue, as all of the candidate motherboards provide at least six 
SATA ports. We'd also like at least two eSATA ports for connecting external hard 
drives, which we'll use for daily backups.The Intel DX58SO includes two eSATA 
ports, as do two or three of the competing boards, but most include only one. 
We didn't rule out any boards on that basis, as it's easy enough to add eSATA 
ports by installing a $15 expansion card. Still, it would be nice to have them 
on-board. 
Most of the motherboards in this price range have three, four, five, or even six 
PCI Express xl 6 slots, while the DX58SO has only two. We really need only one 
PCI Express 2.0 x16 slot, for the video adapter, but we'd like to have two, just in 
case we ever decide to install dual video adapters in CrossFireX mode to run 
graphics-intensive games. 
Brian Bilbrey Comments 
Ha! About the only game you run is Solitaire. More likely, you'll use the video cards as 
fast math coprocessors, as you mentioned 
previously. 
What About SATA 6 Gb/s? 
It has a higher number, so it's easy 
to assume that SATA 6 Gb/s must 
be better than SATA 3 Gb/s. But the 
fastest current hard drives can barely 
saturate an obsolescent SATA 1.5 
Gb/s interface, let alone swamp the 
270+ MB/s data rate of a SATA 3 
Gb/s interface. Right now, only fast 
enterprise-class 
(i.e., very expensive) 
solid-state drives can saturate a SATA 
3 Gb/s interface, so in practical terms 
SATA 3 Gb/s is sufficient for even an 
extreme desktop system. If the price 
of very fast SSDs suddenly 
plummets, 
you can always install a PCI Express 
SATA 6 Gb/s adapter. 
Dual-Channel Versus 
Triple-Channel Memory 
But what about 
performance? 
Dual-channel 
memory is faster than 
single-channel 
memory, so triple-
channel memory must be faster still, 
right? 
Wrong. 
We did detailed benchmark 
testing 
and found no real 
performance 
differences between 
triple-channel 
mode and dual-channel 
mode. 
Triple-channel mode won 
about 
half the time, but only by a couple 
of percentage points. 
Dual-channel 
mode won the rest of the time, but 
again only by a couple of 
percentage 
points. It really doesn't matter which 
mode you use. 
Brian Bilbrey Comments 
A SATA 6 Gb/s motherboard 
can be 
awfully nice when paired with an 
SSD that has similar bandwidth, 
like 
the 256 GB Crucial RealSSD C300 2.5" 
SATA 6Gb/s. 
Building an Extreme System 
165 

Component Considerations 
What About USB 3.0? 
When we built the project systems for 
this book, a few motherboards 
with 
USB 3.0 support were just 
becoming 
available. We decided not to make 
USB 3.0 a checklist item, and in fact 
gave a downcheck 
to 
motherboards 
that included USB 3.0. Why? Early 
implementations 
of what is destined 
to become a widespread 
standard 
are often deficient in their support for 
that standard, sometimes in subtle 
ways. The first motherboards 
with 
USB 1.0 support later showed 
incom-
patibilities with later USB 1.0 devices, 
as did the first USB 1.1 and USB 2.0 
motherboards 
with later devices 
built to those standards. We have no 
reason to believe the same will not be 
true of early USB 3.0 
motherboards. 
Fortunately, 
there's no real dis-
advantage 
to buying a 
motherboard 
that lacks USB 3.0 support. USB 2.0 
is more than fast enough for all of 
our USB devices. For 
high-data-rate 
applications 
like external hard drives 
orHD camcorders, we use eSATA 
or Fire Wire. As devices that require 
USB 3.0 become more common, 
so 
will $15 PCI Express USB 3.0 adap ter 
cards that fully support the stan-
dard. When (or if) we need USB 3.0 
support, we'll install one of these 
cards. We recommend 
that you do 
the same. 
For most people, including us, anything more than two x16 slots is just mar-
keting hype, since they'll never be used. It is important that both slots are elec-
trically full x16, though, which often isn't the case. A PCI Express 2.0 slot may 
be x16 physically, but only x8, x4, or even xl electrically. Both x16 slots in the 
DX58SO are x16 electrically, so either (or both) can support even the fastest 
video adapters. 
Then there was the matter of communications ports. This system will have a 
ton of peripherals connected to it: one or two printers, at least one scanner, a 
webcam, USB speakers, an inexpensive headset for Skype, good headphones 
for listening to audio or watching videos without disturbing Barbara, a high-
quality noise-canceling microphone for overdubbing audio tracks on our vid-
eos, a USB microscope camera, and a partridge in a pear tree. We'll also need 
free USB ports to connect our MP3 players, digital voice recorder, digital SLRs, 
and the USB flash drives we use for quick backups during the working day. 
Most of the motherboards we looked at included four, six, or eight USB 2.0 
ports. The Intel DX58SO provides 12 USB 2.0 ports. Of course, it's easy enough 
to add USB ports by installing an adapter card, but again, it's nice to have as 
many as you need already on-board. 
Finally, we wanted two IEEE-1394 (FireWire) ports to connect our camcord-
ers. (We could get by with one port, but switching cables gets old fast.) Most 
of the motherboards in our price range provide one FireWire port, if any; the 
Intel DX58SO and two of the GIGABYTE models provide two. Once again, we 
could add FireWire ports by installing an adapter card, but the presence of two 
FireWire ports on the Intel board gave us yet another nudge in its direction. 
We settled on the Intel DX58SO, but of course your own priorities may make 
one of the competing models a better choice for you. The Intel board was ideal 
for us because it's on the low end of our price range, provides every feature we 
wanted, and offers Intel's usual rock-solid reliability and compatibility. 
In the same $200 to $225 range as the Intel DX58SO, the GIGABYTE GA-X58A-
UD3R is an excellent choice, as are the ASUS P6T or P6T SE and the ASUS 
P6X58D. If you need a pATX board, choose the ASUS Rampage II GENE. If you're 
willing to spend closer to $300 on your motherboard, look at the ASUS P6T 
Deluxe, P6TD Deluxe, or P6X58D Premium, or the GIGABYTE GA-X58A-UD5. If 
you don't want to spend even $200 on the motherboard, the standout choice 
among less expensive X58 models is the ASRock X58 Extreme. For an AMD 
processor, use the ASUS M4A89TD PRO or the GIGABYTE GA-890FXA-UD5. 
Processor 
Intel Core ¡7-980X (http://www.intel.com) 
For most systems, we give some thought to which processor is the best match 
for our needs and budget. For our extreme system, there really wasn't much 
to think about. We wanted the fastest desktop processor available, and that 
was the Intel Core ¡7-980X. With its high clock speed and six multithreaded 
cores, the Core ¡7-980X simply blew away every competing processor, as well 
it should, given its $1,000 price tag. The Core ¡7-980X is 60% faster than AMD's 
166 
Chapter 5 

best, the Phenom II X6 1090T—which was almost impossible to actually buy 
when we built this system—and 50% faster than Intel's next-fastest model, the 
Core ¡7-970. 
Although plunking down a grand just for the processor may sound ridiculous 
in this day of perfectly usable complete systems that sell for $500, what's really 
important isn't cost so much as cost/benefit ratio. Robert typically works 7-day, 
60+-hour weeks, most of it spent in front of his main office system. The differ-
ence in cost between the Core ¡7-980X and a less capable processor amounts 
to less than a dollar a day over the expected lifetime of the system. If, say, 
rendering a video clip or compiling a program takes 30 seconds on the $1,000 
Core ¡7-980X and twice that long on a $300 processor, that may seem a trivial 
difference. It's not. That's an extra 30 seconds that Robert has to sit twiddling 
his thumbs, waiting on the processor. Every time. Multiply that 30 seconds by 
many such events per day—often many such events per hour—and 
paying 
that extra dollar a day for the Core ¡7-980X starts to sound like a real bargain. 
Of course, not everyone uses a computer as heavily, or for such processor-
intensive tasks. A system doesn't need a $1,000 processor to qualify as ex-
treme. High-performance processors start at around $250 to $300, including the 
slower quad-core Intel Core ¡7 models and the fastest hex-core AMD Phenom II 
X6 models. For that price, you'll get a processor that's half as fast as the Core 
¡7-980X, but still noticeably faster than a mainstream processor. 
Memory 
Crucial Ballistix BL3KIT25664BN1608 PC3-12800 6 GB kit (2GBx3) 
(,http://www.crucial.com) 
When determining memory requirements, it's important to remember that a 
hex-core processor like our Intel Core ¡7-980X is effectively six individual pro-
cessors. Each of those processors needs as much memory as a single-core pro-
cessor does. We consider 1 GB per core the sweet spot, so we decided to install 
at least 6 GB of memory in our hex-core extreme system. 
Of course, each of the six cores in the Intel Core ¡7-980X can run two threads, 
so we might have decided to install 1 GB per thread, for a total of 12 GB of 
system memory. However, based on previous experience with Robert's earlier 
extreme system—a four-core Intel Core2 Quad Q9650 running 32-bit Linux, 
with only 3 GB of the 4 GB installed visible to the operating system—we de-
cided that 6 GB of total memory would probably suffice, even running a 64-bit 
OS. Memory prices were very high when we built this system, so we decided to 
install 6 GB initially with the intention of upgrading that to 12 GB, if necessary, 
once memory prices had decreased. 
The Intel DX58SO motherboard supports several different memory bank con-
figurations, but the fastest of those requires installing three matched PC3-
12800 memory modules in banks A, B, and C. Those modules can be 2 GB 
DIMMs, for a total of 6 GB, or 4 GB DIMMs, for a total of 12 GB. We chose a fast, 
low-latency 6 GB Crucial memory kit, because in the 20 years we've been using 
Crucial memory we've never had a problem with it. 
Building an Extreme System 

Component Considerations 
XMP 
extreme Memory Profi, (XMP) is an Intel-developed 
exten-
sion to JEDEC memory standards 
that allows premium 
DDR3 
memory to run at timings faster than standard JEDEC 
values. 
XMP essentially automates 
the formerly manual process of 
tweaking memory to run faster than its nominal speed. Using 
XMP requires XMP support in both the system BIOS and the 
memory modules 
themselves. 
A standard memory module includes a Serial Presence 
Detect 
(SPD) ROM, from which the system BIOS can read recom-
mended timings for that module. These standard timings are 
generally quite conservative, and therefore provide slower (but 
safer) memory performance 
data than the module is actually 
capable of providing. XMP-enabled 
memory modules use an 
unallocated area in the SPD ROM to store additional 
memory 
timing settings—designated 
"enthusiast"and 
"extreme"—that 
yield higher memory performance 
at the risk of 
compromising 
system stability. Gamers, overclockers, and other 
performance 
enthusiasts often enable XMP on their systems for the minor 
performance 
advantage 
it provides. 
The Intel DX58SO and the Crucial Ballistix memory modules 
we 
used in our extreme system both support XMP, but by default 
run with standard memory settings. If you want to enable XMP, 
run BIOS Setup, choose the Enthusiast or Extreme profile, ignore 
all the Intel warnings, save the settings, and restart the system. 
In case you're curious, we run our extreme system with 
standard 
JEDEC timings. The small performance 
advantage 
of XMP is 
more than offset by the risk of reduced system stability, at least 
to our way of thinking. 
Video Adapter 
ASUS EAH4350 SILENT/DI/512MD2(LP) (http://www.asus.com) 
Choosing a video adapter (or adapters) for an extreme system can be anything 
from very simple to very complicated indeed. If 3D graphics performance is 
unimportant—as it is for our extreme system—you can simply use integrated 
video or install an inexpensive video adapter. If 3D graphics performance is 
critical—as it is for a gaming system—you'll have some decisions and trade-
offs to make. 
Nearly all desktop 3D graphics adapters are based on a chipset ( aphics pro-
cessor un , or GPU) from one of two companies, ATI or NVIDIA. Each of these 
companies produces many chipsets in a wide range of prices and performance 
levels. Numerous companies produce video adapters based on these chipsets, 
at prices ranging from $20 or so up to $750 or more. As you might expect, 
more expensive cards are faster. At the low and middle ranges, price correlates 
pretty well with performance. For example, an $80 video adapter is much fast-
er than a $40 adapter, and a $160 adapter is much faster than the $80 adapter. 
Above $150 or $200, you rapidly enter the realm of decreasing returns. A $300 
adapter may be only 25% faster than a $150 adapter, and a $600 adapter may 
be only 10% faster than a $300 adapter. Even a $75 adapter is fast enough 
to play all but the most recent graphics-intensive games at reasonable frame 
rates, although you may have to use something less than maximum resolution 
and make other tweaks to get smooth game play. 
168 
Chapter 5 

Component Considerations 
Advances in video chipsets occur in Internet time. If you buy the fastest video 
adapter available today, it'll have midrange performance in 12 to 18 months 
and entry-level performance in two to three years. That's why many serious 
gamers replace their video adapters every six months. If you're serious about 
PC gaming, we recommend you do the same. Otherwise, just choose a video 
adapter that fits your needs and budget, and drive it until it drops. 
Several years ago, when PC gaming was at its peak, both NVIDIA and ATI intro-
duced support for yoking together multiple video adapters to provide higher 
graphics performance. NVIDIA's method, called Scalable Link Interface (SLI), 
and ATI's CrossFire> are similar in concept and implementation, but incompat-
ible with each other. Either allows you to install multiple video adapters that 
function as one faster adapter. 
Initially, these technologies were used by serious gamers to get higher video 
performance than even the fastest single adapter could provide. It was (and 
still is) commonplace for serious gamers to install two (or more) super-high-
end video adapters in one system. The resulting video performance isn't quite 
twice as fast as that of a single super-high-end card, but it comes close. 
Later, many gamers realized that they could beat the diminishing bang-for-
the-buck ratio of very expensive video adapters. Rather than installing one 
$600 adapter, they'd install two $300 adapters, which together were much 
faster than the single $600 adapter. You can use that same strategy to get 
much higher graphics performance in a lower price range. For example, two 
$150 adapters will typically significantly outperform one $300 adapter, and 
even two $75 adapters will probably outperform one $ 150 adapter. 
We won't recommend specific video adapter models here, again because vid-
eo adapters change in Internet time. If you need high-end 3D graphics video 
performance, do some online research before you buy. There are numerous 
websites devoted to gaming hardware, but two we have found to be reliable 
are AnandTech (http://www.anandtech.com) and Tom's Hardware (http://www. 
tomshardware.com). 
Of course, 3D graphics performance is unimportant for our particular extreme 
system, so none of this applies. We could even have used integrated video, ex-
cept that most extreme motherboards, including ours, don't include integrat-
ed video. So we went off in search of an inexpensive but reliable video adapter. 
Any of several candidates would probably have served as well, but we chose 
the ASUS EAH4350 SILENT/DI/512MD2(LP), which NewEgg had on sale for 
$29.99, with free shipping and a $10 mail-in rebate. Our net cost was $19.99 
plus the cost of a stamp. 
The RADEON HD 4350 chipset is no barn-burner nowadays, but it's more than 
fast enough for our purposes. This is a low-profile, passively cooled, silent 
video adapter that's targeted at the media center/home theater market, but 
it's also a good fit for our needs. The card includes 512 MB of DDR2 memory 
and has enough horsepower to render full 1080p video smoothly, which is the 
most we'll ever ask of it. 
Building an Extreme System 
169 

Sound Adapter 
Integrated 
Integrated audio on most modern motherboards is excellent, so much so that 
standalone sound adapters are almost never needed nowadays. Even most 
serious audiophiles and gamers find integrated audio acceptable, and the in-
tegrated Intel HD audio on the DX58SO motherboard is certainly more than 
good enough to suit nearly anyone's needs. 
If you plan to use a 5.1,6.1, or 7.1 speaker system for gaming and you need EAX 
audio support for positional audio with your games, install a Creative Sound 
Blaster X-Fi XtremeGamer (PCI interface) or Sound Blaster X-Fi Titanium (PCI 
Express interface). But before you buy any sound adapter, test the integrated 
audio to see if it suits your needs. 
Boot/System Drive 
Crucial CT128M225 128 GB SSD (http://www.crucial.com) 
We wish we could use a solid-state boot/system drive in every system we 
build. In fact, we wish we could use SSDs exclusively. That day isn't here yet, 
but it's rapidly drawing nearer as SSD capacities continue to increase and pric-
es continue to decline. For the time being, unless you have an unlimited bud-
get, you'll have to use rotating drives for bulk data storage. But on an extreme 
system, we can afford to devote some of the budget to buying an SSD large 
enough to store our system, temporary, and working files. 
We decided to allocate $300 to $400 of our budget to the SSD. That left us 
with a major decision to make: should we choose a ingle-level eel (SLC) SSD 
of smaller capacity or a multi-level eel (MLC) SSD of larger capacity? SLC drives 
are usually faster and degrade more slowly than MLC drives, but they also cost 
about four times as much for a given capacity. 
When we built this system, $300 to $400 was enough to buy a 32 GB SLC SSD 
or a 128 GB MLC SSD. Although we'd obviously have preferred to use an SLC 
drive for its performance and durability, 32 GB was simply too small for what 
we wanted to do with the drive. The next step up, a 64 GB SLC drive, would 
have cost $600 to $800, which was simply too large a chunk of the budget to 
devote to the SSD. And even with 64 GB, we'd have been cramped for space. 
So, we reluctantly decided to limit our candidates to MLC models and lookfor 
a drive in the 128 GB range. We found about two dozen drives that met our 
budget and capacity requirements, from manufacturers like Corsair, Crucial, 
Kingston, OCZ, and Western Digital. (The Intel X25-M would also have been a 
serious candidate, but unfortunately the 80 GB model was too small for our 
needs and the 160 GB model was too expensive.) 
Based on our universally good experiences with Crucial products over many 
years, we chose the Crucial CT128M225 SSD. With sustained 250 MB/s reads 
and 190 MB/s writes, the M225 is one of the fastest drives in its class. It's large 
enough and fast enough to do what we need it to do, and it does so at a rea-
sonable price. 
188 Chapter 6 

Data Drives 
Seagate Barracuda XT ST32000641 AS 2TB (four) (http://www.seagate.com) 
We've used and recommended Seagate hard drives for many years, and have 
never had cause to regret it. Seagate Barracuda-series drives are fast, extreme-
ly reliable, quiet, and reasonably priced. 
Of course, we didn't actually decide on Seagate drives without considering 
competing models from other manufacturers. Of the few 2TB 7,200 RPM SATA 
drive models available, we ruled out the Hitachi models immediately, despite 
their low price, based on their small caches and short warranties. That left only 
two candidates, the Western Digital Caviar Black and the Seagate Barracuda 
XT, both of which sell for the same price. 
Western Digital recently went through a bad patch of several years'duration, 
during which we refused to use or recommend WD drives. In the last couple 
of years, the reliability of WD drives seems to have improved dramatically, 
and we've returned them to our recommended list. The Caviar Black models 
are louder and run hotter than similar Barracuda models, but have excellent 
performance. 
One major reason the Caviar Black drives are so popular is the widespread 
perception that they outperform competing models by significant margins. 
In fact, our benchmark tests showed that the performance of the Caviar Black 
and Barracuda XT is very similar overall, with the Caviar Black winning some 
tests and the Barracuda XT others. In every case, the margin of victory was at 
most a few percentage points. 
Given the identical prices and similar performance, we gave the nod to the 
quieter and cooler-running Seagate Barracuda XT. We decided to install four of 
them in our extreme system, for a total of 8 TB of rotating storage. We consid-
ered configuring these four drives in a RAID 3 array to maximize long-block se-
quential read performance—which is ideal for video editing—but that would 
have required buying an expensive hardware RAID controller and would have 
given us only 6 TB of visible disk space. Since we have the very fast SSD avail-
able to our video work files, the additional speed of the RAID 3 wasn't really 
needed. 
Backup Hardware 
SYBA SD-ENC50020 eSATA Dual SATA Hard Drive Docking Station 
At first glance, it might seem impossible to maintain adequate backups of this 
system without spending a fortune on a high-end tape changer. With as much 
as 8,000+ GB of storage to be backed up, there aren't many options. 
Afull backup with a DVD burner would fill a couple of thousand DVD+R discs— 
at a cost of several hundred dollars just for the discs—and would take a week 
or so to complete, even burning discs 24/7. And that doesn't count the time 
or cost required to replace the DVD burner several times. Blu-ray would be 
no better. A full backup would require more than three hundred 25 GB BD-R 
discs—again at a cost of several hundred dollars—and by the time it finished, 
your expensive Blu-ray burner might be on its last legs. 
Building an Extreme System 

Component Considerations 
Figure 5-4. SYBA SD-ENC50020 
hard drive 
docking station 
Fortunately, our situation isn't as dire as it appears, because most of our data 
is already backed up on the source video tapes, flash memory cards, optical 
discs, and internal hard disks that our camcorders and digital SLRs use for pri-
mary data storage. Original camcorder tapes and optical discs are cheap, so 
they simply go directly into the fire safe. Images that were originally recorded 
to flash memory cards and internal camcorder hard drives—very expensive 
forms of storage—can be transferred to inexpensive standard hard drives and 
placed in the fire safe. That accounts for the vast bulk of that 8,000 GB of data. 
That leaves us with a relatively small amount of data that requires routine dai-
ly backup—email, configuration files, working video editing files, and so on. 
Even when we're actively working on a video project, our daily backup sets are 
seldom larger than 50 GB, and often much less. 
External hard drives are the fastest and least costly way to do those backups, 
and are nearly as reliable as tape changers that sell for the price of a good used 
car. Even if you have to buy drives specifically for backing up, the cost is rea-
sonable. Standard 7,200 RPM 3.5"SATA hard drives sell for as little as five cents 
per gigabyte. And you may not need to buy them. This is a good way to use 
older, smaller hard drives that have been retired from older systems—as long 
as they're not too old. We actually use a collection of Seagate Barracuda hard 
drives of 500 GB, 1 TB, and 1.5 TB capacity. 
Some people use commercial or homemade external hard drives for this pur-
pose, but there's a better way. Our problem with external hard drives is that 
we want to take them with us when we leave the house, and that's awkward. 
Each time, we have to disconnect the power and data cables, and the exter-
nal enclosures themselves are bulky enough that they don't fit comfortably 
in Robert's Lands'End canvas attaché. (Yes, it has to be said, Robert carries a 
purse; just hope he doesn't hit you with it.) 
On his old main system, Robert used a pair of Antec MX-1 external USB hard 
drive enclosures. Getting tired of hauling around those enclosures, he eventu-
ally just removed the lids to convert them from external hard drive enclosures 
to hard drive docking stations. That way, he could simply pull the hard drives 
out of the frames and take just the drives along. 
Fortunately, we found a better way. We came across the SYBA SD-ENC50020 
eSATA Dual SATA Hard Drive Docking Station one day when we were on the 
NewEgg website looking for other components, and immediately ordered 
one. At $25 (and with free shipping that day), it was a no-brainer. The SYBA 
unit, shown in Figure 5-4, was designed from the ground up to do what we'd 
been doing as a kludge with the Antec units. 
The ENC50020 has two bays that accept standard 2.5"or 3.5"SATA hard drives, 
which just slide in and out and can be clamped into place. The construction is 
mostly plastic, but the unit appears quite durable. It connects to the computer 
via two eSATA cables, which are long enough to allow the unit to sit on a desk 
and still reach the bottom expansion slot of a case sitting on the floor. 
Because this unit uses native eSATA rather than the bridged eSATA used by 
most competing units, its performance is exceptional, as fast as an internal hard 
drive. We'd gotten used to the USB interfaces on the Antec MX-1 enclosures, 
172 
Chapter 6 

Component Considerations 
which provided sustained write throughput of only 25 to 30 MB/s. For our first 
test of the SYBA eSATA unit, we timed the transfer of a 33 GB archive file at 
5:42, which translates to about 95 MB/s. We used Seagate Barracuda 7200.12 
drives both internally and externally, and this transfer rate is typical of those 
drives when used internally. From that, we concluded that the transfer rate to 
the external SYBA unit really is bound by the performance of the hard drives 
rather than the interface. 
With throughput of about 6 GB/min or 360 GB/hour (less with older, slower 
drives), the SYBA unit is a reasonable backup solution even if your backup sets 
are in the terabyte range. It, or something very like it, is the only reasonably 
priced solution for high-capacity backup on a home system. 
Optical Drive(s) 
Sony Optiarc AD-7260S-0B DVD burner (http://www.sony-optiarc.us) 
Every system needs at least a DVD burner, if only for loading software, casual 
duping of optical discs, and so on. We have no need of reading, let alone writ-
ing, Blu-ray discs on our extreme system, so a simple DVD burner is all we need. 
The current crop of DVD burners are all about as good as you might expect for 
their price, which is to say mediocre at best. Compared to premium drives of 
years past, current optical drives have relatively poor burn quality and are not 
very durable. Still, what can one expect for $25? Even Plextor burners, which 
were once absolutely superb and burned discs of higher quality than com-
mercial pressed discs, are a pale shadow of what they once were, despite their 
current premium pricing. 
We've had the best experience recently with units made by ASUS, LiteOn, and 
Samsung, which we consider pretty much interchangeable. But, despite the 
fact that we swore off Sony products after the root-kit fiasco, we decided it 
was time to look at a Sony optical drive. The Sony Optiarc drives are produced 
as a joint venture between Sony and the optical drive division of NEC, which 
no longer brands its own optical drives. We'd always had good experiences 
with NEC optical drives, so we decided to order a Sony Optiarc unit and run 
it through its paces. Short take: the Sony Optiarc drive produces reasonable-
quality burns—comparable to the ASUS, LiteOn, and Samsung drives—and 
appears to have similar durability. In other words, nothing special. If we had it 
to do over again, we'd probably just order an ASUS, LiteOn, or Samsung burner. 
If you need to read Blu-ray discs, install a read-only BD-ROM drive in addition 
to the DVD burner. (You can buy a hybrid drive that reads Blu-ray discs and 
reads/writes DVDs, but most of them are expensive and you'll wear them out 
reading and writing DVDs.) The best choices among BD-ROM drives are the 
LiteOn ¡HOS104 and the ASUS BR-04B2T. If you seldom write DVDs and want 
a single hybrid drive, the standout bang-for-the-buck choice is the Samsung 
SH-B083L/BSBP combo drive, which costs only $5 or $10 more than BD-ROM 
drives and also includes DVD burning support. 
If you also need to write Blu-ray discs, be prepared to spend some money. 
BD-R/RE drives are expensive, as are the discs. The drive choices are relatively 
limited, but we think the best BD-R/RE burner is the Pioneer BDR-205BKS. 
Ron Morse Comments 
The current Pioneer burners are nice, 
but overpriced compared 
to the 
competition. They do better burns 
than the LG and Samsung 
drives I 
have here. Are they worth the extra 
money? Probably 
not. 
Building an Extreme System 
173 

Component Considerations 
Ron Morse Comments 
/ have to put in a plug for the guys 
at Unicomp, who still make and sell 
the classic IBM Model 
"M"keyboards 
(http://pckeyboards.stores.yahoo. 
net/keyboards.html). There is no sub-
stitute. If you're building the highest-
quality computer possible, you should 
use the highest-quality 
keyboard 
available. The Model 
"M"lasts 
forever. ..mine was made in 1994. 
Keyboard and Mouse 
Microsoft SideWinder X6 keyboard (http://www.microsoft.com) 
Microsoft SideWinder mouse 
As always, the choice of keyboard and mouse is extremely personal. What we 
love, you may hate, and vice versa. Over the years, we've tried wired and wire-
less keyboards and mice from literally dozens of manufacturers, but we keep 
coming back to Microsoft and Logitech products. Both provide a huge range 
of options, and both provide value for money, even in their inexpensive lines. 
With our extreme system budgeted at $3,500, we decided we could afford 
to devote more than usual to the keyboard and mouse. We ended up choos-
ing Microsoft SideWinder models, which are intended for gamers but also have 
manyfeatures that are nice for general use. For example, the detachable numer-
ic keypad on the SideWinder X6 can be repurposed as a macro pad. Robert nev-
er uses the numeric keypad anyway, so being able to define dedicated macro 
keys is very useful. The SideWinder mouse is available in various models with 
different resolutions. High-resolution pointing is important in many games, 
but it can be just as important for general use, including video editing. Besides 
which, how many other mice have an LCD display? 
Speakers 
Logitech Z-523 40 W 2.1 Speaker System (http://www.logitech.com) 
Our extreme system needs a decent set of speakers. The extreme system will 
sit on or under Robert's desk and he doesn't game, so he prefers a 2.1 speaker 
system. He'll actually use his existing Logitech Z3 speaker set on the new sys-
tem, but the Z3 set is no longer available. 
Fortunately, Logitech has replaced theZ3 with the Z-523 2.1 set, which sells for 
under $100 and has equally excellent sound quality. If you want a 2.1 set with 
top-notch sound but more output power, the standout choice is the 200W 
Logitech Z-2300, which sells for half again as much as the Z-523. 
If you don't want or need a subwoofer, you can choose among many excellent 
2.0 speaker sets. In the $60 range, the best choices are the Behringer MS16, 
the Creative InspireTIO, and the Logitech Z-320. In the $100 range, we like the 
Behringer MS20 and the M-AUDIO Studiophile AV 30 sets. In the $150 range, 
the M-AUDIO Studiophile AV 40 set is the best choice. 
In 5.1 speaker systems, the 70W Logitech X-540 sells for well under $100 and 
has excellent sound for the price. If you want the best 5.1 speaker system avail-
able and can afford the $400 price tag, buy the Logitech Z-5500 set. With four 
62W RMS satellite speakers, a 69W center-channel speaker, and a 188W sub-
woofer, theZ-5500 produces a wall-rattling 505W RMS. You don't just hear the 
bass, you feel the bass vibrating your internal organs.The Z-5500 is the leading 
high-end choice among serious gamers, but at lower volume it's also excellent 
for anything from listening to background music to playing DVDs. 
174 
Chapter 6 

Display 
ASUS VW266H 25.5" LCD display (http://www.asus.com) 
It's obviously impossible to recommend any particular display absolutely, be-
cause your needs and budget may be very different from ours. Fortunately, 
nowadays it's pretty difficult to get a bad LCD display, as long as you stick with 
good brand names and avoid the least expensive models. 
We'll use this system heavily for video editing, and we'll soon be getting into 
HD video, so it's essential to have a display with at least 1080p (1920x1080) 
resolution. WUXGA (1920x1200) or even WQXGA (2560x1600) resolution 
would be better still, because that would allow us to view the HD video at full 
resolution while still having a bit of screen real estate available to view the 
timeline. 
Unfortunately, the smallest and least expensive WQXGA displays are 30" and 
$1,200, both of which are bigger numbers than we're prepared to deal with. So 
we looked at WUXGA displays, hoping to find something suitable in the $300 
to $400 range. We found half a dozen candidates from good manufacturers, 
ranging in size from 24" to 28". 
If you want a really large display, the 28" Hanns.G HH-281HPB offers a huge 
screen, good display quality, and reasonable features at a bargain price. Sam-
sung offers two 24" models, the 2433BW near the lower end of our price range, 
and the 2443BW at the top end. Both provide excellent display quality, and 
either would be an excellent choice for many people. 
It's hard to choose just one display from such a great group, but we finally de-
cided to recommend the ASUS VW266H for the extreme system. At just under 
26" the VW266H will "feel" huge to nearly anyone who's not used to a large 
display. Despite its size, at a normal working distance the VW266H provides a 
sharp, crisp image. It's priced near the middle of our range, and to get a notice-
ably better display you'd have to spend two to three times as much. 
Component Summary 
Table 5-1 summarizes our component choices for the extreme system. 
Table 5-1. Bill of materials for extreme system 
Component 
Product 
Case 
Antec Dark Fleet DF-85 
Power supply 
Antec CP-850 850W power supply 
Motherboard 
Intel Extreme Series DX58S0 
Processor 
Intel Core ¡7-980X 
CPU cooler 
(Bundled with processor) 
Memory 
Crucial Ballistix BL3KIT25664BN1608 PC3-12800 6 GB kit (2GBX3) 
Video adapter 
ASUS EAH4350 RADEON HD 4350 PCI Express 2.0 x16 
Sound adapter 
(Integrated) 
Boot/system drive 
Crucial CT128M225 128GB SSD 
Building an Extreme System 

Building the Extreme System 
Table 5-1. Bill of materials for extreme system 
1 Component 
Product 
I 
Data drives 
Seagate Barracuda XT ST32000641 AS 2TB (four) 
Optical drive 
Sony Optiarc AD-7260S-0B DVD burner 
Keyboard 
Microsoft SideWinder X6 keyboard 
Mouse 
Microsoft SideWinder mouse 
Speakers 
Logitech Z-2300 200 W 2.1 Speaker System 
Display 
(See text) 
Building the Extreme System 
Figure 5-5 shows the major components of the extreme system. In the back-
ground, the Antec DF-85 case on the left is flanked by the Antec CP-850 power 
supply, with the Microsoft SideWinder X6 keyboard atop it. At left center is 
a stack of four Seagate Barracuda XT 2 TB hard drives, with the Crucial Bal-
listix 6 GB memory kit and the Crucial CT128M225 128 GB solid-state drive to 
their right. At the center is the SYBA hard drive docking station, with the ASUS 
EAH4350 Silent video adapter atop it. To the far right is the Microsoft Side-
winder mouse. In the foreground, the Intel DX58SO motherboard in the center 
is flanked on the left by the Intel Core ¡7-980X processor and on the right by 
the massive Intel CPU cooler. 
Sequencing the Build 
Although by necessity we describe 
building the system in a particular 
order, you don't need to follow that 
exact sequence when you build 
your own system. Some 
steps—for 
example, installing the processor 
and memory before installing the 
motherboard 
in the case—should 
be 
taken in the sequence we describe, 
because doing otherwise makes the 
task more difficult or risks 
damag-
ing a component. Other steps, such 
as installing the video adapter after 
you install the motherboard 
in the 
case, must be taken in the order we 
describe, because completing 
one 
step is a prerequisite for complet-
ing another. But the exact sequence 
doesn't matter for most steps. As you 
build your system, it will be obvious 
when sequence matters. 
Figure S-S. Extreme system components, 
awaiting 
construction 
Before you start building the system, verify that all components are present 
and accounted for. We always remind readers to do that, but for some reason 
we often forget to do it ourselves. In fact, you may have noticed that we forgot 
the optical drive in Figure 5-5. (We soon located it on the dining room table, 
buried under a pileofdetritusfroma system build we'd just completed.) 
Chapter 5 

Building the Extreme System 
Preparing the Case 
To begin preparing the DF-85 case, place it upright on the work surface and 
remove the four thumbscrews, two per side, that secure the side panels, as 
shown in Figure 5-6. Note the protective film covering the side panels. Leave 
this film in place until you finish the build. 
Swing the rear of the leftside panel away from the case, as shown in Figure 5-7, 
and lift it free. Place the side panel aside, where it won't be scratched. Remove 
the right side panel as well. The thumbscrews are not captive, so to avoid mis-
placing them it's a good idea to tape them to the side panels or reinsert them 
in the screw holes on the chassis until they're needed. 
Figure 5-S. Remove the thumbscrews 
that secure the side panels 
Figure 5-/. Remove the side panels and set them aside 
The first thing you'll notice inside the case is a gigantic, inflexible wad of front-
panel cables hanging down behind the drive bays, all bunched together by 
several twist-ties. That mess of cables will interfere with subsequent steps, 
so the first thing we did was remove the cable ties, as shown in Figure 5-8, 
straighten and sort the cables, and stuff them into a drive bay, as shown in 
Figure 5-9. 
Figure 5-8. Remove the twist ties that secure the cable bundle 
Figure 5-8. Stuff the front-panel cables into a drive bay to get 
them out of the way for now 
Building an Extreme System 
177 

Building the Extreme System 
The next step is to remove the stock I/O shield. To do so, use a tool handle to 
press in on the shield until it snaps out, as shown in Figure 5-10. You can dis-
card or recycle the stock I/O shield. 
Locate the custom I/O shield that was supplied with the motherboard. Verify 
that the I/O shield matches the motherboard rear-panel ports by aligning the 
I/O shield with the back-panel motherboard ports, as shown in Figure 5-11. 
back-panel 
connectors 
1 Used Goods? 
1 
It doesn't happen often, but once or twice we've opened a shrink-wrapped 
box and 
! 
found that the I/O shield in the box didn't match the motherboard. We can't believe 
i 
the motherboard came from the factory that way. Our strong suspicion is that the 
1 
vendor sold us used goods. 
1 
Motherboards 
are among the most commonly returned computer components. A 
i 
less-than-honest 
vendor can simply re-shrinkwrap the returned board and sell it as 
i 
new. If the original purchaser accidentally boxed up the motherboard 
with the ge-
1 
neric I/O shield from the case instead of the I/O shield supplied by the motherboard, 
i 
that explains how an incorrect I/O shield ended up in a sealed box. 
i 
When you unpack a motherboard, verify that the original seal is still present. If you 
i 
find a broken or missing seal (and certainly if you find a mismatched I/O shield), we 
\ 
recommend returning the motherboard 
for refund or replacement. 
Working from inside the case, orient the custom I/O shield properly and then 
press it until it snaps into place. Make sure that all four corners and edges are 
fully seated. I/O shields are made of thin metal with some sharp edges, so we 
generally use a tool handle, as shown in Figure 5-12. As you press on the I/O 
shield to seat it, apply counter-pressure with your fingers to the outside of the 
shield to avoid bending it. 
With the I/O shield installed, the next step is to determine which positions 
require standoffs for the motherboard mounting screws. To do that, first hold 
the motherboard up to a bright light to count the number of mounting holes 
178 
Chapter 5 

Building the Extreme System 
in the board. Then count the number of standoffs that are already installed in 
the case, if any. Lower the motherboard into position, as shown in Figure 5-13, 
and slide it into full contact with the I/O shield. 
Figure 5-1H. Install the custom I/O shield supplied with the 
motherboard 
Figure 5-13. Lower the motherboard into the case to determine 
which positions require stand-offs to be installed 
Look down through each motherboard mounting hole to determine if a 
standoff is already installed in the corresponding position. (Don't confuse CPU 
cooler mounting holes with motherboard mounting holes; our motherboard 
had four CPU cooler mounting holes.) Take note of how many and which of 
the preinstalled standoffs are in the proper positions, which positions have a 
standoff installed but no corresponding mounting hole, and which positions 
require a standoff to be installed. 
In our case, the Antec DF-85 had six standoffs preinstalled, all of which cor-
responded to mounting holes in the motherboard. The motherboard has 10 
mounting holes, so we needed to install four more standoffs. We counted out 
four standoffs from the parts bag, and installed them. 
You can install standoffs with your fingers or by using a 5 mm nut driver, as 
shown in Figure 5-14. If you use a nut driver, be very careful not to overtorque 
the standoffs. They're made of soft brass and the motherboard tray is made 
of thin steel, so it's very easy to strip the threads by overtorquing. Just finger-
tight plus perhaps a quarter turn is sufficient. 
Measure Twice, Cut Once 
Before you proceed, make 
absolutely 
certain that no "extra" standoffs are 
installed. That is, no standoff 
should 
be installed that doesn't 
correspond 
to a motherboard mounting 
hole. 
An extra standoff may contact the 
bottom of the motherboard, 
causing 
a short circuit. If this happens, at best 
the system may not boot. At worst, 
the short circuit may damage the 
motherboard 
or other 
components. 
Figure 5-14. Install standoffs at all required 
positions 
Building an Extreme System 
179 

Building the Extreme System 
• A 
Better Safe Than Toasted 
Before you do anything else, check 
the back of the power supply to see 
if it has an input voltage 
switch. 
Autosensing 
power supplies (like the 
Antec CP-850 we used) 
automati-
cally detect the input voltage and set 
themselves for 
120Vor240Vopera-
tion. Other power supplies must be 
set manually 
for the correct input 
voltage. If you see a voltage 
switch, 
make sure it's set for the correct 
voltage. 
If you connect a power supply set for 
240V to a 120Vreceptacle, 
no harm is 
done. The PC components 
will receive 
only half the voltage they require, 
and the system won't boot. But if you 
connect a power supply set for 120V 
to a 240Vreceptacle, 
the PC 
compo-
nents will receive twice the voltage 
they're designed to use. If you 
power 
up the system, that overvoltage 
will 
destroy it instantly in clouds of smoke 
and showers of sparks. 
Square Hole, Round Peg 
The two black jacks accept only 
six-pin drive power cables. The two 
red jacks accept either six-pin drive 
power cables or eight-pin PCI Express 
power cables. If you connect a six-pin 
drive power cable to a red jack, note 
that the plug and jack are keyed by 
square and rounded holes. Make sure 
the keying aligns properly and then 
press the plug into the jack. After you 
insert the plug, verify that the latch 
on the plug snaps over the tab on the 
jack to secure the cable. 
Installing the Power Supply 
The next step is to install the power supply. We used an oversized Antec CPX form 
factor power supply. If you're using the Antec DF-85 case but with a standard ATX 
power supply, disregard the steps in this section that describe removing the ATX 
adapter plate. 
To begin, remove the ATX adapter plate by removing the four screws that se-
cure it, as shown in Figure 5-15. 
Once you've removed the four screws, press in on the adapter plate until it 
releases and lift it free of the case, as shown in Figure 5-16. 
Do not discard the ATX adapter plate. If you ever need to replace the power 
supply with an ATX unit, you'll need the adapter plate. We recommend taping 
the four screws to the adapter plate, as shown in Figure 5-17, and taping the 
adapter plate itself to the top of the power supply. The power supply will be-
come warm while running, so we recommend using a heat-resistant tape. (We 
later replaced the transparent tape shown in Figure 5-17 with heat-resistant 
duct tape.) Tape the plate securely to prevent vibration. 
The Antec CP-850 is a modular power supply. The following cables are perma-
nently connected to the power supply: 
1 24-pin (20+4) main ATX power cable 
1 four-pin ATX 12V (CPU) power cable 
1 eight-pin EPS12V(CPU) power cable 
2 eight-pin (6+2) PCI Express power cables 
1 3xMolex + 1 xFloppy drive power cable 
1 3xSATA drive power cable 
You can also connect up to four optional cables to the four jacks on the power 
supply. The six optional cables included with the power supply are: 
• 2 six-pin single PCI Express power cables 
• 2 3xMolex drive power cables 
• 2 3xSATA drive power cables 
This modularity allows you to connect only the cables you need, avoiding a 
tangle of unused cables, and also allows you to mix and match cables. For 
example, if (as in our system) you plan to install many hard drives but have no 
need of extra PCI Express power cables for multiple high-end video adapters, 
you can use all four of the available jacks to connect SATA drive power cables. 
(Only two such cables are included, but more can be purchased separately 
from Antec.) 
Choose the optional power cables you need, and press the plug on each cable 
into one of the jacks on the power supply, as shown in Figure 5-18. 
Once you've connected the optional cables you need, slide the power supply 
into the case, as shown in Figure 5-19. 
180 
Chapter 5 

Building the Extreme System 
Figure S-1S. Remove the four screws that secure the ATX adapter 
plate 
Figure 5-18. Remove the ATX adapter plate and set it aside 
Figure 5-1/. Tape the screws to the ATX adapter plate and store 
them for possible later use 
Figure 5-18. Connect the modular cables you need to the power 
supply jacks 
Finally, secure the power supply with the four provided screws, as shown in 
Figure 5-20. 
Figure 5-18. Slide the power supply into position 
Figure 5-HO. Secure the power supply to the chassis with the four 
provided 
screws 
Building an Extreme System 
181 

Building the Extreme System 
Populating the Motherboard 
It is always easier to populate the motherboard—i.e., install the processor and 
memory—while the motherboard is outside the case. In fact, sometimes you 
must do so, because installing the CPU cooler requires access to both sides of 
the motherboard. (Some cases, including the Antec DF-85, have a CPU cutout 
in the motherboard tray that gives access to the CPU cooler area on the bot-
tom of the motherboard. With one of these cases, you can swap out the pro-
cessor or replace the CPU cooler without removing the motherboard.) 
Even if it is possible to populate the motherboard while it is installed in the 
case, we always recommend doing so with the motherboard outside the case 
and lying flat on the work surface. More than once, we've tried to save a few 
minutes by replacing the processor without removing the motherboard. Too 
often, the result has been a damaged motherboard and/or processor. (Most 
recently, Robert managed to pull out the CPU by its pins while attempting to 
remove the CPU cooler in Barbara's sister's old system. We ended up replacing 
that system with the budget system described earlier in this book.) 
Installing the processor 
First, and we can't emphasize this enough—particularly if you're installing a 
$1,000 processor—always ground yourself before touching the processor, 
motherboard, or other static-sensitive components. You can do that just by 
touching an exposed metal surface of the power supply or the case chassis. 
Even if the system is not plugged into a wall receptacle, the metal mass of the 
power supply and chassis provides an adequate sink to dissipate any static 
charge. 
To begin, open the socket lever by pressing it down and away from the latch, 
as shown in Figure 5-21.The tension is quite high, so you have to apply signifi-
cant pressure to release the lever. 
Raise the socket lever to the fully vertical position, as shown in Figure 5-22. 
Figure 5-H1. Open the socket lever by pressing It down and sliding 
it out from under the latch 
Figure 5-HH. Raise the socket lever to the fully vertical position 
182 
Chapter 5 

Building the Extreme System 
Lift the load plate to the fully open position, as shown in Figure 5-23. 
Remove the black plastic socket cover from the socket by grasping the cover 
with your thumb and forefinger and pulling it out of the socket, as shown in 
Figure 5-24. With the cover removed, the fragile socket contacts are exposed. 
Do not touch the contacts or allow anything other than the processor to con-
tact them. Store the socket cover for possible future use. If you ever remove 
the processor from the socket, always reinstall the socket cover immediately. 
Once again, ground yourself. (It does no harm to ground yourself frequently. 
Better too often than too seldom.) Open the processor box and locate the 
processor. Carefully open the hard plastic shell that contains the processor. 
Ground yourself again. Remove the processor from the shell and snap off the 
plastic cover on the pin side of the processor. Retain that cover for possible 
future use. 
Hold the processor body between your thumb and forefinger, as shown in Fig-
ure 5-25. Locate the two notches in the processor circuit board (visible on the 
upper left and right edges of the processor circuit board in Figure 5-25) and 
the two corresponding posts on the inner edge of the processor socket. Align 
the processor over the socket, making sure the keying notches on the proces-
sor align with the posts in the socket. Bring the processor close to the socket 
and lower it straight down without tilting or sliding it in the socket. The pro-
cessor should seat completely in the socket without any pressure whatsoever. 
If it does not, lift it gently, realign it, and drop it gently into the socket. 
Lower the load plate back into closed position, as shown in Figure 5-26. 
Press down on the load plate with one hand while you use the other to close 
and latch the processor lever, as shown in Figure 5-27. (Barbara moved her 
finger from the load plate for visibility in this image.) Make sure the cammed 
rod at the front of the socket engages the tab on the front of the load plate. 
The surface of the processor should be completely clean. If there are any fin-
gerprints, dust, skin oil, or similar contaminants on the processor surface, use 
a clean paper towel to polish the surface, as shown in Figure 5-28. 
Building an Extreme System 
183 

Building the Extreme System 
Figure 5-HS. Align the processor 
with the socket and drop It gently 
into place 
under the latching hook 
Figure 5-HS. Squirt the contents of the thermal compound 
syringe 
onto the center of the processor 
surface 
Figure 5-HS. Lower the load plate into closed 
position 
Figure 5-H8. If necessary, use a clean paper towel to polish the 
processor surface and remove 
contaminants 
Intel provides a syringe with a premeasured amount of 
Dow thermal compound. Remove the cover from the tip 
of the syringe, place the tip at the center of the proces-
sor, and expel the entire contents of the syringe onto the 
processor surface, as shown in Figure 5-29. 
If you ever replace the processor or CPU cooler, do not 
reuse the existing thermal compound. Remove the old 
thermal compound from the processor surface and heat-
sink base, and polish them clean. If the old thermal com-
pound is tenacious, you can use a hair dryer to warm it 
slightly and rub it off. Replace it with new thermal com-
pound. We use Antec Silver thermal compound, but any 
approved thermal compound will do. 
184 
Chapter 5 

Building the Extreme System 
Installing the CPU cooler 
The stock Intel DBX-B CPU cooler supplied with the Core ¡7-980X processor is 
huge. With maximum power dissipation of 130W, it has to be. Because of its 
size and weight, this CPU cooler requires a supporting bracket on the under-
side of the motherboard. (If you use a different processor, the stock CPU cooler 
may mount via locking posts that don't require the support bracket.) 
To begin installing the CPU cooler, loosen the four captive thumbscrews that 
secure it to the support bracket, as shown in Figure 5-30. 
Remove the support bracket and set it aside for now. Invert the CPU cooler 
and peel off the protective plastic film that covers the heatsink base, as shown 
in Figure 5-31. 
Figure 5-30. Loosen the four captive thumbscrews 
that secure the 
Figure 5-31. Peel off the protective plastic film that covers the 
CPU cooler to the support bracket 
heatsink base 
Lift the edge of the motherboard nearest the CPU socket, and slide the sup-
port bracket under the motherboard. Position it so that all four of the threaded 
hubs protrude though the mounting holes surrounding the processor socket. 
Carefully lower the motherboard and verify that all four of the threaded hubs 
are visible in the mounting holes. Position the CPU cooler over the threaded 
hubs, with each captive thumbscrew resting on a hub. Press down on each 
captive thumbscrew and tighten it, as shown in Figure 5-32.The thumbscrews 
are spring-loaded, so finger-tight is sufficient to secure them. 
The last step is to connect the CPU fan power cable to the CPU fan power head-
er pins on the motherboard, which are located near the rear-panel I/O connec-
tors. Align the keyed cable connector with the keyed motherboard connector, 
and press the cable connector down until it fully seats on the motherboard 
header pins, as shown in Figure 5-33. 
Building an Extreme System 
185 

Building the Extreme System 
Figure 5-3H. Position the CPU cooler over the four threaded hubs 
in the support bracket and tighten the four thumbscrews 
to 
secure it 
Figure 5-33. Connect the CPU fan power cable to the CPU fan 
power header pins 
Figure 5-34. Set the CPU fan speed 
The stock Intel CPU fan has a tiny switch, shown in Figure 5-34. By default, this 
switch is set to Q (for quiet). With the switch in the P (for Performance) posi-
tion, the CPU fan runs faster (and louder). 
We didn't want to take any chances with a $1,000 processor, so we started test-
ing with the switch in the P position. At idle, the indicated CPU temperature 
was 31° C (-88° F) with the switch set to P, and 32° C (-90° F) with it set to Q. 
Under full load, the CPU temperature was 61° C (-142° F) with the switch on P, 
and 67° C (~153° F) with it on Q. Those temperature differences are relatively 
insignificant, but the difference in fan noise was very noticeable. We suggest 
you try it both ways. If the noise doesn't bother you with the fan set to Per-
formance mode, use it. Otherwise, you don't give up all that much cooling 
efficiency by going to Quiet mode. 
A 
; 
i Aftermarket Coolers? 
' 
i 
Recent Intel stock coolers are generally quite good. They're usually not quite as 
' 
efficient or as quiet as the best aftermarket coolers, but they're also usually not far 
i 
behind. So we were curious to see how the stock Intel DBX-B cooler compared to a 
, 
i 
top-notch aftermarket cooler, the Thermalright Ultra-120 extreme. 
i 
As it turns out, Intel outdid itself with the DBX-B cooler. The Ultra-120 extreme beat 
i 
1 
the DBX-B cooler, but not by enough to justify its $60 price tag. At idle, the system 
i 
actually reported that the Intel cooler won by one degree. (Idle temperatures re-
i 
ported by motherboard 
sensors are notoriously unreliable, so about the most we can 
i 
1 
conclude from this data is that either cooler does an excellent job of cooling the CPU 
1 
i 
under light loads.) At full load, the reported CPU temperature with the Thermalright 
i 
cooler was 58° C (136.4° F), only three degrees cooler than the DBX-B managed. 
\ 
i 
Usually, you give something up by using the stock cooler from a retail-boxedproces- 
i 
1 
sor. In this case, Intel's stock cooler proved to be a match for first-rate aftermarket 
coolers—and 
a lot less expensive. 
186 
Chapter 5 

Building the Extreme System 
Installing memory 
The next step is to install the memory modules. Once again, ground yourself 
to the power supply or chassis each time before you touch the motherboard 
or a memory module. 
The Intel DX58SO motherboard has four memory sockets that accept 240-pin 
DDR3 memory modules (DIMMs). The black memory socket (nearest the pro-
cessor) is Channel A, DIMM 1. Moving toward the front edge of the mother-
board, the three blue sockets are Channel A, DIMM 0, Channel B, and Channel 
C, respectively. 
If you have a set of three memory modules that are identical in speed and 
capacity, install them in the three blue memory slots. If you have two matched 
modules, install them in memory slots B and C. If you have only one memory 
module, install it in slot C. 
To install a memory module, first ground yourself by touching the power 
supply or case chassis. Swing the pivoting latches open on both ends of the 
memory socket(s) you intend to use. Remove the module from its packaging, 
and position it as shown in Figure 5-35 with both edges of the module aligned 
with the slots in the memory socket. 
Memory modules and sockets are keyed with a notch in the contact (bottom) 
edge of the memory module and a matching nub in the socket that prevent a 
memory module from being installed backward. Verify that the key is aligned 
properly on the module and socket, and then use both thumbs to press down 
firmly on the module, as shown in Figure 5-36, until the module seats com-
pletely in the socket. 
As the memory module seats in the socket, the pivoting latches at both ends 
of the socket should swing back up into the latched position, engaging the 
slots in the center of the edges of the module, as shown in Figure 5-37. If the 
pivoting latches don't move into latched position on their own, move them 
into place manually. (Note that the latch on the rear module in Figure 5-36 did 
not engage. We subsequently latched that one manually.) 
Building an Extreme System 
Figure S-3S. Align the memory module with the socket 
Figure 5-38. Press down firmly to seat the memory module in the 
socket 

Building the Extreme System 
Figure 5-3/. Verify that the pivoting latches have locked each memory module into place 
Installing the Motherboard 
Installing the motherboard is the most time-consuming step in building the 
system because there are so many cables to connect. It's important to get all 
of them connected right, so take your time and verify each connection before 
and after you make it. 
Connecting drive cables 
We'll install six drives in this system—the SSD boot drive on SATA port 0, four 
hard drives on SATA 1 through SATA 4, and an optical drive on SATA 5. The SSD 
will be installed in the removable drive bay, which has a captive black SATA 
data cable. We found a silver metallic SATA data cable to use with the opti-
cal drive. That leaves us with four standard red SATA data cables for the hard 
drives. 
As you're building a system, it's pretty easy to determine which drive is con-
nected to which port. After the cables are dressed, it's a lot less obvious. So, 
for example, if at some point our disk monitoring software tells us that the 
hard drive connected to SATA port 3 is failing, figuring out which physical drive 
needs to be replaced can be nontrivial. 
The easy way to avoid having to tear down the system to figure out which 
drive is which is to label the SATA data cables, as shown in Figure 5-38. Use a 
felt-tip pen to draw lines on both sides of both ends of each SATA cable. 
The SATA ports on most motherboards are vertical.The SATA ports on the Intel 
DX58SO motherboard are horizontal, facing the front of the board, so we de-
cided it would be easier to connect the SATA data cables to the motherboard 
before installing the motherboard in the case. Connect the optical drive data 
cable and the four hard drive data cables, as shown in Figure 5-39. 
188 
Chapter 5 

Building the Extreme System 
Chicken and Egg 
It may be easier to connect the front-
panel switch/indicator and port cables 
before you install the motherboard in 
the case. The trade-off is that if you 
install the motherboard 
first, you 
have plenty of cable length, but the 
pins you must connect those cables 
to are deep in the case and hard to 
get to. If you install the cables first, 
the pins are more easily accessible, 
but you have very little cable slack to 
work with, both when you 
connect 
the cables and when you slide the 
motherboard 
into the case. We gen-
erally install the motherboard first 
and worry later about getting all the 
cables 
connected. 
Figure 5-38. Labeling a SATA data cable that will connect to SATA 
port 2 
The SATA data cable for the 2.5" removable drive bay is a 
captive cable with a black sheath and connector. Locate it 
among the bundle of front-panel cables at the top front 
of the case, and connect it to SATA port 0, as shown in 
Figure 5-40. 
Seating and securing the motherboard 
To begin, slide the motherboard into the case, as shown 
in Figure 5-41. Carefully align the back-panel I/O connec-
tors with the corresponding holes in the I/O template, 
and slide the motherboard toward the rear of the case 
until the motherboard mounting holes line up with the 
standoffs you installed earlier. 
Figure 5-41. Slide the motherboard into position, making sure the back-panel I/O connec-
tors align with the holes in the I/O shield 
It's helpful to keep the front edge of the motherboard slightly raised as you 
slide the motherboard into position. As the back-panel I/O connectors on the 
motherboard come into contact with the back-panel I/O template, lower the 
Figure 5-38. Connecting the SATA data cables to the motherboard 
Figure 5-40. Connect the captive black SATA data cable from the 
top 2.5" removable drive bay 
Building an Extreme System 
189 

Building the Extreme System 
r A 
1 
Less Is More (or Less) 
i 
When you install 
motherboard 
' 
mounting screws, you're also putting 
i 
torque on the standoffs. Tighten the 
i 
motherboard screws gently, using a 
1 
standard screwdriver. When you feel 
i 
tension, stop turning the driver. If you 
i 
overtorque the mounting 
screws, 
1 
you're also overtorquing the stand-
i 
offs, which may strip. Particularly 
i 
if you're using an aluminum 
case, 
1 
don't even think about using a power 
, 
screwdriver. 
front edge of the motherboard until it is level and then press gently to seat the 
back-panel ports in the template. In theory, at least, this prevents the metal 
grounding tabs on the I/O template from intruding into the ports. 
Before you secure the motherboard, verify that the back-panel I/O connectors 
mate properly with the I/O template. Make sure none of the grounding tabs 
intrude into a port connector. An errant tab at best blocks the port, rendering 
it unusable, and at worst may short out the motherboard. 
After you position the motherboard and verify that the back-panel I/O con-
nectors mate cleanly with the I/O template, insert a screw through one mount-
ing hole into the corresponding standoff. You may need to apply pressure to 
keep the motherboard positioned properly until you have inserted two or 
three screws. 
If you have trouble getting all the holes and standoffs aligned, insert two 
screws but don't tighten them completely. Use one hand to press the mother-
board into alignment, with all holes matching the standoffs.Then insert one or 
two more screws and tighten them completely. Finish mounting the mother-
board by inserting screws into all the standoffs and tightening them, as shown 
in Figure 5-42. 
After you install all of the mounting screws, do a final check to ensure that 
none of the rear-panel I/O ports are fouled by grounding tabs on the I/O 
shield, as shown in Figure 5-43. 
Figure 5-4H. Secure the motherboard by driving screws through 
Figure 5-43. Verify that none of the back-panel I/O ports are 
the mounting holes into the standoffs 
fouled by the grounding tabs on the I/O shield 
At this point, you can clear up the cable clutter a bit by routing the free ends 
of SATA data cables 1 through 5 through the access cutout to the underside 
of the motherboard tray. We'll fish them back through other cutouts when we 
connect the drives. 
190 
Chapter 5 

Building the Extreme System 
Connecting power to the motherboard 
The next step is to connect the main and supplemental power cables to the 
motherboard. To begin, locate the 24-pin main ATX power cable in the bun-
dle coming out of the power supply. Route it out the right side of the chassis 
and then pass it back into the motherboard chamber via the cutout nearest 
the main ATX power connector on the front edge of the motherboard. The 
cable connector is keyed to the motherboard jack by a combination of square 
and rounded holes for each of the 24 pins. Orient the connector with the keys 
aligned and press the cable connector down firmly until it seats in the mother-
board jack, as shown in Figure 5-44. Verify that the latch on the cable connector 
snaps into place over the tab on the side of the motherboard jack. 
Most motherboards use the four-pin ATX12V connector to provide supplemen-
tal 12VDC current to the processor socket. Some motherboards that accept 
high-current processors, including the DX58SO, substitute the eight-pin EPS12V 
connector, which can provide twice as much 12VDC current and is really just 
two ATX12V connectors side by side. 
Some power supplies, including the CP-850 we're using, provide both ATX12V 
and EPS12V connectors. Others do not provide an EPS12V connector, but pro-
vide two ATX12V connectors, which can both be plugged into a motherboard 
EPS12V connector to provide the necessary current. If your power supply pro-
vides only one ATX12V connector, it cannot be used with a motherboard that 
requires an EPS12V cable. 
Locate the EPS12V cable in the bundle of cables coming out of the power sup-
ply. Route it out through the right side of the case and back into the mother-
board chamber through the same cutout you used for the 24-pin main ATX 
power cable. The EPS12V motherboard jack and EPS12V cable connector are 
keyed. Align the keys properly and press the cable connector down firmly until 
it seats in the motherboard jack, as shown in Figure 5-45. Verify that the latch 
on the cable connector snaps into locked position over the tab on the side of 
the motherboard jack. 
Ron Morse Comments 
The vendor may have included a 
four-pin 
Molex-to-AXTI2Vconverter 
with the other accessories in the box. 
Figure 5-44. Align the main ATX power cable connector with the 
motherboard jack and press down until it seats 
completely 
Figure 5-45. Align the EPS12V power cable connector with the 
motherboard jack and press down until it seats 
completely 
Building an Extreme System 
191 

Building the Extreme System 
USB 3.0? 
The DF-85 case provides a front-panel 
USB 3.0port, which is color-keyed 
blue to differentiate it from the three 
black USB 2.0 ports. Antec faced a 
dilemma in deciding what type of 
connector to put on the free end of 
that cable. The pin-outs for USB 2.0 
internal header-pin sets are well 
established, but the same is not true 
for USB 3.0. Also, as we write this, 
few motherboards provide USB 3.0 
support, and most of those that do 
provide USB 3.0 as back-panel 
exter-
nal ports rather than USB 3.0 internal 
header-pin sets. 
Antec had two choices, neither of 
them great. The first option was to 
terminate the USB 3.0 cable in indi-
vidual wires, which would have to be 
connected one by one to an internal 
USB 3.0 header-pin set (which prob-
ably wouldn't be present). 
Thesec-
ond was to terminate the front-panel 
USB 3.0 cable in a standard 
external 
USB connector, which could then be 
routed through the case, out through 
an expansion slot or other hole in the 
rear of the case, and then connected 
to an external USB 3.0 port on the 
motherboard rear-panel I/O set. 
Antec elected to do the latter. 
Connecting front-panel ports, switches, and indicators 
The next step is to connect the front-panel ports, switches, and indicators. 
Figure 5-46 shows the front-panel connector positions on the DX58SO 
motherboard. 
s/pDie 
I T H Grourx: 
H S/PDIF OUT 
IS*1 
Audio 
Fort 1 l i s GlT; Ground 
Porti R [[3] 14 Presence» 
Port?R ([S] [6.f; sense IJSet 
Seose_Sertd f ''T\ 
Key {no pin) 
Port2l/[9 ;*] ' Serisc2_Ret 
<S> 
HO Audio Link 
ground 11gb 
3.3VSIHY I '1 
Key (do pin) I 
Back Panel CIR 
Emitter (Output) 
Emitter Out 1 ( 1 ^ Firâitef Oui I 
(»found 3 J lie/(no pin) 
lack Delect I '> b jack Delect 2 
Front Panel OR 
Receiver (Input) 
Ground J i') LiD 
Wo Connection 3 4 ' Leafn-fci 
V Standby 5 6J lire 
key [no pin) | äh Off input 
Figure 5-48. Front-panel connector positions on the DX58SO 
motherboard (image courtesy 
of Intel Corporation) 
Note that the type and number of front-panel ports on a case seldom cor-
responds to the front-panel connectors available on a motherboard. For ex-
ample, the DF-85 case provides three front-panel USB 2.0 ports, while the 
DX58SO motherboard provides six internal USB 2.0 connectors. The DX58SO 
also provides internal connectors for a front-panel FireWire and an IR emitter, 
for which the DF-85 has no front-panel ports. Conversely, the DF-85 provides a 
front-panel USB 3.0 port, for which the DX58SO provides no connector. 
To begin connecting front-panel cables, locate the front-panel audio cable in 
the bundle of cables at the top front of the DF-85 case. That cable is double-
ended, with connecting blocks for both HD audio and AC'97 audio. Locate 
the HD audio header-pin set on the DX58SO motherboard, near the expan-
sion slot covers. That cable connector and the header-pin set are keyed with a 
blocked hole and missing pin, respectively. Orient the cable connector so that 
the missing pin and blocked hole are aligned, and then press the cable con-
nector firmly onto the header-pin set, as shown in Figure 5-47. 
The Intel DX58SO motherboard provides three internal USB 2.0 header-pin 
sets, each of which supports two USB 2.0 ports. The DF-85 case has three 
front-panel USB 2.0 ports, which connect to the motherboard via two USB 2.0 
cables, one with a two-port 10-pin (2X5) connector and the other with a one-
port 5-pin (1X5) connector. 
192 
Chapter 5 

Building the Extreme System 
Locate the dual-port USB 2.0 cable in the bundle of front-panel cables coming 
from the top front of the DF-85 case. Route that cable to one of the USB 2.0 
header-pin sets on the motherboard. Orient the cable connector so that the 
blocked hole in the connector corresponds to the missing pin in the mother-
board header-pin set. Press the cable connector onto the header pins until it 
seats completely, as shown in Figure 5-48. 
Figure 5-4/. Connect 
the front-panel 
HD audio cable to the 
motherboard 
Figure 5-48. Attach the front-panel dual-port 
USB 2.0 cable to a 
motherboard 
USB 2.0 header-pin 
set 
Locate the single-port USB 2.0 cable in the bundle of front-panel cables. Route 
that cable to a second motherboard USB 2.0 header-pin set. Orient the cable 
connector so that the blocked hole in the connector corresponds to the miss-
ing pin in the motherboard header-pin set. Press the cable connector onto the 
header pins until it seats completely, as shown in Figure 5-49. 
The next step is to connect the power switch, reset switch, and hard drive ac-
tivity LED, as shown in Figure 5-50. The two switches are not polarized and 
may be connected in either orientation. The HDD LED cable connector is po-
larized, with the black wire as ground and the red wire as positive. Orient the 
cable connector with the red wire corresponding to the HDD+ pin. 
Figure 5-48. Attach the front-panel single-port 
USB 2.0 cable to a 
motherboard 
USB 2.0 header-pin 
set 
Figure 5-50. Connect 
the power switch, reset switch, and 
HDD 
LED 
cables 
Building an Extreme System 
193 

Building the Extreme System 
Installing the Hard Drive(s) 
The next step is to install the hard drives. The exact procedure for doing so 
differs according to the number of hard drives you are installing, which drive 
bays you install them in, and whether or not you want the hard drives to be 
hot-swappable. 
The DF-85 case has three 3.5" hard drive cages, each of which has three drive 
bays, for a total of nine 3.5" hard drive bays. The DF-85 includes two Fleet-
Swap brackets, each of which converts two adjacent standard drive bays to 
hot-swappable drive bays. 
By default, the two Fleet-Swap brackets are installed in the top and bottom 
drive cages, but you can reposition them anywhere in the nine-bay hard drive 
area. To do so, remove the two screws that secure the Fleet-Swap bracket, as 
shown in Figure 5-51, and slide the Fleet-Swap bracket toward the side oppo-
site those screws until it unhooks. Then lift it out. 
i 
The remaining five 3.5" hard drive bays function as standard nonremovable 
i 
drive bays. Since we are installing four hard drives and the two Fleet-Swap 
brackets provide positions for four drives, we decided to use the Fleet-Swap 
i 
brackets for all of our hard drives, thereby making them removable and hot-
swappable. 
Before we started installing hard drives, we decided to do something about 
the clutter of SATA data cables that was obstructing the rear of the hard drive 
bays. We fed the free end of each of the five non-captive SATA data cables 
through the cutout adjacent to the motherboard SATA ports, as shown in Fig-
ure 5-52. As we install the drives, we'll feed only as much cable as needed to 
reach the drive back through a cutout, leaving the excess cable length on the 
cable management area on the right side of the case. 
Really Hot Swapping 
If you intend to hot-swap 
drives, 
don't forget to enable AHCI in BIOS 
Setup. Otherwise, you may 
corrupt 
data on the drives. 
Figure S-Sl. Removing 
a Fleet-Swap 
drive 
bracket 
Figure 5-5H. Route the SATA data cables through the cutout to the 
rear side of the motherboard 
tray 
194 
Chapter 5 

Building the Extreme System 
Each of the three hard drive cages is covered by a swinging door that can be 
latched and unlatched by applying finger pressure to the left side of the door. 
There is also a locking lever inside the case, about midway up the left edge of the 
front bezel. When this locking lever is in the locked (down) position, the drive 
bay doors cannot be opened. To begin installing the hard drives, locate the lock-
ing lever and slide it up to the unlocked position, as shown in Figure 5-53. 
With the locking lever in the unlocked position, press on the left edge of a 
drive bay door to release the latch and then swing the door open, as shown 
in Figure 5-54. 
Figure S-S3. Slide the drive bay door locking lever up to the 
Figure 5-54. Unlatch the drive bay door by pressing 
in on the left 
unlocked 
position 
side, and then swing the door 
open 
The hard drives simply slide into position in the bays, where they are retained 
by spring tension and the closed drive bay door. Optionally, you can drive four 
screws directly through the sheet metal of the drive cage to secure the drive 
permanently, whether or not that drive connects to a Fleet-Swap bracket. (Ob-
viously, if you secure a drive in a Fleet-Sway bay to the chassis with screws, it 
will no longer be removable.) Figure 5-55 shows Barbara sliding a hard drive 
into position, where it will mate with the Fleet-Swap bracket connectors vis-
ible behind the drive. 
After you've installed the drive or drives in a drive cage, close and latch the 
drive bay door, as shown in Figure 5-56. If you want the hard drives to be re-
movable, leave the drive bay cover locking lever in the upper position. Other-
wise, you can slide it down to lock the drive bay covers. 
The next step is to connect power to the hard drive(s). To do so, route a SATA 
power cable from the power supply chamber out through the right side of the 
case and then back into the motherboard chamber through an access cutout 
close to the rear of the drives. 
Building an Extreme System 
195 

Building the Extreme System 
We were able to power two hard drives in the top two bays and the optical 
drive from one three-position SATA power cable, although it was a very tight 
fit, as shown in Figure 5-57. If the hard drives had been mounted in a standard 
bay rather than a Fleet-Swap bay, wed have had to allocate a separate power 
cable to the optical drive. 
Continue routing SATA power cables and connecting them to drives until all 
of your hard drives have power. Then locate the SATA data cables in the mess 
of cables on the right side of the case, and feed them back through the ac-
cess holes near the drives. Connect each SATA data cable to the corresponding 
hard drive, as shown in Figure 5-58. 
Figure S-SS. Slide the hard drive into the drive bay 
Figure 5-58. Close and latch the drive bay door 
Figure 5-5/. Connect 
a SATA power cable to the power 
connector 
on the Fleet-Swap 
bracket 
Figure 5-58. Connect 
the appropriate 
SATA data cable to each of 
the hard 
drives 
196 
Chapter 5 

Building the Extreme System 
Installing the Optical Drive 
The next step is to install the optical drive in one of the 5.25" external drive 
bays at the top of the DF-85 case. Each of those is covered by a swinging door 
that looks like an open-end wrench. (We love it.) To begin, press in on the left 
side of the top door to release the catch and then swing the door open, as 
shown in Figure 5-59. 
Working from inside the case, use your fingers or the end of a screwdriver to press 
out on the plastic drive bay bezel until it snaps out, as shown in Figure 5-60. 
Figure S-S3. Press in on the left side to release the catch, and then 
Figure 5-80. Snap out the plastic drive bezel 
swing open the door covering the top 5.25" drive bay 
We intended to install our DVD writer in the top drive bay, but when we at-
tempted to slide the drive into the bay we found that it was obstructed by the 
cables that feed the removable 2.5"drive bay on top of the case. Although we 
could have crammed the drive into that top bay, we decided to leave that bay 
unused and install our optical drive in the middle bay. 
To remove the steel RF shielding plate from the middle drive bay, insert a 
screwdriver and twist the plate back and forth, as shown in Figure 5-61, until 
it snaps free. Be careful of the sharp burrs left on either side of the drive bay. 
With the RF shielding plate removed, slide the optical drive into the bay, as 
shown in Figure 5-62. 
Secure the optical drive with at least four screws, two per side, as shown in 
Figure 5-63. 
We used the third SATA power connector from the cable we connected to the 
hard drives in the top two bays. If necessary, run a SATA power cable from the 
power supply chamber outside and along the right side of the case and up to 
the top drive bay area, and pass it into the main chamber through an access 
cutout near the optical drive. Align the L-shaped key on the power cable con-
nector with the mating key on the drive power connector, and press the pow-
er cable connector firmly onto the drive connector, as shown in Figure 5-64. 
Building an Extreme System 
197 

Building the Extreme System 
Figure 5-81. Use a screwdriver 
to work the steel RF shielding 
plate 
back and forth until it snaps 
out 
Figure 5-83. Secure the optical drive with at least two screws 
per 
side 
Figure 5-8H. Slide the optical drive into the bay 
Figure 5-84. Connect 
power to the optical drive 
Locate the free end of the SATA data cable for the optical 
drive in the mess of cables on the right side of the case, 
and route the connector end back into the main com-
partment through an access cutout near the optical drive. 
Align the L-shaped keys on the power cable connector 
and the drive connector, and press the data connector 
into place, as shown in Figure 5-65. 
Figure 5-85. Connect 
the SATA data cable to the optical drive 
198 
Chapter 5 

Building the Extreme System 
Installing the SSD Boot Drive 
The next step is to install the SSD boot drive, which really just means sliding it 
into the 2.5" removable drive bay on top of the system. When we shot Figure 
5-66, Robert had partially inserted the Crucial SSD into the drive bay and told 
Barbara to go ahead and slide it into place. Fortunately, Barbara is more ob-
servant than Robert. She noticed that the SATA connectors on the back of the 
drive and in the drive bay were not aligned. 
So, as unintuitive as it seems, the Crucial SSD goes into the drive bay with the 
label facing down. Slide the drive partway into the drive bay, as shown in Fig-
ure 5-67. Make sure the SATA data and power connectors line up properly, 
and then slide the drive all the way into the bay until the connectors seat 
completely. 
Figure 5-88. Slide the SSD boot drive into the top 2.5" drive bay 
Figure 5-8/. Slide the SSD into the bay until the connectors 
mate 
(but not this way) 
completely 
If you've been paying attention, you may have noticed that while we connect-
ed the captive black SATA data cable from this drive bay to the motherboard 
earlier, we haven't yet connected power to the drive bay. We'll do that later, as 
we're connecting the system fans. 
Installing the Video Adapter 
The next step is to install the video adapter. If you're installing one video 
adapter, install it in the primary PCI Express x16 video adapter slot (the one 
located nearest the processor). Use the secondary video adapter slot only if 
you're installing a second video adapter, or for installing a non-video PCI Ex-
press expansion card. 
To install the video adapter, first ground yourself to the frame or power supply 
and then remove the video adapter from its packaging. Hold the adapter up 
to the primary PCI Express x16 slot to determine which slot cover needs to be 
removed. Remove the screw that secures the expansion slot cover, as shown 
in Figure 5-68. 
Building an Extreme System 
199 

Building the Extreme System 
Grasp the expansion slot cover, tilt it slightly toward the case interior (as shown 
in Figure 5-69), and pull the slot cover free. Note that in some cases the screw 
that secures one expansion slot cover may overlap the edge of the adjacent 
slot cover. In that situation, you'll need to loosen the interfering screw before 
removing the slot cover. 
Figure 5-88. Remove the screw that secures the expansion slot cover 
Figure 5-88. Remove the slot cover 
Position the video adapter vertically over the slot, as shown in Figure 5-70, and 
press down with both thumbs until the adapter seats completely in the slot. 
Depending on the motherboard and video adapter you use, this can require 
anything from very little pressure to significant pressure. In some cases, the 
required pressure was so high that we worried we'd crack the motherboard. If 
seating the adapter seems to require too much pressure, remove the adapter 
and make sure that everything is lined up properly and there are no obstruc-
tions. (In one case that Barbara will never let Robert forget, Robert tried to seat 
a video adapter in a slot that had an errant internal USB cable draped across it.) 
Figure 5-/0. Position the video adapter over the slot and press down firmly with both 
thumbs to seat it 
200 
Chapter 5 

Building the Extreme System 
The PCI Express x16 video adapter slot has a latch that pivots up to seat in a 
slot on the bottom edge of the adapter. Make sure that latch is mated with 
the adapter, as shown in Figure 5-71. (Also make sure, if you remove the video 
adapter later, to unlatch it before you try to pull it from the slot.) 
Once the video adapter is fully seated and latched into the slot, reinstall the 
screw to secure the video adapter bracket to the chassis, as shown in Figure 
5-72. Make sure the card remains fully seated in the slot as you tighten the 
screw. 
Figure S-/1. Pivot the latch into position to lock the video adapter 
into the slot 
Figure 5-/H. Reinsert the screw to secure the video adapter to the 
chassis 
Video Card Power 
We used a faniess video card that requires no supplemental power. However, most 
video adapters, particularly high-performance 
gaming adapters, require more 
powerthan 
the slot can provide. Supplemental power may be provided to thevideo 
adapter by connecting a six-pin or eight-pin PCI Express power cable. An adapter 
may have either or both of those connectors. Some video adapters that have eight-
pin PCI Express sockets accept either a six- or eight-pin power cable, while others spe-
cifically require an eight-pin PCI Express power cable. Refer to your video adapter's 
manual for details. 
Some video adapter fans are powered separately, by connecting a Molexpower 
sup-
ply cable directly to a socket on the adapter. If your adapter uses such an arrange-
ment, make sure to connect fan power or you may cook your video card in short 
order. 
Ron Morse Comments 
Oneor more.... My ATI HD5850 
needs 
two six-pin PCI Express power con-
nectors. Typically, the card vendor will 
provide four-pin Molex-to-six-pin 
PCI 
Express converter cables. If not, find 
a geek. He will be drowning in them. 
Or go to RadioShack. They're about 
$ I each. 
Finishing Up 
At this point, we're nearly finished. With the exception of a few stray fan power 
cables, not much cable dressing remains to be done in the main chamber, as 
shown in Figure 5-73. 
All that remains to be done is to connect power to all seven case fans and the 
2.5" removable drive bay, and then to neaten up the rats'nest of cables on the 
right side of the system before we reinstall the right side panel. 
Building an Extreme System 
201 

Building the Extreme System 
If you haven't done so already, route at least one Molex power cable from the 
power supply chamber to the cable management area on the right exterior of 
the case. Locate the power cables for all seven of the case fans and route them 
to the cable management area as well. Connect the fans and drive bay power 
cables to the cable from the power supply, as shown in Figure 5-74. 
Figure 5-/4. Connect 
power to the case fans and the 2.5" 
remov-
able drive bay 
The fan power connectors are piggyback Molex connectors, with a female jack 
on one side of the connector and a male plug on the other. Fans draw little 
power, so you can connect several (or all) of them to one power supply Molex 
connector, just by piggybacking the fan power connectors together. 
Once you've connected power to the fans and the 2.5" removable drive bay, 
you can sit back and admire the incredible mess of cables, shown in Figure 
5-75. Organize the cables into bundles and use the cable wraps preinstalled 
on the back of the motherboard tray to tie off those bundles. After you do that, 
slide the right side panel back into place and secure it with the two thumb-
screws you removed earlier. 
Before you connect power to the system, verify the fan speed settings. The 
two top and two rear fans are dual-speed and are set by default to low speed. 
They are controlled by a block of four switches on the upper rear of the case. 
The three front fans have continuously variable speeds, from 1,000 RPM on 
the lowest setting to 2,000 RPM on the highest. Each front fan is controlled by 
the small knob at the lower-right corner of its drive bay cover. By default, the 
front fans are set to their lowest speed. Turn the knob clockwise to increase the 
speed, if necessary. 
We found that the default low settings for all seven of the fans provided ad-
equate cooling with a reasonable noise level. We suggest you increase the fan 
speed only if cooling is inadequate at the lower speed. 
Figure 5-/3. The case interior before 
cleanup 
Figure 5-/5. The cable management 
area, 
before 
dressing 
202 
Chapter 5 

. . A 
Zero RPM Fans 
Some power supplies, including manyAntec 
units, provide "Fan Only" Molex 
con-
nectors. If you power one or more of the DF-85 fans with such a connector, set the 
fan speed to high. Otherwise, the reduced voltage available on the Fan Only Molex 
connector may be insufficient to start the fan 
spinning. 
Building the Extreme System 
The Smoke Test 
After you finish building the system, take a few minutes to double-check ev-
erything. Verify that all cables are connected properly, that all drives are se-
cured, and that there's nothing loose inside the case. Check one last time that 
the power supply is set for the correct input voltage, if applicable, and the 
power switch is in the "off" position. It's a good idea to pick up the system and 
tilt it gently from side to side to make sure there are no loose screws or other 
items that could cause a short. Use the following checklist: 
• Power supply set to proper input voltage (if applicable) 
• No loose tools or screws (shake the case gently) 
• Heatsink/fan unit properly mounted; CPU fan connected 
• Memory modules fully seated and latched 
• Front-panel switch and indicator cables connected properly 
• Front-panel I/O cables connected properly 
• Hard drive data cable(s) connected to drive(s) and motherboard 
• Hard drive power cable(s) connected 
• Optical drive data cable connected to drive and motherboard 
• Optical drive power cable connected 
• All drives secured to drive bay or chassis, as applicable 
• Expansion cards fully seated and secured to chassis 
• Video adapter power connected (if applicable) 
• Main ATX power cable and ATX12V power cable connected 
• Front, top, and rear case fans connected 
• All cables dressed and tucked 
Once you're certain that all is as it should be, it's time for the smoke test. Leave 
the left side panel off for now. Connect the power cable to the wall receptacle 
and then to the system unit. Unlike many power supplies, the Antec CP-850 
has a separate rocker switch on the back that controls power to the power 
supply. By default, it's in the"0,"or off, position, which means the power supply 
is not receiving power from the wall receptacle. Move that switch to the "1," 
or on, position. Press the main power button on the front of the case, and the 
system should start up. Check to make sure that the power supply fan, CPU 
fan, and case fans are spinning. You should also hear the hard drive spin up. At 
that point, everything should be working properly. 
Building an Extreme System 
203 

Final Words 
Once the system passes the smoke test, power it down and connect your key-
board, mouse, display, and any other external peripherals. Start the system 
and run BIOS Setup. Set the correct date and time. If you plan to hot-swap hard 
drives, make sure you've enabled AHCI. Once you complete BIOS Setup con-
figuration, save your changes, shut the system down, and restart it with the 
operating system distribution disc in the optical drive. Install the OS, updated 
drivers, and your applications software, and you're ready to roll. Oh, and don't 
forget to replace the side panel. 
Final Words 
This system went together easily. Actual construction took about 90 minutes, 
as usual in our case spread out over several days as we photographed each 
step. If this is the first time you've built a system, leave yourself a full weekend 
to build it, install software, and so on. 
We're quite pleased with the performance of this system. It "feels"at least twice 
as fast as Robert's former quad-core extreme system. That impression is borne 
out by this system's video-rendering performance. A video clip that required 
five minutes to render on Robert's old extreme system now renders in about 
two minutes. 
The system is too loud to call a Quiet PC, but it's much quieter than some of the 
leaf-blower extreme systems we've built in the past. In a relatively quiet room, 
the hum of all those fans is clearly audible from across the room. In a typical of-
fice environment, particularly with the system under the desk, the noise level 
is acceptable, at least to us. 
204 
Chapter 5 

Building a Media 
O 
Center System 
^ 
We admit it. We're audio/video Luddites. When the receiver in our 15-year-old 
home audio system failed a few years ago, we didn't bother to replace it. We 
have a Panasonic 27" analog television, basic $10/month analog cable TV ser-
vice with only the broadcast channels, and no satellite receiver. 
We rent movies and TV series from Netflix, borrow them from the public li-
brary or friends, or buy the DVD sets. (As we write this, we've just gotten 
around to renting The Sopranos. It's new to us....) We sometimes watch local 
TV news, sports, and weather in real time, but that's about it. We've even given 
up watching PBS because of the intrusive begging and increasingly common 
commercials. 
If there's something we really want to see, we usually just buy the DVD set or 
wait until it's available from Netflix. A few times a year, when we don't want 
to wait for the DVD release, we record the program on our DVD recorder. The 
last time we watched a prime-time network television episode live was some-
time in the 20th century. We've never bothered watching TV online, because 
the programs available on Hulu and the network websites contain embedded 
commercials that can't be skipped. If we can't watch something without com-
mercials, we simply refuse to watch it. 
So, why do we need a media center system? We don't, at least if you define 
a media center system as incorporating PVR/DVR (personal/digital video re-
corder) functions. In fact, we built a very capable PVR/DVR media center sys-
tem for the first edition of this book. After we verified that everything worked 
as it should, we found that we never used the system to record programs. We 
turned it off. It gathered dust, and eventually we salvaged its parts for other 
systems.There was nothing wrong with that system, mind you. It worked per-
fectly. We simply had no need for its recording capabilities. For the second 
edition of this book, we built another capable PVR/DVR media center system, 
this one with multiple analog and digital tuner cards. Once again, we turned it 
on, tested it and found it did everything expected of it, and then turned it off 
when we realized that we weren't using it. 
But there's much more to a media center system than just recording TV pro-
grams. The first sentence of Wikipedia's HTPC entry is a pretty good working 
definition: 
IN THIS CHAPTER 
Determining Functional Requirements 
Hardware Design Criteria 
Component Considerations 
Building the Media Center System 
nstalllng Software 
Final Words 
Gotcha 
One problem 
with depending 
on 
DVDs is that DVD releases are 
unpre-
dictable. For example, we rented 
and 
watched 
season 
I of Crossing 
Jordan 
soon after the DVD set was 
released 
in 2008. Alas, we then learned 
that 
the remaining 
five seasons 
haven't 
been released on DVD and 
probably 
never will be because of music 
licens-
ing issues. Oh, well. 
We had a similar problem 
with the 
fine British comedy-drama 
Cold 
Feet, starring the delightful 
Helen 
Baxendale. After we'd rented 
and 
watched 
the first three series, we real-
ized belatedly that 
Netflixdidn'thave 
series four and five. We 
immediately 
tried to buy those, only to learn that 
series four and five had never 
been 
released for the US market and were 
unavailable 
for 
purchase. 
Amazon 
had one used copy of series 
four, but in Region 2 format, 
which 
is incompatible 
with our 
equipment. 
Arrrggggh. 
If we weren't law 
abiding, 
we might have installed a good 
Bit-
Torrent client and visited Pirate Bay. 
205 

A Home Theater PC (HTPC) or Media Center is a convergence device that com-
bines a personal computer with a software application that supports video and 
music playback, and sometimes digital video recorder functionality. 
The emphasis is ours. Sometimes, indeed. A couple of years ago, media 
center systems were all the rage. Best Buy featured several models in every 
Sunday supplement section.The Dell and HP home pages had media center 
systems splashed all over them. NewEgg carried a couple of dozen models. 
Even Sears sold media center systems. And the focus was always on record-
ing TV programs. 
Nowadays, things are very different. We searched the Best Buy website for"me-
dia center" and "HTPC" and got no results. The Dell site lists no media center 
systems, and only one third-party add-on box to provide media center func-
tions when coupled to a standard PC. The HP website lists nothing, nor does 
the NewEgg site. You can still buy dedicated media center systems, but only 
from "boutique" vendors. What happened? 
First and foremost, media center systems were simply much too expensive for 
what they do, ranging in price from perhaps $800 at the low end up to $2,500 
or more. You could accomplish much the same things with a $150 DVD re-
1 
corder or a $300 TiVo, or you could simply rent a PVR from your satellite or 
i 
cable TV provider for a few bucks a month. Furthermore, TiVo, DVD record-
1 
ers, and satellite/cable PVRs are reasonably reliable appliances; ordinarily, they 
i 
Just Work. Media center PVR systems tended to crash, fail to record scheduled 
1 
programs, and otherwise fall down on the job. 
So, why bother to include a chapter on building a media center system? Be-
i 
cause PVR functions were never anything more than a distraction from the real 
purpose of a media center system: centralizing your home media storage and 
j 
making your media easy to access from anywhere in your home. 
But what if you also want to record television programs? In that case, our best 
advice is: 
• If your television service is delivered by digital cable or satellite and you 
want PVR functions, rent or purchase a PVR box from your cable or satel-
lite provider. If your cable or satellite receiver provides dual outputs and 
your television has dual inputs, you can instead use a DVD recorder, with 
or without a hard drive for extended recording time. Current U.S. law 
mandates that any television device that includes a tuner must include 
an ATSC digital tuner, so a DVD recorder may have no tuner, only a digital 
tuner, or both analog and digital tuners. 
• If you have analog cable TV service, you'll probably be happy with a DVD 
recorder, but those are becoming increasingly harder to find. Inexpensive 
cable/satellite PVR boxes are driving them from the market. 
• If, like an increasing number of people, you have "cut the cable" and de-
pend on over-the-air DTV, purchase a DVD recorder with an ATSC tuner. 
Brian Bilbrey Comments 
As long as the TV provider PVR works 
just fine. My wife Marcia hardly ever 
watches "live" TV, but has 
many 
hours of programming 
recorded 
each week that can be easily fast-
forwarded through the mercantile 
segments of each 
program. 
206 
Chapter 6 

Determining Functional Requirements 
Determining Functional Requirements 
For this third iteration, we were determined to design a media center system 
that fit our actual needs, rather than those of some hypothetical "average" 
reader. By following our thought process, you should be able to come up with 
a media center system configuration that fits your needs as well. 
We've never really needed our media center system to include TV recording 
functions, and it's becoming increasingly obvious that many other people 
don't, either. So, we'll design this system to focus on pure media center func-
tions. If we need to record TV programs, we'll use one of the methods we listed 
in the previous section, and we'll assume that you will, too. 
Here's the list of requirements we came up with: 
Video output requirements 
Obviously, the low resolution of our current 27"analog television severely 
constrains what we can do with the system. It was about time to replace 
our old TV anyway, so we checked Costco to see what TVs were selling for 
nowadays. We were surprised to find that we could buy a pretty reason-
able42"HDTV with full 1080p support for $600, so for design purposes we 
assumed that would be our media center system display. 
HDTV 1080p resolution is actually 1920x1080, so we'll need to make sure 
our video adapter can drive the display at that resolution. We'll also need 
to verify that the outputs on the media center system match the inputs 
on the TV, which are HDMI/HDCP times four for video, and SP/DIF digital 
optical plus stereo in for audio. 
Watching DVD videos 
We currently watch rental DVDs using a standard Panasonic DVD player, 
which the media center system will replace. We don't currently own or 
rent Blu-ray discs, but we want to make sure that our media center system 
can be easily upgraded to support Blu-ray in the future. 
Rather than handling the physical discs, we want to rip our collection of 
purchased DVDs to the hard drive so that we can watch any of them just 
by pointing and clicking. That means we'll need plenty of disk space. We 
want sufficient storage for 500+ DVDs. Allowing additional capacity for 
music and other files means we'll want perhaps 4 TB of disk space in our 
media center system. 
Watching web videos 
We find ourselves spending increasingly more of our viewing time watch-
ing web videos on YouTube and similar services. We don't care about sup-
port for ¡Tunes or other copy-protected video download services, but it's 
essential that this system make it easy to browse/watch unprotected web 
videos. 
Building a Media Center System 
207 

Determining Functional Requirements 
Listening to audio 
We've already converted our collection of about 1,000 audio CDs to 320 
kb/s VBR (variable bitrate) MP3 files, which Barbara listens to using MP3 
players in her SUV and at the gym. It makes sense to use the media cen-
ter system as the central storage location for these audio files, allowing 
them to be played back locally in the den or remotely on other systems in 
the house. We'd like the system to index our collection and offer the stan-
dard options for playback (full searchability by title/artist/genre, random 
shuffle, playlists, and so on). When we buy a new CD, we want to be able 
to pop it into the system and have the system automatically rip it, store it, 
and index it. 
Viewing images 
We have thousands of image files taken with our Pentax digital SLRs and 
stored in RAW (PEF) format. We'd like the system to store and index these 
files and make them readily searchable, viewable, and editable. It should 
also make it easy to produce hard copies, either by sending them to our 
color printer or by uploading them to the Walgreens website, which we 
use for most of our photo printing. 
Video editing/production 
Robert shoots a lot of videos for his YouTube channel, TheHomeScientist. 
Currently, he edits them on his main office system, but it would be nice 
to be able to do at least preliminary rough-cut editing while kicking back 
and relaxing on the sofa. Essentially, that means we'll need a faster proces-
sor, more memory, and a faster hard drive than we might otherwise use. 
We transfer videos from the camcorder to Robert's main office system, so 
FireWire support isn't necessary. 
Web browsing 
We want instant access to the Web. For example, while we're watching a 
DVD, we might want to pause the video and pop up a browser window 
to look up a cast member in the Internet Movie Database. Or, if we've just 
gotten back from walking the dog, we might want to check our email to 
see if our VoIP telephone service has emailed us a new voicemail message 
notification with an encapsulated audio file. 
Interface 
Our first thought was to use a standard media center "10-foot interface" 
with large text and icons and a handheld remote control for navigation. 
Then we realized that with a 42"display running at 1920x1080 resolution, 
we didn't need that; we could simply use a standard desktop interface, 
which will be easily readable at that size and distance. That means we 
won't need a handheld remote and receiver for the media center system. 
Instead, we can just use a wireless keyboard/mouse with sufficient range 
to reach across the room. 
208 
Chapter 6 

Hardware Design Criteria 
With the functional requirements determined, the next step was to establish 
design criteria for the media center system hardware. Here are the relative pri-
orities we assigned for our media center system. 
Here's the breakdown: 
Price 
Price is a consideration, but only in the sense that we don't want to waste 
money.This media center system will be our shared den PC, and we spend 
a lot of time in the den. Accordingly, we'll use only first-rate components 
in this system, and if spending a few extra dollars buys us additional per-
formance, reliability, or functionality, we'll spend the extra money. 
Reliability 
Reliability is moderately important for this system, but primarily because 
this system will run 24/7/365, and we don't want to have to stop what 
we're doing to fix it in the middle of an evening's viewing. Although the 
system will store as much as 4 TB of data, we won't use RAID. We'll keep 
copies of our audio and video collections on network or external hard 
drives, and if worse comes to horrible we can simply re-rip our audio CD 
and DVD collections. 
Size 
Size is a consideration for this system only in that it must fit the area avail-
able for it. We do want it to look like a standard home theater component 
rather than a computer. So, rather than using the smallest available case, 
we decided to choose from among cases designed for home theater use. 
A 
; 
1 Clearances Matter (and So Does Cooling) 
1 
i 
If your system will reside in an entertainment 
center, make sure that the case you 
1 
choose fits. In particular, if your entertainment 
center has an enclosed back, make 
i 
sure the case is not too deep. Allow room for video and power cables. Also, 
many 
i 
media center cases exhaust warm air through side or top vents, so it's important to 
i 
1 
maintain an inch or more of clearance near those vents to prevent 
overheating. 
1 
Even if the clearances are adequate, you also need to consider cooling. 
Evenacool-
i 
running PC produces much more heat than a typical A/V component, 
and is often 
i 
left running 24/7. Before you run your media center system for any extended period 
i 
1 
in an A/V rack, verify that the ventilation and cooling are sufficient to protect the 
system from 
overheating. 
Noise level 
Noise level is moderately important for this system. On one hand, when 
the system is being used to view a movie or listen to music, system noise 
is swamped by the sound coming from the speakers. On the other hand, 
because this system is always running, it must be reasonably quiet to 
avoid interfering with other uses of the room. On the gripping hand, it's 
Hardware Design Criteria 
Price 
-k-kikikik 
Reliability 
-k-k-kikik 
Size -k-kikikik 
Noise level 
* * * * i ? r 
Expandability 
-k-kikikik 
Processor performance -k-k-kikik 
Video performance -k-kikikik 
Disk capacity/performance -k-k-kikik 
Brian Bilbrey Comments 
That's just awful, IMO. Your time is far 
more valuable than a few terabytes 
of disk. I'd reconsider RAID, or have 
the system auto-rsync 
to an equiva-
lent amount of disk in 
somesystem 
at the other end of the house 
each 
night, 
overnight. 
In Our Defense 
Well, as we said, we do keep copies of 
our audio and video data on 
network 
or external drives (actually, we keep 
copies on multiple network 
and 
external drives). Worse would really 
have to come to horrible before we 
had to re-rip anything at all. 
Building a Media Center System 
209 

Component Considerations 
across the room from where we sit, so minor system noise is acceptable. 
Accordingly, we decided to use quiet standard components, but not go to 
extremes to minimize system noise. 
Expandability 
Expandability is relatively unimportant. Any new component we install 
will likely replace an old component, so we have no real need for spare 
drive bays, expansion slots, and so on. We want provision for at least one 
optical drive and two hard drives. We'll choose a motherboard with inte-
grated everything, so we could actually get along with no expansion slots 
at all. We do want to make provision for adding unrelated functions to the 
system, such as controlling a home weather station or functioning as an 
automated attendant and voicemail controller for our telephone system, 
but we can accommodate that requirement with at most one or two avail-
able expansion slots and an available USB port or two. 
Processor performance 
Processor performance is moderately important for our configuration, 
mainly because we'll be doing some video editing on this system. (The 
same would be true if we were using this system for PC gaming, which 
we won't, but you may.) That means we'll need a mainstream processor 
in this system. Otherwise, we'd have chosen a budget processor like the 
AMD Athlon II X2 240 Regor, which is sufficient for 1080p video playback, 
at half the price. 
Video performance 
Video performance is relatively unimportant for our configuration. Inte-
grated video is sufficient for everything we'll do with this system, includ-
ing video editing. We'll choose a motherboard that provides integrated 
video but also includes a PCI Express x16 slot, just in case at some point 
we decide to add a standalone video adapter. If you'll use your system for 
3D gaming, you'll want at least one PCI Express x16 expansion slot, and 
you'll want to make sure that the case and power supply you choose are 
adequate to support the video card(s). 
Disk capacity/performance 
Disk capacity and performance are moderately important, capacity more 
so than performance. We estimated our disk storage requirements to be 4 
TB. At the time we built this system, 2 TB drives were the largest available, 
so a pair of those fit our requirements nicely. Standard 7,200 RPM SATA 
hard drives are more than fast enough to keep up with anything we're 
likely to demand of this system. If after a couple of years we find ourselves 
a bit cramped for storage space, we'll simply swap out the pair of 2 TB 
drives for a pair of 4TB drives, or whatever size drives are then available. 
Component Considerations 
With our design criteria in mind, we set out to choose the best components for 
the media center system. The following sections describe the components we 
chose, and why we chose them. 
210 
Chapter 6 

Display 
Sharp LC-42SB48UT (http://www.sharpusa.com) 
The most prominent component of any media center system is, of course, the 
display. Our old analog 27" television obviously wasn't going to cut it as a me-
dia center display, so with some trepidation we visited the Costco website. 
Our two primary criteria were full HDTV 1080p support (1920x1080 resolution) 
and a 40" to 42" screen (about the largest we have room for). We expected the 
model we'd want would cost $1,500 or so. 
We were pleasantly surprised to find that 1080p support is now almost univer-
sal, and that 42" models were quite affordable. After carefully checking specifi-
cations and reviews, we settled on the Sharp LC-42SB48UT, the least expensive 
42" 1080p model that Costco offered. The price was only $600. 
The LC-42SB48UT lacks some of the bells-and-whistles features of more expen-
sive models—LED backlighting, picture-in-picture, picture-outside-picture, and 
so on—but it's more than adequate for our needs. The image quality is excel-
lent, and the unit provides a plethora of I/O connectors, including no fewer 
than four HDMI/HDCP ports. At 6.5 ms, the response time is fast enough even 
for most gaming. 
Obviously, you needn't buy a display if you already have a 1080p HDTV with 
the necessary inputs. If you have a 720p HDTV, make sure the video out on the 
motherboard or video adapter you choose supports 720p resolution. 
Case and Power Supply 
Antec NSK-2480 (http://www.antec.com) 
Antec Fusion Remote (http://www.antec.com) 
If appearance doesn't matter, you can, of course, build your media center sys-
tem in a standard computer case. But for many people, the critical Spousal-
Unit Approva (SUA) criterion (otherwise known as, "You're not putting that in 
my den!") demands a case that matches standard home-audio components 
in size and appearance as closely as possible. Barbara has a sense of humor 
about these things. Many spouses do not, so it's worth checking before you 
purchase a case. 
When we were designing our media center system, we visited NewEgg to 
see which media center cases they offered. There were 77 media center cases 
available, ranging from $40 to $60 no-name units we wouldn't use on a bet to 
a $600 Zalman unit that we wouldn't pay for on a bet. 
Decide first if you need a front-panel display and, if so, which type. Many me-
dia center cases use LED or LCD displays, which we think are less than ideally 
suited for that purpose. Some media center cases use a 'acuum-fluorescent 
display (VFD), which we prefer. Particularly if you intend to include PVR func-
tionality in your media center system and will use a 10-foot interface rather 
than a standard PC desktop interface, the display may be worth having. Oth-
erwise, we consider it a distraction, and an expensive one at that. 
Building a Media Center System 

Component Considerations 
Silver Cases 
The one thing we don't like about the 
NSK2480 
case is the 
silver/aluminum 
front panel, which is actually plastic. 
The problem is that it's impossible 
to match that front panel with the 
front bezel of any optical drive we've 
ever seen. We have three or four older 
optical drives with different "silver" 
bezels, but none of them are an exact 
match with any silver case we've ever 
seen. Apparently, others came to the 
same conclusion, 
because 
optical 
drives with silver bezels are now 
almost impossible to find. Actually, 
anything but black is now 
almost 
impossible to find, including the for-
merly common 
beige and 
somewhat 
less common 
white. 
The problem is that an 
"almost-
match"looks 
hideous. It's worse 
looking than a complete 
mismatch, 
such as using a black optical drive in 
a silver case. TheAntec Fusion case 
doesn't have this problem, because it 
has a flip-up optical drive cover that 
conceals the front bezel of the optica! 
drive. Alas, the NSK2480 
is avail-
able only in silver. IfAntec offered a 
black version, that's what we'd have 
chosen. This system is going to sit in 
our den, so we'll probably 
remove 
the front panel of the case and 
spray-paint it matte black or a dark 
charcoal gray. If necessary, we can 
also spray-paint 
the front bezel of the 
optical drive to match exactly. 
Most media center cases that include a front-panel display also include a 
remote-control module (an IR receiver and remote control). These are useful if 
you intend to use a 10-foot interface, but not needed if you use a standard PC 
desktop interface. Even if you want a remote control module, don't rule out an 
otherwise desirable case simply because it doesn't include one. You can pur-
chase a remote control and IR receiver separately that you may actually prefer. 
Although you can pay upward of $600 for a media center case, we set an ar-
bitrary $200 limit, including the power supply. Although we'd prefer to pay 
less, neither do we want something cheap and cheesy-looking in our den. For-
tunately, that price range includes numerous attractive models from Antec, 
Apex, Ark, Lian-Li, nMEDIAPC, Silverstone, Zalman, and other manufacturers. 
Antec has been the bang-for-the-buck leader in PC cases for a long time, so 
we weren't surprised as we culled down the field to find that our two finalists 
were both Antec cases. 
For a case with a front-panel display, our pick is the Antec Fusion Remote, 
which is available in either silver or black. This is essentially the same case we 
used in the second edition of this book. Sometimes, oldies really are goodies. 
The only real difference between the original Antec Fusion case and the ver-
sion sold today is that the original version included a power supply and the 
current model does not. Adding a $40 Antec Earth Watts 380W power supply 
brings the total cost to about $175, well within our price range. 
For a case without a front-panel display, our pick is the $110 Antec NSK-2480, 
which is available only in silver, unfortunately. This is essentially the same prod-
uct as the Fusion Remote, but with a 380W EarthWatts power supply included 
and the front-panel display, remote-control module, and front-panel FireWire 
port removed. The absence of the front-panel display frees up a second 5.25" 
external drive bay, which can be used for a second optical drive (such as a Blu-
ray reader) or for a third hard drive. 
Black Isn't Black 
You may assume that you could avoid this problem just by buying a black case and 
using an optical drive with a black bezel. Alas, black isn't black, at least when it 
comes to consumer products. "Black" comes in a huge variety of shades, from dark 
gray to truly black. There are warm blacks, cool blacks, and neutral blacks. Then 
there's the matter of texture. Even if their blacks are very similar, a matte drive looks 
odd in a semi-matte case, and vice versa. Chances are small that your optical drive 
bezel will match the front panel of your case, and even a slight mismatch 
is glaringly 
obvious. 
If you want your case and bezel to match, you're going to have to spray paint both 
of them. (We chose a very dark neutral charcoal gray in semi-matte finish.) So, as it 
turns out, the only real advantage 
to starting with a black case rather than an alumi-
num or silver model is that it's easier to cover with the paint (and scratches 
don't 
show up as well). 
212 
Chapter 6 

Component Considerations 
If you plan to run Windows 7 rather than Linux on your media center system, 
either of these cases is suitable for a light- to medium-duty gaming rig. You'll 
want to choose a video adapter that doesn't draw much current or produce 
much heat or noise, but numerous low- to midrange video adapters meet 
those criteria. 
Processor 
Intel Core ¡3-530 (http://www.intel.com) 
Most of the core functions of a media center system require relatively little pro-
cessing power. For playing back audio and video, even a dual-core Intel Atom 
processor would suffice, although it might be marginal if we later upgrade our 
media center system to Blu-ray. Also, the A/V output options on Atom processor/ 
motherboard combos are too limited for a media center system. Finally, because 
we want our media center system to function as a general-purpose PC, we de-
cided we needed at least a low-end mainstream processor. 
In that range, the Intel Core ¡3-530 is the obvious choice. It costs only $50 or 
so more than a budget CPU, and its performance approaches that of more ex-
pensive mainstream units. Because we intend to do some light video editing 
on this system, we actually considered using a Core ¡5 processor, but we con-
cluded that would be overkill. The video editing we'll do on this system will be 
just that—editing—rather than rendering, which is the real horsepower pig. 
Motherboard 
Intel BOXDH55TC (http://www.intel.com) 
Our choice oftheAntec Fusion case dictates a microATX motherboard. For our 
Core ¡3-530 processor, we wanted a Socket LGA 1156 motherboard with sup-
port for at least 8 GB (and, preferably, 16 GB) of dual-channel DDR3 memory. 
We'd prefer four memory slots rather than two. That way, if we install only two 
memory modules initially, we can upgrade the memory simply by adding a 
pair of DIMMs rather than removing existing memory. Support for Core ¡3 and 
Core ¡5 processors would be nice, just for future-proofing, although it's un-
likely we'll ever upgrade the processor in this system. 
Expansion slots aren't critical, because we want a board with integrated every-
thing. We'd like a PCI Express 2.X x16 expansion slot in case we ever need to 
install a separate video adapter. It would be nice to have at least one PCI ex-
pansion slot and one or two PCI Express xl slots, in case we ever decide to add 
an expansion card or two to support ancillary functions such as home control, 
a weather station, or a PC-based telephone system. 
We need at least three SATA connectors, one for the optical drive and two for 
the hard drives. SATA 6 Gb/s would be nice for future-proofing, but SATA 3 
Gb/s is all we really need. We'd also like at least one and preferably two eSATA 
ports, just in case at some point we decide to expand disk storage with exter-
nal hard drives. 
Drive It Until It Drops 
A subtle point is that a media center 
system is likely to be upgraded 
much 
less frequently than a desktop PC. 
Once a media center system is built, 
configured, connected, and tested, 
it should reasonably 
be expected to 
live quietly in the home-audio 
rack 
for several years between 
upgrades. 
Accordingly, 
when the choice is be-
tween "just enough"and 
"more than 
I'll ever need," we suggest you 
choose 
the latter. 
Building a Media Center System 
213 

Component Considerations 
USB 3.0 support would be nice, but in practical terms USB 3.0 peripherals are 
still thin on the ground. USB 2.0 is sufficient for our current needs and likely 
to remain so for the foreseeable future. If at some point we find a gotta-have 
USB 3.0 peripheral, we'll simply install a USB 3.0 expansion card. Because we 
transfer camcorder videos on Robert's main office system, a FireWire port isn't 
necessary. 
In terms of A/V outputs, it's essential that the motherboard provide at least 
an HDMI connector with HDCP support, and we'd like to have a dual-channel 
DVI-D connector as well. Standard 5.1 audio out is required, and we'd like to 
have a digital audio out as well. 
Entering all of these requirements into the NewEgg filtering system returned 
nine suitable boards, including models from ASUS, eVGA, GIGABYTE, Intel, and 
MSI. Any of those would be suitable, but we have a strong preference based 
on experience for motherboards from ASUS, GIGABYTE, and Intel. Over the 
years, we've come to use ASUS and GIGABYTE motherboards almost exclu-
sively for AMD-based systems. For Intel processors, we've found Intel mother-
boards to be rock-solid reliable, so for this system we chose the retail-boxed 
Intel DH55TC motherboard. 
Memory 
Crucial Ballistix CT2KIT25664BN1337 4 GB Kit (2 GBx2) 
0h ttp://www.crucial.com) 
The Intel DH55TC has four DDR3 memory slots and supports dual-channel 
memory operation with PC3-8500 or PC3-10600 modules in capacities up to 
4 GB per slot. Our original rule of thumb was 1 GB of RAM per processor. With 
the advent of multi-core processors, we modified that rule to 1 GB per core. 
Nowadays, with multi-core processors running multiple threads per core, our 
current rule is 1 GB per thread. On that basis, we decided to install 4 GB of 
system memory. 
When we checked the Crucial memory configurator to find modules compat-
ible with the DH55TC motherboard, we found that four 1 GB modules cost 
more than two 2 GB modules, so we chose a 4 GB kit with two 2 GB PC3-10600 
modules. Using only two DIMMs means we leave two memory slots free for 
future expansion. 
At the time we ordered, Crucial offered three PC3-10600 4 GB memory kits, 
one with its standard modules with CL9 memory timing, and the other with 
its high-performance Ballistix modules at CL7 or CL6 timings. The CL6 Ballistix 
kit cost 50% more than the standard kit, but the CL7 Ballistix kit was only $8 
more. We chose the CL7 Ballistix kit for its superior cooling and additional safe-
ty margin over the standard modules. (We'd probably have chosen the same 
memory for the mainstream system, but when we built that system the CL7 
Ballistix modules were selling at a significantly higher premium.) 
214 
Chapter 6 

Video Adapter 
Integrated 
Video output requirements for our media center system are relatively un-
demanding. We need a video adapter that can output 1920x1080 full HDTV 
resolution and that has an output connector compatible with our HDTV. The 
Intel integrated video provided by the DH55TC motherboard and Core ¡3-530 
processor meets both requirements, with power to spare. 
We'll connect our media center system to our HDTV using the High-Definition 
Multimedia Interface (HDMI) connector on the rear panel of the motherboard. 
That HDMI connector also supports High-Bandwidth Digital Content Protection 
(HDCP), an Intel DRM technology. Ordinarily, we'd have no truck with any DRM 
technology, but having HDCP support may come in handy in the future if we 
want to implement Blu-ray or another technology with embedded DRM that 
requires HDCP. 
The Intel DH55TC motherboard also provides a dual-link Digital Visual Interface-
Digital (DVI-D) connector. DVI-D is essentially an older version of HDMI that 
is electrically compatible but uses physically incompatible connectors. Most 
HDTV units that predate HDMI use DVI connectors, and DVI-to-HDMI adapter 
cables are readily available. 
Having that DVI-D connector also keeps our options open. It will be useful, 
for example, when we're building the media center system and installing 
software, because we can use any DVI-compatible flat-panel display in our 
workroom. Also, although we may be a bit paranoid, if we ever have conflicts 
or compatibility problems with the HDCP DRM on the HDMI output, we can 
simply disable it and use the DVI-D output to connect to our HDTV, using an 
inexpensive adapter cable. 
We'll run Linux on our media center system, but if we were running Windows 7 
and wanted to use the system for gaming, we'd install a separate video adapt-
er. The days when serious gaming demanded a $500 video card (or cards) 
that drew 120W are long gone (although some devoted PC gamers still in-
stall multiple high-end video adapters). Nowadays, you can play all but the 
most demanding 3D games at reasonable frame rates with a $75 to $125 video 
adapter. As of summer 2010, the best choice is a passively cooled (for mini-
mum noise) ATI RADEON HD 4670 or 4850 adapter. Obviously, make sure the 
card you choose has an HDMI output. 
Wireless Networking Adapter 
ASUS PCE-N13 802.11 b/g/n PCI Express wireless adapter 
(,http://www.asus.com) 
Although we plan eventually to connect the media center system to our 
lOOOBaseT (gigabit) wired Ethernet network, there's currently no Ethernet jack 
near the television. Running that cable will be a major project, because the tele-
vision sits against an insulated exterior wall with no access above the ceiling or 
Building a Media Center System 

Component Considerations 
below the floor. So, for the time being, we decided to install a wireless net-
working card in the media center system and simply make it a client on our 
wireless network. 
If we intended to use a wireless network adapter as a permanent solution, 
wed install an ASUS PCE-N13 802.11 b/g/n PCI Express wireless adapter, which 
sells for under $30, is very fast, and provides full WPA2 security. However, be-
cause we'll use wireless networking only until we have time to install an Ether-
net cable, we fished around in our spare parts closet and came up with an old 
D-Link DWL-G520 AirPlusXtremeG 802.11 b/g/g+ PCI wireless adapter. With 
nominal data rates up to 108 Mb/s and WPA support, it's both fast enough and 
secure enough for our temporary needs. And it didn't cost anything. 
Of course, as Barbara will tell you, Robert's"temporary"solutions have a way of 
becoming permanent, so perhaps we should have installed the ASUS 802.11 n 
adapter. Oh, well. That'll be easy enough to fix later. 
Hard Disk Drive(s) 
Seagate Barracuda XT ST32000641 AS 2TB (two) (http://www.seagate.com) 
You'll have some decisions to make when you choose a hard drive or drives for 
your media center system. If you're not storing much video (or if your video is 
stored remotely on a home server system), you can probably get by with one 
$50 mainstream desktop hard drive. At the other extreme, if you have a large 
DVD collection that you want to rip and store locally on your media center 
system, as we do, you'll need all the hard drive capacity you can get. 
When we were building our media center system, the largest drives available 
were 2 TB drives, the most expensive of which cost more than twice as much 
as the least expensive models. Why the large difference? Speed, amount of 
cache, and interface. The least expensive 2 TB drives run at 5,400 RPM, have 8 
MB, 16 MB, or 32 MB of cache, and use the SATA 3.0 Gb/s interface. Those that 
cost twice as much run at 7,200 RPM, have 64 MB of cache, and use the SATA 
6.0 Gb/s interface. 
At this point, the SATA 6.0 Gb/s interface is just marketing hype. Even the fast-
est current hard drives can't saturate the SATA 3.0 Gb/s interface, so doubling 
that interface speed is meaningless. But rotation speed and cache size are real 
issues, ones that may affect the performance of the media center system. 
For simple media playback, a 5,400 RPM drive is fast enough, and it has the 
advantages of being quieter and cooler-running than most 7,200 RPM drives. 
In this class, the standout choices are the Samsung SpinPoint and EcoGreen 
series drives and the Western Digital Caviar Green series drives. 
If you're doing more than just media playback on your media center system, 
or if it will also multitask—for example, serving multiple audio/video streams 
to other systems in your home—7,200 RPM drives are a better choice. They're 
more expensive, run hotter, and make more noise than 5,400 RPM models, but 
they're fast enough for disk-intensive tasks like serving multiple video streams 
or editing video. 
216 
Chapter 6 

Component Considerations 
The two real competitors in the high-performance 7,200 RPM segment are the 
Seagate Barracuda 7200.12 and Barracuda XT series and the Western Digital 
Caviar Black series. Performance-wise, they're very similar. The Seagate drives 
win some benchmark tests and the WD drives others. The Barracudas general-
ly outperform the Caviars in sequential read/write performance, which is more 
important than random read/write performance for a media center system. 
The Barracudas also run noticeably cooler and quieter than the Caviars, both 
of which are important for a media center system. 
So, which drives would we go for? For a media center system with moderate 
storage requirements, choose a Seagate Barracuda 7200.12 drive of moderate 
capacity. If you need massive storage capacity but 5,400 RPM performance is 
sufficient, install one or two 2 GB Samsung SpinPoint drives. If you need both 
massive capacity and high performance, install one or two 2 TB Seagate Bar-
racuda XT drives. 
What About Backup? 
Backing up a system with gobs of disk space is problematic. Optical discs don't hold 
enough data, and tape drives are very expensive. External hard drives are often the 
only realistic option. 
At first glance, backup may seem to be unimportant 
for a typical media center sys-
tem. After all, we're already backed up in the sense that all of the music and videos 
that we've ripped to our media center system are still on the original discs and all 
of our camcorder video is still on the original tapes. If a hard drive fails, we haven't 
actually lost any data. 
On the other hand, the thought of having tore-rip all those discs gives us pause. It 
takes only a few minutes to rip an audio CD or a DVD, but multiply that by a thou-
sand discs and you're looking at a serious time investment. So we decided to spring 
for a couple of extra 2 TB Barracuda XT drives, install them in external drive enclo-
sures, run a full data backup set from the media center system, and then 
periodically 
backup 
any new or changed 
files on the media center system. 
Optical Drive 
LiteOn ¡HAS424-98 DVD writer (http://us.liteonit.com/us/) 
At $25 or so, DVD writers are pretty much commodities nowadays, although 
over the last couple of years we've had the best experience with units made by 
ASUS, LiteOn, and Samsung. The day we ordered components for this system 
NewEgg offered free shipping on the LiteOn drive but not on the similar ASUS 
and Samsung units, so we ordered the LiteOn. 
Interestingly, the drive we ordered was retail-boxed. NewEgg also had the 
bare drive, but that day it was charging a dollar more for the bare drive than 
the retail-boxed model. Hmmm. 
Brian Bilbrey Comments 
OK. That makes me feel better. But 
detach them from the system 
and 
put them elsewhere, except for dur-
ing the once-a-month/week 
refresh 
cycle. 
Retail-Boxed Versus Bare Drives 
Ordinarily, a retail-boxed 
optical 
drive costs a few bucks more than a 
bare drive. For that extra money, you 
usually get mounting 
screws (be still, 
our throbbing hearts), a cheap SATA 
cable, and an OEM software disc. 
That software may include 
some 
Windows utilities (such as Light-
Scribe support for burning labels on 
LightScribe discs or a 
disc-quality 
scanner) and may or may not include 
a "Lite" version of Nero Burning 
ROM 
or some other disc burning 
software. 
If you run Windows and don't have 
disc burning software, or if you 
hap-
pen to need a SATA cable to install 
the drive, the retail-boxed 
version 
maybe 
a good deal. Otherwise, 
unless the price difference is tiny, buy 
the OEM (bare) drive. 
Building a Media Center System 
217 

Component Considerations 
Backup Hardware 
Antec Easy SATA (http://www.antec.com) 
SYBA SD-ENC50020 (http://www.syba.com) 
Seagate 3 TB FreeAgent GoFlex Desk (http://www.seagate.com) 
We actually installed no backup hardware in our media center system, be-
cause what little backup it requires can be done across our network. If you do 
need backup hardware for your media center system, there are three obvious 
alternatives: an internal hard drive docking station (like the Antec Easy SATA), 
an external hard drive docking station (like the SYBA SD-ENC50020), or a stan-
dard external hard drive (like the Seagate FreeAgent). 
Installing the Antec Easy SATA or a similar internal docking station requires a 
second 5.25" external drive bay, which is available with the Antec NSK-2480 
(and many other media center cases), but not with the Antec Fusion Remote. If 
you have an available 5.25"external drive bay, the Antec Easy SATA is both the 
cleanest and least expensive solution. It allows you to recycle older SATA hard 
drives, and its eSATA transfers are very fast. 
The SYBA SD-ENC50020 external hard drive docking station offers the same 
performance as the Antec Easy SATA for about the same price, but it supports 
two hard drives simultaneously at the expense of additional clutter. However, 
neither of the cases we recommend has an external eSATA port, let alone the 
two eSATA ports required by the SYBA unit to support dual drives. You can, of 
course, substitute a case (or motherboard) that does provide external eSATA 
connectors, but it's easy enough to solve the problem with the components 
we used. 
The SYBA unit includes two long eSATA cables, which have a standard SATA 
connector on one end and the special eSATA connector on the other. These 
cables can't be used on this system, because it has no eSATA connectors. The 
solution is simple. Just order an extra pair of standard SATA cables 18" to 24" 
long. Connect one end of each cable to a motherboard SATA port, run the 
cables out the back of the case, and connect them to the SYBA unit. Problem 
solved. 
If you prefer a standard external hard drive, any of the Seagate FreeAgent 
models is a good choice. In particular, we're looking forward to seeing the 3 TB 
Seagate FreeAgent GoFlex Desk, which had been announced but was not yet 
available when we were building this system. Obviously, we can recommend 
it only provisionally, since we haven't actually seen it yet, but the specifications 
and suggested retail pricing indicate that this external drive will offer a lot of 
bang for the buck. 
There is one obvious problem, though, at least for our chosen media center 
configuration. The 3 TB Seagate external unit can use any of three interfaces: 
USB 2.0, USB 3.0, and FireWire 800. We don't have either of the latter two on 
our media center system (although you may choose a motherboard that pro-
vides one or both of those), and USB 2.0 is simply too slow. Filling a 3 TB drive 
at a typical USB 2.0 data rate of 25 to 30 MB/s would require more than a full 
day. 
218 
Chapter 6 

Component Considerations 
If your own media center configuration has USB 3.0 or FireWire available, the 
GoFlex 3 TB unit is a practical backup choice. Of course, you can also choose 
an external hard drive that uses an eSATA interface and run one or two SATA 
cables out the back of the case, as we recommended for the SYBA unit. 
Keyboard and Mouse 
Microsoft Wireless Desktop 3000 (http://www.microsoft.com) 
The primary requirement here is a wireless keyboard/mouse combo that works 
reliably at across-the-room distances. Most wireless keyboards and mice de-
signed for desktop use have a range of a meter (40") or so at most. Among the 
units with sufficient range, we think the standout choice is the Microsoft Wire-
less Desktop 3000. At a street price of around $60, the Wireless Desktop 3000 
is inexpensive, well built, and has a rated range of 30 feet. It uses alkaline bat-
teries rather a rechargeable battery, but battery life is rated at eight months. 
Speakers 
Home audio speakers: 
Logitech Z-5500 speaker system (http://www.logitech.com) 
Logitech X-540 speaker system 
Most people who build a media center system install it in their home enter-
tainment center and connect the PC audio outputs to an existing receiver or 
amplifier. Obviously, if you already have a good receiver and speakers, you 
might as well use them. 
Of course, not everyone has a suitable receiver and speaker set. When we built 
the home theater PC system for the first edition of this book, we'd just de-
cided to move our elderly JVC receiver and speakers to the downstairs guest 
suite and replace them with a high-powered PC speaker system. At that time, 
the best PC speaker set available was the Logitech Z-680 5.1 speaker system, 
which we used then and still use now. 
Several years ago, Logitech replaced the Z-680 with the Z-5500, which has 
similar specifications and equal sound quality. The street price of the Z-5500 
is $375 or so, considerably less than the price of a traditional home audio re-
ceiver and speakers with comparable power and sound quality. The Z-5500 
incorporates four satellite speakers for left/right and front/rear audio, a center-
channel speaker, and a low-frequency emitter (LFE) subwoofer. The satellite 
speakers are rated at 62W RMS each, the center-channel speaker at 69W RMS, 
and the LFE at a massive 188W RMS, for a total RMS output of 505W. 
The Z-5500 speaker system includes Dolby Digital & DTS hardware decoding 
and isTHX certified. We confess that we don't understand what all that means, 
but our audiophile friends tell us those are Good Things. And, although admit-
ting it may label us as audio barbarians, we have to say that the audio from our 
older Z-680 speaker system still sounds as good to us as anything else we've 
listened to, and the Z-5500 audio quality is just as good. 
PeakVersus RMS 
Two methods are commonly 
used to 
specify the output power of ampli-
fiers. Peak power is often specified 
for computer speakers, 
particularly 
inexpensive ones, but is essentially 
meaningless. 
Peak power 
indicates 
the maximum 
instantaneous 
power 
an amplifier can deliver, but it says 
nothing about how much power it 
can deliver continuously. 
The root 
mean square (RMS) power rating is 
more useful because it specifies how 
much power the amplifier can deliver 
continuously. 
Building a Media Center System 
219 

Building the Media Center System 
Limited Choices 
Several years ago, we could have 
chosen from among dozens of 5.1, 
6.1,7.1, and even 8.1 PC speaker sets 
from a dozen or more 
manufacturers. 
The decline of PC gaming 
changed 
that. Nowadays, 
your choices are 
limited to 2.0,2.1, and5.1 sets, and 
Logitech is the only 
mainstream 
manufacturer 
that still offers a high-
power 5.1 system. 
Choosing a Work Surface 
We build systems on the kitchen 
table because it provides plenty of 
workroom, 
easy access from the 
front and rear, and plenty of light, 
all of which are important. 
Barbara 
isn't happy about having her kitchen 
table thus occupied, but when 
Robert 
explained that the alternative 
was 
using her antique dining room table, 
she grudgingly 
agreed that the 
kitchen table was the better choice. 
Whatever location you choose to 
build your system, make sure it 
provides sufficient workspace, 
easy 
access, and good lighting. 
Spousal 
approval is optional, but highly 
recommended. 
If the Z-5500 speaker set is a bit expensive for your budget, consider the Logi-
tech X-540, which costs about $90, provides 70W RMS total power, and has 
very good sound quality for the price. Or you can, of course, simply use the 
speakers built into your HDTV. 
Component Summary 
Table 6-1 summarizes our component choices for the media center system. 
Table6-1. Bill of materials for media center system 
Component 
Product 
Display 
Sharp LC-42SB48UT 42" 1080p HDTV 
Case 
Antec Fusion Remote or Antec NSK-2480 
Power supply 
Antec EarthWatts 380 
Processor 
Intel Core ¡3-530 
Motherboard 
Intel DH55TC 
Memory 
Crucial Ballistix CT2KIT25664BN1337 4GB Kit (2 GBx2) 
Video adapter 
Integrated or RADEON HD 4670/4850 
Wireless network adapter 
ASUS PCE-N13 802.11 b/g/n wireless adapter (see text) 
Hard drives 
Seagate Barracuda XT ST32000641 AS 2TB (two) 
Optical drive 
LiteOn ¡HAS424-98 DVD writer 
Backup hardware 
Antec Easy SATA hard drive docking station (see text) 
Seagate 3 TB FreeAgent GoFlex Desk (see text) 
SYBA SD-ENC50020 Hard Drive Docking Station (see text) 
Keyboard and mouse 
Microsoft Wireless Desktop 3000 
Speakers 
Home audio speakers or Logitech Z-5500 speaker system 
HDMI cable 
Nippon Labs Premium High Performance HDMI1.3-6 
Remote control 
Logitech 915-000132 Universal Harmony300 Remote 
Building the Media Center System 
Figure 6-1 shows the core components of the media center system. At the top 
left of the image, the Antec Fusion Remote media center case sits atop the 
Antec NSK-2480 media center case. (When we shot this image, we still hadn't 
decided which case to use.) On the left are the Crucial Ballistix 4 GB memory 
kit and Nippon Labs HDMI cable, with a pair of 2 TB Seagate Barracuda XT 
hard drives to their right. The LiteOn optical drive and the Intel Core ¡3-530 
processor sit atop the Intel DH55TC motherboard, with the Logitech Universal 
Harmony 300 remote in front of them. The Sharp 42" 1080p HDTV we bought 
for our media center display wouldn't fit in the picture. 
220 
Chapter 6 

Building the Media Center System 
Figure 8-1. Core media center system components, 
awaiting 
construction 
Before you proceed, verify that you have all of the necessary components. 
Open each box and confirm that all items on the packing list are present. 
Sequencing the Build 
You needn't follow the exact se-
quence we describe when building 
your own system. For example, some 
people prefer to install the drives 
before installing the motherboard, 
while others prefer the converse. The 
best sequence may depend on the 
case you use and the 
components 
you are installing. For example, some 
case and motherboard 
combinations 
make it difficult or impossible to con-
nect the ATX power cable after drives 
have been installed. Use your best 
judgment while building the system 
and you won't go far wrong. 
Preparing the Case 
To begin preparing the Antec NSK-2480 case, place it on a flat surface and re-
move the single thumbscrew at the top rear, as shown in Figure6-2.Then slide 
the top panel to the rear and lift it off, as shown in Figure 6-3. 
- A 
. 
i Avoid Fireworks 
' 
i 
Before you do anything else, make sure that the power supply is set to the correct 
1 
input voltage. Some power supplies, including the EarthWatts 380 unit bundled with 
i 
the Antec NSK-2480 case, autodetect input voltage and set themselves 
automati-
i 
cally. Other power supplies require moving a slide switch to indicate the correct input 
i 
1 
voltage. 
1 
If your mains voltage is 115V and the power supply is set for 230V, no damage 
oc-
i 
curs. The system simply won't start. However, if your mains voltage is 230V and the 
i 
power supply expects 115V, you will see a very short and expensive fireworks show 
i 
1 
the first time you plug in your new system. The motherboard, processor, 
memory, 
expansion cards, and drives will all be burnt to a crisp within a fraction of a second. 
Building a Media Center System 
221 

Building the Media Center System 
Remove the optical drive bay by sliding it toward the rear of the case, pivoting 
it upward, and then lifting it free of the chassis, as shown in Figure 6-4. 
With the optical drive bay removed, you have access to the bundle of cables 
from the power supply. Remove the AC power cord and set it aside. Remove 
the cable wraps that bundle the power supply cables, as shown in Figure 6-5, 
and straighten out the various cables. 
Figure 8-4. Remove 
the optical drive bay 
Figure 8-5. Remove 
the cable tie that secures 
the bundle of cables 
from the power 
supply 
Like most cases, the Antec NSK-2480 comes with a generic rear-panel I/O 
shield. Generic I/O shields don't fit any motherboard we've ever used, so we're 
not sure why case makers bother to include them. Removing the generic I/O 
shield simply adds one more task. 
To remove the generic I/O shield, press gently inward on it with a screwdriver 
handle, as shown in Figure 6-6. Don't worry about bending the I/O shield, be-
cause you'll discard it anyway. Do take care not to bend the cutout area of the 
case, which would make it very difficult to install the proper I/O shield. Sup-
port the edge of the cutout area with your fingers, and press on the generic 
I/O shield until it snaps out. 
222 
Chapter 6 

Building the Media Center System 
Every motherboard comes with a custom I/O shield that matches the ports on 
its rear I/O panel. The included I/O shield is nearly always correct, but we have 
on occasion received a motherboard with an incorrect I/O shield. Before 
you install the custom I/O shield supplied with the motherboard, compare 
it against the motherboard I/O panel, as shown in Figure 6-7. If you received 
the wrong I/O shield, contact the motherboard manufacturer to request a 
replacement. 
Figure 8-8. Press gently on the generic I/O shield until it snaps out 
Figure 8-/. Compare the custom I/O shield with the I/O panel of 
the motherboard 
To install the custom I/O shield, first make sure that it's oriented properly rela-
tive to the back-panel motherboard ports. Working from inside the case, align 
the I/O shield with the cutout. Using a screwdriver handle, start at one corner, 
as shown in Figure 6-8, and press gently until the I/O shield snaps into place. 
Run the screwdriver handle around the edges and corners of the I/O shield to 
ensure that it's fully seated. 
After seating the I/O shield, hold the motherboard aligned in position directly 
over the case. Compare the positions of the motherboard mounting holes 
with the standoff mounting positions in the case. The Intel DH55TC has eight 
mounting holes. The Antec NSK-2480 case has six standoffs preinstalled, all of 
which correspond to mounting hole positions in the motherboard. Locate and 
note the two positions that require standoffs to be installed. 
Install a brass standoff in each required position, and then use the mother-
board again to verify that a standoff is installed at each of the required eight 
positions. Although you can screw in the standoffs using just your fingers, it's 
much easier and faster to use a 5 mm nut driver, as shown in Figure 6-9. Be 
careful not to overtorque the standoffs as you install them. The standoffs are 
made of soft brass, and the motherboard tray, although steel, is relatively thin. 
Applying too much torque can strip the standoff or the screw hole. Finger-
tight is good enough, plus maybe an extra quarter turn or so. 
A 
Better Safe Than Sorry 
Make absolutely sure that every 
standoff installed corresponds to 
a motherboard mounting hole. An 
extra standoff can contact the bot-
tom of the motherboard, causing it 
to short and possibly damaging 
or 
destroying the motherboard 
and 
other 
components. 
Building a Media Center System 
223 

Building the Media Center System 
Figure 8-8. Press gently to seat the custom 
I/O shield 
Figure 8-3. Install a standoff In each position that corresponds 
to 
a motherboard 
mounting 
hole 
Preparing the Motherboard 
The next step is to prepare the motherboard by installing the processor, CPU 
cooler, and memory. Although some case and motherboard manuals suggest 
installing these components after the motherboard has been installed in the 
case, it's easier and often safer for the motherboard to mount the processor, 
cooler, and memory first. 
Installing the processor 
To begin, locate the processor socket. Ground yourself by touching the chas-
sis, and then release the metal socket lever by pressing it down and away from 
the socket body. Once the catch releases, lift the lever until it's fully vertical. 
Lifting the lever raises the load plate and exposes the socket. Snap out the 
black plastic socket cover and set it aside. Don't discard the socket cover. If 
you ever remove the processor from the socket, you should replace the socket 
cover to protect the socket until another processor is installed. 
Ground yourself to the power supply or chassis frame, and then open the 
processor package. Snap off the black plastic processor cover and set it aside. 
Once again, store the processor cover in case you ever need to remove the 
processor. 
The processor and socket are keyed to prevent the processor from being in-
serted backward into the socket. The gold triangle visible in Figure 6-10 on 
the left corner of the processor matches a beveled corner on the processor 
socket. The processor and socket are also keyed with two notches on the edge 
of the processor that mate with two protruding nubs on the inside edge of 
the socket. Make sure the processor and socket are aligned properly and then 
drop the processor straight into the socket, as shown in Figure 6-10.The pro-
cessor should seat completely without you needing to apply any pressure. If 
it doesn't, lift the processor from the socket, recheck the alignment, and try 
again. 
224 
Chapter 6 

Building the Media Center System 
With the socket lever still vertical, lower the load plate, as shown in Figure 6-11. 
Figure 8-10. Align the processor 
with the socket and then drop the 
Figure 8-11. Lower the load plate into the closed 
position 
processor 
into the 
socket 
Lower the processor lever to cam the load plate into locked position. Make 
sure the notch at the front of the load plate latches under the shoulder screw 
cap, as shown in Figure 6-12. 
Press the processor lever flush with the motherboard and snap it into place 
under the load plate latch, as shown in Figure 6-13. 
Figure 8-1H. Lower the processor 
lever to cam the load plate into 
Figure 8-13. Press the processor 
lever flush with the 
motherboard 
locked position 
and snap it into the load plate latch 
Examine the surface of the processor for fingerprints, dust, or other contami-
nants. If any are present, polish the surface of the processor with a clean paper 
towel before you proceed to installing the CPU cooler. (If you're reinstalling the 
CPU cooler, make sure to remove all of the old thermal compound. You can use 
a hair dryer to soften it and make it easier to rub off.) 
Building a Media Center System 
225 

Building the Media Center System 
Installing the CPU cooler 
Remove the CPU cooler from its packaging and look at the bottom of the 
cooler. The gray patches on the copper bearing surface of the cooler, visible in 
Figure 6-14, are thermal compound.This thermal compound melts each time 
the processor warms up, filling the voids between the surfaces of the proces-
sor and the base of the heatsink to ensure good heat transfer. If any of those 
patches are damaged, carefully rub off any remaining thermal compound, polish 
the surface of the heatsink base, and apply an approved thermal paste. 
The CPU cooler mounts to the motherboard using four posts that protrude 
through matching holes in the motherboard. Because the posts and holes are 
in a square pattern, you can install the CPU cooler in any of four orientations. 
It doesn't matter which you use, so we generally install the CPU cooler so that 
the CPU fan power lead has just enough slack to reach the CPU fan power 
header pins on the motherboard. 
You can't install the CPU cooler with the motherboard on a hard surface because, 
when seated, the posts protrude slightly on the back side of the motherboard. 
Placing the motherboard on a soft surface (such as packing foam) allows the 
posts to penetrate the motherboard and lock into position. If you use foam, 
make sure to keep the antistatic bag the motherboard was packaged in be-
tween the motherboard and the foam. Or, you can do what we usually do, 
which is to support the motherboard at a slight angle to provide clearance for 
the posts as we press the posts into place. 
To install the CPU cooler, align the tips of its four posts with the four mounting 
holes in the motherboard. Once all four posts are aligned, press down firmly 
on one post, as shown in Figure 6-15, until you feel it snap into place. 
Figure 8-14. Verify that the thermal compound 
on the copper 
Figure 8-15. Align each CPU cooler post with a mounting 
hole and 
heatsink base is undamaged 
press down until it snaps 
into place 
After you seat the posts, use a flat-blade screwdriver to turn the top of each 
post in the direction of the arrow to lock it into position, as shown in Figure 
6 - 1 6 . 
226 
Chapter 6 

Building the Media Center System 
Finally, connect the CPU fan power cable to the CPU fan power header pins 
on the edge of the motherboard, as shown in Figure 6-17. This connector is 
keyed. Make sure the slot in the cable connector aligns with the projecting tab 
on the motherboard header-pin set, and then slide the cable connector onto 
the pins until it seats. 
Figure 8-18. Lock each CPU cooler post by turning the head In the 
direction of the arrow 
Figure 8-1/. Connect 
the CPU fan power cable to the CPU fan 
power header 
pins 
Installing memory 
The next step is to install the memory modules. The DH55TC motherboard 
accepts 240-pin DDR3 memory modules. Installing memory modules in pairs 
enables dual-channel memory operation for faster memory performance. 
If you are installing two identical memory modules, install them in the two 
blue slots. If you are installing two matched pairs of memory modules that 
differ in capacity, install the higher-capacity pair in the two blue slots and the 
lower-capacity pair in the black slots. Although it will reduce overall memo-
ry performance, you can install three memory modules if two of them are a 
matched pair. In that case, install the matched pair in the two blue slots, and 
the third module in either black slot. 
In any case, fill the slots nearest the processor first and work forward toward 
the edge of the board. Ground yourself by touching the power supply or chas-
sis frame before you handle a memory module. To install the first module, po-
sition it vertically over the appropriate slot. Align both edges of the module 
with the slots in the vertical posts on the sides of the slot. DDR3 DIMMs are 
keyed with an off-center notch on the contact edge of the DIMM. Make sure 
this notch aligns with the corresponding post in the slot, and then slide the 
DIMM into position, as shown in Figure 6-18. 
After you've aligned the module properly, place one thumb on each side of 
the module and press down firmly until it snaps into place, as shown in Figure 
6-19. Repeat this procedure to install any remaining DIMMs. 
Building a Media Center System 
227 

Building the Media Center System 
Ron Morse Comments 
/ like to use a thick towel or some-
thing that's larger than the mother-
board just in case it moves around a 
bit. The little component lead stubs 
on the back of a motherboard 
can do 
anumberon 
the paint finish on the 
exposed edge of the case. 
Installing the Motherboard 
Installing the motherboard is the most time-consuming part of the build, be-
cause there are so many cables to be connected. Take your time during this 
phase, because it's important that all of the cables be connected properly. 
Connecting front-panel switch and indicator cables 
Ordinarily, we install the motherboard in the case before connecting cables 
to it, but this combination of motherboard and case has so little clearance that 
we decided to connect the cables first. If you're using the Intel DH55TC mother-
board and Antec NSK-2480 case, we recommend you do the same. To do so, 
route the front-panel switch, indicator, and port cables into the motherboard 
chamber and out the top of the case. Place the protective plastic bag that con-
tained the motherboard on top of the chassis over the motherboard chamber, 
and balance the motherboard on top of the chassis. 
The only essential front-panel connector is the power switch, which must be 
connected before you can start the system. You'll probably also want to con-
nect the reset switch and the hard disk activity LED (shown in Figure 6-20). If 
you are using a different case, it may have front-panel cables for which there 
are no corresponding header-pin sets on the motherboard. Conversely, a 
motherboard may have header-pin sets for which the case has no correspond-
ing cables. For example, the Intel DH55TC motherboard has pins for a power 
LED, for which the Antec NSK-2480 case does not provide a cable. (The NSK-
2480 power LED connects directly to a Molex connector from the power supply. 
When the system is turned on, the power LED is illuminated.) 
Figure 8-18. Position the memory module with the notch aligned 
with the socket tab 
Figure 8-18. Press straight down with both thumbs until the mod-
ule snaps into place 
228 
Chapter 6 

Building the Media Center System 
Bright Lights 
Connecting front-panel audio 
The NSK-2480 front-panel audio cable terminates in two 
connectors, one labeled HD AUDIO and the other FP'97. 
The motherboard HD audio front-panel audio connector 
is located near the PCI expansion slot and is keyed with 
a missing pin. The audio cable HD audio connector has 
a corresponding blocked hole, to prevent the connector 
from being installed backward. Align the HD audio cable 
connector over the HD audio header-pin set on the mother-
board, and press the cable connector straight down until 
it seats completely, as shown in Figure 6-21. 
Figure 8-21. Connect 
the front-panel audio cable to the 
mother-
board HD audio 
connector 
Figure 8-20. Connect 
the front-panel switch and indicator 
cables 
Before you begin connecting front-panel cables, examine the connectors. 
Each should be labeled descriptively (POWER SW, RESET SW, HDD LED, and 
so on). Match those descriptions with the front-panel connector header pins 
on the motherboard to make sure you connect the correct cables to the ap-
propriate pins. The power and reset switch cables are not polarized and may 
be connected either way. LED cables may or may not be polarized, but if you 
connect a polarized LED cable backward the worst that happens is that the 
LED won't light up. Most Antec cases use white wires for ground and colored 
wires for signal. Some cases use black wires for ground, and a few use green. 
When you're connecting front-panel cables, try to get it right the first time, but 
don't worry too much about getting it wrong. Other than the power switch 
cable, which must be connected properly for the system to start, none of the 
other front-panel switch and indicator cables are essential, and connecting 
them incorrectly won't damage the system. 
The NSK-2480 
power LED and 
HDD 
LED are quite bright. They're 
not 
intrusive in a normally 
lit room or 
if you're not looking directly at the 
system, but in a typical home 
theater 
setup the lights are often 
dimmed 
and the media center system is 
usually quite close to the television. 
Under those conditions, 
you may find 
the power and HDD LEDs 
distracting. 
For that reason, some builders 
don't 
bother to connect 
them. The only 
downside 
to doing that is that if you 
later decide you want those 
indica-
tors working, you may have some dif-
ficulty getting the cables 
connected. 
We suggest 
that you connect 
the 
power and HDD LEDs initially. If you 
decide they're too bright, you 
can 
disconnect 
them easily. 
Building a Media Center System 
229 

Building the Media Center System 
Connecting front-panel USB ports 
The Antec NSK-2480 case provides two front-panel USB ports with cables that 
terminate in one Intel-standard dual-USB connector. Locate that cable, which 
is labeled USB, and connect it to one of the three dual-USB motherboard con-
nectors located near the left front edge of the motherboard near the SATA 
ports, as shown in Figure 6-22. The motherboard connector is keyed with a 
missing pin that corresponds to a blocked hole on the cable connector, so it's dif-
ficult to connect the cable incorrectly. (However, it is possible to offset the cable 
connector against the motherboard connector and still seat the connector.) Note 
that we chose to use the FP USB 2 header-pin set, which can instead be used to 
connect an internal Intel SSD. We have no plans to install such a drive, and this 
header-pin set is perfectly usable for a standard USB front-panel connection. 
Figure S-HH. Connect 
the front-panel 
USB cable to a motherboard 
dual-USB 
connector 
Seating and securing the motherboard 
To begin, lower the motherboard into the case, as shown in Figure 6-23, with 
the front edge of the motherboard slightly raised. Carefully align the back-
panel I/O connectors with the corresponding holes in the I/O shield, and slide 
the motherboard toward the rear of the case as you lower the motherboard 
to horizontal. This process is hard to describe, but easy to do. The goal is to get 
the back-panel ports on the motherboard low enough that they come into 
contact with the I/O shield grounding tabs, without those tabs intruding into 
the ports themselves. (The Ethernet grounding tab is usually the problem; 
we've been known to bend that tab slightly upward to facilitate installing the 
motherboard and then bend it backdown into contact afterward.) 
Maintain slight rearward pressure on the motherboard to keep it in contact 
with the I/O shield. Examine the rear I/O panel to make sure that none of the 
I/O shield grounding tabs intrude into a port connector. More than once, 
230 
Chapter 6 

Building the Media Center System 
we've mounted a motherboard, inserted all the screws, and connected all the 
cables before we noticed that there was a metal tab sticking into one of our 
USB or LAN ports. Before you secure the motherboard in place, verify that the 
back-panel I/O connectors are mated cleanly with the I/O shield, as shown in 
Figure 6-24. A bright flashlight can be very helpful here. 
Figure 8-23. Slide the motherboard into position 
Figure 8-24. Make sure the back-panel connectors mate cleanly 
with the I/O shield 
Once the motherboard is positioned properly and you have verified that the 
back-panel I/O port connectors are mated cleanly with the I/O shield, insert 
a screw through each motherboard mounting hole into the corresponding 
standoff, as shown in Figure 6-25. For the first two or three screws, you may 
have to apply pressure with one hand to keep the holes and standoffs aligned 
while driving the screw with the other. 
Figure 8-25. Securing the motherboard 
At times it's difficult to get all the holes and standoffs aligned. If that occurs, 
insert two screws into easily accessible positions, but don't tighten the screws 
completely. You should then be able to force the motherboard into complete 
alignment, with all holes matching the standoffs. At that point, insert one or 
two more screws into standoffs and tighten them completely. Finish mounting 
Building a Media Center System 
231 

Building the Media Center System 
the motherboard by inserting screws into all the standoffs and tightening 
them. Don't put excessive force on the screws, or you may crack the mother-
board. Finger-tight is plenty, plus at most a quarter turn. 
,
-
A 
1 Playing Both Ends Against 
i the Middle 
i 
Both ends of a SATA cable are 
i 
identical in terms of pin 
assignments 
' 
and keying, so it usually 
doesn't 
i 
matter which end you connect to 
i 
the motherboard 
and which to the 
1 
drive. Many SATA cables have simple 
i 
plastic connectors on both ends, 
i 
but some, including those 
supplied 
1 
with some Intel motherboards, 
have 
i 
metal latching connectors 
on one or 
i 
both ends that are designed to lock 
1 
the cable to the connector. 
1 
If you subsequently 
remove such a 
i 
cable, make sure to press the latch to 
i 
disconnect it before you pull the cable, 
1 
or you may damage the 
motherboard 
i 
connector and/or the cable. Back in 
i 
the days when latching SATA con-
1 
nectars were still very 
uncommon, 
i 
we once pulled a SATA cable from 
i 
a motherboard 
without 
watching 
1 
what we were doing. We heard a 
, 
loud cracking noise. Fortunately, it 
i 
was the cable we damaged 
rather 
1 
than the motherboard, 
but it might 
easily have been otherwise. 
Screwed 
Although 
the problem is more common 
with cheap motherboards 
and cases, even 
if you're using high-quality 
components 
it can be difficult, if not impossible, to get 
all of the mounting 
holes aligned with the standoffs. There simply isn't much 
slack 
to work with. With high-quality 
components, 
everything usually lines up perfectly 
(although it may take some pressure). But if you find yourself unable to insert all 
of the motherboard 
mounting 
screws, don't despair. We like to get all the screws 
installed, both for physical support and to make sure all of the grounding 
points on 
the motherboard 
are grounded, but getting most of them installed—say 
sixor seven 
of the eight—is 
normally good 
enough. 
If you are unable to install all of the screws, take the time to remove the brass 
stand-
offs where no screw will be installed. A misaligned 
standoff may short 
something 
out. In situations where we couldn't use all of the brass standoffs because of align-
ment issues, we have been known to trim double chopsticks to length and install 
them as substitute standoffs. They're the right thickness to support the 
motherboard 
and are made of non-conducting 
wood. 
It's particularly important to provide some support for the motherboard 
near the 
expansion 
slots, where significant pressure may be applied when installing cards. If 
the motherboard 
is unsupported, pressing down on it may crack it. 
Connecting SATA data cables 
The next step is to connect the SATA data cables for the hard drives and the 
optical drive. The Intel DH55TC motherboard provides a cluster of six SATA 
connectors near the left front corner of the motherboard. Four of these, color-
coded black, are standard SATA data connectors. Two, color-coded red, are 
eSATA connectors, which may be used to connect standard SATA devices as 
well as eSATA devices. Intel properly labels the four standard connectors SATA 
0 through SATA 3. (Some motherboards begin numbering at SATA 1.) We'll 
connect our two hard drives to SATA ports 0 and 1, and our optical drive to 
SATA port 2. 
Locate three SATA data cables, which may be supplied with the motherboard, 
the drives, or both. Connect those SATA data cables to SATA ports 0, 1, and 2, 
as shown in Figure 6-26. Align the cable connector with the motherboard con-
nector, making sure that the L-shaped keys on both connectors are oriented 
properly, and then press the cable connector straight down until it seats in the 
motherboard connector. (As a close examination of Figure 6-26 shows, we ac-
tually used three different SATA cables; they just happened to be the first three 
we pulled from our supplies closet.) 
The two hard drive SATA data cables can remain in the motherboard chamber 
for now, but we need to route the optical drive SATA data cable through the 
bulkhead and into the chamber that contains the power supply and optical 
drive. To do so, loosen the screw that secures the sliding access panel in the 
bulkhead, as shown in Figure 6-27, and slide the panel fully open. 
232 
Chapter 6 

Building the Media Center System 
Figure 8-28. Connect the SATA data cables to the motherboard 
Figure 8-2/. Loosen the screw that secures the access 
panel 
Pass the free end of the optical drive SATA data cable through the access door 
and into the chamber that contains the optical drive bay, as shown in Figure 
6-28. 
Figure 8-28. Pass the SATA data cable for the optical drive into the power supply 
chamber 
Routing and connecting power to the motherboard 
The next step is to route the main ATX power cable and the ATX12V (CPU) 
power cable from the power supply chamber to the motherboard chamber 
and connect those cables. To begin, pass the 24-pin main ATX power cable 
from the power supply chamber into the motherboard chamber, as shown in 
Figure 6-29. 
Align the 24-pin main ATX power cable connector with the motherboard sock-
et, as shown in Figure 6-30, and press down firmly until it snaps into place. 
Examine the connection visually to verify that the connectors are fully mated 
and that the latch has engaged. A partially seated main ATX power connector 
can cause subtle problems that are very difficult to troubleshoot. 
Building a Media Center System 
233 

Building the Media Center System 
Figure 8-23. Route the main ATX power cable from the power supply 
Figure 8-30. Connect the main ATX power cable 
chamber into the main 
chamber 
The next step is to route and connect the ATX12V power cable, as shown in 
Figures 6-31 and 6-32.The ATX12V motherboard connector is located between 
the CPU socket and the rear I/O panel. Orient the ATX12V cable properly, and 
press down firmly until it snaps into place. Examine the connection to make 
sure that the latch is engaged. 
Figure 8-31. Route the ATX12V power cable from the power supply 
chamber into the main 
chamber 
Figure 8-32. Connect the ATX12V power cable 
Installing the Optical Drive 
The next step is to install the optical drive. The Antec NSK-2480 case provides 
two external 5.25" drive bays, either or both of which can be used for optical 
drives or other 5.25" devices, such as the Antec Easy SATA hard drive docking 
station. To begin installing the optical drive, press the inside of the plastic bezel 
until it snaps out, as shown in Figure 6-33. 
234 
Chapter 6 

Building the Media Center System 
Locate the optical drive cage that you set aside earlier. Slide the optical drive 
into the cage and use four or more of the provided screws to secure it, as 
shown in Figure 6-34. Make sure to orient and position the optical drive as 
shown. It needs to protrude from the front of the drive cage if you want the 
optical drive bezel to be flush with the case bezel. 
Figure 8-33. Snap out the plastic bezel from a 5.25" external drive 
Figure 8-34. Secure the optical drive to the bay with four screws 
Slide the optical drive cage into the case with the front tilted downward, as 
shown in Figure 6-35. 
Lower the rear of the optical drive cage, making sure that the projecting nubs 
on the cage frame fit into the cutouts on the chassis, and then slide the optical 
drive cage into the locked position, as shown in Figure 6-36. 
Figure 8-35. Slide the optical drive cage into the case 
Figure 8-38. Slide the optical drive cage into the chassis 
Locate an available SATA power cable from the power supply and connect it to 
the optical drive power connector, as shown in Figure 6-37. (We used the SATA 
power cable with the P5 connector.) Make sure the L-shaped keys on the cable 
connector and drive connector are aligned properly, and then press the cable 
connector onto the drive connector until it seats completely. 
Building a Media Center System 
235 

Building the Media Center System 
Locate the SATA data cable that you previously fed through from the mother-
board chamber to the power supply chamber, and connect that SATA data 
cable to the optical drive, as shown in Figure 6-38. Make sure the keying on the 
drive and cable connectors is aligned properly, and then press the connector 
into place until it's fully seated. 
Figure 8-3/. Connect a SATA power cable to the optical drive 
Figure 8-38. Connect the SATA data cable to the optical drive 
Routing Drive Power Cables to the 
Motherboard Chamber 
The next step is to route power cables for the hard drives, fan, and power LED 
from the power supply chamber into the motherboard chamber. We'll need 
Molex power connectors for the power LED and both case fans, and two SATA 
power connectors for the hard drives. Depending on your configuration, it can 
be important which cables you choose to route. Obviously, you need the right 
number and type of power connectors for the devices you need to connect. 
Less obviously, depending on your power supply, some cables may be longer 
or shorter than others, or may have the wrong type of connector in the right 
place, or vice versa. We routed the P2 cable (shown in Figure 6-39) and the PI 0 
cable (shown in Figure 6-40) into the motherboard chamber. That combina-
tion works for the configuration we used, but again, check your own configu-
ration to be sure. 
Draw sufficient length of each cable into the motherboard chamber to reach 
the devices you need to connect. Don't forget to allow some slack for cable 
dressing. Once you've done that, you can slide the bulkhead access door 
closed, as shown in Figure 6-41, and tighten the screw that secures it. 
236 
Chapter 6 

Building the Media Center System 
Figure 8-33. Routing the P2 cable into the motherboard chamber 
Figure 8-40. Routing the P10 cable into the motherboard 
chamber 
mm 
Figure 8-41. Slide the bulkhead access door closed 
Installing the Hard Drive(s) 
The next step is to install the hard drive(s), a task that's considerably more in-
volved with the NSK-2480 than it is with most cases. The NSK-2480 mounts 
one or two hard drives vertically in a separate chamber at the front of the case. 
In most cases, you can install hard drives and connect the power and data 
cables without much regard for sequence. In the NSK-2480, the sequence is 
important because access to the drive connectors is restricted after you've in-
serted them in the cage. To begin, remove the four screws that secure the top 
plate of the hard drive chamber, as shown in Figure 6-42, and then remove the 
top plate, as shown in Figure 6-43, and set it aside. 
Building a Media Center System 
237 

Building the Media Center System 
Figure 8-42. Remove the four screws that secure the top plate of 
Figure 8-43. Remove the top plate from the hard drive chamber 
the hard drive chamber 
Connect an available SATA power cable to the first hard drive, as shown in 
Figure 6-44. We used the P9 connector. 
Connect a SATA data cable to the first hard drive, as shown in Figure 6-45. 
Figure 8-44. Connect a SATA power cable to the first hard drive 
Figure 8-45. Connect a SATA data cable to the first hard drive 
P9 or P6 ? 
We mentioned the connector by 
number not because of function or 
power provisioning, but simply to 
indicate which connector we found 
most convenient to use because of 
cable length, connector 
positioning, 
and so on. 
Slide the first hard drive into the hard drive chamber, oriented as shown in 
Figure 6-46. 
Hard drives can be secured with two screws driven through the top plate and 
(optionally, according to Antec) with two more screws driven through the 
bottom of the case. Rather than having our hard drives hanging like bats, sus-
pended from the top plate and free-floating on the bottom, we prefer to se-
cure our drives with four screws as usual. To do that, turn the case on its side, 
while supporting the hard drive to make sure it doesn't fall out. Use one hand 
to wiggle the hard drive back and forth until the grommeted screw holes in 
the bottom of the case align with the drive screw holes. Drive in two screws, as 
shown in Figure 6-47, to secure the drive to the bottom of the case. 
238 
Chapter 6 

Building the Media Center System 
To install the second hard drive, connect a SATA data cable and a SATA power 
cable, as shown in Figures 6-48 and 6-49. 
Figure 8-48. Slide the first hard drive into the hard drive chamber 
Figure 8-4/. Secure the first hard drive with two screws 
through 
the bottom of the case 
Figure 8-48. Connect a SATA data cable to the second hard drive 
Figure 8-48. Connect a SATA power cable to the second hard drive 
Slide the second hard drive into the hard drive bay, wiggle it back and forth 
until the screw holes in the drive align with those in the chassis, and secure the 
drive to the chassis by driving in two hard drive mounting screws, as shown 
in Figure 6-50. 
Figure 6-51 shows both hard drives properly mounted. 
The next step is to replace the top plate on the hard drive bay and secure each 
hard drive by driving two hard drive mounting screws through the plate and 
into the drive, as shown in Figure 6-52. 
Building a Media Center System 
239 

Building the Media Center System 
Figure 8-50. Secure the second hard drive to the chassis by driv- 
Figure 8-51. Both hard drives properly 
mounted 
ing two hard drive mounting screws through the bottom of the 
case and into the drive 
The final step in installing the hard drives is to reinstall the four screws that 
secure the top plate to the hard drive bay, as shown in Figure 6-53. 
Installing the Expansion Cards 
If you have a video adapter or expansion cards to install, now is the time to do 
it. We had only a half-height PCI wireless networking card to install, and we 
actually installed it earlier in the build. Then, as we were writing this section, 
we realized that we should shift this step to very late in the build. The potential 
problem is that a full-length, full-height expansion card may block the sliding 
access plate in the bulkhead, making it difficult to route cables from the power 
supply chamber to the motherboard chamber. 
Figure 8-5H. Secure both hard drives to the top plate of the hard 
drive bay by driving two hard drive mounting screws into each 
drive 
Figure 8-53. Secure the top plate to the hard drive bay by driving 
in four screws 
240 
Chapter 6 

Building the Media Center System 
To begin installing your expansion card(s), determine which card(s) will oc-
cupy which slot(s), and therefore which expansion slot covers you need to re-
move. You can do that by holding the card in position against the appropriate 
motherboard slot and determining which expansion slot cover that card's ex-
pansion bracket covers. Once you've determined that, remove the screw that 
secures the expansion slot cover, as shown in Figure 6-54. 
With the screw removed, tilt the expansion slot cover slightly toward the front 
of the case, as shown in Figure 6-55, and pull straight up to remove it. 
Figure 8-54. Remove the screw that secures the expansion slot 
Figure 8-55. Tilt the expansion slot cover toward the inside of the 
case and pull it free 
Align the contact edge of the expansion card with the slot and press down 
firmly to seat the card, as shown in Figure 6-56. Verify visually that the card is 
fully seated. Video adapters are particularly problematic. The video adapter 
may appear to seat. You may even feel it snap into place. That doesn't guaran-
tee that it's completely seated. Always examine the slot carefully to make sure 
that the card is fully seated and level in the slot, with the top edge of the card 
contacts flush with the top edge of the slot. After you seat each expansion 
card, reinsert the screw to secure the bracket to the chassis. After you tighten 
the screw in the retaining bracket, double-check to make sure the card is com-
pletely seated in its slot. (Sometimes, driving the screw into the bracket can 
twist the card up and out of the slot slightly; in that situation, you're better off 
omitting the screw entirely.) 
If the expansion card has any sort of external dongle, antenna, or other con-
nector, hook it up now. For example, Figure 6-57 shows Barbara attaching the 
antenna to the WiFi card. 
A 
Check the Latch, Both Ways 
A plastic retention mechanism 
is 
used to secure a PCI Express video 
adapter in the slot. When you install 
a video adapter, make sure the reten-
tion mechanism 
latches. When you 
remove a video adapter, make sure 
to unlatch the retention 
mechanism 
before you attempt to remove the 
card from the slot. 
Building a Media Center System 
241 

Building the Media Center System 
Figure 8-58. Align the expansion card with the slot and press down 
Figure 8-5/. Connect the WiFi antenna to the back of the card 
firmly to seat it 
Finishing Up 
We're in the home stretch now. All that remains is to connect power to the case 
fans and the power LED (if you choose to do that), and a few minor cleanup 
tasks. Figures 6-58,6-59, and 6-60 show Barbara connecting power for the pow-
er LED, using connector P10, and to the case fans using the P2/P3 connectors. 
Figure 6-61 shows our media center system at this point in the build. Obvi-
ously, we can't leave that rats'nest of cables flopping around in there where 
they might foul a fan, so the next task is to dress the cables. 
Nobody's Perfect 
One of our tech reviewers asked if the SATA data cables should have been routed 
through the cutout between the motherboard 
chamber and the hard drive chamber, 
and whether there was sufficient clearance for the cover with the SATA cables run 
over the top edge of the bulkhead (as it isn't clear in the image). The answer to both 
of those questions is yes. We should have routed the SATA cables through the cutout, 
but we didn't notice that until after we'd finished building the system. And there is 
sufficient clearance between the top edge of the bulkhead and the case cover, so we 
elected to leave the cables as they were and simply tie them off to the chassis frame. 
As Figure 6-62 shows, even at full extension the ATX12V cable wasn't long 
enough to route along an edge of the motherboard, so we did the best we 
could. We tried it both ways, running it along the back of the motherboard as 
well as the front. We got the fan power cables secured away from the blades 
and used the cable wraps to tie the cable bundles to the chassis. While we 
were at it, we rerouted the SATA data cables to run them through the chassis 
cutout visible underneath them in the preceding image. 
242 
Chapter 6 

Building the Media Center System 
Figure 8-53. Connect power to the first case fan 
Figure 8-58. Connect power to the power LED 
Figure 8-80. Connect power to the second case fan 
Figure 8-82. The final system, with cables 
dressed 
Figure 8-81. Our media center system, before cleanup 
Building a Media Center System 
243 

Building the Media Center System 
Only the Good Die Young 
When you turn on the rear power 
switch, the system will come to life 
momentarily 
and then die. That's 
perfectly normal behavior. 
When 
the power supply receives power, it 
begins to startup. It quickly 
notices 
that the motherboard 
hasn't told it to 
start, though, so it shuts down 
again. 
All you need to do is press the front-
panel power switch and the system 
will start normally. 
Ron Morse Comments 
Robert makes a good case for prefer-
ring the eSATA interface over the 
slower USB connection 
for remov-
able, "hot-pluggable"storage 
de-
vices, but there's a potential 
gotcha: 
it only works if both the SATA disk 
controller on the motherboard 
and 
the operating system support it. 
You won't have a problem if you 
follow Robert's 
recommendations 
for the hardware and use Linux, 
Windows Vista, or Windows 7 as your 
operating system, but 
WindowsXP 
doesn't support AHCI—at 
least, not 
without a complicated 
and error-
prone modification 
to the system 
software. If for some reason you find 
yourself using Windows XP as the 
operating system on your media cen-
ter PC, leave the BIOS setting for the 
SATA controller in default IDE mode 
and make do with the USB interface 
for external 
storage 
The CPU fan cable was obnoxious. It was too short to route and dress the way 
we wanted to, and too long to leave flopping loose. We finally looped it over 
one of the CPU cooler posts and declared the job done. (Until we powered up 
the system for the smoke test and quickly realized that the CPU fan cable had 
fouled the CPU fan.) 
Once you have the cables dressed, take a few minutes to double-check every-
thing one last time before you apply power to the system. Use the following 
checklist: 
• No loose tools or screws (shake the case gently) 
• CPU cooler properly mounted; CPU fan connected 
• Memory modules fully seated and latched 
• Front-panel switch and indicator cables connected properly 
• Front-panel I/O cables connected properly 
• Hard drive data cables connected to drive and motherboard 
• Hard drive power cables connected 
• Optical drive data cable connected to drive and motherboard 
• Optical drive power cable connected 
• All drives secured to drive bay or chassis, as applicable 
• Expansion cards fully seated and secured to chassis 
• Main ATX power cable and ATX12V power cable connected 
• All cables dressed and tucked 
Once you're certain that all is as it should be, it's time for the smoke test. Leave 
the cover off for now. Connect the power cable to the wall receptacle and then 
to the system unit. Flip the rear power switch from 0 to 1. Press the main power 
button on the front of the case, and the system should start up. Check to make 
sure that the power supply fan and CPU fan are spinning. You should also hear 
the hard drives spin up. At that point, everything should be working properly. 
After the system passes the smoke test, turn it off and connect the keyboard, 
mouse, display, and any other external peripherals. When the BIOS Setup 
screen appears, run BIOS Setup and verify that all hardware is recognized and 
that the date and time are set correctly. Verify that the optical drive is first in 
the boot sequence screen. If you've installed a removable or eSATA hard drive, 
make sure to configure the IDE/ATA options to enable AHCI. Once BIOS Setup 
is the way you want it, save your changes and exit. Put your operating system 
disc in the optical drive and turn the system off. Restart it and install the oper-
ating system. 
244 
Chapter 6 

installing Software 
Installing Software 
Now that we've built the system, it's time to install the software we need. For 
each of the first two editions of this book, we spent a couple of weeks install-
ing and testing scads of media center applications, everything from Windows 
Media Center Edition to third-party Windows PVR apps to half a dozen Linux 
media center apps. We played around with numerous handheld remotes and 
IR receivers and spent time tweaking various software plug-ins to do things 
like convert recorded TV programs to DVD format or send commands to a 
cable box to turn it on and change channels. 
We started to do the same thing this time, looking at Windows 7, Mythbuntu, 
LinuxMCE, and many other media center apps. Then it finally hit us. If we won't 
use our media center system to record TV programs, we don't need any of this 
specialized software. With an HDTV, we don't need a low-resolution 10-foot 
interface and a handheld remote to control the system. We can do everything 
we need to do with Windows 7 or a standard Linux distribution with a stan-
dard wireless keyboard and mouse, and you probably can, too. 
Windows certainly has some very nice features, and for many people it will be 
the perfect media center operating system. But Linux also has some very nice 
features, and since we run Linux on all of our other systems, we decided to 
make our media center system Linux-based as well. Even if you're a Windows 
or OS X household, you may well find that Linux is the best choice for your me-
dia center system. If nothing else, Linux and all of the applications we feature 
in this section cost nothing, which can save you several hundred dollars on 
your new media center system. 
Of course, you may decide to run Windows 7 on your media center system, 
either because you're just more comfortable with it or because you intend to 
use the system for gaming, or both. (Linux positively suXOrz for gaming. If we 
decide to run games, we'll buy an xBox, PS3, or Wii console.) 
Operating System 
Ubuntu Linux (http://www.ubuntu.com) 
We chose Ubuntu Linux for our media center system, mainly because it's what 
we run on all of our other PCs. Ubuntu is the most popular desktop Linux dis-
tribution, and for good reason. It's newbie-friendly, well maintained, and has 
a huge selection of freely downloadable software available in its repositories. 
Nearly any Linux application you might want to use is likely to be available in a 
version for Ubuntu. If you're already comfortable with another Linux distribu-
tion, use it. But if you're new to Linux, Ubuntu is an excellent way to get started. 
To install Ubuntu, visit the website and download the ISO file. Burn that file to 
a CD in ISO mode. (That is, burn the downloaded ISO file as a disc image rather 
than as an individual file.) If you're downloading the Linux ISO to a Windows 
system and don't have disc-burning software that can burn ISO image files, 
download and install ImgBurn (http://www.imgburn.com). 
Ron Morse Comments 
/ think Windows 7Media 
Center is by 
far the best way to go for someone 
who needs 
broadcast/cable/satellite 
TV and PVR. Microsoft has finally 
gotten all of the integration 
sorted 
and debugged. I don't think Media 
Center has blown up on me even 
once, even back during the public 
beta stage. 
Brian Bilbrey Comments 
But that may be changing 
once 
again, since Valve is bringing its 
Steam platform and a bunch of 
games to Linux, theoretically in 
autumn 2010. And of course, there's 
Cedega, which is a 
gaming-oriented 
commercial 
wrapper around 
WINE. 
I've used that for several 
Windows 
games over the years. 
Building a Media Center System 
245 

installing Software 
Make sure you've set up the BIOS to boot from the optical drive, insert the disc 
in the drive, start the system, and follow the prompts to install Ubuntu. (If dur-
ing installation you have no clue about which options to select, just accept the 
defaults.) As soon as the installation is complete and the system reboots, click 
the System menu, choose Update Manager, and allow Ubuntu to download 
and install all updates. 
The standard Ubuntu distribution includes by default most of the general-
purpose applications you might need—things like OpenOffice.org for word 
processing and spreadsheets, Firefox for web browsing, and so on. But there's 
tons more stuff available, and all at no cost. Anything we might need for our 
media center system is available for Linux. Those Linux applications are usually 
at least as capable as similar apps available for Windows, and often more so. 
Windows users are invariably surprised when they see how easy it is to in-
stall Linux apps. In Ubuntu, you can simply click Add/Remove from the Ap-
plications menu, select the application or applications you want to install, 
and click Apply Changes. Linux automatically downloads and installs the new 
application(s). If a new application requires supporting files that aren't already 
installed on your system, those additional files are automatically downloaded 
and installed as well. Figure 6-63 shows the Ubuntu Add/Remove dialog just 
after we installed LAME (the consensus best MP3 encoder), which is included 
in the Ubuntu Restricted Extras package. 
Mythbuntu for TV Recording 
If you did install a TV tuner card or cards in your media center 
system, you can make things a lot easier by installing 
Myth-
buntu (http://mythbuntu.org) 
rather than the standard 
Ubuntu 
distribution. Mythbuntu 
is a modified version of Ubuntu 
that has MythTV preinstalled and preconfigured. 
By default, 
Mythbuntu 
uses the minimalistXFCE 
user interface and does 
not install the general-purpose 
applications 
that are bundled 
with the Ubuntu distribution, but Mythbuntu 
is actually 
Ubuntu 
under the hood. You can have the capabilities of both 
Ubuntu 
and Mythbuntu 
simply by installing Mythbuntu 
and then using 
the Control Centre to install the ubuntu-desktop 
package 
and 
any other packages 
you need. 
If you do decide to install Mythbuntu 
for PVR functions, we 
strongly recommend 
you check their supported hardware list 
and hew rigorously to it. During a back-channel 
conversation 
between Robert and our tech reviewers, Ron Morse—who's 
for-
gotten more about Linux than Robert ever 
learned—commented 
that, despite playing with it extensively, he'd never been able 
to get Mythbuntu 
to work. Robert replied that he'd installed 
Mythbuntu 
(and earlier versions ofMythPC) 
on several systems, 
as far back as 2004, and had never had a problem getting it to 
work. 
The reason for that difference became clear as the 
conversation 
continued: Robert had used only the exact components 
that 
appeared on the supported hardware list. Ron had tried to use 
some components 
that were very similar to supported 
compo-
nents (e.g., a different model of tuner card, but one based on 
the same chipset as a supported tuner card). Close doesn't cut 
it with Mythbuntu. If you're going to try it, do it right. Make sure 
every component 
you use is explicitly listed as 
supported. 
Or, as Ron suggests, install a version of Windows 7 that includes 
Media Center and have done with it. 
246 
Chapter 6 

Add/Remove Applications 
Show: 
All dVdildble dpplKdtioifc 
Search: 
LAME 
li^ff Accessories 
fa Education 
¿ft, Games 
Jjji Graphics 
i^) internet 
J j office 
h* Other 
c "* Piogrdmrning 
DQ Sound & Video 
System Tools 
^ 
Universal Access 
g 
^ 
GStreamer extra pJugins 
1 Codecs to play mp3r ltd, mpegl. mpcg2r AC-3, DVD (witiwut encryption) 
Popularity 
*
*
*
*
* 
n 
"j!/ Ubunlu restricted cxlras 
— 
commonly uses applications with restricted copyright impj. avi, mpco. [rue 
^ 
. U b u n t u restricted e x t r a s 
This package depends an some commonly used packages in the ubuntu 
multiverse repository. Z 
Installing ''I'. package will pull i'. ppti1' lor MPS playback arid decoding, buppoit loi various 
other audio formats (GStreamer piuqlrre), Microsoft fonts, |ava runtime environment, Flash 
plug in L/.ME (to create compressed audio files], and DVD playback. Please note that this does 
not install llbdvdessz, and will not let you play encrypted DVDs. For more Information, see 
https:flhelp.ubijntu.conn/cornnnunity/ftestnctedFomiats/PlayingDVDs. Please also note that 
packages fmm mLiltivrne are restricted hy copyright or legal v.ir-. In-amfi countries. see 
http y/www. ubuntu. corri/ubuntu^censmg tor more information. 
. "elp 
Q 
cancel 
Figure 8-83. The Ubuntu Add/Remove 
Applications 
dialog 
Audio CD Ripping and Encoding 
K3b + LAME (Ubuntu repositories) 
Ripping a CD is the process of extracting the original music tracks from an 
original audio CD as WAV files. Encoding is the process of converting those 
WAV files to some other audio format, such as MP3. There are dozens of audio 
CD rippers available for Linux, but the one we find ourselves coming back to 
every time we try something different is K3b (KDE Burn, Baby, Burn), shown in 
Figure 6-64, which is also the best disc burning application available for Linux. 
To install K3b, click the Ubuntu Applications menu and choose Add/Remove. 
When the Add/Remove Applications dialog appears, type"K3b"in the search 
box. Mark the K3b checkbox, and click the Apply Changes button. 
Like the gold-standard Windows application Exact Audio Copy, K3b performs 
extremely accurate rips. It's also very convenient to use, particularly if you have 
a huge stack of audio CDs to rip. As you insert each audio CD, K3b automati-
cally looks up the CDDB track information, rips the audio data to WAV files 
(which can be deleted automatically as processing for each CD is complete), 
and encodes those WAV files as MP3 files or in another format you specify. All 
you have to do is insert a new audio CD each time K3b finishes processing the 
last one and ejects it. 
Some years ago, we ripped our entire collection of audio CDs to uncompressed 
WAV files, because we wanted the best possible audio quality. Unfortunately, 
a typical audio CD contains about 600 MB of WAV files, so our collection of 
several hundred CDs occupied about 500 GB of disk space. As it turned out, 
that was overkill. 
Building a Media Center System 

I 5 T 
CD Ripping - K3b 
CD Ripping ia tracks (41:17:23) 
K? 
Filename 
Length 
File Size 
Type 
Sarah McLachlan - Surfacing/01 - Building A Mystery.mp3 
04:07:20 unknown Audio 
Sarah McLachlan - Surfacing/02 1 Love You.mp3 
04:44:12 unknown Audio 
Sarah McLachlan - Surfacing/03 - Sweet Surrender.mp3 
04:00:43 unknown Audio 
Sarah McLachlan - Surfacing/04 Adia.mp3 
04:04:45 unknown Audio 
Sarah McLachlan - Surfacing/05 - Do What You Have To Do.mp3 03:46:55 unknown Audio 
Sarah McLachlan - Surfacing/06 Witness.mp3 
04:47:57 unknown Audio 
Sarah McLachlan - Surfacing/07 - Angel.mp3 
04:30:30 unknown Audio 
Sarah McLachlan - Surfacing/08 Black & White.mp3 
05:02:35 unknown Audio 
Sarah McLachlan - Surfacing/09 - Full Of Grace.mp3 
03:41:08 unknown Audio 
Sarah McLachlan - Surfacing/10 Last Dance.mp3 
02:32:18 unknown Audio 
Settings 
File Naming 
Advanced 
-Filetype 
Mp3 (Lame) 
-| Wave 
Ogg-Vorb¡5 
m 
Free space in directory: 
146,7 GB 
Space needed: 
unknown 
Options — 
• 
Create m3u playlist 
• . 
• 
Create single file 
• 
Write cue file 
S t a r t R i p p i n g 
Cancel 
Figure 8-84. Ripping and encoding 
an audio CD with K3b and 
LAME 
We did some listening comparison tests, putting the original WAV files up 
against MP3 files compressed with the LAME encoder set to use the "insane" 
preset, which encodes MP3 audio at 320 kb/s VBR (variable bit rate). Listening 
with a high-quality receiver and speakers, we couldn't tell any difference at all 
between the uncompressed files and the MP3 files. So we re-encoded all of 
those tracks to MP3 files, reducing our storage requirements from 500 GB to 
about 125 GB and at the same time quadrupling the number of tracks that fit 
on Barbara's MP3 players. 
If you decide to rip and encode your audio CD collection, we strongly recom-
mend that you encode your tracks as MP3 files for maximum compatibility 
with portable players and so on. And, if you decide to encode to MP3, don't 
even think about using any encoder other than LAME. Nothing else comes 
close to LAME in audio quality. Use the LAME "insane" preset for the best pos-
sible audio quality. 
Unfortunately, installing K3b does not install the LAME encoder by default. To 
get LAME, clickon the Ubuntu Applications menu and run Add/Remove Appli-
cations to install the Ubuntu Restricted Extras package, as described previous-
ly. Once LAME is installed, put an audio CD in the drive, run K3b, and choose 
Rip Audio CD from theTools menu. When the CD Ripping dialog appears, click 
the gear tool next to the Filetype drop-down list, and configure LAME to your 
preferences. Figure 6-65 shows the LAME command-line options we use. 
Chapter 6 

• 
Configure plugin K3b External A u d i o Encoder - K3b 
I his dialog can be used to setup external command lire applications as audio encoders rhese car 
then be used by K3b to encode audio data (Tracks from an audio CD orthe titles from an audio 
project) to formats that are normally not supported (i.e. no encoder plugin exists). 
K3b comes with a selection of predefined external applications that depends on the installed 
applications. 
-Configured Encoders 
Name 
Extension 
Command 
Mp3 (Lame) mp3 
/usr/bin/lame --preset insane —tt %t —ta %a —tl %m --ty %y ~tc %c - %f 
Remove 
Edit... 
Add... 
OK 
Apply 
Cancel 
Figure 8-85. The External Audio Encoder 
dialog, where LAME is 
configured 
Music Management 
Rhythmbox Music Player (default) 
Amarok (Ubuntu repositories) 
If your CD collection is anything near the size of ours, you'll end up with an 
MP3 directory that contains hundreds of subdirectories, which in turn contain 
thousands to tens of thousands of MP3 files. Just double-clicking any of those 
MP3 files will start it playing, but that's obviously not an ideal way to manage 
your music collection. Fortunately, there are at least two good Linux applica-
tions available to manage your music files. 
By default, Ubuntu installs the Rhythmbox music player, shown in Figure 6-66. 
Rhythmbox is essentially a partial clone of the ¡Tunes application, except that 
it points to free music stores rather than the commercial Apple ¡Tunes ser-
vice. Rhythmbox provides all of the basic music management/player features, 
along with some nice extras such as smart playlists and the ability to burn a 
playlist to CD. Rhythmbox is a bit light on features for our tastes, but it's ex-
tremely popular and may be all you need. 
To start using Rhythmbox, open the Ubuntu Applications menu, choose 
the Sound & Video submenu, and click Rhythmbox Music Player. Open the 
Rhythmbox Edit menu, choose Preferences, point it to your MP3 directory, and 
set up Rhythmbox the way you want it. It will scan and index your audio collec-
tion automatically, a process that took less than half an hour when run against 
our 125 GB music directory. Once the indexing completes, you're ready to roll. 
The other standout choice among Linux music managers is Amarok, shown 
in Figure 6-67. Amarok supports every music management/player feature we 
can imagine, and then some. It's not included in the standard Ubuntu distribu-
tion, so if you want to use it you'll have to add it manually. To do so, click the 
Ubuntu Applications menu and choose Add/Remove. When the Add/Remove 
Applications dialog appears, type "Amarok" in the search box. Mark the Ama-
rok checkbox, and click the Apply Changes button. 
Building a Media Center System 

installing Software 
Dire Straits • Money For Nothing 
H F W f ^ 
* 
Music £dit yiew 
control 
iletp 
r> 
Play 
M l 
M i 
Previous 
Next 
Repeat 
m 
© 
m 
Shuffle 
Browse 
Visualization 
4S 
M o n e y F o r N o t h i n g hy aire Straits from Brothers in Arms 
GB 
3:49 Of 0:26 
Library 
J } 
Ptay Queue 
^ 
Podcasts 
Q 
Import Errors 
Q Lastfm 
g } 
Radio 
Stones 
Q Jamerido 
Magnatune 
Artists 
Albums 
Titles 
90 songs, S hours and 13 minutes, 1.1 GB 
v.; Track Tide 
v Artist 
Album 
Time 
Lions 
Dire ¿traits 
Dire Straits 
5:02 
Local Hero Wild Theme (Live) Dire Stroits 
Sultans Of Swing (The Very B... . 4:24 
Love Over Gold 
Dire Straits 
Love Over Gold 
6:21 
Love Over Gold (Live) 
Dire Straits 
Sultans Of Swing (The Very B... . 3:40 
1 
Money Foi Nothinq 
Dire St rails 
Bröthen» Iri Arms 
8:?6 
Money For Nothing 
Oire Straits 
Money For Nothing 
4:06 
Money For Nothing 
Dire Straits 
Sultans Of Swing (The Very B... 4:09 
Money For Nothinq (Live) 
Dire Straits 
On The Might (Live) 
6:2S 
My Parties 
Dire Straits 
On Every Street 
5:32 
News 
Dire Straits 
Communique 
4:13 
Once Upon a Time in the West 
Dire Straits 
Communique 
5:26 
On Every Street 
Dire Straits 
On Eveiy 5trcet 
5:04 
On Every Street 
Dire Straits 
Sultans Of Swing (The Very B... . 4:39 
On Every Street (Live) 
Dire Straits 
On The Night {Live) 
7:01 
One World 
Dire Straits 
Brothers In Arms 
3:41 
Planet Of New Orleans 
Dire Straits 
On Every Street 
7:4« 
Porlobello Belle 
Dire Straits 
Communique 
4:30 
PortobelSo Belle - Live 
Dire Straits 
Money For Nothing 
4:33 
Figure 8-88. The Rhythmbox music player main screen 
Brian Bilbrey Comments 
I especially like the time-killer that is 
the Band/Artist Wikipedia entry in 
the Amarok interface. Hours wasted 
filling the brain with facts only useful 
if you're (a) on Jeopardy, and (b) get 
lucky with the topic selections that 
night. 
* 
Amarok 
Playlist 
Tools 
settings 
Help 
ose© "c= 
° 
Adw.inreri 
Z 
Artist / Year - Album 
v 
" 
± Sarah MtlacNan 
• 
2004 - KFOG Live fr... 
• 
2004-The Celtic Ci... 
• 
2003 - Afterglow 
• Q 
1997 
Surfacing 
Z. 
* 
1ÍW0 - Rarities, B-Si... 
Z 
- ^ j J 1Ï9J- HjmWing To,.. 
Rogers, Kenny - Kenny Rogers 50 Years 
1 2 tracks 
Dylan. Dob - G 
1 0 tracks 
Elsewhere 
Mr 
Kjmbling towards test... 
Good Enough 
Hold On 
ill 
u 
u 
U
^ 
M l 
is neks 
W 
i] 
Bruce Springsteen - Working On A Dream [CD... 
b Dylan's Creates Hits 
The Tragically Hip - Fully Completely {1992} 
1 2 tracks 
Purr Drivel CD 1 (190R1 
A 
• 
El 
Figure 8-8 /. The Amarok music player main screen 
n n 
Once Amarok is installed, open the Settings menu and choose Configure Ama-
rok to display the Configure-Amarok dialog shown in Figure 6-68. Point Amarok 
to your MP3 directory or directories, make any other changes you wish, apply 
the changes, and dismiss the dialog. 
Like Rhythmbox, Amarok automatically scans and indexes your music files. 
Unlike Rhythmbox, Amarok takes a lonnnnngggg time to index a sizable col-
lection. When we started Amarok indexing our 125 GB MP3 directory, we fig-
ured it'd take maybe half an hour. Four hours later, it finally finished indexing, 
having hammered the hard drive the whole time. Still, we think the additional 
features of Amarok are worth waiting a few hours for. 
250 
Chapter 6 

Configure - Amarok 
General 
Internet Services 
y © 
P l a y b a c k 
O n S c r e e n D i s p l a y 
Help 
Configure Collection 
^ 
Collection Folders 
These folders will be scanned for media to make up your collection: 
S 
bin 
e 
boot 
f§3 cdrom 
Q data_l 
- •' ^ Hafra, 
Rescan Collection 
fl 
Import Collection 
Scan folders recursively 
Watch folders for changes 
OK 
Cancel 
Figure 8-88. The Amarok 
music player configuration 
screen 
Once Amarokfinishes indexing, you can leave it active as an icon in the system 
tray. Accessing your music files and playlists requires only one clickon the icon. 
DVD Ripping 
DVD Shrink (search the Web to find it) 
D V D F a b (http://www.dvdfab.com) 
DVD rippers extract the program content from DVD-Video discs while remov-
ing copy protection, region coding, and other DRM measures. They may out-
put the unprotected audio and video data as individual directories and files, 
or as a single ISO file ready to be burned to a DVD. Some DVD rippers offer you 
the option of producing discrete files or a single ISO file. 
Because burnabledual-layer DVDsare relatively expensive and of questionable 
reliability, many DVD ripping applications offer you the option of compress-
ing the original DVD material to fit an inexpensive standard 4.4 GB DVD±R(W) 
disc. The quality of the compression varies widely from one ripper to another 
and with the configuration of the ripper. Depending on the amount of data 
on a particular DVD-Video disc, the best rippers may produce compressed rips 
that are nearly indistinguishable from the original DVDs, even when viewed 
on an HDTV. Some rippers offer a high-quality mode, which does deep analy-
sis of the data before compressing it for maximum quality, and a fast mode, 
which compresses the data as quickly as possible but with lower quality. 
DVD rippers are commonly used in two ways. 
First, and probably most common, is rent-rip-and-return 
(RRR), where the user 
rents a DVD-Video disc from Netflix, Blockbuster, or Redbox (or borrows it from 
the local public library), rips a copy of the video for his own collection, and 
returns the original disc. RRR drives the MPAA nuts, but there's not much they 
can do about it.The more charitable term for RRR is time-shifting. 
Building a Media Center System 

installing Software 
Second, many people rip their purchased DVD-Video discs to place-shift or 
format-shift the content. For example, they may rip videos to lower-resolution, 
highly compressed files that match the screen resolution and storage capacity 
of their cell phones. Or, as in our case, they may rip their DVD-Video discs to 
the hard drives of their media center systems. 
Although there are several DVD ripping apps available for Linux, such as K9copy, 
none of them are as good as the corresponding Windows applications. Fortu-
nately, that's not a problem, because the best Windows DVD ripping applica-
tions install and run perfectly well under Ubuntu Linux. 
The great-granddaddy of DVD rippers is DVD Shrink 3.2.0.15, shown in Figure 
6-69, which was last updated in July 2004, just before the MPAA attack lawyers 
shut it down. Despite its age, DVD Shrink is still many people's first choice of 
DVD rippers. It does what it does quickly and well. When set to use deep analy-
sis for maximum quality, the resulting videos are often indistinguishable from 
the originals. 
t> 
D V D S h r i n k 3.L2*^D:\ 
1 
File 
Edit 
View 
Help 
® 
& 
t 
F u l l 
IS 
Open Disc 
Open Files 
Analysis 
Backup! 
Re-author 
0 MB 
4,464 MB 
i Full Disc Backup 
$ 
Compression Settings j 
DVD Structure 
1 Duration 
Size II 
Video 
O DVD7699 A TOUCH OF FROST 
Video 
EE) Q Menus 
Œ) Ö Main Movie 
00:01.15 
2MB 
(Automatic 
4,203 MB 
EE) Q Menus 
Œ) Ö Main Movie 
02:28.10 
4,434 MB 
EE) Q Menus 
Œ) Ö Main Movie 
02:28.10 
4,434 MB 
EE) Q Extras 
00:00.53 
27 MB 
159.7 
% 
J 
EE) Q Extras 
00:00.53 
27 MB 
Audio 
Audio 
• • J 
1. AC3 2-ch Unspecified 
1. AC3 2-ch Unspecified 
1 MB 
1. AC3 2-ch English 
208 MB 
Subpicture 
1, Unspecified 
9 MB 
For Help, press F1 
r "1 
1 
^ 
Figure 8-83. The DVD Shrink main 
screen 
DVD Shrink is extremely easy to use. After you install it and configure it as you 
wish, you can simply put a protected DVD-Video disc in the drive and click 
Open Disc. DVD Shrink runs a quick preliminary analysis and then returns to 
the main screen. If you want to back up the DVD without any changes, simply 
click the Backup button and let 'er rip. If you want, for example, just the movie, 
you can click Re-author and eliminate unwanted structure elements. 
You can also make some minor changes that may have major quality benefits. 
For example, you can opt to eliminate the soundtrack in alternate languages, rip 
only stereo sound rather than stereo plus 5.1 sound, or eliminate the director's 
252 
Chapter 6 

comments audio track. You can also choose to replace some useless video 
content (for example, coming attractions) with a simple placeholder image, 
which frees up space for the content you want to keep. 
To install DVD Shrink under Ubuntu Linux, you must first install WINE (Wine Is 
Not an Emulator), a Linux package that allows many Windows programs to run 
under Linux. To do so, open the Ubuntu Applications menu and choose Add/ 
Remove. In the Add/Remove Applications dialog, search for WINE. Mark the 
checkbox and click the Apply Changes button. 
We can't give you a URL to download DVD Shrink, but a quick Google search 
will turn up numerous download sites. Save the installer executable to your 
hard drive and double-click it to fire up the WINE installer. You can accept all 
the WINE installer defaults, except that we recommend you set the Windows 
type to Windows XP. When the installation finishes, you'll be prompted to re-
start your system (which actually does a virtual Windows restart rather than 
restarting the Linux system). After the restart, DVD Shrink will appear in the 
Applications->WINE->Programs submenu. If you requested it during installa-
tion, there'll also be a program icon on your desktop. 
Although DVD Shrink works with nearly all DVD-Video discs, a few discs that 
were created after the final release of DVD Shrink use altered copy-protection 
methods that DVD Shrinkcan't handle.The usual symptom is a "disc read error" 
message during the preliminary scan or the analysis pass. If that occurs, DVD 
Shrink can't rip that DVD (although it can still be used to compress files ripped 
by a more recent ripper). You'll need to rip the disc with a different ripper, such 
as DVDFab, shown in Figure 6-70. 
m 
1 7.D.3.D (26/03/2010) 
DVD to DVD 
A 
Full Disc 
Main Movie 
®
=
5
® 
Split 
Customize 
Customize 5plit 
Clone 
More... 
DVD to Mobile 
V 
Blu-ray ta Blu-ray 
V 
E:lu ray to Mobile 
V 
File to Mobile 
V 
) D:\[DVD7699_A_TOUCH_QF_FRQ5T_8_2_5CN] 
Target: tfj Z:\data_l\data\vldeo 
DVD to DVD - Full Disc 
— Copying 
@ Copy DVD-Video (VIDEO_T5 folder) 
I B Copy DVD-Audio (AUDIO_TS Polder) 
I B Copy Non-DVD Files 
• Removing 
[ B Remove DT5 audio 
I B Remove menus, play the titles continually 
IB Rewind when done playing 
Title Playback Order Settings 
• Navigation (PathPlayer must be enabled) 
• 
Change DVD playback order 
• 
Jump to first menu when disc Inserted 
• 
Jump to main title when disc inserted 
I I Remove annoying PGCs (like FBI warnings) 
DVD7699_A_T0UCH_0F_FR05T_8_2_5' 
Quality: 100% (7301 MB ->7301 MB) 
GIT 
installing Software 
Figure 8-/0. The DVDFab 
main 
screen 
Building a Media Center System 
253 

installing Software 
The most recent free version of DVDFab will almost certainly be able to rip any 
DVD-Video disc that DVD Shrink chokes on. (The pay version of DVDFab has 
many additional capabilities and is well worth considering.) 
The free version of DVDFab operates only in file mode, ripping the contents 
of a DVD-Video disc to directories and files rather than to an ISO image file. 
Although the free version can compress these files to fit a 4.4 GB writable DVD, 
we've found that it's better to rip the files uncompressed (using the 100% or 
DVD9 setting) and then run DVD Shrink against those files to produce a com-
pressed ISO image file for later burning to disc. 
To install DVDFab, download the latest installer from the website and save it to 
the hard drive. Double-click the installer file to fire up the WINE installer, and 
proceed as described for installing DVD Shrink. 
Video Playback 
VLC Media Player (Ubuntu repositories) 
For watching videos, we need an application to turn our HDTV computer mon-
itor back into an HDTV, without distracting elements like the task bar, menu, 
or mouse pointer visible. We also need all of the controls present on a DVD 
player—play, pause, next/previous chapter, and so on. 
There are many video playback applications available for Linux, but for our 
purposes the VLC Media Player is the standout choice. Figure 6-71 shows the 
VLC control panel, which offers every control imaginable for playing back DVD 
and other video content. 
j . l i . 
11 . " •hiiiib^i m l h lim ii 1 
ifll ii 
ii h i i i i m i w i 
i 
^ DVD7699 A TOU C H OF F ROST_8_2_Sff] 
Media Audio Video Pjayback Playlist Jools Help 
An rftrn 
ü l i i 
DO 0 
G>D 
E 
lis® 
1 
19 
DVD7699 A T O U CH_OF_FROST_8_2_S 
1. OOx 
00:38/1:14:05 
Figure 8-/1. The VLC control 
panel 
Ubuntu does not install VLC by default. To install it, first make sure that you've 
installed the Ubuntu Restricted Extras package, which includes several of the 
codecs needed to display video in various formats. Then click the Ubuntu Ap-
plications menu and choose Add/Remove. When the Add/Remove Applica-
tions dialog appears, type "VLC" in the search box. Mark the VLC checkbox in 
the packages list and click Apply Changes to install VLC. 
With one exception, the default configuration of VLC will probably be suitable. 
To modify VLC settings, clickToolson the VLC control panel and choose Prefer-
ences to display the Preferences dialog shown in Figure 6-72. About the only 
change you may want to make is to mark the Fullscreen checkbox to cause VLC 
to come up in full-screen mode by default for watching videos. 
254 
Chapter 6 

4 
Interface 
(Î) 
Subtitles & OSD 
4 
Input & Codecs 
- 4 
Hotkeys 
Show settings 
® Isimplel 
O All 
General Video Settings 
0 
Enable video 
Display 
• 
Fullscreen 
• 
Always on top 
0 Skip frames 
Output 
Video snapshots 
Directory | 
Prefix 
[ vlcsnap-
Format 
png 
Reset Preferences 
B Accelerated video output 
E Window decorations 
• 
Sequential numbering 
Cancel 
Save 
Figure S-/2. VLC Preferences 
dialog 
Unless you change preferences, VLC displays video in windowed mode, as 
shown in Figure 6-73. You can toggle VLC output to full-screen mode from the 
VLC control panel Video menu. From full-screen mode, press the Escape key to 
return to the windowed display. 
Figure 8-/3. VLC windowed 
display 
output 
Building a Media Center System 

installing Software 
Image Management and Editing 
digiKam (Ubuntu repositories) 
There are many image management and editing applications available for 
Linux, but we think digiKam (Figure 6-74) is the best choice. We use it primarily 
to index, annotate, manipulate, and edit our collection of thousands of digital 
camera images, but it's also useful to manage and edit other images in nearly 
any format. (For example, we used it to manage theTIFF screen captures used 
in this chapter.) 
Figure 8-/4. digiKam splash 
screen 
Ubuntu doesn't install digiKam by default. To install digiKam, click the Ubuntu 
Applications menu and choose Add/Remove. When the Add/Remove Appli-
cations dialog appears, type "digiKam" in the search box. Mark the digiKam 
checkbox in the packages list and click Apply Changes. 
When you fire up digiKam for the first time, the splash screen shown in Figure 
6-74 appears, and persists until the program has finished scanning your hard 
drives. In our case, that took more than an hour, with the hard drives banging 
away the whole time. Of course, if you don't have 12TB of disk space and tens 
of thousands of image files, your wait will be shorter. 
Once indexing completes, you can use digiKam to organize your images into 
albums, attach captions, tags, and ratings to each image, and so on. Figure 
6-75 shows the main screen of digiKam as we began to attach captions and 
tags to some recently shot images. 
256 
Chapter 6 

installing Software 
a n : 
Album 
rag 
¡mage 
fcdit 
View 
Tools 
Batch 
Import 
fcxport 
bettings 
Help 
^ 
R.ic k v 
, • 
!» New 
* Properties 
-5 Search 
PI V i ™ 
edit 
/j1 Rename 
; ; full S i it 
- J 
working 
~ ^ harkup h-irfann 
backup-robert 
bii'iinpss 
a 
DVD 
* 
iiomeScientist 
fiiittelldrieuu!. 
* 
ne verde I 
a orj 
- 
BtPP3e 
Bipp?i- chapb 
fcg BtTPJe-firet-drat 
a 
p ^ 
,.ub'.< liplicm rri.itcri. 
"•g spreadsheets 
My Albums/data/work1ng/ora/BtPP3e/lmages/100_0415 
Al ht im n.itc; 15 Apr ?010 
File Properties 
IMGP1H1.PEF 
J,04Dx2,024 (fc.ljMpx) 
Pharagrnph Prop*rrl« 
Make/Mwlel 
PENTAX Coiporatiuu / PENT/,... 
Created: 
M/1V10 1Ï-0J.J0 pm 
Aiwnurr/Fornl: 
F?7 /WO mm (l'irc'nv Ç7.0 m 
EKEOEure.'Sens^vltyil.QO s S BOO ISO 
Mude.'Pru'jmrn: 
AuU) I Apettute piiuiity 
dlglKnm PrapfrtiM 
Option- 
— 
MfiPlfifil.PFFil Uf 
v -it-ÙÛ-ÙÛ " 
Figure 8-/S. digiKam 
main 
screen 
Indexing, annotating, and viewing image files is essential, but we also need 
the ability to edit and convert those image files. For example, as Robert was 
working on this section, Barbara handed him the DSLR she'd used to shoot 
images on a recent trip and asked him to download the RAW format image 
files she'd shot and convert them to JPEGs that she could have printed at Wal-
greens. No problem. For image editing, digiKam includes the professional-
grade showFoto image editor, shown in Figure 6-76. 
Figure 8-/8. showFoto 
main 
screen 
We've used a lot of image editors, and nothing else we've used comes close to 
the capabilities of showFoto. Like many well-designed applications, showFoto 
can be used on many levels, from easy cleanup and format/resolution con-
versions to very complex bit-level functions that we don't completely under-
stand. (OK, that we don't understand at all.) 
Building a Media Center System 
257 

installing Software 
FireWire if You Need It 
The Intel DH55TC 
motherboard 
does 
not provide a FireWire interface. We 
captured 
that screen on 
Robert's 
main system, where he does all the 
video transfers and heavy lifting. If 
you wan t Fire Wire support on your 
media center system, choose 
an 
ASUS, GIGABYTE, or Intel 
mother-
board that provides 
it, or simply 
install an inexpensive 
FireWire 
adapter 
card. 
Camcorder Capture 
Kino (Ubuntu repositories) 
Transferring your camcorder video to the media center system may be as sim-
ple as connecting the camcorder to a USB port. If the camcorder is a USB mass 
storage device, Linux pops up a File Browser window that lists the video files 
on the camcorder. From there, just copy the files to the video directory on your 
hard drive. If your camcorder captures video to an optical disc, insert the disc 
into the optical drive and copy the files from File Browser to your hard drive. 
If your DV camcorder uses the IEEE 1394 (FireWire) interface, you'll need a sep-
arate program to transfer your video files. The best one we've found is Kino, 
shown in Figure 6-77. That's Robert in our home lab, shooting an intro seg-
ment for one of his YouTube Home Scientist videos (http://www.youtube.com/ 
user/TheHomeScientist). 
Figure 8-//. Kino capturing 
video footage from our DV 
camcorder 
Kino requires FireWire support, which is not installed in Ubuntu by default. 
To install Kino and FireWire support, from the Ubuntu main menu choose 
System->Administration->Synaptic Package Manager. Search for "raw1394". 
When the list of packages that contain that string appears, mark the checkbox 
for the Iibraw1394 library item and select it for installation. Then search for 
"Kino" and mark it for installation. Click the Apply button to install Kino and 
1394 support. When the packages are installed, close Synaptic. 
You may encounter the same problem we do with 1394 support. If you run 
Kino and attempt to capture DV footage, it may tell you that the file /dev/ 
raw!394 is not available. The problem is that accessing that file requires root 
access. You can fix that problem as follows: 
Untitled - Kino 
File 
Edit View 
Help 
B 1 M 
Cock 
[> Properties 
n 
( j T | 
^ 
» 
M 
M 
î 
0 0 : 0 7 : 4 8 . 3 3 5 
Dropped : o 
Capturing /home/thDmpsorVtest-OOlOOl.dv 
w 
Edit 
5S 
Capture 
©
~ 
Timeline 
m 
Trim 
t-4-
File; |/home/thompson/test-001 
Storyboard 
Export 
258 
Chapter 6 

installing Software 
1. Close Kino. 
2. Open a terminal window (Applications->Accessories->Terminal). 
3. At the prompt, type cd /dev and press Enter. 
4. At the prompt, type sudo chmod 777 rawl394and press Enter (and type your 
password if prompted). 
5. Close the terminal window and restart Kino. 
The raw1394 library will be available until the system is rebooted. (Yes, this is 
a kludge, and there's probably a better way to do it. If so, we don't know what 
that is.) 
Camcorder Video Editing 
Cinelerra (http://cvs.cinelerra.org) 
When we started shooting YouTube videos, we spent a long time checking out 
various Linux video editors. Kino includes video editing functions, but they're 
limited and crude. We looked at several other editors, all of which had one or 
another fatal problem. Several friends and associates recommended we buy 
a Mac. Fortunately, we borrowed one first and played around with ¡Movie. We 
found that package so feature-poor that we considered it unusable, and the 
commercial alternatives for OS X or Windows cost much more than we were 
willing to pay. 
Finally, we came across Cinelerra, shown in Figure 6-78. Cinelerra is a professional-
grade video-editing program that's similar in power and features to Adobe's Pre-
miere Pro or Apple's Final Cut Pro but on a basic level is about as easy to use as 
Apple's ¡Movie. After playing around with Cinelerra for an hour or two, we were 
able to do everything we could do with ¡Movie, and a lot more. 
Easy Does It 
Ubuntu recently added the video 
editor PiTiVi as a standard 
pack-
age. It's considerably 
less 
power-
ful than Cinelerra, but it's also 
easier to learn and may be all you 
need. Look for PiTiVi under the 
Applications^Sound 
& Video 
menu. 
Figure 8-/8. Using Cinelerra to edit one of Robert's 
YouTube 
videos 
Building a Media Center System 
259 

Final Words 
The good news about Cinelerra is that it's free, incredibly powerful, and (rela-
tively) easy to learn to use. The bad news is that its interface is, uh, unusual. 
But you'll get used to that quickly enough. The other bad news is that you'll 
have to get your hands dirty to install it. It's not included in Ubuntu, and it's not 
available in the Ubuntu repositories. Cinelerra does, however, maintain its own 
repository, and it provides packages for current and recent Ubuntu releases. 
For complete instructions on installing Cinelerra, point your web browser to 
http://cvs.cinelerra.0rg/getting_cinelerra.php#ubur1tu. 
Final Words 
Now that we've finally done it, we can't believe we waited this long to build a 
real media center system and connect it to an HDTV. For relatively little money, 
we now have all of our audio and video content centralized and easily acces-
sible, not just in the den, but from anywhere in the house, and we no longer 
have to swap discs in and out. 
Barbara has instant access to the Web and her email. (Robert still has a separate 
den system, so he can browse the Web or check email while Barbara watches 
a video.) Robert can kick back on the sofa and edit videos on a big screen with 
high-quality audio. In fact, all of the functionality of a general-purpose PC is 
always available, just one click away. 
Of course, we seldom leave well enough alone. Here are some possible future 
upgrades we're considering: 
Security video 
Among our planned projects is implementing a complete home video 
security system with TCP/IP webcams and Linux security video manage-
ment software. We'll set up webcams to monitor the exterior doors, home 
interior, and yard, and run monitoring and video stream recording soft-
ware on the media center system. When someone rings the doorbell, one 
click will display the front-door webcam video/audio on the HDTV. We can 
even implement motion activation in software. When something changes 
significantly in a camera's field of view, recording kicks in automatically. 
We'll set up a cron job to transfer video still sequences via our broadband 
connection to an off-site server in case we're burgled and the media cen-
ter system is stolen. To guard against a burglar smart enough to cut our 
cable, we'll also set up cooperative arrangements with neighbors to trans-
fer video still sequences by WiFi to their systems, and vice versa. 
Home control 
We played around years ago with XI0 home control but found it to be 
unreliable. We may try again with a later technology, such as INSTEON or 
Universal Powerline Bus. If we do, the media center system will be an ideal 
central control system. 
260 
Chapter 6 

Final Words 
Weather station 
Barbara is a weather junkie. We have a standalone weather station with 
remote sensors for temperature, rainfall, and so on. It records things like 
maximum/minimum temperature since the last reset, but what Barbara 
would really like is a logging system that tracks and records temperatures 
and other data very accurately and with finegranularity.The media center 
system is an ideal control center for this project. 
Recording TV programs 
Yeah, we know. After arguing that there are much better alternatives for 
recording television programs, here we are talking about maybe adding 
PVR functions in the future. For now, we'll continue using our DVD record-
er when we infrequently want to record OTA programs. But everything 
dies sooner or later, and when our current DVD recorder goes to that great 
electronics warehouse in the sky, we may decide it makes more sense to 
add a tuner card and PVR software to our media center system than to 
replace the DVD recorder. 
These are just a few upgrade ideas. We'll probably think of many more uses for 
our media center system, and we suspect those of you who build your own 
media center systems will do the same. 
Building a Media Center System 
261 

Building an Appliance/ 
/ 
Nettop System 
' 
In a strict sense, we define an appliance system as a small, quiet computer 
that is dedicated to one task or a group of related tasks, such as a home 
server, a network-attached storage (NAS) box, a media center front-end, or a 
home-automation controller. In a broader sense, an appliance system may be 
a general-purpose computer that is particularly small, quiet, and unobtrusive. 
By that definition, the archetypal appliance systems are the Mac mini and the 
many models of ASUS Eee nettop systems and all-in-ones. 
But we don't have to buy a Mac Mini or ASUS Eee. We can build our own sys-
tem based on a 6.7" square Mini-ITX motherboard with an AMD or Intel pro-
cessor and run Windows 7 or Linux on it. Because we're designing and building 
it ourselves, we can optimize our system for our own needs and budget. 
For example, we can build an inexpensive, nearly silent appliance system with 
moderate performance around an Intel Atom motherboard and processor, or 
we can build a system with mainstream desktop performance around an Intel 
Core ¡3 or Core ¡5 processor. If we want both silence and high storage perfor-
mance at the expense of storage capacity, we can install a fast, silent solid-
state drive (SSD). If our priorities are low noise and high storage capacity at the 
expense of disk performance, we can install a quiet, high-capacity 5,400 RPM 
laptop drive. Or we can strike a happy compromise between noise level, ca-
pacity, and performance by installing a 7,200 RPM or faster laptop hard drive. 
Those aren't options with the Mac mini or the ASUS Eee. 
The point is, we can have it our way, and so can you. In this chapter, we'll de-
sign and build the perfect appliance system for our needs. But your priorities 
may differ from ours, so we'll also point out alternatives all along the way. 
IN THIS CHAPTER 
Determining Functional Requirements 
Hardware Design Criteria 
Component Considerations 
Building the Appliance System 
Final Words 
Determining Functional Requirements 
The problem with determining functional requirements for an appliance 
system is that the appliance umbrella covers a huge range of systems. For 
example, we found 18 ASUS Eee models, ranging from a $230 nettop with a 
single-core Intel Atom CPU and no display to an $1,100 all-in-one model with 
a Core2 Duo processor and a 21 "LCD display. 
We can't build an all-in-one system—one that embeds the motherboard and 
drives in the display—but that's all to the good. With an all-in-one system, if 
one thing breaks, the whole computer is unusable while you ship it off for 
263 

Determining Functional Requirements 
repair and wait for its return. With a separate system unit and display, it's easy 
to repair or swap out the faulty component and have the system back up and 
running quickly. 
By necessity, we had to choose specific components for our own appliance 
system. That allowed us to optimize it for our own requirements, but obviously 
your own priorities may differ. Accordingly, we specify numerous alternative 
choices, indicating the components that we might have used if we had been 
designing the appliance system for a different purpose. 
We set our price goal at $350 without the display, external peripherals, or 
software—the same as for our budget system. The two systems are very dif-
ferent in their emphases, though. The appliance system makes small size and 
low noise the priorities at the expense of performance; the budget system em-
phasizes bang for the buck. 
When we sat down to think through our own requirements for an appliance 
system, here's what we came up with: 
Size 
We plan to use a Mini-ITX motherboard, so we looked at Mini-ITX cases 
in the 7-liter range (roughly the dimensions of a letter-sized sheet of pa-
per, by about 4" high). That gives us room for a slim optical drive, one 2.5" 
hard drive bay with a spare bay for future expansion, and one or two half-
height PCI and/or PCI Express expansion cards. A 7-liter case is about two-
thirds larger in every dimension than a Mac mini case—about five times 
the volume—but still small enough to be unobtrusive. 
Reliability 
One of the major characteristics of any appliance is that it Just Works. 
When you click the button on the remote control, you expect your televi-
sion or DVD player to power up every time, day after day, year after year. 
That's a bit much to expect from any computer system, so our goal is rea-
sonably high reliability. 
Of course, the trade-off here is between reliability on the one hand and 
performance and cost on the other. We could design a system with ex-
treme reliability by eliminating moving parts entirely—leave out the 
optical drive, use a passively cooled processor and power supply, use an 
SSD drive(s) rather than mechanical hard drives, and so on. By doing that, 
though, we'd also significantly increase costs, or decrease functionality 
and performance, or both. We decided to strike a happy medium here, 
shooting for high reliability without needlessly increasing costs or sacrific-
ing performance and functionality. 
Performance 
We don't expect our appliance system to be anywhere near as fast as 
a mainstream desktop system, but we do want enough horsepower to 
browse the Web, check email, watch YouTube videos, and so on—all with-
out any noticeable sluggishness. In fact, a system with even half the pro-
cessor and disk performance of the budget system would be more than 
264 
Chapter 7 

Hardware Design Criteria 
adequate for our needs, both now and for the next few years. This system 
won't have the performance needed for even undemanding 3D games, so 
integrated video will suffice. 
Noise level 
We want our appliance system to be unobtrusive, but that requires more 
than just small size. A small system that sounds like a leaf blower is an 
epic fail. Building a completely silent system is possible, but it involves 
too many cost, performance, and reliability trade-offs. We decided to aim 
for a system that was extremely quiet, but not completely silent. If system 
noise is not noticeable from two or three feet away, that's sufficient. 
Hardware Design Criteria 
With the functional requirements determined, the next step was to establish 
design criteria for the appliance PC hardware. Here are the relative priorities 
we assigned for our appliance PC. Your priorities may, of course, differ. 
Our appliance system configuration is heavily skewed toward reliability, size, 
and noise level, with other elements taking a backseat. Here's the breakdown: 
Price 
Price is moderately important for this system, as we'll use it only as a sup-
plemental system. We're willing to spend about the same amount we did 
for the higher-performance budget system. Obviously, if this were to be a 
primary system, we'd boost the budget significantly. 
Reliability 
Reliability ties for top importance with size and noise level. We'll make 
minor compromises in cost, performance, or features to make this system 
as reliable as possible without taking any of the extreme measures de-
scribed in the preceding section. 
Size is another high priority. We don't need a truly tiny system, but we 
want something that will fit comfortably and unobtrusively on Robert's 
end table, either nestled in under the LCD display's bezel or perhaps sit-
ting under its base. 
Noise level 
Noise level is as important as reliability and size. That means we'll need a 
passively cooled processor and a notebook hard drive. If the system has 
any fans, we'll want them to run at very low speed while still providing 
adequate cooling. 
Expandability 
Expandability is unimportant for our appliance system. We may at some 
point want to make some minor system upgrades, such as adding an 
expansion card or more memory and perhaps a second hard drive, if we 
have a free bay. To the extent that we can provide for such future expansion 
Price 
• • • - f r - f r 
Reliability 
* * * * i ? r 
Size 
* * * * i ? r 
Noise level 
* * * * i ? r 
Expandability 
-kikikikik 
Processor performance -k-kikikik 
Video performance -kikikikik 
Disk capacity/performance -k-kikikik 
Building an Appliance/Nettop System 
265 

Component Considerations A 
Brian Bilbrey Comments 
If this system has a home server to 
pull files from, a smaller, faster drive 
might be much better, or even a 
small, inexpensive SSD just for the 
OS, with all data stored on the server. 
without compromising higher-priority considerations, we'll do so. But we 
consider expandability as tied with video performance for dead last in 
priority. 
Processor performance 
Processor performance is relatively unimportant for our appliance system. 
Minimizing noise in a small case just about requires a passively cooled 
processor, like some of the Intel Atom models. We'd like a dual-core pro-
cessor with a CPU Mark score of 500 or higher, but we wouldn't rule out a 
single-core unit if it meets our needs better than the available dual-core 
models. 
Video performance 
Video performance is tied with expandability for the lowest priority. We 
want integrated video good enough to drive the display we choose at its 
optimum resolution. Other than that, we'll make no demands of the video 
subsystem. 
Disk capacity/performance 
Disk capacity and performance are relatively unimportant, in the same 
category as processor performance. Size and noise constraints mean we'll 
have to use a 2.5" notebook hard drive rather than a 3.5" desktop unit. 
We'd like a 1 TB 7,200 RPM drive, but that's not an option in this size range. 
We'll choose a higher-capacity 5,400 RPM drive rather than a small-capacity 
7,200 RPM unit. The extra speed would be nice, but the higher capacity is 
a bigger priority for us. 
Component Considerations 
If you've ever built a standard PC, you'll probably be surprised when you first 
see just how small all the components for an appliance system are. Mini-ITX 
motherboards are much smaller than what you'll be used to. Drives look like 
they've shrunk in the dryer. The largest Mini-ITX cases are small, and the small-
est are tiny. 
All of this may have a major impact on your system design and build. You'll 
have to verify, for example, that your optical drive fits your case. You'll proba-
bly use a slim (quarter-height) optical drive, but you may find that not just any 
slim drive will do. The depth of a particular slim optical drive may be greater 
than the case will accommodate. 
Similarly, the motherboard layout may assume much more significance 
than it has in an ATX or even pATX system. For example, the main ATX power 
cable from your power supply may be too short to reach the connector on 
the motherboard, or parts of the case frame may block access to motherboard 
connectors. The standard CPU cooler you planned to use may be too tall to fit 
the case, and so on. 
Sometimes, there'll bean easy solution.You may, for example, be able to con-
nect a front-panel USB cable to a different set of motherboard USB header pins 
than you planned to use, or you may be able to bend something just slightly, 
266 
Chapter 8 

Component Considerations 
enough to give you clearance to plug in a cable or drive in a screw. But some-
times a particular component just can't be made to work in a particular case, 
which is why it's important to do your homework. 
Before you actually order any component, check the website for detailed 
specifications—things like component height or mounting hole positions. 
Study a high-resolution image of the motherboard and match it up against 
the case you intend to use. You may find that an essential motherboard con-
nector is blocked by the bottom of the power supply or that some of the com-
ponents near the edge of the motherboard are too tall to fit under the edge of 
an intruding part of the case frame. 
In short, you have to take much more care in choosing components for a Mini-
ITX system than you do with larger systems. (We actually built our appliance 
system using the components we recommend, but we didn't build systems 
around our suggested alternatives, so you'll need to checkcarefully for yourself.) 
Even if you're careful to choose only components that fit the case, you may 
find that building the system is more involved than you expected. With larger 
systems, you can usually install components in nearly any order that makes 
sense to you. With a Mini-ITX system, you may have to install components in 
one particular order, because installing one component may block the access 
you need to install another component. 
If you use components other than those we actually used to build the system 
illustrated here, don't be surprised if you have one or two false starts. That hap-
pens to us more often than not when we build a tiny system with components 
that we haven't used before. 
Worst case, you may get the whole system assembled before you realize that 
you forgot to install a cable whose motherboard connector is no longer acces-
sible. So you remove the drives and bays, disconnect everything until you have 
access to the hidden connector, connect that cable in the proper sequence, 
and rebuild the rest of the system. You may spend an extra half-hour building 
the system and curse yourself for not getting it right in the first place, but that's 
just part of building tiny systems. 
With those cautions kept firmly in mind, here are the components we chose 
for our own appliance system. 
Case and Power Supply 
Antec ISK 300 Mini-ITX case (http://www.antec.com) 
When we wrote the preceding edition, Mini-ITX products were available but 
had not yet become mainstream. In particular, the selection of suitable Mini-
ITX cases was extremely limited. But Mini-ITX "arrived" in 2009, and a wide se-
lection of Mini-ITX motherboards and cases is now readily available. 
Mini-ITX cases range in volume from about 1.8 liters (a smidgen larger than a 
Mac mini) to 15 liters (a bit smaller than a basketball). Most mainstream Mini-
ITX cases are either flat ("book-style") or cubic, but models are also available 
for rack-mounting or installing in vehicles. 
Building an Appliance/Nettop System 
267 

Component Considerations A 
Some Mini-ITX cases, such as the Antec 300-150, have a built-in power supply 
that connects to a standard AC wall receptacle.The power supply provides the 
usual power cables for the motherboard and drives, just as in a standard ATX 
system. Other Mini-ITX cases, such as the Antec 300-65, use an external power 
brick that provides low-voltage DC current to a jack on the case. That jack con-
nects to a circuit board inside the case, which provides the usual power cables 
for the motherboard and drives. 
Cases with an internal power supply (usually) have higher output, and may be 
necessary if you use a relatively fast processor (such as an Intel Core 2 Duo or 
45W AMD Athlon) rather than an Intel Atom—or if you install a high-current 
video adapter or multiple 3.5" hard drives. Conversely, cases that use an ex-
ternal power brick are (usually) cooler-running and quieter overall and may 
provide an extra drive bay without increasing the case volume. They are also 
usually somewhat less expensive. 
Book-style cases are generally less obtrusive and more space-efficient, partic-
ularly if you intend to use a passively cooled processor such as an Intel Atom. 
The greater height of a cube or shoebox case may be required if your proces-
sor requires active cooling or if you intend to install a full-size video adapter. 
Another benefit of these somewhat larger cases is that many accept standard-
size optical drives and 3.5" hard drives, which broadens your options and cuts 
your costs. 
Among the book-style cases, our first choice is the Antec ISK 300, which is 
available with a 150W internal power supply or a 65W power brick. The only 
minor fault we noticed with these cases is that the side cooling fan is noisier 
than wed like. Even with the fan running at low speed, the hum is audible to 
us if the system is less than a meter away. Most people probably wouldn't con-
sider the fan noise objectionable, but if you do you can easily replace the case 
fan with a $10 aftermarketfan that's much quieter. 
If you're building a Mini-ITX home theater system, you may prefer the Thermal-
take RSI H SD100. If you want to use a mainstream processor and standard-size 
optical and hard drives, our pick is theThermaltake Element QVL52021N2U, 
which includes a 200W SFX power supply. If we were building a "pocket battle-
ship"Mini-ITX system with a fast processor and high-performance graphics card, 
we'd choose the Silverstone Sugo SG05-B, which includes a 300W power sup-
ply and can accept a RADEON HD 4850 graphics card. 
Processor, CPU Cooler, and Motherboard 
Intel D510MO (http://www.intel.com) 
Depending on the processor you choose, the CPU performance of your appli-
ance system may vary by an order of magnitude or more. At one extreme, you 
can build your appliance system around a processor like the Intel Core ¡5 and 
achieve performance that matches that of all but the fastest desktop systems. 
At the other extreme, you can choose a processor like the dual-core Intel Atom 
D510, which is much slower but also much less expensive and much cooler-
running. 
268 
Chapter 8 

Component Considerations 
The Intel D510 Atom is slow only in comparison to more expensive recent pro-
cessors, though. To put the performance of the D510 Atom in perspective, it's 
faster than high-performance processors from just a few years ago, such as the 
AMD Athlon 644000+ and the 3.8 GHz Intel Pentium 4. Millions of people still 
use systems with those older, slower processors and are perfectly content with 
their performance. 
Before you decide on a processor, decide just how much performance you re-
ally need. It's tempting to build a faster appliance system than you really need, 
but the downsides of doing that are that your fast appliance system will be 
larger, noisier, and more expensive. 
For a typical appliance system, we think the best choice is an Intel Atom D510 
processor on an Intel D510MO motherboard.That combination is fast enough 
to handle routine tasks under Linux or Windows. The integrated Intel Graphics 
Media Accelerator 3150 (GMA 3150) video is not fast enough for full-HD video 
playback, but it is fast enough for SD video and has excellent display qual-
ity for typical general computing tasks. (We do wish the D510MO included a 
DVI or HDMI output rather than just analog VGA, but that's acceptable for our 
purposes.) The processor and video together draw a maximum of only 13W, 
which means the system can use passive cooling.The motherboard meets Intel's 
usual quality, compatibility, and reliability standards, which are extremely high. 
And the whole shebang—motherboard with processor installed—costs well 
under $100. 
Other than the analog-only video port, our only criticism of the D510MO is 
that it includes only two SATA connectors, which limits us to one hard drive 
and one optical drive. Or so it seems at first glance. In fact, we could install 
an optical drive just long enough to install the operating system and then re-
move it and substitute a second hard drive. Alternatively, we could install a 
half-height PCI or PCI Express expansion card to get additional SATA ports. 
The GIGABYTE GA-D510UD is another excellent choice. It's very similar to the 
Intel D510MO, but costs $10 or so more. For that extra money, you get an add-
ed standard ATA port and two more SATA ports. GIGABYTE (along with ASUS) 
makes first-rate motherboards, and we might actually have chosen this board 
if it had been the same price as Intel's offering or if it had included a DVI/HDMI 
video output. But in our experience it's tough to beat Intel motherboards for 
quality, stability, and reliability, so we happily selected the Intel D510MO. 
Of course, you may need more horsepower—CPU, video, or both—than the 
D510MO provides. Here are some options: 
• If processor performance is adequate but you need better video perfor-
mance, choose an ASUS or GIGABYTE D510 Atom motherboard that uses 
embedded NVIDIA 8xxx/9xxx-series or ION video. Those boards are more 
expensive than the D510MO, but their embedded video is more than ade-
quate to handle full-HD video streams, such as for Blu-ray playback. Alter-
natively, look for an ASUS or GIGABYTE Atom motherboard that includes 
a PCI Express x16 expansion slot and install a standalone video adapter. 
Of course, that means you'll probably also need a larger case and power 
supply. 
Building an Appliance/Nettop System 
269 

Component Considerations A 
• If you need better processor performance, buy the Intel DH57JG, which 
supports fast Intel Core i3 and Core ¡5 processors, includes integrated Intel 
HD graphics, and provides a PCI Express x16 expansion slot. Once again, 
you'll probably want to choose a cube- or shoebox-style case with an in-
ternal power supply of 200W or more. 
Why no AMD products? In our opinion, the Intel platforms are simply a much 
better choice for any appliance system, and we don't see that changing any 
time soon. 
Memory 
Crucial CT2KIT12864AA800 PC2-6400 Kit (2 GBx2) 
0h ttp://www.crucial.com) 
The Intel D51C1MO motherboard has two DDR2 memory slots and supports 
dual-channel memory operation with PC2-5300 or PC2-6400 modules in ca-
pacities up to 2 GB, for a maximum of 4 GB. At the time we built this system, 
PC2-6400 CL6 modules sold for the same price as PC2-5300 CL5 modules. Even 
with one extra wait-state, the PC2-6400 memory is slightly faster, so that's 
what we installed. 
We might have gotten away with installing only 2 GB of memory in this sys-
tem, but the 4 GB memory kit cost only about $40 more than the 2 GB kit. We 
decided that a system with a low-power processor and 5,400 RPM hard drive 
could really use a bit of extra help, so we decided to install a 4 GB memory kit. 
We chose a compatible 4 GB memory kit from Crucial because we've never 
had a problem with Crucial memory. 
Video Adapter 
Integrated Video 
The Intel D510MO motherboard includes integrated GMA 3150 video, which 
is sufficient for our needs. If we required more integrated graphics power, 
we'd have chosen an Atom motherboard that included integrated NVIDIA 
8xxx/9xxx-series or ION video. If we required still more graphics horsepower, 
we'd have chosen an Atom motherboard with a PCI Express x16 slot and in-
stalled a midrange video adapter, such as an ATI RADEON HD 4xxx-series card. 
Primary Storage 
Seagate Momentus 5400 ST9640320AS (640GB) (http://www.seagate.com) 
This section was originally titled "Hard Drive," but an appliance system doesn't 
necessarily use a traditional 3.5" hard drive, or even a 2.5" laptop hard drive. 
Nowadays, a solid-state drivt (SSD) is an affordable option. Each of those three 
types has advantages and disadvantages. 
A typical 3.5" 7,200 RPM desktop hard drive can have a capacity of 2 TB or 
more and, at roughly $0.10/GB, has by far the lowest cost per gigabyte of any 
of these drive types. Read and write speeds are both high, as is reliability. Most 
book-style Mini-ITX cases are too small to have a 3.5"drive bay, and we rejected 
270 
Chapter 8 

Component Considerations 
those few that did for other reasons. Some cube-style Mini-ITX cases provide 
one 3.5" drive bay, and a few provide two or more. If the case you choose has 
a 3.5"drive bay and you require significant storage capacity, installing a quiet 
desktop 3.5" hard drive is by far the most cost-effective decision. 
Nearly all Mini-ITX cases include one or more 2.5"drive bays. Mainstream 2.5" 
laptop hard drives are available with capacities up to 1 TB and rotation rates 
from 4,200 to 7,200 RPM. A few 10,000 and 15,000 RPM models are available, 
but their prices are outrageous, their capacities small, and their heat produc-
tion and noise prodigious. The price, capacity, and performance of laptop hard 
drives are closely interrelated: the largest drives are expensive and slow, the 
fastest drives are expensive and small, and the least expensive drives are small 
and slow. 
A typical laptop 2.5" hard drive has half the capacity of a 3.5" desktop hard 
drive that costs the same, and runs at 5,400 rather than 7,200 RPM. You pay 
that premium for the smaller physical size and lower power consumption. 
Read and write speeds are closely matched and vary from moderate to high 
depending on the type of drive. Laptop hard drives have a reputation for un-
reliability compared to desktop hard drives, but in all fairness that's probably 
because they are typically used in poorly ventilated laptop systems that are 
much more likely than desktops to be dropped or shocked. If the case you 
choose does not accept a 3.5" hard drive, the most cost-effective choice is a 
2.5" hard drive in whatever combination of capacity, performance, and price is 
best for your needs. 
Solid-state drives debuted in consumer systems as very expensive options for 
high-end notebook systems, but they are becoming increasingly common in 
Mini-ITX systems. Their advantages are obvious: high performance, low power 
consumption (and heat production), and completely silent operation. SSDs 
are available in many form factors, including some units that can be installed 
in a PCI slot, leaving a drive bay available for another drive. 
With the exception of their very high price per gigabyte, the disadvantages of 
SSDs are less obvious, but worth considering. First and foremost, SSDs wear 
out as they are used. Consumer-grade multi-level cell (MLC) SSDs are gener-
ally rated for one to two million write cycles (1,000 to 10,000 writes per cell) 
and professional-grade single-level cell (SLC) SSDs for about five million write 
cycles (100,000 writes per cell). Even with wear-leveling enabled and a large 
allocation of spare sectors, the capacity of any SSD gradually decreases with 
use as more individual cells become unusable. 
The performance of SSDs is a mixed bag. Excluding the least expensive mod-
els, a new SSD generally offers noticeably faster read performance than a hard 
drive. In particular, random reads are much faster because there are no heads 
to be moved and zero latency. Writes are much slower than reads, however, 
and write performance declines as the drive ages, even if the operating sys-
tem fully supports TRIM (as do Windows 7 and recent Linux releases). In some 
cases, write performance may degrade sufficiently to cause the system to ap-
pear to hang for a second or more while a write is completed. 
Finally, although it's not an issue for most people, it's impossible to securely 
wipe an SSD. Well, at least if you expect the drive to be usable after it's wiped. 
Building an Appliance/Nettop System 
271 

Component Considerations A 
Balancing all of these factors, we decided that a 2.5" laptop hard drive was the 
best choice for our appliance system. We'd budgeted about $100 for primary 
storage. That would have bought us a 1 TB or larger 7,200 RPM 3.5" desktop 
hard drive, but alas, we had no room for a 3.5"drive. For $100 we could have 
purchased a 32 GB MLC SSD, but that was simply too little storage space. So we 
looked at 2.5"laptop hard drives.The 5,400 RPM 640 GB Seagate ST9640320AS 
Momentus was selling for about $90, and the 7,200 RPM 320 GB Seagate ST-
903203N3A1 AS Momentus for $20 more. We decided on the larger, slower 
model, but on another day we might just as easily have chosen the smaller 
7,200 RPM drive. 
Optical Drive 
LiteOn DS-8A4S Slim Internal DVD Burner (http://www.liteonit.com) 
One of the drawbacks of using a small Mini-ITX case is that few of them, in-
cluding the one we chose, have room for standard optical drives. That meant 
we needed a "slim" DVD burner. Compared to standard units, the selection of 
such drives is quite limited, the prices are higher, and the durability is lower. 
Still, the only alternative would have been to use a different case, and that we 
didn't want to do. 
Slim internal DVD burners are available in slot-load and tray-load models. Our 
experience with slot-load drives from numerous manufacturers has been uni-
formly terrible. (Weonce had to tear down a system and remove and disassemble 
the optical drive to reclaim the DVD it had eaten, which was a friend's only 
backup copy.) Ruling out slot-load models left us with several tray-load mod-
els to consider. Of those, we ruled out Sony and LG models because our experi-
ence with slim drives from those manufacturers has been less than good. That 
left us with the LiteOn DS-8A4S drive, which we purchased. 
External Peripherals 
We're going to wimp out here. It's not that we don't want to list recommended 
external peripherals for the appliance system. It's that we can't, because the 
best external peripherals for our appliance system probably won't be the best 
for your system. Accordingly, all we can recommend is that you choose ex-
ternal peripherals according to your budget and the purpose of your system. 
Our appliance system will replace Robert's current den system, a mini-tower 
unit. Yes, we also have a media center system with a 42" HDTV display in the 
den, but Robert may want to do something else while Barbara re-watches 
Brideshead Revisited. Of course, Barbara may want to do something else while 
Robert watches Firefly or Buffy the Vampire Slayer (for the fourth or fifth time), 
but she doesn't want a computer and display on her end table. 
272 
Chapter 8 

Building the Appliance System 
Component Summary 
Table 7-1 summarizes our component choices for our appliance system. 
Table 7-1. Bill of materials for appliance 
system 
I Component 
Product 
I 
Case 
Antec ISK 300-150 Mini-ITX case w/150W power supply 
Motherboard 
Intel D510M0 
Processor 
Intel D510 Atom (installed on motherboard) 
CPU cooler 
(Installed on motherboard) 
Memory 
Crucial CT2KIT25664AA800 PC2-6400 4 G B Kit (2 G B x 2 ) 
Video adapter 
(Integrated) 
Hard disk drive 
Seagate ST9640320AS Momentus 5400 (640 GB) 
Optical drive 
LiteOn DS-8A4S Slim Internal DVD Burner 
Building the Appliance System 
Figure 7-1 shows the internal components of the appliance system. (Yep, that's 
the same image we used on the cover.) The Intel D510MC) motherboard sits 
atop the Antec ISK300-65 case, with the Crucial 4 GB memory kit to its left. At 
the bottom right are the LiteOn slimline DVD writer and the Seagate Momen-
tus 2.5" hard drive. That's everything. Not many components, but that's all it 
takes to build our appliance system. 
What's Wrong with This Picture? 
OK, we admit it. We 
compromised 
our technical integrity to get a pret-
tier cover image. We figured 
we'd 
better 'fess up now, before one of our 
sharp-eyed 
readers noticed the glar-
ing mistake in this image and 
called 
us to account. 
Yes, that's a 
7mm 
Sears Craftsman 
nut driver, which we 
chose for its pretty orange 
handle. 
We've used cases that require a 5 mm 
or 6 mm nut driver, but never a 7 mm 
one. And we didn't actually need a 
nut driver for this system, 
anyway. 
Figure /-I. Appliance 
system 
components, 
awaiting 
construction 
Building an Appliance/Nettop System 
273 

Building the Appliance System 
If this is your first system build, it might take you an hour or so. If you've built 
systems before, you'll probably have it ready to boot up in only 10 or 15 min-
utes. Before you proceed, make sure you have everything you need. Open each 
box and verify the contents against the packing list. Make sure the I/O shield 
and all driver discs, cables, screws, and other small components are present. 
Order Is Important 
When you build a standard desktop or tower PC, the exact component 
installation 
sequence usually doesn't matter much. With an appliance system, that's often not 
true. The small case means there's little room to work in. One component 
may be 
inaccessible after you've installed another component. If you forget to connect a 
cable to the motherboard, for example, you may later have to partially 
disassemble 
the system to get to it. 
The Antec ISK300 case is much better than most small cases in this respect. The 
integrated top and side panels slide off as a unit, which means the interior is quite 
accessible, albeit a bit cramped in places. If you're using a different case, it's worth 
spending some time thinking through the installation order before you actually 
start connecting things. Otherwise, you may have to tear everything down and start 
again. 
As you build your system, pay particular attention to cable routing. As you 
connect 
cables, make sure you route them along and around frame components 
so that it 
will be possible to dress and tie off the cables neatly to avoid restricting air flow or 
fouling the fan. 
Preparing the Case 
To begin preparing the Antec ISK300-65 case, remove the three thumbscrews 
that secure the cover, as shown in Figure 7-2. (On our case, the thumbscrews 
were tight enough that we needed a screwdriver to loosen them.) 
After you remove the thumbscrews, slide the cover back about a third of the 
way and then lift the cover straight off, as shown in Figure 7-3. 
Figure /-?.. Remove the three thumbscrews 
that secure the cover 
Figure /-3. Slide the cover back about a third of the way and lift it 
off 
274 
Chapter 7 

Building the Appliance System 
The next step is to remove the drive tray assembly. To do so, remove the three 
Phillips screws—one at the center rear and one each at the left and right 
front—that secure it to the chassis frame, as shown in Figure 7-4. Grip the 
middle of the tray, as shown in Figure 7-5, and slide the tray toward the rear 
of the chassis until it comes free. Lift the drive tray clear of the chassis and put 
it aside. 
Figure /-4. Remove the three Phillips screws that secure the drive 
Figure /-5. Slide the drive tray back and lift it off 
tray to the frame 
With the drive tray removed, the inside of the case is visible. If you've spent 
any time inside a PC before, the first thing you'll probably notice is that there 
are lots of power supply wires, but no power supply. That circuit board at the 
lower front of the case accepts 19VDC from the power brick and converts it to 
the voltages needed by the system components. 
You'll also notice a thin metal I/O shield, which you can put aside for later dis-
posal. Nearly every case we've used, including the Antec ISK300-65, includes a 
generic I/O shield whose holes never seem to match the port arrangement on 
any motherboard ever manufactured on planet Earth. We're not sure why case 
manufacturers include these worthless bits of metal. 
But we do need to install an I/O shield, both to block dust from entering the 
large hole that would otherwise be present and to make sure the case pro-
vides proper ventilation to the processor and chipset. Open the motherboard 
box and locate the I/O shield provided with the motherboard. Before you 
proceed, place that I/O shield against the back panel of the motherboard, as 
shown in Figure 7-6, to verify that the holes in the template match the ports on 
the motherboard. (You might think the template and motherboard are guar-
anteed to match, since they came in the same box. Not always. We've found 
mismatched I/O shields supplied with more than one motherboard, including 
some from first-tier manufacturers.) 
Once you've done that, install the custom I/O shield. Working from inside the 
case, align the bottom, right, and left edges of the I/O shield with the match-
ing case cutout. When the I/O shield is positioned properly, begin on one 
corner and press gently along the edges to seat it in the cutout, as shown in 
Figure 7-7. 
A 
You Can't Get There from Here 
If you're using the Antec 
ISK300-65 
case and Intel D5WMO 
mother-
board, jump forward and read the 
section on seating and securing the 
motherboard 
before you actually 
install the I/O shield. 
Building an Appliance/Nettop System 
275 

Building the Appliance System 
Figure /-8. Verify that the I/O shield matches the motherboard 
rear-panel ports 
Figure /-/. Position the I/O shield and snap it into place 
See the Light 
If you simply look at the mother-
board, it's easy to miss one of the 
mounting holes in all the clutter. We 
generally hold the motherboard 
up 
to a light, which makes the mounting 
holes stand out distinctly. 
A 
Check and Double Check 
If your case comes with preinstalled 
standoffs, make absolutely cer-
tain that each standoff matches a 
motherboard mounting 
hole. If you 
find one that doesn't, remove it. 
Leaving an "extra" standoff in place 
may cause a short circuit that could 
damage 
the motherboard 
and/or 
other 
components. 
The I/O shield should snap into place, although getting it to seat properly 
sometimes requires several attempts. As you apply pressure from inside the 
case against the template, use your finger to apply offsetting pressure on the 
outside of the template to avoid bending it. If you can't get it to snap into 
place using finger pressure alone, use the handle of your screwdriver to press 
along the edges until you feel it seat. 
Be careful not to bend the I/O shield when you seat it.The template holes need 
to line up with the external port connectors on the motherboard I/O panel. If 
the template is bent even slightly it may be difficult to seat the motherboard 
properly. After you seat the I/O shield, temporarily place the motherboard 
in position to verify that the back-panel I/O ports on the motherboard align 
properly with the corresponding holes in the I/O shield. 
Once you're sure the I/O shield is installed and aligned properly, hold the 
motherboard over the case, aligned and positioned as it will be when it is in-
stalled in the case. Look down through each motherboard mounting hole to 
locate the mounting positions on the base of the case. The goals are to make 
sure that there is a standoff installed that corresponds to each motherboard 
mounting hole, and that no extra standoffs are installed. 
If necessary, install and/or remove standoffs until each motherboard mount-
ing hole has a standoff and each standoff has a motherboard mounting hole. 
You'll probably be able to use your fingers to install or remove standoffs. If the 
fit is too tight for finger pressure alone, use needlenose pliers. 
Once you've installed and/or removed the standoffs required to match the 
motherboard mounting hole configuration, do a final check to verify that (a) 
each motherboard mounting hole has a corresponding standoff, and (b) no 
standoffs are installed that don't correspond to a motherboard mounting hole. 
The Intel D510IV10 motherboard hasfour mounting holes.The Antec ISK300-65, 
like many cases, ships with several standoffs preinstalled. All four of the stand-
offs preinstalled in the ISK300-65 corresponded with mounting holes on the 
D510IV10 motherboard, so we didn't need to install or remove any standoffs. 
Place the prepared case aside for now. 
276 
Chapter 7 

Building the Appliance System 
Installing Memory 
The D510MC) motherboard comes with the Atom processor and CPU cooler 
preinstalled, so all we need to do to prepare the motherboard is install the 
memory modules. 
Installing memory in the Intel D510MC) motherboard is straightforward. We 
have two memory modules to install, and two memory slots available. 
To begin, ground yourself. Place the antistatic wrapper from the D510MC) 
motherboard on a flat surface, and place the motherboard atop the wrapper. 
Pivot the white plastic locking tabs on both sides of both DIMM sockets out-
ward to prepare the slots to receive DIMMs, as shown in Figure 7-8. 
Orient the first DIMM with the notch in the contact area of the DIMM aligned 
with the raised plastic tab in the DIMM socket and slide it into place, as shown 
in Figure 7-9. 
Figure /-8. Pivot the DIMM slot locking tabs outward to prepare 
Figure /-S. Orient the DIMM 
with the notch aligned properly 
with 
the slot to accept a DIMM 
the 
socket 
With the DIMM properly aligned with the slot and oriented vertically relative to 
the slot, use both thumbs to press down on the DIMM until it snaps into place. 
The locking tabs should automatically pivot back up into the locked position, 
as shown in Figure 7-10, when the DIMM snaps into place. If they don't, close 
them manually to lock the DIMM into the socket, as shown in Figure 7-11. 
Repeat this procedure for the second DIMM. With the memory installed, you're 
almost ready to install the motherboard in the case. Before you do that, check 
the motherboard documentation to determine if any configuration jump-
ers need to be set. The Intel D510MO has only one jumper, the BIOS Setup 
configuration jumper, which sets operating mode. On our motherboard, that 
jumper was set correctly to Normal (pins 1 and 2 jumpered) by default, so we 
proceeded to the next step. 
,-A 
1 Avoid Static Shock 
1 
Before handling 
memory 
modules 
or 
i 
other static-sensitive 
components, 
i 
first touch the chassis frame to 
' 
ground 
yourself. 
Building an Appliance/Nettop System 
277 

Building the Appliance System 
Figure /-10. Seat the DIMM by pressing firmly until it snaps into 
Figure /-ll. Make sure the latches engage the notches on the 
place 
DIMM to lock the DIMM into place 
r A 
i 
Neatness Counts 
i 
Before you install the motherboard, 
1 
tie off the front-panel and other 
i 
cables to keep them out of the way. 
i 
The limited working space inside 
i 
a small case makes it easy to lose 
' 
track of a cable and later find that 
i 
it's caught underneath the mounted 
i 
motherboard and can't be pulled 
1 
free because the connector jams it 
. 
in place. 
Installing the Motherboard 
Installing the motherboard is the most time-consuming step in building the 
system because there are so many cables to connect. It's important to get all 
of them connected right, so take your time and verify each connection before 
and after you make it. Figure 7-12 shows the positions of the major compo-
nents and connectors on the Intel D510MC) motherboard. Refer to this dia-
gram as you install the motherboard and connect the cables. 
P 
0 
N 
Figure 7-1H. Positions of major components 
and connectors on the Intel D510M0 
mother-
board (image courtesy of Intel Corporation) 
278 
Chapter 7 

Building the Appliance System 
Here's the key: 
A - Back-panel connectors 
B - Serial port header (COM1) 
C - Parallel port header 
D - Serial port header (COM2) 
E - LVDS inverter power voltage selection jumper (optional) 
F - Chassis fan header 
G - Power connector (2x12) 
H - LVDS inverter power connector (optional) 
I - Standby power LED 
J - Intel Atom processor 
K - LVDS inverter voltage selection header (optional) 
L - DIMM channel A socket, DIMM 0 
M - DIMM channel A socket, DIMM 1 
N - LVDS panel connector (optional) 
O - S A T A connector 1 
P - SATA connector 0 
Q - Front-panel header 
R - Battery 
S - Front-panel wireless activity LED header 
T - Intel NM10 Express Chipset 
U - Front-panel USB header (with Intel Z-U130 USB Solid-State 
Drive (or compatible device) support 
V - PCI conventional bus connector 
W - PCI Express xl Mini Card connector 
X - USB front-panel header 
Y - Front-panel audio header 
Z - BIOS setup configuration jumper block 
AA-S/PDIF header 
Seating and securing the motherboard 
Particularly with Mini-ITX cases, clearances may vary from adequate to tiny to 
nonexistent. You may find it's simply impossible to get everything assembled 
without making a minor case mod or two, temporary or permanent. With vari-
ous small cases and motherboards, we've had to do everything from tempo-
rarily bending something out of the way to enlarging an access hole with our 
Dremel Moto-Tool to supergluing the I/O shield to the back of the case. 
We encountered just such a situation with the Antec ISK300-65 case and the 
Intel D510MO motherboard. We should emphasize that the problem was re-
ally neither Antec's nor Intel's fault. Although the Mini-ITX specification is 
well defined, when you're working in three dimensions with small clearances, 
there's enough slop in the specification to allow some problems to occur. 
Building an Appliance/Nettop System 
279 

Building the Appliance System 
A different Mini-ITX motherboard might have fit the ISK300-65 case with no 
problems; the D510MC) motherboard might have fit a different Mini-ITX case 
without problems. Unfortunately, the only way to know for sure if a particular 
combination of motherboard and case will go together smoothly or require 
minor case mods is to try it. 
In our situation, the problem was a lack of clearance caused by a combination 
of the metal port enclosure (labeled H949d in Figure 7-13) on the D510MO 
motherboard that contains the keyboard and mouse PS/2 ports, and a project-
ing black plastic expansion connector that joins part of the ISK300-65 case to 
the frame, just to the right of the H949d enclosure. 
With the I/O shield in place, there was simply no way to slide the motherboard 
into position, because we couldn't slide the H949d enclosure past that pro-
truding expansion connector. We considered temporarily removing the as-
sembly secured by the expansion connector and then reinstalling it after the 
motherboard was in place, but that looked to be more work than it was worth. 
So we decided to use our butt nippers to nibble off excess plastic from the 
offending expansion connector, as shown in Figure 7-14. That, of course, re-
quired removing the I/O shield. 
Don't Cut Too Much 
Remove only excess protruding plastic; leave enough of the connector to keep the 
subassembly 
secured. If you don't have butt nippers, you can use a sharp knife or 
single-edge razor blade to remove the excess plastic. 
Figure /-13. Motherboard installation blocked by a protruding 
Figure /-14. Use butt nippers to nibble off excess plastic from the 
connector 
offending projection 
Slide the motherboard into position, carefully aligning the back-panel I/O con-
nectors with the corresponding holes in the I/O shield. Once the motherboard 
is in position, examine the rear I/O panel carefully to make sure that none of 
the grounding tabs are protruding into jacks. 
280 
Chapter 7 

Building the Appliance System 
Sometimes You Need a Shoehorn 
I/O shield grounding 
tabs, particularly those for Ethernet and 
USB jacks, have a nasty tendency to foul the jacks they're 
designed to ground. In some cases, the problem is obvious at a 
glance, because the grounding 
tab actually covers the jack. In 
other cases, the problem is easy to miss unless you look care-
fully, because the tab intrudes into the jack. Ron Morse notes 
that a bright flashlight is helpful to make it easy to see an errant 
grounding 
tab. 
Sometimes there's no alternative but to bend the offend-
ing grounding 
tab out of the way until you've installed the 
motherboard. If you have to do that, use the tip of a screwdriver 
to bend the grounding 
tab back into contact with the body of 
the jack after you've seated the motherboard 
and installed the 
screws to secure it. 
Keep pressure on the motherboard to align the standoffs with the correspond-
ing mounting holes, and drive screws into all four standoffs to secure the 
motherboard in place, as shown in Figure 7-15.Tighten the screws finger-tight, 
plus at most a quarter turn. Overtorquing the screws may crack the mother-
board or make it difficult to remove later. After you secure the motherboard, 
verify once again that the back-panel I/O connectors mate properly with the 
I/O shield. 
Ron Morse Comments 
A tiny dab of soft wax (I use a product 
called "Museum Wax,"available 
at 
the grocery store) on the tip of the 
screwdriver will hold the screw in 
place while you maneuver it into the 
mounting hole. Chasing 
dropped 
screws around the inside of a Mini-
ITX chassis is no fun. 
Figure /-IS. Secure the motherboard by driving screws into all four standoffs 
Connecting motherboard cables 
The final steps required to install the motherboard are to connect the vari-
ous signal, data, and power cables. It doesn't much matter in what order you 
connect these cables, but make sure to get all of them connected. Figure 
7-16 shows the positions and pinouts of the connectors on the Intel D510IV10 
motherboard. Refer to this diagram as you connect the cables. 
Building an Appliance/Nettop System 
281 

Building the Appliance System 
Figure /-IS. Locations 
of header-pin 
connectors 
on Intel D510M0 
motherboard 
(image 
courtesy 
of Intel 
Corporation) 
To begin, locate the 2x12 main ATX power connector (item G on the diagram) 
on the motherboard and the corresponding power cable in the bundle of ca-
bles coming from the circuit board in the ISK300-65 case. The main ATX power 
cable in the ISK300-65 case is long enough to reach the socket on the D510MC) 
motherboard, but only just. Get as much slack in that cable bundle as possible 
by separating unrelated cables from the main ATX power cable bundle. 
Because it's so short, you'll have to route that cable bundle directly across the 
processor heatsink (the black multi-pronged assembly in the middle of the 
motherboard). Don't be concerned about heat affecting the wires; the Intel 
Atom processor consumes very little power and produces very little heat. The 
tips of the heatsink prongs don't become hot enough to melt the insulation 
on the wires. 
Align the main ATX power cable connector as shown in Figure 7-17. Press it 
firmly into place until the latch on the cable connector snaps into place over 
the lip on the motherboard jack. Make absolutely sure that the latch snaps 
into place. A poorly seated ATX main power cable can cause many subtle and 
intermittent problems. 
Next, locate one of the SATA data cables supplied with the motherboard (an-
other good reason to buy a retail-boxed motherboard). Both ends of these 
cables have the same connectors, and either end can be used to connect to 
the motherboard or a drive. Note that each connector has a locking latch that 
mates with the connectors on the motherboard and drives. Make sure this 
282 
Chapter 7 

Building the Appliance System 
latch snaps into the locked position when you connect a cable to either the 
motherboard or a drive. (Not all SATA cables have these latches; if you use a 
cable without a latch, simply make sure it's fully seated in the socket.) 
Use a permanent marker to draw a single line on each end of one cable, as 
shown in Figure 7-18. Although it may be obvious when you're building the 
system which cable connects which motherboard SATA port to which drive, 
it will be less so with the cables bundled and dressed months later, when you 
want to upgrade or replace a drive. If your system uses more than two SATA 
ports, label the remaining cables as well: no lines for portO, one line for port 1, 
two lines for port 2, and so on. 
Next, locate the Slimline SATA adapter in the Antec parts bundle. One end of 
this adapter has a single connector that fits both the SATA power and SATA 
data connectors on the slimline SATA optical drive. The other end of the adapt-
er branches into a power cable with a Molex jack that connects to a Molex plug 
from the power supply board and a standard SATA data cable that connects to 
a motherboard SATA port. Connect the Slimline SATA adapter SATA data cable 
to motherboard SATA port 0 and one end of the standard SATA data cable to 
motherboard SATA port 1, as shown in Figure 7-19. 
The next step is to connect the front-panel switch and indicator cables, as 
shown in Figure 7-20. Refer to section F on the diagram in Figure 7-16 for the 
pinouts. Each of the front-panel switch and indicator cables is labeled descrip-
tively, e.g.,"Power,""Reset,"and "HDD LED."Match those descriptions with the 
front-panel connector pins on the motherboard to make sure you connect the 
correct cables to the appropriate pins. 
The power switch and reset switch connectors are unpolarized, so they may 
be connected in either orientation, as long as you connect each cable to the 
correct pair of pins.The HDD activity LED cable is polarized and should be con-
nected with the correct polarity. (If you get it wrong, though, the worst that 
happens is that the LED fails to illuminate.) 
Figure /-I/. Align the main ATX power connector 
and press it 
firmly into place 
Figure /-18. Label both ends of one SATA cable with one stripe for 
SATA port 1 
Building an Appliance/Nettop System 
283 

Building the Appliance System 
Figure /-IS. Connect 
one end of each SATA cable to the corre- 
Figure /-HO. Connect 
the front-panel switch and indicator 
cables 
sponding 
motherboard 
SATA 
port 
The next step is to connect one of the front-panel audio cables to the audio 
header pins, which are located at the left rear of the motherboard, near the PCI 
expansion slot. The ISK300-65 case provides two monolithic front-panel audio 
cables—HD audio and AC'97—that are keyed with a blocked hole that corre-
sponds with a missing pin on the motherboard connector. Align the HD audio 
cable connector as shown in Figure 7-21, and press firmly to seat it. 
The final step in installing the motherboard is to connect the front-panel USB 
ports to the motherboard. The Antec ISK300-65 case provides a monolithic 
10-pin (5x2) dual-port USB connector that matches the standard Intel USB pin 
assignments. 
The Intel D510MO motherboard provides two internal USB 2.0 header-pin sets, 
but they are not identical. One set of USB header pins, labeled H in Figure 7-16, 
provides standard connections for two USB ports. That's the one to which we'll 
connect the front-panel USB cable. The second set of USB header pins actually 
provides only one standard USB port, plus an LED signal pin. That set of header 
pins is intended to be used to connect an internal SSD drive. We'll leave that 
set of header pins unused, at least for now. 
The Antec front-panel USB cable connector is keyed with one blocked hole 
that corresponds to the one missing pin in the Intel USB header-pin group. Ori-
ent the cable connector properly and slide it onto the header pins, as shown 
in Figure 7-22. If your case uses front-panel USB cables with individual con-
nectors for each wire (or a different connector block pinout), refer to the pin 
assignment shown in Figure 7-16 to get those individual wires connected 
correctly. 
Do what you can to bundle and tie off the cables and tuck them out of the way. 
Use the black plastic cable ties included in the ISK300-65 parts bundle. 
284 
Chapter 7 

Figure /-HI. Connect 
the front-panel HD audio cable to the front-
panel audio connector 
pins 
Building the Appliance System 
Figure /-?.?. Connect 
the front-panel 
USB cable to the 
mother-
board USB header 
pins 
Installing the Drives 
The Antec ISK300-65 has one external 5.25" drive bay for a slimline optical 
drive and two internal 2.5" drive bays for hard drives. Our motherboard pro-
vides only two SATA ports, which we'll use to connect one optical drive and 
one hard drive. 
The first step is to install the hard drive in the HDD tray. To do so, recover the 
drive tray assembly you set aside earlier. Remove the thumbscrew that secures 
the HDD tray to the drive tray assembly, as shown in Figure 7-23. 
Slide the HDD tray back slightly to free the locking hinges, and lift the HDD 
tray away from the drive tray assembly, as shown in Figure 7-24. 
Figure /-H3. Remove 
the thumbscrew 
that secures 
the HDD tray 
Figure /-'¿A. Lift the HDD tray free of the drive tray 
assembly 
to the drive tray 
assembly 
Slide the hard drive into the HDD tray, as shown in Figure 7-25, with one side 
of the drive under the retaining lip of the HDD tray. The rear (connector side) of 
the hard drive should be toward the rear of the tray, and overhanging slightly. 
Building an Appliance/Nettop System 
285 

Building the Appliance System 
Hold the hard drive in position with your thumb, invert the tray, and place it 
on a flat surface. If necessary, move the drive until the drive screw holes align 
with the mounting holes in the HDD tray and insert the first screw. Drive that 
screw partially in, but leave enough slack that the drive can still move freely. 
Insert the remaining three screws and tighten all four screws finger-tight plus 
a quarter turn or so, as shown in Figure 7-26. 
At this point, following Antec's instructions, we reattached the HDD tray to the 
drive tray assembly and reinserted the thumbscrew to secure the HDD tray to 
the drive tray assembly, as shown in Figure 7-27. 
Although with the hard drive in place we were able to install the optical drive 
and connect the power and data cables to the hard drive and optical drive, 
in retrospect it would have been easier to replace the HDD tray in the drive 
tray assembly after we'd installed the optical drive and connected its data and 
power cables. 
The next step is to install the optical drive. With the front of the case facing 
you, first strip the protective tape from the drive bezel. 
Press gently on the upper-right corner of the optical drive bezel, as shown in 
Figure 7-28, and release the pressure to open the bezel, as shown in Figure 
7-29. 
Working from inside the case, use gentle finger pressure to pop the drive bay 
face plate free of the bezel, as shown in Figure 7-30. 
Working from the rear of the assembly, slide the optical drive into position, as 
shown in Figure 7-31. 
Locate the optical drive screw in the Antec parts bundle (it's the tiniest screw 
there). Slide the optical drive back and forth until the screw hole in the optical 
drive is visible through the mounting hole just behind the HDD tray mounting 
thumbscrew in the drive assembly tray. Insert and tighten the optical drive 
screw to secure the optical drive, as shown in Figure 7-32. 
Figure /-HS. Orient the hard drive correctly, and slide it into the 
HDD 
tray 
Figure /-HS. Holding the hard drive and tray inverted, 
partially 
drive one 
screw 
286 
Chapter 7 

Building the Appliance System 
Figure /-H/. Reattach 
the HDD tray to the drive tray 
assembly 
Figure /-HS. Release the optical drive bezel and allow it to pivot 
down 
Figure /-H8. Press gently on the optical drive bezel to unlatch it 
Figure /-30. Press gently from inside the case to pop out the drive 
bay face plate 
Figure /-31. Slide the optical drive into the bay 
Figure /-3H. Insert the optical drive screw to secure the optical 
drive 
Building an Appliance/Nettop System 305 

Building the Appliance System 
Before you reinstall the drive tray assembly, you need to connect the case fan 
power cable and the Slimline SATA power cable. Locate the fan power cable 
and a Molex power cable from the power supply circuit board, and connect 
them, as shown in Figure 7-33. 
After you connect the case fan power cable, set the fan speed switch on the 
top rear of the case. By default, it's set to low. We recommend setting fan speed 
to high initially for better cooling. Only if you find the fan makes too much 
noise on high should you consider setting it to medium or low. 
Locate another available Molex connector from the power supply, and con-
nect the power jack from the Slimline SATA adapter to it. 
The next step is to connect the Slimline SATA adapter to the optical drive, as 
shown in Figure 7-34. If necessary, you can remove the HDD tray temporarily 
and replace it after you connect the Slimline SATA adapter (as we did to shoot 
this image). 
We're about to make things much less accessible, so before you proceed, do a 
final check of the interior of the case: 
• No loose tools or screws (shake the case gently) 
• I/O shield not fouled 
• Memory modules fully seated and latched 
• Main ATX power cable connected and latched 
• SATA data cables for hard drive and optical drive connected to mother-
board 
• Front-panel switch and indicator cables connected properly 
• Front-panel audio and USB cables connected properly 
• Power connected to case fan and Slimline SATA adapter 
• Hard drive and optical drive secured to drive assembly tray 
• Slimline SATA adapter connected to optical drive 
• All cables dressed and tucked out of the way (insofar as possible) 
Figure /-33. Connect 
the case fan power 
cable 
Figure /-34. Connect 
the Slimline SATA adapter to the optical 
drive 
288 
Chapter 7 

Building the Appliance System 
Once you've completed the checklist, the next step is to reinstall the drive tray 
assembly. Slide it into position and secure it with three screws (one rear and 
two front), as shown in Figure 7-35. 
Fish the SATA data and power cables for the hard drive up through the frame 
of the drive tray assembly and connect them to the hard drive, as shown in 
Figure 7-36. 
Figure /-35. Reinstall the drive tray assembly 
and secure it with 
three 
screws 
Figure /-38. Connect 
the SATA data and power cables to the hard 
drive 
Final Assembly Steps 
Congratulations! You're almost finished building the system. About all that re-
mains is to reinstall the cover and fire up the system. Make one final check to 
verify that the cables are tucked away, the case fan is not fouled, and so on. 
Once you're satisfied that everything is correct, it's time for the smoke test. 
Leave the cover off for now. Connect the AC power cable to the power brick, 
plug the AC cable into a wall receptacle, and then connect the DC cable from 
the power brick to the system unit. Press the main power button on the front 
of the case, and the system should start up. Check to make sure that the case 
fan is spinning. You should also hear the hard drive spin up. At that point, ev-
erything should be working properly. 
Turn the system off and disconnect the DC power cable from the case. Before 
you reinstall the cover, locate the sticky labels in the motherboard box and ap-
ply them to the inside of the cover, making sure not to cover up any ventilation 
holes. Slide the cover back onto the case and reinsert the three thumbscrews 
at the rear of the case to secure the cover. 
Move the system to the location where you plan to use it. Connect the key-
board, mouse, display, and Ethernet. Plug the AC cable from the power brick 
into a wall receptacle and the DC cable from the power brick into the jack on 
the rear of the case. Power up the display and turn on the system. 
When the boot screen appears, enter BIOS Setup and verify that everything 
is as it should be (the full amount of memory recognized, time and date cor-
rect, and so on). Set the boot sequence to attempt booting from the optical 
Building an Appliance/Nettop System 
289 

Final Words 
drive first and the hard drive second. Save the BIOS settings and allow the 
system to reboot. Insert your Windows or Linux distribution disc in the optical 
drive, close the tray, and turn off the system. Restart the system, and follow the 
prompts to install Windows or Linux. 
Final Words 
Our appliance system failed the smoke test. (No, it didn't erupt in a shower 
of sparks and gouts of smoke.) When we connected power to it, the green 
power LED on the motherboard lit, but nothing happened when we pressed 
the power button. Hmmm. So we went back and re-rechecked all the cable 
connections, and we found that the 24-pin main ATX power connector wasn't 
completely seated. Pressing that down until the connector clicked into place 
solved the problem, and the system started normally. 
We hit a home run with this system. It's everything we hoped for, and more. 
Although the benchmarks say the dual-core Atom processor is only half the 
speed of the Athlon II X2 240 processor we used in the budget system and 
the server system, this system "feels" reasonably responsive running Windows 
7 and even more so running Ubuntu 10.4 Linux. It's obviously not suited to 
heavy multitasking—nor was it ever intended to be—but for web browsing, 
checking email, editing documents, and so on, it's more than fast enough. 
The system is very quiet if the case fan is running at low speed. At the default 
high speed, the case fan produces a whine that's audible from across the room. 
Set to medium speed, the case fan is quiet enough to be inaudible from more 
than a couple of feet away. (It would be more noticeable in a quiet environment, 
but our den is about as noisy as most.) When Robert hooked up this system next 
to the sofa in the den and powered it up with the case fan set to low, he first 
thought the system wasn't running. At low fan speed, which seems adequate 
to cool this system, you have to have your ear right next to the system to hear 
anything at all. The Seagate Momentus notebook drive is inaudible other than 
during heavy seeks, when a subdued clicking noise is barely audible. 
We decided to push the limits of this system a bit, so we connected it temporarily 
to our HDTV and ran some video. SD (DVD) video rendered perfectly, so we de-
cided to run a 1080p HD video clip from the hard drive to see how well the Atom 
processor and 5,400 RPM hard drive could keep up. Here we ran into the hardware 
limitations of this system. We're not sure if the bottleneck was the Atom processor 
or the hard drive, but dropped frames and other artifacts were pretty obvious. Not 
that that mattered, because we didn't design this system for media center use.The 
2D video quality, running on Robert's 22" LCD display, is excellent. 
What would we change? Not a thing, except maybe the hard drive. The 5,400 
RPM 640 GB Seagate Momentus 2.5" notebook hard drive provides high ca-
pacity and decent performance at a reasonable price, but a 5,400 RPM drive 
just isn't as snappy as a 7,200 RPM drive. If we had been willing to trade off 
lower capacity against higher performance at the same price point, we'd have 
installed a 7,200 RPM 320 GB Seagate Momentus hard drive. But, on balance, 
we're just as happy with the larger 5,400 RPM drive. Programs load a bit more 
slowly, it's true, but then with 4 GB of memory we tend to keep our most-used 
programs loaded all the time anyway. 
290 
Chapter 7 

Building a Home Server 8 
IN THIS CHAPTER 
Determining Functional Requirements 
Hardware Design Criteria 
Component Considerations 
Building the Home Server 
Final Words 
Media Center System Versus Home Server 
Although 
they appear superficially similar, there are significant differences between a 
media center system and a home server. Both store files, but there the similarity 
ends. 
A media center system sits front and center in theden orliving 
room and is used in-
teractively in much the same way as a desktop system, albeit usually from across 
the 
room. Size, noise level, and appearance 
are important, 
and disk storage is typically 
fairly limited. 
A home server usually sits in a closet or buried under a desk somewhere, 
and is 
seldom if ever used interactively. Size, noise level, and appearance 
are generally 
less 
important 
for a server, and the amount 
of disk storage it supports 
is massive. For ex-
ample, our media center system has two hard drives, for a total of 4 TB of disk 
space; 
our home server will eventually host eight hard drives, with a total of 24 TB of disk 
space. It may also host several eSATA external hard drives for even more disk 
space. 
You can, of course, combine 
the functions 
of these two systems, building a media 
center system with lots of disk space, and also using it as a general-purpose 
home 
server. The drawback 
is that you'll need to use a much larger (and likely louder) 
case, 
which many people would find unacceptable 
in their dens orliving 
rooms. 
By the mid to late '90s, all the necessary pieces were in place for home network-
ing to take off. Many households had two or more computers (and wanted to 
share their printers and other expensive peripherals), networking hardware 
had become affordable, and Windows 95 and 98 made it easy to set up a home 
network. Finally, always-on DSL or cable broadband Internet access was be-
coming common, and many people wanted to share that fast Internet connec-
tion with all of the computers in the house. 
A home serve is a computer located in a private residence that is dedicated to 
providing file sharing and other centralized services to other computers with-
in that residence. A home server may also provide virtual private networ (VPN) 
service or password-controlled access to allow authorized people to access 
server resources remotely via the Internet. Some home servers are configured 
as public-facing Internet hosts that run web servers, mail servers, or other ser-
vices open to the Internet at large. 
291 

Determining Functional Requirements 
These early home networks were almost invariably peer-to-peer. All or most 
of the computers in a home network shared disk storage and other resources 
with all of their peers. Almost no one used a dedicated server, because PCs 
were still relatively expensive and setting up a server-based network was 
much more complicated than simply sharing resources on a peer network. 
That started to change, almost by accident, as more and more people bought 
new PCs to replace older models. Some people donated their old comput-
ers to charities or simply discarded them, of course, but many decided to run 
those old systems as dedicated home servers, perhaps installing larger hard 
drives to provide more shared disk space. 
Even today, a repurposed older system is by far the most common type of 
home server. That's unfortunate, because an old system is about the worst 
possible choice for a home server. Granted, a typical home server doesn't re-
quire much processor horsepower, but that's about the only way an older sys-
tem is suited to be a home server. 
Think about it. You'll probably load up your home server with gobs of data 
that really matter to you: irreplaceable digital camera images and home video 
footage, your prOn collection, all of your documents, your old tax returns and 
business records, and so on. Do you really want all of that precious information 
residing on a system that's near the end of its design life, with a five-year-old 
motherboard and power supply? That's a disaster waiting to happen. 
Fortunately, it doesn't cost much to build a new home server, one that uses 
new components and is designed for reliability. You don't need much in the 
way of processor performance, so even a budget processor will suffice. You 
don't need a motherboard with high performance or a lot of features, so again 
even a budget model is suitable. You don't need much memory. You don't 
need a fancy case—in fact you can even recycle that old case (but not the 
power supply). You don't even need a display, keyboard, and mouse, because 
you can run your new server headless (without a keyboard, mouse, or display). 
Even an optical drive is optional. 
You will need to spend some money on the important stuff: a good power 
supply, an extra case fan (or two or three...), a large hard drive or two (or three 
or four...), and a good backup power supply (BPS) or uninterruptible power sup-
ply (UPS). You may also need to spend some money on backup hardware. But 
in return you'll get a rock-solid reliable data repository that you can trust to 
keep your priceless data safe. 
Determining Functional Requirements 
We began by sitting down to think through our requirements for a home server. 
Here's the list of functional requirements we came up with: 
Reliability 
First and foremost, the home server must be reliable. Our server will run 
24/7/365, and yours probably will, too. Other than periodic downtime to 
blow out the dust, upgrade hardware, and so on, we expect our server to 
Just Work without us having to think about it. 
292 
Chapter 8 

Determining Functional Requirements 
Massive storage capacity 
In the past, we routinely used lossy compression formats like JPEG and 
MPEG to cut down file sizes. The problem with lossy compression is that, 
by definition, it loses data relative to the original source format. We want 
to store our digital camera images as RAW files, our camcorder video as 
DV files, and our scans of old photographs as lossless TIFFs. Some of those 
source formats are themselves compressed with lossy algorithms, so the 
last thing we want to do is lose still more data by converting them to 
something lossier still. 
Modern digital AV devices produce a huge amount of data. For example, 
we accumulated more than 20 GB of data just shooting RAW digital camera 
images for this book. Our SD DV camcorder records about 13.5 GB/hour.We 
intend to upgrade to an HD camcorder, which boosts storage requirements 
to about 40 GB/hour. (Raw HD footage can be captured at about 185 MB/ 
second, if you have a drive array fast enough to keep up.) We have hundreds 
of family photographic prints, some dating from the mid to late 19th cen-
tury. Scanning just one of those at high resolution may require 50 MB or 
more of disk space, as may scanning just one of our 35 mm color slides or 
negatives at 4,000 DPI, even using lossless compression. 
And then there's our collection of ripped CD-Audio and DVD-Video discs. 
All of them are stored on our media center system and we also have the 
original discs, so at first glance it might seem wasteful to store copies on our 
home server. But that ignores the time and effort we put in ripping all those 
discs in the first place. We really don't want to have to re-rip hundreds and 
hundreds of discs if a hard drive fails in our media center system. 
In short, we have a ton of data, so we need a ton of disk space on our server. 
We decided that 6 TB (6,000 GB) would suffice, at least to get started. You 
might not have as much data as we do, but you probably have a lot more 
than you think. Consider your own current and future storage require-
ments carefully before you configure your home server. 
Data safety 
We've never lost any data other than by our own stupidity, and we want 
to keep it that way. Accordingly, you might expect that we'd configure our 
home server with RAID storage. We didn't. Here's why. 
Using RAID can increase storage performance on a heavily loaded server, 
and it allows data to be recovered if a hard drive fails. Although it may 
sound odd, neither of those benefits is particularly important to us. A 
modern SATA hard drive is fast enough to saturate our lOOOBaseT (giga-
bit) Ethernet networkall by itself, so we don't need higher disk performance. 
And hard drivefailuresareso rare that it's simply not worth worrying about 
them. 
Because RAID doesn't protect against the more common causes of data 
loss—accidental deletion, data being corrupted by a virus or malfunction-
ing hardware, or catastrophic loss caused by theft or fire—we'd still need to 
maintain backups even if we had a full RAID storage system. Given that we 
back up frequently—when we're actively creating new data, we often do 
Building a Home Server 
293 

Determining Functional Requirements 
differential backups several times a day—the only thing that using RAID 
would buy us is a very limited protection against losing a very small amount 
of un-backed-up data, and that only in the event of a hard drive failure. 
Ultimately, we decided that the small benefits weren't worth the additional 
cost and complexity of installing RAID. We decided to use nonredundant 
SATA hard drives in our home server. By giving up the small additional safe-
ty factor provided by RAID, we'll gain more available hard disk space and 
free up at least a couple of drive bays that can be used for later expansion. 
Flexibility 
Initially, our home server will be almost exclusively a file server. It will run 
Linux, though, so at some point we may decide to add other functions to 
the home server. To allow for that possibility with minimum disruption, 
we'll configure the server initially with enough processor and memory to 
allow adding functions incrementally without upgrading the hardware. 
Expandability 
When we set out to design our new home server, we considered building 
it as an appliance system with an Intel Atom Mini-ITX board in a tiny case. 
There are advantages to such a server. It's small and can be put anywhere, 
and it doesn't consume much power, produces little heat, and doesn't 
make much noise. 
But we soon realized that for us the lack of flexibility inherent in a small 
system outweighed its advantages. Looking back on how our last server 
had grown and changed over the years made it clear that we wanted a 
larger form factor for our new server. 
Our last server was built in 2006, and originally had four 500 GB drives 
installed, for a total of 2 TB of disk storage. We reached that storage limit 
within a year, a lot faster than we'd expected. As a stopgap, we installed a 
750 GB drive, for a total of five drives and 2.75 TB. As drive prices contin-
ued to fall, we replaced or added drives until we eventually ended up with 
four 1 TB drives installed, and a total of 4 TB of storage. (We recycled the 
500 and 750 GB drives as external hard drives for backups.) 
That was where things stood when we set out to design and build our 
new server. With 4TB, we still had some available space, but the trend was 
clear. The largest available hard drives when we designed our new server 
were 2 TB, so we decided to start with three of those, for a total of 6 TB. But 
we knew our storage requirements would continue to grow, so we want-
ed a system that we could expand to at least six or eight hard drives. With 
3 TB drives on the near horizon, that means we can eventually expand this 
server to a capacity of between 18 TB and 24 TB, which should hold us for 
a while. (We're sure that in a few years we'll look back with amusement on 
the days when we thought 24TB was a lot of disk space.) 
Networking 
Of course, a server is useless if you can't get data into and out of it, so 
we need fast, reliable networking support. Our current home network is a 
mix of 100BaseT (100 Mb/s) and lOOOBaseT (1,000 Mb/s, "gigabit") Ether-
net devices that we're currently in the process of upgrading to exclusively 
294 
Chapter 8 

Hardware Design Criteria 
lOOOBaseT. We've complained elsewhere about the 25 MB/s throughput 
of USB 2.0, and, at about 10 MB/s, 100BaseT is even worse. A lOOOBaseT 
network transfers data at about 100 MB/s, or about the same rate as a fast 
hard drive. That's acceptably fast for our purposes, so we'll choose a mother-
board that supports lOOOBaseT Ethernet. 
Hardware Design Criteria 
With the functional requirements determined, the next step was to establish 
design criteria for the home server hardware. Here are the relative priorities we 
assigned for our home server. Your priorities may, of course, differ. 
Here's the breakdown: 
Price is moderately important for this system. We don't want to spend mon-
ey needlessly, but we will spend what it takes to meet our other criteria. 
Reliability 
Reliability is the single most important consideration. If this system goes 
down, we're out of action until we can get it running again. We didn't 
award this category five stars because we don't have the budget to build a 
professional-grade server with expensive features likedual-failover mother-
boards or redundant power supplies. 
Size is relatively unimportant. Our home server will reside under the desk 
in Robert's office, which has enough room for a mid-tower system. (A full 
tower would be pushing it.) 
Noise level 
Noise level is unimportant for a server that sits in a server room, but in a resi-
dence it may be critical. Because the home server will be installed in Robert's 
office, it's important to keep the noise level relatively low. We'll choose quiet 
standard components, but not expensive "Quiet PC'technologies. 
Expandability 
Expandability is moderately important. Our server will initially have four 
hard drives installed, but we may want to expand the storage subsystem 
later. Similarly, although we'll use the integrated SATA and network inter-
faces initially, we may eventually install additional disk adapters, network 
interfaces, and so on. 
Processor performance 
Processor performance is relatively unimportant. Our home server will run 
Linux for file sharing, which places little demand on the CPU. However, the 
server may eventually run some server-based applications. The incremen-
tal cost of installing a budget dual-core processor and sufficient memory 
to support those possible software upgrades is small enough that we'll do 
it now and have done with it. 
Price 
Reliability 
* * * * i i r 
Size -k-kikikik 
Noise level -k-k-kikik 
Expandability 
-k-k-kikik 
Processor performance -k-kikikik 
Video performance ikikikikik 
Disk capacity/performance 
* * * * i i r 
Building a Home Server 
295 

Hardware Design Criteria 
A 
RAID is NOT Backup 
We can't say it often enough. 
RAID 
does not substitute for backing 
up. 
RAID protects against data loss as 
a result of a drive failure, and may 
increase performance. 
But RAID does 
not and cannot protect against 
data 
loss or corruption caused by viruses, 
accidental or malicious 
deletions, 
or catastrophic 
events such as a fire, 
flood, or theft of your server. 
Brian Bilbrey Comments 
RAID 6 is actually more than just 
RAID 5 with another parity stripe. It's 
usually configured with a different 
checksum algorithm, to protect 
against algorithmic 
weakness. In 
addition, with the real possibility of 
a bit error during a rebuild 
following 
drive loss, I'd consider RAID 6 to be 
required when individual drives of 
750 GB or larger are used. 
Video performance 
Video performance is of literally zero importance, because we'll run our 
home server headless. That is, we'll temporarily install a monitor while we 
install and configure Linux, but we'll subsequently manage the server from 
a desktop system elsewhere on the network. We'll either use a motherboard 
with integrated video, or install a video card for just long enough to get 
Linux installed and working. 
Disk capacity/performance 
Disk capacity and performance are very important. Our home server will 
have only one or two simultaneous users, so standard 7,200 RPM SATA 
hard drives will provide more than adequate performance. Capacity is the 
more important consideration for our server. We want 6 TB of hard disk 
space initially, and we'd like to be able to expand that to 12TB or more with-
out making major changes to the case or the existing drive subsystem. That 
means we'll need to use relatively few high-capacity hard drives instead of 
many lower-capacity drives. 
RAID for Home Servers 
Although we elected not to use RAID on our home server, that doesn't mean 
RAID isn't right for your home server. RAIL is an acronym for edundant Array 
of Inexpensive Disks. A RAID stores data on two or more physical hard drives, 
thereby reducing the risk of losing data when a drive fails. Some types of RAID 
also increase read and/or write performance relative to a single drive. 
Five levels of RAID are formally defined, RAID 1 through RAID 5. (Some manu-
facturers sell proprietary arrays that they describe as RAID 1.5, RAID 5E, RAID 
5EE, RAID 6, RAID 7, RAID DP, RAID K, RAID S, RAID Z, and so on, but those are 
merely enhanced versions of one of the standard RAID levels.) 
RAID levels are optimized to have different strengths, including level of re-
dundancy, optimum file size, random versus sequential read performance, 
and random versus sequential write performance. RAID 1 and RAID 5 are com-
monly used in PC servers. RAID 3 is used rarely (generally for streaming video). 
RAID 2 and RAID 4 are almost never used. The RAID levels typically used on 
home servers are: 
RAID 1 
RAID 1 uses two drives that contain exactly the same data. Every time the 
system writes to the array, it writes identical data to each drive. If one drive 
fails, the data can be read from the surviving drive. Because data must be 
written twice, RAID 1 writes are a bit slower than writes to a single drive. 
Because data can be read from either drive in a RAID 1, reads are some-
what faster. RAID 1 is also called mirrorin , if both drives share one control-
ler, or duplexinc, if each drive has its own controller. 
RAID 1 provides very high redundancy, but it is the least efficient of the 
RAID levels in terms of hard drive usage. For example, with two 2 TB hard 
drives in a RAID 1 array, only 2 TB of total disk space is visible to the sys-
tem. RAID 1 may be implemented with a physical RAID 1 controller or in 
software by the operating system. 
296 
Chapter 8 

Hardware Design Criteria 
RAID 5 
RAID 5 uses three or more physical hard drives. The RAID 5 controller 
divides data that is to be written to the array into blocks and calculates 
parity blocks for the data. Data blocks and parity blocks are interleaved 
on each physical drive, so each of the three or more drives in the array 
contains both data blocks and parity blocks. If any one drive in the RAID 5 
fails, the data blocks contained on the failed drive can be re-created from 
the parity data stored on the surviving drives. 
RAID 5 is optimized for the type of disk usage common in an office 
environment—many random reads and fewer random writes of relatively 
small files. RAID 5 reads are faster than those from a single drive, because 
RAID 5 has three or more spindles spinning and delivering data simulta-
neously. RAID 5 writes are typically a bit faster than single-drive writes. 
RAID 5 uses hard drive space more efficiently than RAID 1. 
In effect, although RAID 5 uses distributed parity, a RAID 5 array can be 
thought of as dedicating one of its physical drives to parity data. For ex-
ample, with three 2TB drives in a RAID 5 array, 4TB—the capacity of two of 
the three drives—is visible to the system. With RAID 5 and four 2 TB drives, 
6 TB—the capacity of three of the four drives—is visible to the system. RAID 
5 may be implemented with a physical RAID 5 controller or in software by 
the operating system. Few motherboards have embedded RAID 5 support. 
RAID 3 
RAID 3 uses three or more physical hard drives. One drive is dedicated to 
storing parity data, with user data distributed among the other drives in 
the array. RAID 3 is the least common RAID level used for PC servers, be-
cause its characteristics are not optimal for the disk usage patterns typical 
of small office LANs. RAID 3 is optimized for sequential reads of very large 
files, so it is used primarily for applications such as streaming video. 
Then there is the so-called RAID 0, which isn't really RAID at all because it pro-
vides no redundancy: 
RAIDO 
RAID 0, also called ;tripin , uses two physical hard drives. Data written to 
the array is divided into blocks, which are written alternately to each drive. 
For example, if you write a 1 MB file to a RAID 0 that uses 256 KB blocks, 
the first 256 KB block may be written to the first drive in the array. The 
second 256 KB block is written to the second drive, the third 256 KB block 
to the first drive, and the final 256 KB block to the second drive. The file 
itself exists only as fragments distributed across both physical drives, so if 
either drive fails all the data on the array is lost. That means data stored 
on a RAID 0 is more at risk than data stored on a single drive, so in that 
sense a RAID 0 can actually be thought of as less redundant than the zero 
redundancy of a single drive. RAID 0 is used because it provides the fastest 
possible disk performance. Reads and writes are very fast, because they 
can use the combined bandwidth of two drives. RAID 0 is a poor choice for 
desktops and workstations, which typically do not load the disk subsystem 
Building a Home Server 
297 

Hardware Design Criteria 
RAID 1 Versus RAID 0+1 
If your storage subsystem has four 
hard drives, there is no point to 
using RAID I rather than RAID 
0+1, 
assuming 
that your motherboard 
or 
RAID adap ter supports RAID 0+1. A 
RAID I uses two of the four drives for 
redundancy, 
as does the RAID 
0+1, 
so you might just as well configure 
the drives as a RAID 0+1 and get the 
higher performance 
of RAID 0+1. 
Either RAID level protects your data 
equally well. 
heavily enough to make RAID 0 worth using. Heavily loaded servers, how-
ever, can benefit from RAID 0 (although few servers use bare RAID 0 be-
cause of the risk to the data stored on a RAID 0 array). 
Finally, there is stacked RAIL, which is an "array of arrays" rather than an array 
of disks. Stacked RAID can be thought of as an array that replaces individual 
physical disks with subarrays. The advantage of stacked RAID is that it com-
bines the advantages of two RAID levels. The disadvantage is that it requires a 
lot of physical hard drives: 
Stacked RAID 
The most common stacked RAID used in PC servers is referred to as RAID 
0+1, RAID 1+0, or RAID 10. A RAID 0+1 uses four physical drives arranged 
as two RAID 1 arrays of two drives each. Each RAID 1 array would normally 
appear to the system as a single drive, but RAID 0+1 takes things a step 
further by creating a RAID 0 array from the two RAID 1 arrays. For example, 
a RAID 0+1 with four 2 TB drives comprises two RAID 1 arrays, each with 
two 2 TB drives. Each RAID 1 is visible to the system as a single 2 TB drive. 
Those two RAID 1 arrays are then combined into one RAID 0 array, which 
is visible to the system as a single 4 TB RAID 0. Because the system "sees" 
a RAID 0, performance is very high. And because the RAID 0 components 
are actually RAID 1 arrays, the data are very well protected. If any single 
drive in the RAID 0+1 array fails, the array continues to function, although 
redundancy is lost until the drive is replaced and the array is rebuilt. 
Until a few years ago RAID 0+1 was uncommon on small servers because 
it required SCSI drives and host adapters, and therefore cost thousands of 
dollars to implement. Nowadays, thanks to inexpensive SATA drives, the 
incremental cost of RAID 0+1 is very small. Instead of buying one $200 
hard drive for your small server, you can buy four $100 hard drives and a 
$50 RAID adapter. You may not even need to buy the RAID adapter, be-
cause some motherboards include native RAID 0+1 support. Data protec-
tion doesn't come much cheaper than that. 
Hardware Versus Software Versus Hybrid RAID 
RAID can be implemented purely in hardware, by adding 
an 
expansion 
card that contains a dedicated RAID controller, 
processor, and cache memory. Hardware RAID, if properly 
implemented, offers the highest performance 
and reliability 
and places the fewest demands 
on the main system 
proces-
sor, but is also the most costly alternative. True hardware 
RAID 
adapters cost several hundred dollars and up, and are generally 
supplied with drivers for major operating systems 
(including 
Windows and Linux). 
Software RAIL requires only standard ATA or SATA interfaces, 
and uses software drivers to perform RAID functions. In general, 
software RAID is a bit slower and less reliable than 
hardware 
RAID and places more demands 
on the main system 
proces-
sor. Most modern operating systems, including Windows 
and 
Linux, support software RAID—usually 
RAID 0, RAID I, and 
RAID 5—and 
may also support RAID 0+1. We believe that well-
implemented 
software RAID is more than sufficient for a typical 
home server, if indeed RAID is desirable at all. 
Hybrid RAID combines hardware and software RAID. Hybrid 
RAID hardware does not contain the expensive dedicated 
RAID 
processor and cache memory. Inexpensive RAID adapters 
have 
limited or no onboard processing, and instead depend on the 
main system processor to do most or all of the work. With very 
few exceptions, motherboards 
that feature onboard 
RAID 
support, such as Intel models, use hybrid RAID, although 
it is 
sometimes incorrectly called hardware RAID. If you choose a 
hybrid RAID solution, make certain that drivers are available for 
your operating 
system. 
298 
Chapter 8 

Component Considerations 
And what if you choose not to use any form of RAID, as we did? We decided to 
install three 2TB drives in our home server, configured as a 'BOL (Just a Bunch 
of Drives). All three drives function independently as ordinary drives, and we 
get the full 6 TB combined capacity of the three drives. If we installed a fourth 
2 TB drive, we could choose any of the following disk configurations without 
making any hardware changes: 
JBOD 
All four drives operate independently. With four 2 TB drives, the operating 
system "sees" 8 TB of disk capacity. Performance and data safety are de-
termined by the performance and reliability of the individual drives. Note 
that a drive failure is four times as likely to occur with four drives spinning 
than it is when only one drive is spinning. If a drive fails, you lose whatever 
data was stored on that drive, but the data on other drives is not affected. 
RAID 5 
All four drives are assigned to the RAID 5. The operating system sees 
6 TB of disk capacity. (The equivalent of one drive's capacity is used to 
store parity data, although that data is actually distributed across all four 
drives.) Read and write performance for small files is the same or slightly 
faster than with individual drives. Read and write performance for large 
files is slightly slower than with individual drives. RAID 5 offers moderate 
redundancy. Any one drive may fail without loss of data. If two drives fail 
simultaneously, all data on the array will be lost. 
RAID 10 
All four drives are assigned to the RAID 10, as in effect a RAID 0 pair of RAID 
1 mirrored drives. The operating system sees 4 TB of disk capacity. Read 
performance for any size file is noticeably faster than with JBOD or RAID 5, 
particularly when the drives are heavily loaded. Write performance is also 
faster. RAID 10 offers very high redundancy. Any two drives may fail without 
loss of data, as long as they are not both members of the same RAID 1. If 
both drives in a RAID 1 fail simultaneously, all data on the array will be lost. 
With the hardware configuration we detail later in this chapter, you can choose 
any of these disk configurations during setup. You don't even need to pop the 
lid or move any cables. But give some serious thought to which configuration 
to use. If you change your mind later, you can reconfigure the disk subsystem, 
but you'll need to back up all of your data and restore it after you set up the 
new configuration. 
Component Considerations 
With our design criteria in mind, we set out to choose the best components for 
our home server system. The following sections describe the components we 
chose, and why we chose them. 
Brian Bilbrey Comments 
Given the time needed to repopulate 
the data after acquiring 
another 
drive, I'd almost certainly put five or 
six2 TB drives in a RAID 6 
configura-
tion, rather than just using JBOD. My 
time has value, too. 
If I were optimizing a server for write 
performance, 
I'd mirror RAID 0 arrays 
of two or three drives each to yield 
maximum 
performance 
with mirror-
ing protection, but without the parity 
calculation 
overhead. 
Note that I'm running 3Ware 
(now 
LSI) hardware 
RAID without a bat-
tery backup in my home 
server/ 
workstation 
today. I'm currently 
un-
decided about the next 
generation. 
This chapter should help inform my 
decision. 
Brian Jepson Comments 
I'd argue that the likelihood is some 
(probably small) value greater than 
four times more likely, given that 
additional drives add heat and 
vibration. I'm reminded of Brendan 
Gregg's experiment in the effect of 
noise on JBOD arrays: http://blogs. 
sun.com/brendan/entry/unusual_ 
diskjatency. 
My favorite moment comes at 0:59 
when he looks like he's about to say 
something 
and then goes right back 
to the array. 
Building a Home Server 
299 

Component Considerations 
A 
Your Mileage May Vary 
Although 
we tested the configuration 
we used to build our own home server, we did 
not test permutations 
with all the listed alternatives. Those alternatives are simply 
the components 
we would have chosen had our requirements been different. That 
said, we know of no reason the alternatives we list should not work perfectly. 
More Power 
Why a 500W power supply? Even if 
we load this system to the gills with 
hard drives and other peripherals, a 
350W power supply would 
probably 
be adequate. 
For20years 
or more, we've over-
specced power supplies in servers 
because we want the power 
supply 
to run at half or less of its rated 
capacity. The downside is that a 
Ugh tly loaded power supply is sligh tly 
less efficient in terms of power 
consumption. 
The upside is that a 
Ugh tly loaded power supply 
produces 
cleaner power and runs much cooler, 
which greatly extends its expected 
service life. 
r-A 
i Case, Yes. Power Supply, No. 
i 
If you intend to recycle an old case as 
1 
your new home server, we strongly 
i 
recommend 
that you replace the 
i 
power supply and case fans. Even 
1 
top-quality power supplies and case 
i 
fans have a design life, typically five 
i 
years, and the lower-quality 
power 
i 
supplies and fans used in mass-
' 
market systems may well be on their 
i 
last legs after only two or three years 
i 
of use. While you're at it, consider 
1 
adding case fans if there are unused 
i 
fan positions in your case. The more 
i 
air you have moving through the 
1 
system, the cooler it will run and the 
. 
more reliable it will be. 
Case and Power Supply 
Antec Atlas 550 Server Case (http://www.antec.com) 
A home server can be built in anything from a tower case specifically designed 
to house servers down to the smallest of small form factor cases. True server 
cases are usually large, heavy, and expensive—overkill for a typical home server. 
Very small cases may be suitable for some home servers, but their lack of drive 
bays and low-output power supplies often rule them out. 
For our home server, the ideal case must be reasonably priced, be equipped 
with a top-quality power supply of 500W or more, have at least six or eight 
drive bays—ideally, with provisions to soft-mount hard drives for higher 
reliability—and have enough fans (or fan positions that we can populate) to 
provide high cooling efficiency. We'd also like the case to be attractive and 
reasonably quiet. 
The key considerations for a home server case are the number of drive bays 
it provides and its cooling efficiency. In a residential environment, noise level 
and appearance may also be important. For us, all four of those factors were 
important. We wanted at least half a dozen hard drive bays to accommodate 
our initial disk configuration while leaving drive bays available for future ex-
pansion. Effective cooling is critical for obvious reasons. Noise level is impor-
tant because this server will live in Robert's office, which already has several 
computers contributing to the noise level. Appearance is important because 
Robert doesn't want an ugly box sitting in his office. 
We budgeted $140 to $160 for the case and power supply, because a top-
quality 500W or better power supply costs at least $80 and a suitable case at 
least $60.That ruled out several otherwise suitable server cases from Intel and 
Super Micro that were priced considerably higher. If our budget could have ex-
tended to $200 or more, we'd have seriously considered models like the Antec 
Titan 650, the Intel SC5299UPNA, and the Super Micro CSE-733i-645. 
In the $150 price range, the Antec Atlas 550 is the standout choice, so much 
so that we couldn't find any comparable cases at anything close to its price. 
Despite its mini-tower form factor, the Atlas 550 provides a total of eight drive 
bays—four external 5.25" bays and four internal 3.5" bays—and accepts full 
ATX (although not extended ATX) motherboards. Only the four internal bays 
have shock mounts for the hard drives, but if we want to install drives in the 
external bays we can use silicone washers from the hardware store. 
300 
Chapter 8 

Component Considerations 
In stock form, the Atlas 550 has very good cooling. In addition to the power 
supply fan, a three-speed 120 mm rear fan is standard. There are also three 
open fan positions, for one 80 mm fan on the side panel and two front 92 
mm fans to cool the hard drives. Frankly, we're not sure why Antec didn't just 
include those two 92 mm fans as a standard feature. 
The Atlas 550 is a reasonably quiet case, particularly if you run the case fans at 
less than full speed. TheTruPower power supply is nearly inaudible, particu-
larly running lightly loaded. Appearance is obviously a matter of taste, but we 
think the Atlas 550 is a very attractive case. We wouldn't hesitate to use it in our 
den, library, or living room, let alone our offices. 
Motherboard and Processor 
ASRock K10N78M Pro (http://www.asrock.com) 
A M D Athlon II X2 240 (http://www.amd.com) 
Most home servers spend most of their time reading, writing, transmitting, 
and receiving files, none of which places much burden on a processor. Other 
than stability and reliability, the only requirements for the motherboard are 
that it supports at least a couple of gigabytes of memory, provides ports for 
connecting at least the three SATA hard drives we plan to install initially, and 
provides at least one fast, reliable Ethernet port. Of course, even a mother-
board that lacks those ports can be expanded by adding PCI or PCI Express 
adapter cards to increase the port count. 
In fact, we seriously considered using an inexpensive Intel Atom motherboard/ 
processor combo for our home server. We decided not to, but only because 
Atom motherboards are short of both ports and expansion slots. Instead, we 
decided to use the same processor and motherboard we used in the budget 
system. (Why reinvent the wheel?) That boosted our cost for the motherboard 
and processor from $80 or so for the Intel Atom motherboard/processor to 
$120 or so for the budget motherboard/processor, less the cost of the $15 ex-
pansion card we'd have had to add to provide more SATA ports. 
That $25 or so extra was well worth spending. Rather than a tiny motherboard 
with very limited expansion capabilities, we ended up with a |jATX mother-
board with four SATA ports, a PCI Express xl expansion slot, and two PCI ex-
pansion slots. We also ended up with a processor that's several times faster 
than the Atom, giving us some headroom if we later decide to add other func-
tions to the server. 
We used the ASRock motherboard and Athlon II X2 processor because we'd 
used them to build (and torture-test) the budget system and knew they were 
both inexpensive and reliable. With the light burden a home server system 
places on the processor and motherboard, just about any AMD or Intel budget 
processor in any other ASRock, ASUS, GIGABYTE, or Intel motherboard would 
have done as well. 
In fact, if we hadn't needed to use all-new components for our server for the 
purpose of this book, we might well have recycled the processor and mother-
board from one of our existing systems. A two-year-old system that was built 
- A 
1 You Want a Cable with 
i That Drive? 
i 
Most retail-boxed motherboards 
and 
i 
retail-boxed hard drives come with 
1 
drive cables, but if you plan to install 
i 
multiple drives it's worth 
checking 
i 
the detailed motherboard 
and drive 
1 
specifications 
to see what's 
included 
\ 
in the box. The ASRock K10N78M 
Pro, 
i 
for example, includes only one stan-
1 
dard ATA/IDE cable and one SATA 
i 
cable. We ordered OEM (bare) hard 
i 
drives, so no cables were included 
1 
with the drives. We have spare SATA 
cables all over the place, so it wasn't 
i 
an issue for us, but it may be for you. 
i 
When you order your 
components, 
' 
order extra cables if there aren't 
i 
enough included with the mother-
i 
board and drives. 
i 
Another problem you may encounter, 
' 
particularly with f.¡ATXand 
Mini-ITX 
i 
motherboards, 
is that the cables 
i 
supplied with the motherboard 
may 
1 
not be long enough for some larger 
i 
cases. Very few motherboard 
makers 
i 
specify their products to that level of 
1 
detail, so about the best you can do is 
i 
hope, unless you want to order some 
i 
long cables just to be sure. 
i 
If you do find yourself needing to buy 
1 
longer cables, don't visit the local big-
i 
box stores. They may carry the cables 
i 
you need, but the price will probably 
1 
be outrageous. Instead, look for a 
i 
local system builder, who 
probably 
i 
has hundreds of the things in a back 
1 
room and will probably be willing to 
sell you a couple 
cheap. 
Building a Home Server 
301 

Component Considerations A 
with high-quality components is, in our experience, just finishing an extended 
burn-in, and is probably good for several more years. About the only change 
wed make to such recycled components would be to replace the CPU cooler 
(or at least its fan) and to remove the memory modules, polish the contacts, 
and reinstall them. Alas, none of this is true for typical mass-market systems, 
many of which are built with the cheapest possible third- and fourth-tier 
motherboards, cheap memory, and so on. 
Memory 
Crucial CT2KIT25664AA800 PC2-6400 4 GB kit (2 GBx2) 
0h ttp://www.crucial.com) 
The ASRock K10N78M Pro motherboard has two memory slots that support 
a maximum of 8 GB of memory. Our normal practice for 32-bit operating sys-
tems is to install 1 GB of memory per core (or per thread, for multithreaded 
processors). On that basis, a pair of 1 GB memory modules for a total of 2 GB of 
system memory would probably have sufficed. A 32-bit OS recognizes at most 
3 to 3.5 GB of memory, so installing more than 4 GB would be pointless. 
However, in our 20 years of dealing with servers, we've never heard anyone 
complain that a server had too much memory. It's possible that at some point 
we'll install a 64-bit operating system on this server, which would effectively 
double the memory requirements to 4 GB. A pair of 2 GB memory modules 
didn't cost all that much more than a pair of 1 GB modules, so we decided to 
install 4 GB of memory initially. We considered installing a pair of 4 GB mod-
ules to max out system memory at 8 GB, but at the time we built this system 
4 GB modules were selling for more than twice as much per gigabyte as 2 GB 
modules, so that would have been a waste of money. 
We chose a Crucial 4 GB (2 GBx2) memory kit, using the online Crucial product 
selector to ensure compatibility with our motherboard. The motherboard sup-
ports DDR2-533 (PC2-4200), DDR2-667 (PC2-5300), DDR2-800 (PC2-6400), and 
DDR2-1066 (PC2-8500) memory modules. Although Crucial offered PC2-4200 
and PC2-5300 modules for this motherboard, those modules were priced the 
same as PC2-6400 modules, so there was no reason to choose the slower mod-
ules. The PC2-8500 modules were considerably more expensive than the PC2-
6400 modules and would have provided no noticeable performance benefit, 
so we settled on the PC2-6400 kit. 
Hard Disk Drives 
Seagate Barracuda XT ST32000641 AS 2TB (three) 
0h ttp://www.seagate.com) 
The disk subsystem of our home server must be capacious, fast, and reliable: 
capacious because this server will store all of the data we want to keep online, 
which is currently nearly 4 TB and growing; fast because when we retrieve a 
file we don't want the server slowing things down; and reliable, well, for obvi-
ous reasons. Here are our recommendations: 
302 
Chapter 8 

Component Considerations 
Capacity 
Our target for capacity was 6 TB (6,000 GB). The largest hard drives avail-
able when we built this system held 2 TB, so using three of those hits our 
target while leaving five free drive bays for later expansion. 
We considered using 1.5 TB drives, which when we built this system had 
the lowest price per unit storage—about $0.07/GB versus about $0.10/ 
GB for the 2 TB models—but we decided that wed rather pay slightly 
more per gigabyte than use an extra drive bay. Installing four 1.5TB drives 
would also have maxed out our motherboard's four SATA connectors, so 
we'd need to use an ATAPI optical drive. If (when) we wanted to add a hard 
drive, we'd need to buy and install a SATA expansion card. 
Performance 
High-capacity SATA hard drives are available in 7,200 RPM mainstream 
models and 5,400 or 5,900 RPM economy models. We seriously consid-
ered using the slower drives, which would have reduced drive costs sig-
nificantly. For example, when we built this system, 2 TB 5,900 RPM drives 
were selling for literally half the price of 7,200 RPM models. As tempting 
as it was to cut our drive costs by half, we decided that the performance 
penalty was too high a price to pay, particularly since we intend to use this 
server for years to come. 
Reliability 
There are different kinds of reliability. First, of course, is the inherent reli-
ability of the hardware itself. Seagate Barracuda SATA drives are extremely 
reliable, as any data recovery firm knows. We have had fewer failures with 
Seagate drives than with any other brand, and many of our readers report 
similar experiences. A clean, well-ventilated system with reliable power 
protection contributes further to drive reliability. And, although we could 
nearly eliminate the small risk of data loss caused by a drive failure by 
configuring our four drives in a RAID 5, that would cost us a quarter of our 
available storage. 
Which brings up the final type of reliability: procedural reliability. Our pro-
cedures replicate our data, both manually and automatically, to multiple 
systems on our network. For example, our audio/video data will reside 
both on this server and on our media center system, Barbara's scans of 
family photographs will reside both on this server and on her main sys-
tem, and our raw camcorder video will reside both on this server and on 
Robert's main system. 
A failed hard drive on the server might cost us at most a few minutes' 
work, depending on which drive failed. Chances are that a drive failure 
will lose us no work at all, and all we'll have to do is replace the failed drive 
and restore the data to it from a backup. We can live with that. 
Obviously, the best storage configuration for your needs may differ signifi-
cantly from our configuration. Not everyone needs a 6 TB server, and many 
people will happily accept the slower performance of 5,400 RPM or 5,900 RPM 
drives in exchange for cutting their drive costs significantly. 
Brian Bilbrey Comments 
/ buy the ES (or whatever 
they're 
calling the Enterprise-grade) 
drives, 
generally at a 50% premium over the 
equivalent-sized 
consumer spindle. I 
figure the sleep I gain from 
improved 
drive reliability is worth every penny. 
Building a Home Server 
303 

Component Considerations A 
Strength in Numbers 
One of the advantages 
of having several hard drives installed is 
that it provides a great deal of flexibility. With three 2 TB drives, 
for example, you can configure your disk subsystem as a 6 TB 
JBOD or a 4 TB RAID 5. With four 2 TB drives, you can set up an 8 
TB JBOD, a 6 TB RAID 5, or a 4 TB RAID 10. 
We actually borrowed a fourth 2 TB Barracuda XT from one 
of the other project systems long enough to testaRAID 
10 
configuration. 
When we tested hard drive performance 
locally, 
RAID 5 and particularly RAID 10 were faster than JBOD in some 
benchmarks, 
as we expected. But for accessing files over the 
network—which 
is all that really matters—our 
lOOOBaseT 
network was the bottleneck. Network file reads and writes were 
no faster with RAID 10 than with JBOD, again as we expected. 
We concluded 
that using RAID with 7,200 RPM drives in the 
server was pointless. But, although 
we didn't have 
enough 
5,400 or 5,900 RPM drives to test our hypothesis, we would 
expect a server using those slower drives in a JBOD to be disk-
bound rather than network-bound. 
In that case, we'd 
probably 
buy an extra drive or drives and configure them as a RAID 10. 
When 1 OOOOBaseT network components 
become 
affordable, 
we'll revisit the RAID issue. 
Of course, you needn't fill all or even most of your drive bays initially. You can 
start small and expand as needed. For example, you might start with just one 
or two drives, and simply add another drive each time your data approaches 
maximum disk capacity. This is particularly easy to do with a JBOD; with a RAID 
you may have some backing up and restoring and reconfiguring to do each 
time you install a new drive or drives. 
Ad Hoc Backups 
Don't overlook the opportunity 
to use new drives for ad hoc 
backups when you expand your system. For example, one of 
our readers started with a pair of7,200 RPM 1 TB drives set up 
as a RAID 1. Then she got into shooting HD video and 
decided 
to add a pair of5400 RPM 1.5 TB drives for bulk data 
storage 
and to convert the RAID 1 to a JBOD to give her additional 
fast 
hard drive capacity. 
That took her from a 1 TBRAID 
1 configuration 
to a 5 TB JBOD, 
and of course she ran two full backups to eSATA external hard 
drives before doing anything else. Then she realized she could 
use the two new hard drives to make two more full backups. So 
she put the two new hard drives in her eSATA dock, 
formatted 
them, copied the contents of the RAID 1 to both of them, shut 
down the system, and disconnected 
the drives. 
She said she'd have been very uncomfortable 
having only one 
full backup before breaking and reformatting 
the RAID 1, and 
at least slightly uncomfortable 
having only two backups. But, 
as she said, with four full backups there was more chance 
that 
she'd be struck by lightning than that she'd lose all her data 
during the upgrade. 
The Big 3-0 
As we wrote this, 2 TB drives were the largest available, but 
Seagate has announced 
plans to ship a 3 TB model in late 2010. 
No doubt Samsung, 
Western Digital, and other drive makers 
will follow Seagate's lead and introduce similar 
models. 
Unfortunately, the BIOSs on nearly all current motherboards 
do 
not support booting from drives larger than 2 TB. This is a hard 
limitation. There's no way to get around it, short of replacing 
the motherboard 
with a model that uses a 
nified Extensible 
Firmware Interfaci (UEFI) BIOS. 
Fortunately, this limitation applies only to the boot drive. As 
long as you boot the system from a 2 TB or smaller drive, and 
as long as your operating system, HDD device drivers, and/or 
HBAs or RAID controllers support drives larger than 2 TB, you 
can install as many 3 TB drives as you have SATA ports 
available 
for them. 
With three 2 TB drives and five spare drive bays, we have 
room 
to expand our own server to a total of 21 TB without 
replacing 
any drives. That should suffice for the expected life of the server. 
304 
Chapter 8 

Component Considerations 
Backup Hardware 
None 
Easy SATA (http://www.antec.com) 
SYBA SD-ENC50020 Hard Drive Docking Station (http://www.syba.com) 
Backing up a multi-terabyte server is a real challenge. Optical discs just don't 
cut it. A full backup of a 6 TB server fills more than 1,300 DVD+R discs. Blu-
ray isn't much better; a 6 TB backup fills 240 BD-R discs. And you'd have to sit 
there around the clockfor several days swapping discs.Tape backup would be 
nice, but even an 800 GB LTO Ultrium tape drive runs $1,500 or more, and a 
tape changer with enough capacity that's fast enough for backing up a multi-
terabyte server overnight costs as much as a decent used car. And then there's 
the cost of the tapes. 
That leaves hard drives as the only practical solution.They're inexpensive, fast, 
easy to use, and reasonably rugged. A USB 2.0 external hard drive transfers 
data at about 30 MB/second, or about 108 GB/hour, so backing up 1 TB of 
data would take close to 10 hours. That's much too slow, unless your server 
has a relatively small amount of data that needs routine backup. An eSATA 
external hard drive or a removable SATA hard drive is much faster than USB 2.0, 
because backup throughput is limited by the speed of the hard drives them-
selves rather than the interface. In our tests, a Seagate 7,200 RPM hard drive 
transferred data via eSATA at a sustained rate of more than 100 MB/s, or close 
to 400 GB/hour. 
We listed our first choice of backup hardware as "none" because we didn't ac-
tually install any backup hardware in our home server (well, we did, but only 
for the purpose of shooting images for this chapter). Our server runs headless 
and is backed up across the network to removable hard drives in Robert's main 
desktop system, but many home servers require local backup hardware. 
If you need to back up your server locally, our first choice would be either an 
Antec Easy SATA, which allows you to install or remove a bare SATA hard drive 
simply by sliding it into or out of the frame, or a SYBA hard drive docking sta-
tion. The SYBA unit holds two hard drives, but requires an eSATA port for each. 
Since we have only four SATA ports available in this system, three of which are 
devoted to hard drives, we decided to install an Antec Easy SATA frame and 
allocate the fourth SATA port to it. 
Data to Go 
At $20 or so, the Antec Easy SATA units are inexpensive 
enough 
that you might want to consider purchasing 
one or more of 
them for each of your systems. If you install all of your hard 
drives in these frames, you can simply slide out the drives and 
take them with you when you leave the house. You can also 
install an empty Easy SATA frame in each of your systems 
and 
use two or three hard drives as a rotating backup set for all of 
your systems. 
Of course, carrying bare hard drives around risks 
damaging 
them. There are several possible solutions to that problem. First, 
some hard drives come packaged 
in resealable hard plastic 
blister packs, which are excellent for transporting 
and storing 
drives. If you don't have those, you can purchase padded 
hard 
drive wallets for each of your drives. Alternatively, if the drives 
you purchase are shipped in protective bubble wrap, you can 
simply reuse that bubble wrap. 
Building a Home Server 
305 

Component Considerations A 
Windows Versus Linux 
Yes, we know about Windows 
Re-
mote Desktop, but it's not the same. 
Remote Desktop provides 
limited 
remote management 
functions, 
but some management 
tasks must 
still be done from a monitor 
and 
keyboard physically connected 
to the 
server. Linux remote 
management 
tools allow us to do almost 
anything 
remotely that doesn't require 
chang-
ing 
hardware. 
Brian Bilbrey Comments 
I'd go with this latter suggestion 
as a 
primary solution—it's 
good to have 
a USB drive around anyway, and if 
you are going to have a spare optical 
drive, it may as well be trivially inter-
machine 
portable. 
ATAPI Versus SATA Optical Drives 
If you plan to install an optical drive 
permanently, you may want to 
choose an ATAPI DVD burner rather 
than a SATA model. Doing so allows 
you to allocate all of your SATA ports 
to hard drives, current or future. (And 
buy a spare ATAPI optical drive now; 
they are becoming 
increasingly 
hard 
to find.) 
There is no drawback 
to installing 
an ATAPI optical drive. They cost the 
same as SATA models and have the 
same performance 
and reliability. 
Optical Drive 
None 
Our home server runs headless, so it doesn't really need an optical drive, ex-
cept for installing the operating system. The ASRock motherboard has four 
SATA ports, three of which are devoted to hard drives, leaving one available 
for a SATA optical drive (or adding another hard drive later). The motherboard 
also provides one ATA/133 port, so we could install an ATAPI optical drive on 
the ATA port, but that drive would simply sit there collecting dust for months 
on end. It would also occupy a drive bay that we might need later for an ad-
ditional hard drive. 
The usual reason for installing an optical drive on a server—making backups— 
doesn't apply to this system, either. It will be backed up across the network. 
Our home server will sit in Robert's office in the far back corner under Robert's 
desk (a 3'solid-coredoor mounted to the wall studs). This will be very much an 
out-of-sight-out-of mind system. In fact, Robert put entries in his calendar so 
he wouldn't forget to vacuum out the dust bunnies every few months. 
Of course, your situation may be different. If you need a DVD writer in your 
server, install one of the ASUS, LiteOn, or Samsung models mentioned in one 
of the other system chapters. If you intend to use Blu-ray BD-R/RE for backup, 
install the Pioneer Blu-ray writer. Of course, if you intend to install several hard 
drives in your server and also intend to leave an optical drive installed perma-
nently, you may need to use a different motherboard that provides additional 
ATA and/or SATA ports. 
We elected to conserve both ports and bays by connecting an optical drive 
only long enough to install the operating system. As it happened, we had an 
old ATAPI DVD available, so we connected it temporarily to the ATA port on the 
motherboard. We could also have connected a SATA optical drive temporarily, 
or even used one of our USB external optical drives. 
Keyboard, Mouse, and Display 
Because this home server runs Linux, we need a keyboard, mouse, and display 
only for initial installation and configuration. Once the server is running, we 
can manage it remotely from one of our desktop systems. 
UPS 
Falcon Electric SG or SSG Series On-Line UPS (http://www.falconups.com) 
Running a server without a UPS is foolish. Even a momentary power glitch can 
corrupt open databases, trash open documents, and crash server-based apps, 
wiping out the work of everyone connected to the server. A UPS may literally 
pay for itself the first time the power fails. 
We used and recommended APC UPSs for many years. Then, after we experi-
enced several premature failures of APC units and received numerous mes-
sages from readers about their increasingly frequent problems with APC units, 
we decided to look elsewhere. On the advice of our friend and colleague Jerry 
306 
Chapter 8 

Component Considerations 
Pournelle, we looked at Falcon Electric UPSs, which turned out to be as good 
as Jerry said they were. (Years ago, an earthquake rattled Chaos Manor, knock-
ing over everything in the server room. All of Jerry's equipment failed, except 
the Falcon Electric UPS, which just kept running, lying on its side amidst the 
debris of his computer room.) We've now used Falcon Electric units exclusively 
for about five years, without so much as a hiccough. 
Falcon Electric units are built to industrial standards, and priced accordingly. 
You won't find Falcon UPSs at online resellers or big-box stores, but they are 
readily available from numerous distributors. Check the Falcon Electric web-
site for details. 
Our server connects to a 2 kVA Falcon Electric SG Series On-Line UPS that was 
already located in Robert's office, protecting his desktop system. That unit has 
plenty of reserve capacity to protect the server as well, so there was no need 
to install a separate UPS for the server. 
We think it's worth spending the extra time, effort, and money to get a Falcon 
Electric UPS. They really are better-built and more reliable than consumer-
grade models. If the Falcon Electric units are out of your price range, we think 
the APC Smart-UPS units remain the best of the mass-market UPSs, despite the 
problems we and our readers have had with them from time to time. (We've 
had more problems with other brands.) If you're on an even tighter budget, 
the APC Back-UPS units are reasonable choices. 
If you've decided to forego a UPS entirely, we suggest you think again. Any 
power protection is better than none at all. Even the inexpensive units that 
look like fat outlet strips are better than nothing. Their run-time is very short, 
but even a few seconds of backup power is often sufficient. If you buy one 
of these inexpensive units, just make sure that the VA rating is high enough 
to support the draw of your server. Also be aware that the built-in surge and 
spike suppression in these units is often very poor, so it's worthwhile to install 
a good surge protector between the power receptacle and the UPS. 
Component Summary 
Table 8-1 summarizes our component choices for the home server system. 
Table 8-1. Bill of materials for home server 
Component 
Product 
Case 
Antec Atlas 550 Server Case 
Power supply 
(Bundled 550 W ) 
Motherboard 
ASRock K10N78M Pro 
Processor 
AMD Athlon IIX2 240 (retail boxed) 
CPU cooler 
(Bundled with processor) 
Memory 
Crucial CT2KIT25664AA800 PC2-6400 4 GB kit (2 GBx2) 
Video adapter 
(Integrated) 
Sound adapter 
(Integrated) 
Hard drives 
Seagate Barracuda XT ST32000641AS 2TB (three) 
Building a Home Server 
307 

Building the Home Server 
Table8-h Bill of materials for home server 
1 Component 
Product 
I 
Backup hardware 
(See text) 
Optical drive 
(None; see text) 
Keyboard 
(None; see text) 
Mouse 
(None; see text) 
Speakers 
(None; see text) 
Display 
(None; see text) 
UPS 
Falcon Electric SG orSSG Series On-Line UPS 
He Got Up, Got Dressed, and Took 
a Shower 
As always, you needn't follow the 
exact sequence 
of steps we 
describe 
when you build your own 
home 
server. Always install the 
processor 
and memory 
before you install the 
motherboard 
in the case, 
because 
doing otherwise 
risks damaging 
the 
processor, memory, or 
motherboard. 
The exact sequence 
doesn't 
matter 
for most other steps, though. 
Some 
steps must be taken in the order we 
describe, because completing 
one 
step is required for completing 
the 
next, but as you build your 
system 
it will be obvious 
when 
sequence 
matters. 
Building the Home Server 
Figure 8-1 shows the major components of the home server. Well, except for 
the Falcon Electric UPS—it weighs a ton, and we didn't feel like hauling it from 
Robert's office into the kitchen and lifting it up onto the table. 
The AMD Athlon II X2 240 Regor processor is visible at left center, with a Crucial 
4 GB memory kit sitting atop it, leaning against the Antec Atlas 550 case. To the 
right is the Antec Easy SATA drive caddy, with the ASRock K10N78M Pro mother-
board front and center. The three Seagate Barracuda XT 2 TB hard drives are 
visible at the lower left. That's everything we need to build our server, other 
than the optical drive, display, keyboard, and mouse that we'll connect just 
long enough to get the software installed and configured. 
Figure 8-1. Home server components, 
awaiting 
construction 
Make sure you have everything you need before you start building the system. 
Open each box and verify the contents against the packing list. 
308 
Chapter 8 

Building the Home Server 
Preparing the Case 
The first step in preparing any case that has an installed power supply is to 
look for an input-voltage selector switch on the rear of the power supply. 
If that switch is present, make sure it's set to the correct input voltage. If the 
switch is set for 230VAC and you connect the system to a 115VAC receptacle, 
nothing bad happens. The power supply provides only half the voltage the 
motherboard and other components expect, and the system simply doesn't 
power up. However, if the input voltage is set to 115VAC and you connect the 
power supply to a 230VAC receptacle, the system will receive twice the voltage 
it's designed to accept, and you'll get a nice (and expensive) fireworks show. 
The Antec TruePower Trio 550 power supply in the Atlas 550 is autosensing, 
which means it detects the input voltage and adjusts itself automatically. No 
switch necessary, and nothing to worry about. But if you're using some other 
case and power supply, make sure to check. 
To begin preparing the Antec Atlas 550 case, place it upright on a flat surface. 
Loosen both of the captive thumbscrews that secure the side panel, as shown 
in Figure 8-2, and then swing the panel out and remove it from the case, as 
shown in Figure 8-3. 
Figure i-2. Loosen both captive thumbscrews 
on the rear of the left side 
panel 
Figure 8-3. Swing the side panel out and 
remove it from the case 
The front bezel is secured by three black plastic latching tabs at the left front 
edge of the chassis. Press the top tab gently to release the tension and pull 
outward very gently on the top of the front bezel to prevent that tab from 
snapping back into place. Repeat this procedure for the middle tab, as shown 
in Figure 8-4, and the tab located near the bottom of the chassis frame. 
After you release all three latching tabs, swing the front bezel out about 45°, 
as shown in Figure 8-5. Lift the front bezel straight up an inch or so, remove it, 
and place it aside. 
With the front bezel removed, the hard drive cage cover, shown in Figure 8-5, 
is visible. Loosen the two thumbscrews, top and bottom, that secure the drive 
cage cover, as shown in Figure 8-6. 
ra 
• ; 
"A j 
ft 
i 
Figure 8-4. Release the three latching 
tabs 
that secure the front bezel to the 
chassis 
frame 
Building a Home Server 
309 

Building the Home Server 
Figure 8-5. Swing the front bezel out to 
about 45°, lift it clear, and set it aside 
Figure 8-/. Swing the drive cage cover 
open 
Figure 8-8. Loosen the two thumbscrews 
that secure the hard drive cage 
cover 
Swing the drive cage cover open, as shown in Figure 8-7. Lift it straight up to 
remove it, as shown in Figure 8-8, and set it aside. 
The drive cage contains four hard drive mounting trays, each of which is re-
tained by a pair of spring-metal clips. Remove as many drive trays as you have 
hard drives to install by squeezing both clips and pulling the tray straight out 
of the chassis, as shown in Figure 8-9. Set the drive tray(s) aside for now. 
For the best cooling, provide as much space as possible between the hard 
drives. If you're installing two hard drives, remove the top and bottom drive 
trays. If you're installing three hard drives, as we did, leave one of the middle 
two drive trays unused. 
The plastic bag that contains screws and other components is located in one 
of the external drive bays at the top of the chassis. Use your dykes (diagonal 
cutters), as shown in Figure 8-10, to cut the plastic cable tie that secures the 
parts bag to the chassis. If you don't have dykes, carefully use a sharp knife or 
similar tool. Set the parts bag aside. 
m 
mp.-
• j ¡ f c l 
m: 
Figure 8-8. Lift the drive cage cover slightly to release it, and set it aside 
310 
Chapter 8 

Building the Home Server 
Figure 8-3. Remove drive trays by squeezing both metal clips and 
Figure 8-1C 
pulling the drive tray straight out of the chassis 
chassis 
Cut the cable tie that secures the parts bag to the 
Installing the Hard Drive(s) 
The next step is to install the hard drive(s). To begin, place the hard drive in-
verted (circuit board-side up) on a flat surface and position a drive tray on top 
of it, as shown in Figure 8-11. Make sure the drive and drive tray are oriented 
correctly, with the front of the hard drive on the side of the drive tray that has 
the metal clips. The rear of the hard drive, with the power and data connectors, 
should protrude from the rear of the tray, as shown in Figure 8-11. 
Locate four of the special hard drive mounting screws in the parts bag. (One 
of these screws is shown at the bottom left of Figure 8-11.) Align the holes 
in the rubber grommets on the drive mounting tray with the screw holes in 
the bottom of the hard drive, and secure the hard drive by driving in the four 
screws. Tighten the screws finger-tight plus a quarter turn or so, but be careful 
not to overtighten them. Overtightening eliminates the noise- and vibration-
damping benefits of the grommets. Repeat this procedure for each of your 
hard drives. 
Locate as many SATA data cables as you have hard drives. The SATA ports on 
your motherboard may be numbered starting with 0 or 1. (The ASRock mother-
board we used uses both numbering methods.) Use a felt-tip pen to label each 
SATA data cable on both ends with the number of the drive/port you'll use it 
with, as shown in Figure 8-12. Label both sides of each cable to make sure the 
label will be visible after the cables are installed. 
Connect a SATA data cable to each of your hard drives, as shown in Figure 
8-13.The connector is keyed with an L-shaped socket and plug. Make sure the 
cable connector and drive connector are aligned properly and then press the 
cable connector straight in until it seats. Avoid placing any lateral pressure or 
torque on the connectors, which are relatively fragile. Install the other SATA 
data cables on the remaining hard drive(s), if any. 
Flat Versus Phillips 
Yes, we used a fiat-blade screw-
driver to secure the hard drives. The 
special hard-drive mounting 
screws 
Antec supplies have a 
combination 
straight/Phillips head, but the Phillips 
portion is so shallow that we were 
able to get a better grip with the flat-
blade screwdriver. 
Building a Home Server 
311 

Building the Home Server 
Figure 8-11. Place the hard drive inverted on a flat surface and use 
Figure 8-1H. Label each of your SATA data cables with the 
drive/ 
four of the special drive-mounting 
screws 
to secure it to the drive 
port number you'll use them with 
Feed the free end of the SATA data cable through the drive bay and into the 
interior of the case. Align the drive tray with the chassis and slide the tray into 
the chassis, as shown in Figure 8-14. Press the drive tray until the spring clips 
snap into place, securing the hard drive. Repeat this procedure for each of the 
remaining hard drives, if any. When you've finished, check all of the SATA data 
cables to make sure they're still fully seated. 
Figure 8-13. Connect 
a SATA data cable to the hard drive 
Figure 8-14. Slide the drive tray back into the chassis 
and 
press 
firmly until the spring clips snap into place 
To reinstall the hard drive bay cover, align the pins on the left side of the drive 
bay cover with the sockets on the chassis, and lower the drive bay cover back 
into place, as shown in Figure 8-15. Swing the drive bay cover closed and tight-
en both thumbscrews to secure it, as shown in Figure 8-16. 
312 
Chapter 8 

Building the Home Server 
Hard Drive Fans 
If you want to install one or two 92 mm supplemental 
cooling 
fans for the hard drive bay, now is the time to do so. You can use 
any standard 92 mm case fan. 
If you install one or both of these fans, make certain that they 
are oriented to push air into the case rather than draw air out of 
it. Look for an arrow on the body of the fan, which indicates the 
direction of the air flow. 
To mount a fan, simply install the four mounting screws or 
expansion connectors supplied with the fan in the four holes 
surrounding 
the fan grill on the hard drive bay cover. Run the 
fan power cable into the interior of the case, and connect it to 
an available power 
connector. 
If you install a fan or fans that have switchable speeds, decide 
how much noise you're willing to tolerate. If the server is in an 
area where noise is not an issue, set the fans to run on high. 
Otherwise, start by setting them on low and increase the speed 
later if you need more cooling. 
Different fans have different power connectors. The most com-
mon is a standard Molex (old-style hard drive) power 
connec-
tor. If your power supply has one or more Molex 
connectors 
labeled Fan-Only, you can use those to allow the power supply 
to control fan speed. If you do that, set the fan power switch 
to high. If you set it to medium or low, the voltage supplied by 
the Fan-Only power connector may not be sufficient to spin up 
the fan. If your fan has a three-or four-pin header-pin 
connec-
tor, it's designed to be connected to the motherboard. Locate a 
header-pin connector on the motherboard 
labeled AuxFan 
or 
Case Fan and connect the fan power cable to that set of header 
pins. Once again, if the fan has a speed switch, set it to high. 
We decided not to install any hard drive fans in our server, at 
least initially. We'll keep an eye on hard drive temperatures, and 
install a fan or fans later if necessary. 
Figure 8-15. Align the pins on the drive bay cover with the sockets 
Figure 8-18. Reinsert the thumbscrews 
to secure the drive bay 
in the chassis and lower the drive bay cover back into place 
cover 
Preparing the Motherboard 
With the hard drives installed, the next step is to prepare the motherboard 
by installing the processor, CPU cooler, and memory. Some manuals suggest 
installing the motherboard in the chassis before installing the processor and 
memory, but after nearly cracking a motherboard by doing it that way, we 
decided it was much safer to install the processor and memory first. 
To begin, locate the metal cam lever on the side of the processor socket. Press 
the cam lever slightly outward (away from the socket) to release it from the 
plastic latches that secure it, and then lift the lever, as shown in Figure 8-17. 
Building a Home Server 331 

Building the Home Server 
Figure 8-1/. Release the cam lever from the processor 
socket and lift It up 
Open the outer box of the processor and remove the hard plastic shell that 
contains the processor. Open that package carefully.Touch the chassis or pow-
er supply to ground yourself before you touch the processor itself. Remove the 
processor from the antistatic foam bed on which it rests. Align and orient the 
processor carefully with the processor socket. The socket and processor are 
keyed, with an arrow on one corner of the processor and a corresponding key 
on one corner of the processor socket. 
When you have the processor and socket aligned, simply drop the processor 
into the socket, as shown in Figure 8-18. The processor should seat fully with 
no pressure whatsoever. Do not apply any pressure; doing so risks bending 
the fragile contact pins. If the processor doesn't drop into the socket freely, 
it's not aligned properly. Realign it and try again until it drops easily into the 
socket and seats completely. 
Once the processor is seated properly, swing down the metal cam lever and 
snap it into place under the plastic locking tab on the socket, as shown in Fig-
ure 8-19. You should feel slight resistance on the cam lever as the cam clamps 
the socket onto the processor pins. If the resistance is anything more than 
slight, back up and start over. 
Figure 8-18. Orient and align the processor 
properly 
with the 
socket and then drop it into place 
Figure 8-18. Press the cam lever down and snap it into place 
under 
the plastic locking tab on the processor 
socket 
314 
Chapter 8 

Building the Home Server 
With the processor seated and clamped into place, the next step is to install 
the CPU cooler. Before you install the cooler, examine the bottom of the heat-
sink to verify that the patch of thermal compound is present and undamaged. 
The CPU cooler mounts to the processor socket using two shiny metal latches 
on the CPU cooler that fit over two black plastic tabs on the processor socket. 
One of those latches is free-floating, and the other has a camming lever that 
allows the CPU cooler to be locked into place. The CPU cooler can be oriented 
so that either latch fits over either tab, but it's more convenient to use the 
free-floating latch toward the interior of the motherboard (where there is less 
clearance) and the cammed latch on the edge of the motherboard. 
Examine the CPU cooler and locate the side with the free-floating latch. Tilt the 
opposite side of the CPU cooler up slightly, and hook the free-floating metal 
latch over the black plastic tab on the side of the processor socket near the 
passive heatsink, as shown in Figure 8-20. 
Pivot the CPU cooler down and into full contact with the processor, making 
sure that the first latch remains connected. Maintaining finger pressure to 
keep the CPU cooler in position, press the second (cammed) latch into posi-
tion over the second black plastic tab, as shown in Figure 8-21. 
When Recycling Is Bad 
If you ever remove and replace the 
processor, don't attempt to reuse 
the thermal compound. Rub off any 
compound 
present on the processor 
surface and the heatsink base—if it's 
tenacious,you 
can warm it slightly 
with a hair dryer—and 
then polish 
both the processor surface and the 
heatsink base with a clean paper 
towel to remove all traces of the 
old compound. Apply new thermal 
compound 
according to the instruc-
tions supplied with it. (We generally 
use Antec Silver thermal 
compound, 
which is inexpensive and effective.) 
Figure 8-HO. Hook the free-floating metal latch over the black 
Figure 
plastic tab on the processor socket 
tab 
¡-HI. Press the cammed latch into position over the second 
Verify that both latches are secured over both tabs, and then press the black 
plastic cam lever down until it latches to lock the CPU cooler to the processor 
socket, as shown in Figure 8-22. 
Ordinarily, the next step would be to connect the CPU cooler fan power cable 
to the motherboard CPU fan header pins. In this case, though, the position of 
the CPU fan header pins made it more convenient to install the memory be-
fore we connected the CPU fan. 
With the processor installed, the next step is to install the memory modules. 
To begin, swing open the DIMM locking tabs on both sides of both memory 
sockets, as shown in Figure 8-23. 
Building a Home Server 
315 

Building the Home Server 
Figure 8-HH. Press the black plastic cam lever on the CPU cooler down 
Figure 8-H3. Open the DIMM locking tabs on both sides of both 
until it latches to secure the CPU cooler to the processor socket 
memory 
sockets 
Before handling the memory modules, touch the chassis or power supply 
to ground yourself. Align the first DIMM with a memory socket, as shown in 
Figure 8-24. Make sure the keying notch on the contact edge of the memory 
module aligns with the keying tab in the socket and that the two sides of the 
memory module fit into the slots on the vertical sides of the memory slot. 
Make sure that the memory module and slot are lined up properly, with the 
memory module vertical relative to the slot. Using one thumb on each side 
of the memory module, press straight down until the memory module snaps 
into place, as shown in Figure 8-25. 
Figure 8-H4. Align the memory 
module 
with the 
socket 
Figure 8-H5. Press straight down on both sides of the 
memory 
module until it seats completely 
in the 
socket 
After you seat the memory module, make sure the plastic latching tabs on the 
memory socket have snapped into place to latch the module into position, 
as shown in Figure 8-26. If the latching tabs are not seated in the notches on 
the memory module, it's possible that the module is not seated completely. 
The metal contacts on the base of the module should be concealed by the 
memory socket. If any are visible, the module is not fully seated. 
Repeat this process with the additional memory module(s). 
316 
Chapter 8 

Building the Home Server 
With the memory installed, you can now connect power to the CPU fan, as 
shown in Figure 8-27. 
Figure 8-HS. Verify that the memory 
module is latched into position 
Figure 8-H/. Connect 
the CPU fan power cable to the CPU fan 
header 
pins 
The motherboard is now prepared. Place it aside for now. Use the antistatic foam 
under the motherboard to make sure it's not damaged by static electricity. 
Final Case Preparation 
Next, we'll complete a few final case-preparation steps to ready the case to re-
ceive the motherboard. To begin, remove the I/O shield installed in the Antec 
Atlas 550 case. The easiest way to do that is to press on the outside of the I/O 
shield with a tool handle, as shown in Figure 8-28, until the I/O shield pops 
loose. You can discard this I/O shield. 
Locate the I/O shield in the motherboard box and hold it up to the rear I/O 
panel of the motherboard, as shown in Figure 8-29, to make sure that the holes 
in the I/O shield correspond to the ports on the motherboard rear I/O panel. 
Working from inside the case, position the I/O shield and use a tool handle to 
press gently on it until it snaps into position, as shown in Figure 8-30. Be care-
ful not to bend the thin metal of the I/O shield. If necessary, use your fingers on 
the outside of the I/O shield to support it while you're pressing it into position. 
With the custom I/O shield installed, the next step is to determine the proper 
number and location of the motherboard mounting standoffs. The ASRock 
motherboard has six mounting holes. The Atlas 550 case comes with four 
brass standoffs installed, only two of which are in the proper positions for the 
motherboard. (The remaining two are located off to one side where they can't 
contact the motherboard; you can leave those standoffs installed or remove 
them, as you like.) 
Locate the motherboard mounting hole positions by holding the mother-
board up to a bright light. Slide the motherboard temporarily into position in 
the case to determine which of the holes in the chassis need to have standoffs 
installed. We used a felt-tip pen to mark the holes in the chassis that needed 
standoffs to be installed, as shown in Figure 8-31. 
Building a Home Server 
317 

Building the Home Server 
Figure 8-H8. Use a tool handle to press on the outside of the I/O 
shield until it pops free 
Figure 8-HS. Verify that the custom I/O shield supplied with the 
motherboard 
in fact matches 
the rear I/O panel of the 
motherboard 
318 
Chapter 8 
Figure 8-30. Position the I/O shield and press gently until it snaps 
Figure 8-31. Mark the chassis 
holes that need standoffs 
to be 
into position 
installed 
After you locate and mark the four additional mounting holes that require 
standoffs, hold the motherboard directly over the case and look straight down 
through each mounting hole in the motherboard to verify that you've marked 
the correct holes. Then locate the four additional standoffs in the parts bag 
and install them, as shown in Figure 8-32. You can use your fingers to install 
and tighten the standoffs, but we found it easier to use our 5 mm nut driver. 
Do not overtighten the standoffs, or you risk stripping the threads. 
Figure 8-3H. Install four additional 
stand-
offs in the marked mounting 
holes 
Installing the Motherboard 
Slide the motherboard into position. Before you begin driving in screws to se-
cure the motherboard, examine the back panel carefully to make sure that 
none of the grounding tabs on the I/O shield intrude into the motherboard 
port connectors, as shown in Figure 8-33. A bright flashlight is helpful here. 
When you're sure the motherboard is properly positioned relative to the I/O 
shield, install one screw through the motherboard and into a standoff, as 
shown in Figure 8-34. Tighten that screw only partially. 

Building the Home Server 
Figure 8-33. Verify that none of the grounding 
tabs on the I/O 
shield have fouled motherboard 
I/O port 
connectors 
Figure 8-34. Drive screws 
through the motherboard 
mounting 
holes and into their corresponding 
standoffs 
You'll need to apply some pressure against the springiness of the I/O shield 
to align the motherboard mounting holes with the standoffs. Get a second 
mounting hole aligned with its standoff and install a second screw. Once 
you've driven in the second screw, all of the mounting holes should align 
properly with their corresponding standoffs. Tighten all six motherboard 
mounting screws finger-tight, plus at most a quarter turn. Do not overtighten 
them, which risks cracking the motherboard. 
Remove the cable tie that secures the bundle of cables from the power sup-
ply. Locate the ATX12V power cable, and route it to the ATX12V socket on the 
motherboard, located between the processor socket and the rear I/O panel. 
The ATX12V socket and plug are keyed. Orient the plug properly with the sock-
et and press the connector into place, as shown in Figure 8-35. 
Locate the 24-pin main ATX power cable in the power supply cable bundle, 
and route it to the front edge of the motherboard, just in front of the memory 
slots. The plug and jack are keyed. Orient the cable connector properly relative 
to the motherboard socket and press the cable connector into place, as shown 
in Figure 8-36. Make certain that the latch on the cable connector snaps into 
place over the tab on the motherboard connector to lock the cable into place. 
Figure 8-35. Connect 
the ATX12V power cable from the power 
Figure 8-38. Connect 
the 24-pin main ATX power cable from the 
supply to the motherboard 
power supply to the 
motherboard 
Building a Home Server 
319 

Building the Home Server 
r A 
1 Frying Peripherals 
1 
Years ago, we found out the hard 
way that just because a 
front-panel 
i 
IEEEI394 
cable connector fits an 
1 
IEEEI 394 header-pin set doesn't 
mean the connection 
is wired prop-
i 
erly. We connected a camcorder 
to a 
1 
miswired front-panel 
IEEEI394port 
and promptly blew the circuitry on 
i 
the camcorder. That was an expen-
1 
sive lesson, but one we'll never make 
' 
again. 
r - A 
I We Hate It When That Happens... 
I 
The power LED connector on the 
' 
ASRock motherboard 
is two adjacent 
I 
header pins. The Atlas 550 Power LED 
I 
cable also uses two pins, but on a 
1 
three-pin connector, with the middle 
I 
position empty. This 
sortofmis-
i 
match is pretty common, 
particularly 
1 
with the power LED and 
speaker 
. 
connectors. 
I 
Unfortunately, there's no 
convenient 
I 
way to solve the problem, unless the 
1 
motherboard 
provides both sorts 
of connector (some do, but not this 
I 
one). We actually decided to leave 
I 
the power LED unconnected, 
because 
' 
our server will sit under Robert's desk, 
I 
where the power LED wouldn't be 
I 
visible 
anyway. 
I 
If you want your power LED to work, 
1 
you'll have to do some minor 
surgery. 
I 
Use your dykes or a sharp knife to cut 
I 
the three-pin power LED cable con-
1 
nectar in half, leaving you with each 
, 
of the two wires on separate 
con-
i 
nectars, and then connect those two 
1 
wires individually to the 
appropriate 
motherboard 
header pins. 
Connecting Front-Panel Ports and Indicators 
With the case still on its side, it's now a good time to install the various front-
panel connectors. To begin, locate the front-panel audio cable in the bundle 
of cables coiled up near the front of the case. This cable has two connectors, 
one for AC'97 audio and the other for HD audio. Locate the front-panel audio 
header-pin set in the back corner of the motherboard, which is keyed with a 
missing pin that corresponds to a blocked hole on the HD audio cable. Orient 
the HD audio cable connector properly relative to the header pins and press it 
onto those pins, as shown in Figure 8-37. 
In addition to the six rear-panel USB ports, the ASRock motherboard includes 
two sets of USB header pins located near the front corner of the motherboard, 
each of which provides two USB ports. Locate the front-panel USB cable and 
route it to the USB header-pin set's location. Like the front-panel audio cable, 
the USB cable and motherboard connector are keyed with a missing pin and 
blocked hole. Orient the USB cable connector properly relative to the header-
pin set, and press the connector onto the header pins, as shown in Figure 8-38. 
The Atlas 550 also provides a front-panel IEEEI394 (FireWire) port, but our 
motherboard provides no connector for it. If your motherboard provides a set 
of FireWire header pins, connect that cable to those pins, but first verify that 
the pinouts on the cable connector and the header-pin set correspond prop-
erly. The motherboard manual and the case manual should both specify the 
pinouts used; if these do not match exactly, re-pin the cable connector using 
the instructions provided in the case manual. 
With all of the front-panel ports connected, it's time to connect the front-panel 
switch and LED indicator cables. The two-pin switch connectors—the power 
switch and reset switch—are not polarized. They can be connected either way 
and will still work. Connect the reset switch and power switch by pressing their 
connectors onto the proper pairs of header pins, as shown in Figure 8-39. 
LED connectors are polarized. If you connect one backward, the LED won't 
illuminate, but no damage is done. By convention, ground on these two pin 
connectors is the side with the white or black wire, and positive (+) is the side 
with a colored wire. Most motherboards have the proper polarity silkscreened 
onto the board near the connection, but this ASRock motherboard does not. 
Fortunately, the only LED cable we need to connect is the hard drive activity 
indicator, visible in Figure 8-39 behind and to the right of the POWER SW con-
nector. That connector is oriented properly in the image, with the red wire 
toward the USB connector to its right. 
With all of the front-panel cables connected, the next step is to connect the 
SATA data cables to the motherboard SATA ports. The ASRock motherboard 
provides four SATA ports, labeled SATAII_1 (Port 0) through SATAII_4 (Port 3). 
We have three hard drives to connect, and it doesn't really matter which drive 
we connect to which port. But we like to be as organized as possible, so by 
habit we connect the first hard drive to Port 0, the second to Port 1, and so on. 
To connect a SATA data cable, verify that the L-shaped key in the cable connec-
tor is oriented properly relative to the key in the motherboard SATA port, slide 
320 
Chapter 8 

Building the Home Server 
the connector into the port body, and press straight down until the connector 
fully seats, as shown in Figure 8-40. After you connect the hard drives, verify 
that all of the SATAdata cables are securely seated on both ends. 
Figure 8-3/. Connect 
the front-panel HD audio cable to the HD 
audio header pin set 
Figure 8-38. Connect 
the front-panel 
USB cable to the 
USB 
header-pin 
set 
Figure 8-38. Connect 
the front-panel switch and indicator cables 
Figure 8-40. Connect 
the SATA data cables to the 
motherboard 
SATA 
ports 
With three hard drives installed, our configuration leaves one of the mother-
board SATA ports free. We'll actually leave that port unused for now, but we 
may use it later to add a fourth hard drive. Depending on your hard drive con-
figuration, you may have one or more ports free. You can use one of those for 
an optical drive or for the Antec Easy SATA hard drive docking station, which 
we'll talk about shortly. 
Connecting Power to the Hard Drives and Fan 
With the SATA data cables connected, it's time to connect power to the hard 
drives and case fan. Lest we forget, let's get the case fan connected first. In the 
bundle of cables coming from the power supply, locate the connector labeled 
FAN ONLY. Connect that cable to the power cable from the rear case fan, as 
Building a Home Server 
321 

Building the Home Server 
shown in Figure 8-41. If you installed one or two 92 mm supplemental fans to 
cool the hard drive cage and didn't connect power to them at the time, con-
nect them now as well. 
The next step is to connect power to the hard drives. It pays to do a little bit of 
planning here, both to make sure you can dress all the cables neatly after you 
finish assembling the system and to make sure your SATA power cables can 
reach all of your SATA devices. If you're using only hard drives in your server, 
and if they're all located in the lower 3.5" hard drive cage, you won't have any 
problem. If you're installing SATA devices in the top (5.25") drive bays, getting 
power to all the SATA devices may be a stretch, literally. 
To connect a SATA power cable to a drive, first ensure that the L-shaped key 
on the power cable and the corresponding key on the drive connector are 
oriented properly. Then slide the SATA power cable connector onto the drive 
power connector and press until it seats, as shown in Figure 8-42. 
. A 
, 
1 Fried Drives 
1 
1 
Large hard drives aren't cheap. Although 
we connected 
the data and power cables 
1 
' 
to all three of the 2 TB drives in the sequence 
we describe here, we did that only to 
i 
preroute the cables, to make it easier to dress them. 
i 
i 
Before we powered 
up the system for the first time (the "smoke test"), we discon- 
i 
1 
nected the power and data cables from all three of the 2 TB drives and temporarily 
1 
connected 
an old 160 GB SATA drive. That way, if the power supply or 
motherboard 
i 
turned out to be catastrophically 
defective, we'd fry only the old, small hard drive. 
\ 
1 
Once we were satisfied that the system worked normally, we shut it down and recon- 
1 
' 
nected the three real system hard 
drives. 
In all of the systems we've built over the last 20 years, we've had only one catastroph- 
. 
i 
ic smoke test. That was enough 
to teach us caution. If you don't have an expendable 
\ 
1 
spare hard drive, you can do the first boot with no drives connected 
or connect just 
1 
an optical drive. 
Figure 8-41. Connect 
the case fan to a FAN ONLY power 
connector 
Figure 8-4H. Connect 
a SATA power cable to each of the hard 
drives 
322 
Chapter 8 

Building the Home Server 
Installing an Optical Drive and/or Hard Drive 
Docking Station 
At this point, we're nearly finished building the system. All that remains to be done 
is installing the optical drive or hard drive docking station—temporarily, in our 
case, but perhaps permanently in yours—and completing a few other final tasks. 
Until now, we've been working with the case on its side. It's easier to install 
drives in the 5.25" drive bays if the case is sitting normally, so stand it up on 
your work surface. If you don't intend to leave an optical drive installed perma-
nently, there's no point to installing it in the case. Instead, just set it on top of 
the case, as shown in Figure 8-43, and temporarily connect the SATA data and 
power cables to it. 
Note the Antec Atlas 550 pamphlet between the optical drive and the Atlas 
550 case. Although an optical drive is unlikely to short out even with the bot-
tom of the drive in direct contact with the metal chassis frame, after once 
shorting out a hard drive we've gotten in the habit of using insulating material 
between the drive and the metal case. 
If you're installing an optical drive permanently, locate two drive rails and the 
parts bag with the mounting screws. Position one drive rail as shown in Figure 
8-44. With the drive rail in this position, the optical drive will protrude just far 
enough out of the chassis that its bezel is flush with the front case bezel. 
Figure 8-43. An optical drive connected 
temporarily 
Figure 8-44. Install drive rails on both sides of the optical drive 
There are four screw holes in the mounting rail and the drive, but we've never 
found it necessary to use more than two screws per drive rail, one at the bot-
tom front and one at the top rear. Locate four drive mounting screws, and test 
one to make sure it matches the screw holes in the drive. Once you're sure 
you have the correct screws, secure both rails to the drive, using two screws 
for each. Connect a SATA data cable to the drive, feed that cable through the 
drive bay into the case, and then slide the optical drive into the case, as shown 
in Figure 8-45. Use both thumbs to press the drive into position until you hear 
the spring-metal tabs latch into place. Working from inside the case, connect a 
SATA power cable to the power connector on the rear of the drive. 
Building a Home Server 
323 

Building the Home Server 
If you're installing an Antec Easy SATA hard drive docking station instead of or 
in addition to the DVD writer, the procedure is the same: attach drive rails to 
both sides of the Easy SATA frame, slide the frame into the chassis, as shown in 
Figure 8-46, and connect SATA data and power cables. 
Figure 8-45. Slide the drive into the chassis and press until it 
Figure 8-48. Installing an Antec Easy SATA hard drive docking 
latches 
station 
The Easy SATA docking station also provides an eSATA connector, visible in 
Figure 8-46 just to the left of Barbara's right thumb. If your motherboard has a 
spare SATA port and you want to make this eSATA port live, connect the cap-
tive cable inside the Easy SATA unit to that free SATA port. Note that this con-
nector provides only SATA data, not power, so any external drive you connect 
to it must be powered separately. 
Configuring and Using the Antec Easy SATA 
To enable hot-swapping, 
the Antec Easy SATA docking 
station 
requires Advanced Host Controller Interface (AHCI) support. 
Before you install the operating system, enter BIOS Setup and 
locate the SATA configuration screen. If SATA is already set 
to use AHCI, you need make no changes. If SATA is set to IDE, 
change the setting to AHCI, save your settings, exit BIOS Setup, 
and restart the system. 
If Windows Vista or Windows 7 is already installed, chang-
ing the SATA setting from IDE to AHCI will render the system 
unbootable, so exit BIOS Setup without making any 
changes. 
Visithttp://support.microsoft.com/kb/922976 
and follow the 
instructions there to enable AHCI on your system. If you have 
a recent Linux version installed, use your package manager to 
verify that the AHCI driver is installed, use BIOS Setup to enable 
AHCI, save the settings, and restart the system. 
To install a hard drive in the Antec Easy SATA hard drive docking 
station, press the button on the left front of the docking 
station 
to release the latch, and slide the drive—with 
the circuit board 
side down and the SATA connectors facing the case—into 
the 
bay until you feel it seat. (When fully seated, the front of the 
drive protrudes from the Easy SATA bay, which allows you to 
grip the drive to remove it.) 
As soon as the drive connectors make contact, the drive should 
spin up. After a few seconds, as it reaches operating speed, a 
drive icon will appear automatically under Windows or Linux. 
(The drive icon may not appear automatically under 
Windows 
7; if it doesn't, refresh [F5] your drives list and it should appear.) 
At that point, you can read from and write to the drive just as 
you would any internal hard drive. 
To remove the drive, ensure that it is not in use and that all 
cached data has been flushed to the drive. (Right-clickon the 
drive icon and choose "Remove Drive Safely," "Unmount," or a 
similarlyworded option.) Press the button on the front of the Easy 
SATA bay to unlock the drive and then pull the drive far enough 
out of the bay to break the power connection. Allow several sec-
onds for the drive to spin down and the heads to lock, and then 
pull the drive completely out of the bay. (If you simply pull the 
drive straight out of the bay without allowing it to spin down, the 
spinning platters act as a gyroscopic stabilizer, which is discon-
certing. The first time we did that, we nearly dropped the drive.) 
324 
Chapter 8 

Building the Home Server 
Finishing Up 
At this point, the new system is just about ready to roll. Before you power it up, 
though, take a few minutes to do a few final tweaks. 
First, if your server looks anything like ours did, there's a rats' nest of cables 
running hither and yon. Your new system will look better, be easier to trouble-
shoot, and be more reliable if you dress those cables and tuck them out of 
the way. To dress the cables, organize them into bundles and route them as 
far away from the motherboard and other components—particularly fans— 
as possible. If necessary, disconnect cables temporarily to untangle them and 
reroute them as necessary. Use the cable ties supplied with the case to secure 
the bundles, and don't hesitate to tuck the cables under or tie them to chassis 
components to get them out of the way. (If you need more cable ties, the yel-
low plastic ties supplied with lawn bags work well.) 
After you finish dressing the cables, do a final check to make sure everything 
is correct: 
• Power supply input voltage set correctly (if applicable) 
• No loose tools or screws (shake the case gently) 
• CPU cooler properly mounted; CPU fan connected 
• Memory modules fully seated and latched 
• Front-panel switch and indicator cables connected properly 
• Front-panel I/O cables connected properly 
• Hard drive data cables connected to drives and motherboard 
• Hard drive power cables connected 
• Optical drive data cable connected to drive and motherboard 
• Optical drive power cable connected 
• All drives secured to drive bay or chassis, as applicable 
• Expansion card(s) (if any) fully seated and secured to chassis 
• Main ATX power cable and ATX12V power cable connected 
• Casefan(s) installed and connected 
• No unused cables flopping around 
Once you're certain that all is as it should be, it's time for the smoke test. (As we 
mentioned earlier, you may want to do the smoke test with a minimal configu-
ration to avoid risking all of your expensive hard drives.) Connect a keyboard, 
mouse, and display, and turn on the display. 
Connect the power cable to the wall receptacle and then to the system unit. 
The Antec power supply has a separate rocker switch on the back that controls 
power to the power supply. By default, it's in the "0," or off, position, which 
means the power supply is not receiving power from the wall receptacle. 
Move that switch to the "1,"or on, position. Press the main power button on 
the front of the case, and the system should start up. Check to make sure that 
all fans are spinning. You should also hear the hard drive(s) spin up. At that 
point, everything should be working properly. 
False Starts 
When you turn on the rear power 
switch, the system will come to life 
momentarily 
and then die. That's 
perfectly normal behavior. 
When 
the power supply receives power, it 
begins to start up. It quickly 
notices 
that the motherboard 
hasn't told it to 
start, though, so it shuts down 
again. 
All you need to do is press the front-
panel power switch and the system 
will start normally. 
Building a Home Server 
325 

Final Words 
If you did the smoke test with a minimal configuration, turn off the system 
now and reconnect the hard drives and any other components you'd left dis-
connected. After verifying that all connections are correct, turn the system 
back on and wait for the POST screen to display. Press F2 to enter BIOS Setup. 
In BIOS Setup, verify that all of your devices are detected, including the full 
amount of memory, and set the correct date and time. Refer to your operat-
ing system documentation to determine if any other changes are necessary 
in BIOS Setup. Make any required changes, save those changes, and restart 
the system. At this point, you're ready to install your operating system and 
applications. 
Final Words 
This system went together smoothly and worked perfectly when we turned 
it on. Server hardware is useless without the software to run it, though, so we 
spent some time looking at various alternatives. 
Choosing the operating system for a home server involves several trade-offs. 
We considered the following operating systems for our own home server: 
Microsoft Windows Home Server 
Originally available only from hardware OEMs bundled with server hard-
ware, Windows Home Server (WHS) can now be purchased separately 
for about $100. Early releases of WHS had an impressive feature set—not 
surprising, considering that WHS is essentially a cut-down version of Win-
dows Server 2003 SP2—but suffered some serious problems, notably a 
severe data corruption bug that went unpatched for far too long. The cur-
rent VI release supports Windows 7 clients and is reliable. 
Microsoft plans to release WHS V2, a major upgrade, sometime in 2010. 
WHS V2 is based on Windows Server 2008 and requires a 64-bit proces-
sor, which obviously rules out upgrades for those running 32-bit systems. 
The WHS V2 feature set has not been announced as we write this, but we 
expect WHSV2 to include several major new features as well as significant 
upgrades to existing features. 
We ruled out WHS for our server because it would make no sense to buy 
and install the dated WHS VI with WHS V2 so close to release. If WHS V2 
includes features we want—and they are worth the (presumably) $100 
price tag—it will be easy enough to buy and install it later. For now, we 
can do what we need to do (and do it well) using free software. 
Desktop Windows 
We have numerous unused licenses lying around for versions of desktop 
Windows from Windows 7 all the way back to Windows NT 4. (Somehow 
we missed out on Vista.) We considered installing one of these—probably 
Windows XP—on our home server and simply setting up workgroup shares 
on the server. The problem with doing that is that desktop Windows is not 
designed to run headless, so we'd have to leave a display, keyboard, and 
326 
Chapter 8 

Final Words 
mouse connected to the server. We have plenty of spares lying around, 
but leaving those peripherals connected would make it difficult to tuck 
the server away under Robert's desk as we planned. 
Ubun tu Server 
Ubuntu Server is free-as-in-beer and free-as-in-speech. It uses text-based 
installation and maintenance, so it's unlikely to be suitable for anyone who's 
not comfortable with command-line Linux. On the other hand, this is seri-
ous server software. It's stripped down to essentials, hence the absence of a 
default GUI, and it's far faster than any of the other products we considered. 
One wonderful feature of Ubuntu Server is its scripted setup of a LAMP 
(Linux, Apache, MySQL, PHP/Perl/Python) server. Setting up a LAMP server 
manually may take a newbie hours (or an experienced Linux administra-
tor maybe 20 minutes). With Ubuntu Server, setting up a LAMP server is a 
single menu option. Frankly, we think Ubuntu Server is a pretty good choice 
for a small office server, provided you're already a moderately experienced 
command-line-savvy Linux administrator (or have access to a Linux guru for 
advice and assistance). But it really is overkill for most home servers, which 
typically don't need to run web servers, mail servers, and so on. 
A desktop Linux distribution 
If your functional requirements are modest, don't rule out using a standard 
desktop Linux distribution like Ubuntu on your server. In theory, there are 
a lot of disadvantages to doing that, but in practice many of those objec-
tions disappear. For example, a desktop Linux distribution is usually slow-
er than a purpose-built server distribution. So what? We'll never notice 
any tiny performance difference that may exist. A desktop distribution 
may not support software RAID. Again, we don't care, because we plan to 
run a JBOD on our home server. Desktop Linux distributions also have ad-
vantages relative to server distributions. The biggest advantage for most 
people is that the desktop distro uses a familiar graphic interface. Setting 
up a shared disk volume or printer is usually a matter of a few clicks. And 
most desktop Linux distributions are set up to allow remote management 
by default, or can easily be configured to do so. 
ANAS package 
There are several Linux- or FreeBSD-based network-attached storage (NAS) 
distributions that are optimized to function as servers rather than work-
stations. They do nothing that any other Linux or FreeBSD distribution 
can't do, but the advantage is that they're preconfigured to provide NAS 
functions with a standard installation. You could spend hours or days get-
ting a desktop Linux or FreeBSD distribution set up to do the same things. 
Among the most popular of these NAS packages are FreeNAS (http:// 
freenas.org), NASLite (http://www.serverelements.com), andTurnKey Linux 
(,http://www.turnkeylinux.org). All run on standard x86 systems and can 
be configured and managed from a web browser running on a network 
client. We also looked at NexentaStor (http://www.nexenta.org), which is 
an industrial-strength NAS environment based on OpenSolaris.The main 
Building a Home Server 
327 

Final Words 
Nexenta product is commercial, but the community edition NexentaStor 
is freely downloadable and has only minor restrictions. (For example, the 
free version is limited to 12 TB of disk space in use.) 
We looked at all of these alternatives except Windows Home Server, which we 
didn't have and didn't want to buy (for the reasons cited). We suggest you do 
the same before you decide on the OS for your server. 
We first ruled out Windows Home Server, desktop Windows, and Ubuntu Serv-
er, for the reasons listed above. That left us with either desktop Linux or one of 
the NAS environments. We looked at several of the latter and decided that, as 
nice as some of them are, they really didn't do anything we needed to do that 
we couldn't do ourselves about as easily with a general Linux distro. 
We ended up installing Ubuntu 10.04, mainly because it was familiar to us and 
we already knew how to do everything we needed to do to configure it as a 
remotely managed server. We run Ubuntu on all of our other computers, so 
using it on the server has the advantage of not requiring us to learn the ins 
and outs of a different operating system or distribution. Also, Ubuntu 10.04 is a 
long-term support (LTS) release, so we won't have to upgrade the OS until the 
next LTS release, 12.04, due in April 2012. 
Alas, the best-laid plans sometimes go awry. Nothing we tried, including 
manually editing the xorg.conf file, allowed headless booting to work under 
Ubuntu 10.04. After beating our heads against the wall for several hours, we 
finally decided to punt. We installed Ubuntu 9.10, which worked perfectly. 
Setting up headless booting, file sharing, and remote management in Ubuntu 
9.10 took us all of 15 minutes, most of which we spent installing and config-
uring the Samba server, creating home directories and accounts, and setting 
permissions. When we finished setting up the server, we shut it down and dis-
connected the display, keyboard, and mouse. We then removed the optical 
drive, reinstalled the cover, moved the system under Robert's desk, connected 
it to the UPS and Ethernet, and pushed the start button. The system came up 
as expected and was visible to our network clients. 
So we now have a stable server with gobs of disk space, which, after all, is what 
we set out to build. 
328 
Chapter 8 

Index 
Symbols and 
Numbers 
3D graphics adapters, 71,72,168-169 
3 TB drives, support for, 304 
6-pin Slimline SATA power 
connector, 44 
9-pin Micro SATA power connector, 44 
+12V power connectors, 42 
15-pin Standard SATA power 
connector, 44 
80 PLUS initiative, 13 
200-pin DDR2-SDRAM SO-DIMM 
modules, 55 
240-pin DDR2-SDRAM DIMM 
modules, 55 
240-pin DDR3-SDRAM DIMM 
modules, 55 
240-pin DDR3-SDRAM SO-DIMM 
modules, 55 
lOOOBaseT Ethernet, 294 
5400 or 5900 RPM drives, 10 
7200 RPM drives, 10 
10,000 RPM drives, 61 
A 
Advanced Host Controller Interface 
(AHCI), 324 
advice from Brian Bilbrey. See Bilbrey, 
Brian (contributor) 
advice from Brian Jepson. 
See Jepson, Brian (editor) 
advice from Jerry Pournelle. 
See Pournelle, Jerry 
(columnist) 
advice from Ron Morse. See Morse, 
Ron (contributor) 
AHCI (Advanced Host Controller 
Interface), 324 
Altec-Lansing speakers, 77 
Amarok software, 249-251 
Amazon, online vendor, 86 
AMD processors, 47-48 
AMD Athlon 11,51 
AMD Athlon 11X2 240,301-302 
AMD Athlon II X2 240 Regor, 93-94 
AMD Athlon II X3 435 Rana, 94 
AMD Phenom, 51 
AMD Phenom 11X6,167 
AMD sockets, 53-54 
amplifiers, power ratings for, 219 
AnandTech website, 36, 72,169 
Antee cases, 40 
Antee Atlas 550 Server case, 
300-301 
Antee Dark Fleet DF-85 case, 
163-164 
Antee ISK 300 Mini-ITX case, 
267-268 
Antee Mini PI80 pATXcase, 
122-123 
Antee NSK-3480 case, 92 
Antee NSK-4482 Mid-Tower case, 92 
Antee Titan 650 case, 300 
Antee Twelve Hundred case, 163 
Antee hard drives 
Antee Easy SATA, 218-219, 305 
Antee Easy SATA docking station, 
127-128,324 
Antee Easy SATA removable drive 
bays, 70 
Antec power supplies, 47 
Antec CP-850 850W, 163-164 
Antec EarthWatts EA-500D Green, 
123 
Antec TruePowerTrio 550, 301,309 
A PC Smart-UPS, 307 
A PC UPSs, 306 
appliance/nettop system 
BIOS setup for, 289-290 
building instructions for, 266-267, 
273-290 
case for 
choosing, 264,267-268 
preparing for build, 274-276 
components for, 266-273 
CPU cooler for, 268-270 
design considerations for, 263, 
265-266 
external peripherals for, 272 
final checklist for, 288 
front panel connections for, 
283-285 
functional requirements for, 
263-265 
hard drive for 
choosing, 266,270-272, 290 
installing, 285-289 
I/O shield for, installing, 275-276, 
281 
memory for 
choosing, 270 
installing, 277-278 
motherboard for 
choosing, 268-270 
installing, 278-285 
populating, 277-278 
329 

appliance/nettop system (continued) 
optical drive for 
choosing, 272 
installing, 285-289 
powering up, 289,290 
power supply for, 267-268 
processor for, 266, 268-270 
time required to build, 274 
video adapter for, 266,269, 270 
Arctic Cooling CPU coolers, 52 
aspect ratio, display, 73 
ASRock motherboards, 59 
ASRock K10N78M Pro, 301-302 
ASRock K1ON78M-PRO, 94-95 
ASRock X58 Extreme, 166 
ASUS audio adapters, 76 
ASUS displays, 76 
ASUSMS228H,129-130 
ASUSVH196T, 97 
ASUSVH198T, 97 
ASUS VW193TR, 97 
ASUS VW246H, 129-130 
ASUS VW266H 25.5" LCD, 175 
ASUS Eee system, 263 
ASUS motherboards, 59 
ASUS M4A89TD PRO, 166 
ASUSP6T, 166 
ASUS P6TD Deluxe, 166 
ASUS P6T Deluxe, 166 
ASUS P6TSE, 166 
ASUS P6X58D, 166 
ASUS P6X58D Premium, 166 
ASUS Rampage II GENE, 166 
ASUS optical drives, 67 
ASUS DRW-24B1 ST DVD writer, 97, 
127 
ASUS video adapters, 72 
ASUS EAH4350 SILENT/ 
DI/512MD2(LP), 168-169 
ASUS wireless adapters 
ASUS PCE-N13 802.11 b/g/n PCI 
Express, 215 
ATA/IDE hard drives, 10 
ATAPI optical drives, 306 
ATI CrossFireX, 169 
ATI integrated video adapters, 72 
ATI RADEON HD 3200,94 
audio adapters. See sound adapters 
audio CDs, ripping, 247-249 
autosensing power supplies, 134, 
180,309 
Auzentech audio adapters, 76 
B 
backlighting, display, 75 
backup hardware, 67-70 
external hard drives, 69 
for extreme PC, 171-173 
hard drive docking stations, 70 
for home server, 305 
for mainstream PC, 127-128 
for media center PC, 209,217, 
218-219 
new drives for ad hoc backups, 304 
optical discs, 67 
RAID not sufficient for, 296 
removable hard drive bays, 69-70 
USB flash drives, 68 
backup power supply (BPS), 292. See 
also UPS 
balanced design, 10-11 
BD-ROM drives, 66 
benchmarks for component 
performance, 33 
Berg power connector, 43-44 
Bilbrey, Brian (contributor), xix 
appliance/nettop system with 
home server, 266 
ATE/IDE hard drives, 10 
backing up media center PC, 209, 
217 
enterprise grade drives compared 
to consumer grade, 303 
noise of system when booting, 8 
Parallel ATA (PATA) hard drives, 10 
problems with eMachines power 
supplies, 5 
RAID 6 compared to J BOD, 299 
RAID 6 features, 296 
SATA 6Gb/s motherboard, 
usefulness of, 165 
TV shows, recording, 206 
USB portable optical drive, uses 
for, 306 
BIOS compatibility, 54 
BIOS Setup, 25,27-28, 29,30 
BIOS updates, downloading, 18 
Blu-ray discs, resolution for, 72 
Blu-ray drives. See optical drives 
boot drive, SSD for, 162,170,199 
booting up 
failure to, 29 
from inadequate power, 100,134 
from short circuit, 105,179 
No Boot Device error, 30 
from optical drive, 30-31 
headless, 328 
maximum drive capacity for, 304 
noise level during, 8 
from optical drive, 246 
bottlenecks in performance, 10 
BPS (backup power supply), 292. See 
also UPS 
brand names, importance of, 34-35 
brightness, display, 74 
budget PC 
building instructions for, 99-117 
case fan, connecting, 116 
case for 
choosing, 92 
installing, 100-106 
components for, 92-99 
CPU cooler for 
choosing, 93-94 
installing, 106-109 
design considerations for, 89, 
91-92 
display for, 97-98 
final checklist for, 116-117 
front panel connections for, 112, 
113-115 
functional requirements for, 89, 90 
hard drive for 
choosing, 92, 96 
installing, 100-106 
I/O ports, connecting, 112 
keyboard for, 97 
memory for 
choosing, 95-96 
installing, 106-109 
motherboard for 
choosing, 94-95 
installing, 110-115 
populating, 106-109 
mouse for, 97 
optical drive for 
choosing, 97 
installing, 100-106 
330 
Index 

peripherals for, 90 
powering up, 117 
power supply for 
choosing, 92 
connecting to motherboard, 
111-112 
setting input voltage for, 100 
processor for 
choosing, 91,93-94 
installing, 106-109 
speakers for, 97 
time required to assemble, 117 
video adapter for, 92, 94-95, 96 
buffer with hard drive, 61 
building PCs 
burning in period, 24 
checklist of items needed for, 21-24 
comparing to manufactured PCs, 
3, 99 
concentration required for, 20 
design issues for. See design issues 
force required for, 19 
preparations for, 18-20 
projects 
appliance/nettop system. 
See appliance/nettop system 
budget PC.See budget PC 
extreme PC. See extreme PC 
home server. See home server 
mainstream PC. See mainstream 
PC 
media center. See media center 
PC 
quiet PC. See quiet PC 
reasons to, 2-5 
time required for, 20 
trend toward, xiii-xiv 
troubleshooting, 24-32 
work surface for, 220 
BurnlnTest software, 24 
burn-in utilities, 24 
business-class PCs, quality of, 4 
c 
cables 
dressing, 22,116,155,242-244, 
325 
included with components, 301 
Nylon ties for, 22 
problems with, 25 
cache with hard drive, 61 
camcorder capture software, 
258-259 
camcorder video editing software, 
259-260 
canned air, 22 
case fans 
for hard drive bay, 313 
inline resistor for, 15 
mounting, 15 
space used by, 135 
cases, 37-40 
brand name significance for, 35 
build quality of, 38 
cooling provisions in, 40 
cost of, 38 
cover of, when to put back on, 20 
front-panel connectors of, 39 
material of, 39 
motherboard form factor 
compatibility of, 38 
noise reducing features of, 12,40 
old, using in new system, 300 
power supply bundled with, 39 
recommended, 40-41 
for appliance/nettop system, 
267-268 
for budget PC, 92 
for extreme PC, 163-164 
for home server, 300-301 
for mainstream PC, 122-123 
for media center PC, 211 -213 
for quiet PC, 122 
size of, 38 
for appliance/nettop system, 264, 
265 
for budget PC, 91 
compatibility issues with, 1 
expandability of, 8 
for extreme PC, 161 
for home server, 295 
for mainstream PC, 121 
for media center PC, 209 
priority of, 7-8 
type of, 38 
CCRT (cold-cathode ray tube) 
illumination, 75 
CD drives. See optical drives 
CDs, ripping, 247-249 
cell type ofSSDs,64 
Cinelerra software, 259-260 
cold-cathode ray tube (CCRT) 
illumination, 75 
communications ports, 57-58 
compatibility 
between components, 1, 25 
BIOS compatibility, 54 
HSF and processor, 52 
with motherboard form factor, 14, 
38 
power supply and receptacle, 100 
components. See also specific 
components 
benchmarks for performance of, 33 
BIOS updates for, downloading, 18 
buying, guidelines for, 80-86 
checklist of, 21 
choosing, guidelines for, 3,33-36 
compatibility of, 1,25 
cost of, 10,2 
customer reviews of, 36 
DOA (dead on arrival), 25 
documentation for, 18 
driver CDs for, 22 
driver updates for, downloading, 
18 
handling, 18 
integrated. See integrated 
components 
in manufactured PCs 
intentionally nonstandard, 5 
quality of, 2,3-4,99,119 
selection of, 2 
OEM form of, 82 
opening boxes from bottom, 86 
parts of 
checking, 18,87 
organizing, 19 
product reviews of, 36 
receipts for, saving, 5 
recommended. See recommended 
products 
retail-boxed form of, 82 
returning, 83-84 
shipping, 24,81,84-85, 92 
sources for, 80-81,85-86 
"visible"and "invisible" 3-4 
warranties for, 5,84-85 
Index 
331 

consumer-grade hard drives, 62 
contact information for this book, xvii 
contrast, display, 74 
Cooler Master cases, 40 
Cooler Master HAF X case, 163 
cooling mechanisms. See case fans; 
CPU coolers; passive heatsinks 
cordless mice, 80 
Corsair memory modules, 59 
Corsair power supplies 
Corsair CMPSU-450VX, 123 
Corsair CMPSU-550VX, 123 
cost. See price 
cover, when to put back on, 20 
CPU coolers 
bundled with processor, 51,125 
choosing, considerations for, 51-52 
compatibility issues, 14,52 
noise level of 
ratings for, 52 
reducing, 13-14 
recommended, 52 
forappliance/nettop system, 
268-270 
for quiet PC, 13-14 
stock compared to aftermarket 
versions, 186 
thermal compound for, 27, 52,107 
CPUs (central processing units). 
See processors 
CPU socket for motherboard, 52-54 
Creative Labs audio adapters, 76 
Creative Sound Blaster X-Fi 
XtremeGamer sound adapter, 
170 
Creative speakers, 77 
CrossFireX, 169 
Crucial memory modules, 59,60 
Crucial Ballistix 
BL3KIT25664BN1608 PC3-
12800 6 GB kit, 167-168 
Crucial Ballistix 
CT2KIT25664BN1337 4 GB kit, 
214 
Crucial CT2KIT12864AA667 2 GB 
kit, 95-96 
Crucial CT2KIT12864AA800 PC2-
6400 kit, 270 
Crucial CT2KIT25664AA800 PC2-
6400 4 GB kit, 302 
Crucial CT2KIT25664BA1339 PC3-
10600 4 GB kit, 125 
Crucial SSDs, 64 
Crucial CT128M225 128 GB, 170 
customer reviews, importance of, 36 
D 
data safety, 293-294 
DB-15 analog (VGA) connector, 74 
dBs (deciBels), 12 
DDR2 memory modules, 55, 59 
DDR3 memory modules, 55 
dead on arrival (DOA) components, 
25 
deciBels (dBs), 12 
Dell PCs 
comparing to home-built PC, 99 
components in, 2, 5, 37 
design issues 
for appliance/nettop system, 263, 
265-266 
balanced design, 10-11 
for budget PC, 89,91-92 
cost, 6 
expandability, 8 
for extreme PC, 159,160-162 
hard drive performance, 10 
for home server, 292,295-299 
for mainstream PC, 119,120-122 
for media center PC, 205-206, 
209-210 
noise level, 8 
priorities for, deciding, 6-10 
processor performance, 9 
reliability, 7 
size of PC, 7-8 
video performance, 9 
desktop Windows, 326-327 
diagnostic utilities, 23 
digiKam software, 256-257 
digital video recorder (DVR), 205-
206. See also media center PC 
Digital Visual Interface-Digital 
(DVI-D) connectors, 215 
Digital Visual Interface (DVI) 
connector, 74 
discs. See optical discs; optical drives 
disks. See FDDs; hard drives 
displays. See also video adapters 
aspect ratio, 73 
backlighting, 75 
brightness, 74 
choosing, considerations for, 72-75 
contrast, 74 
dual displays, 71 
high-resolution displays, 71 
interfaces for, 74 
matching to video adapters, 71, 98 
microphone, built-in, 75 
recommended, 76 
for budget PC, 97-98 
for extreme PC, 175 
for mainstream PC, 129-130 
for media center PC, 211 
resolution, 72 
response time of, 74-75 
screen size, 73 
speakers, built-in, 75 
troubleshooting, 27-28 
webcam, built-in, 75 
DMI Pool Error message, 29 
DOA (dead on arrival) components, 
25 
drivers for components 
CDs for, 22 
downloading updates to, 18 
drives. See hard drives; floppy disk 
drives (FDDs); optical drives 
dual displays, 71 
duplexing (RAID 1), 296 
DVD drives. See optical drives 
DVD Fab software, 251-254 
DVDs 
playing, 207,254-255 
ripping, 251-254 
DVD Shrink software, 251-254 
DVI-D (Digital Visual Interface-
Digital) connectors, 215 
DVI (Digital Visual Interface) 
connector, 74 
DVR (digital video recorder), 205-
206. See also media center PC 
332 
Index 

E 
EarthWatts 380 power supply, 92 
eMachines, nonstandard power 
supplies in, 5 
embedded components. 
See integrated components 
Endpcnoise.com, resistor kits by, 13 
enterprise-grade hard drives, 62 
erasers, 22 
ergonomic keyboards, 78 
errors. See troubleshooting 
eSATA ports, 57-58 
ESP (estimated selling price), 81 
EVGA video adapters, 72 
Exact Audio Copy software, 247 
expandability, 8 
of appliance/nettop system, 
265-266 
of budget PC, 91 
of extreme PC, 161 
of home server, 294, 295 
of mainstream PC, 121 
of media center PC, 210 
of small PCs, 17 
expansion cards, troubleshooting, 
27, 28 
expansion slots, 56-57 
external hard drives 
for backups, 69,127-128,171-173, 
217,218-219,305 
eSATA for, 57-58 
front panel connectors for, 39 
USB 3.0 for, 57 
external optical drives, 66 
extreme Memory Profile (XMP), 168 
extreme PC 
backup hardware for, 171-173 
building instructions for, 176-204 
case fans, connecting, 201-202 
case for 
choosing, 161,163-164 
preparing for build, 177-179 
components for, 162-176 
CPU cooler for, installing, 185-186 
design considerations for, 159, 
160-162 
display for, 160,175 
drive cables, connecting, 188-189 
final checklist for, 203 
front panel connections for, 
192-193 
functional requirements for, 160 
hard drives for 
choosing, 160,162,171 
installing, 194-196 
I/O ports, connecting, 192-204 
keyboard for, 174 
memory for 
choosing, 160,167-168 
installing, 187-188 
motherboard for 
choosing, 164-166 
installing, 188-193 
populating, 182-188 
mouse for, 174 
optical drive for 
choosing, 173 
installing, 197-198 
powering up, 203 
power supply for 
choosing, 163-164 
connecting to motherboard, 191 
installing, 180-181 
processor for 
choosing, 160,161,166-167 
installing, 182-184 
sound adapter for, 170 
speakers for, 174 
SSD drive for 
choosing, 170 
installing, 199 
time required to assemble, 204 
video adapter for 
choosing, 160,161-162,168-169 
installing, 199-201 
F 
Falcon Electric SG or SSG Series On-
Line UPS, 306-307 
fans. See case fans; CPU coolers; 
video adapter fans 
FDDs (floppy disk drives), 60-61 
FireWire (IEEE-1394) ports, 58 
firmware for hard drives, 62 
flash drives. See USB flash drives 
flashlight, 21 
floppy disk drives (FDDs), 60-61 
format-shifting DVDs, 252 
FreeNAS package, 327 
FrozenCPU, resistor kits by, 13 
FSP ZEN 400 power supplies, 13 
full Windows license, 4 
G 
gaming. See also extreme PC 
audio adapter for, 76 
cases for, 40 
cooling for, 40 
display response time for, 74 
extreme PC capabilities for, 159, 
168,169,170 
gaming consoles for, 159 
media center capabilities for, 210, 
211,213,215 
motherboard form factor for, 38 
portable cases for, 38 
power connector for, 43 
processor for, 9 
quality of gaming systems, 4 
speakers for, 77 
video adapter for, 9, 72 
GIGABYTE motherboards, 59 
GIGABYTE D510 Atom, 269 
GIGABYTE GA-890FXA-UD5,166 
GIGABYTE GA-X58A-UD3R, 166 
GIGABYTE GA-X58A-UD5,166 
GIGABYTE processors 
GIGABYTE GA-D510UD, 269 
GIGABYTE video adapters, 72 
GPU (graphics processor unit), 168 
graphics adapters. See video 
adapters 
graphics cards. See video cards 
(standalone video adapters) 
graphics processor unit (GPU), 168 
grounding yourself before handling 
components, 18 
H 
Hanns.G displays, 76 
Hanns.G HH-281HPB, 175 
Hanns.G HW191APB, 97 
Hanns.G HZ201 HPB, 98 
hard drive bays, removable, 69-70 
Index 
333 

hard drive docking stations, 70 
for extreme PC, 171-173 
for home server, 305, 323-324 
for mainstream PC, 127-128 
hard drives. See also backup 
hardware; RAID; SSDs 
3 TB drives, support for, 304 
5400 or 5900 RPM drives, 10 
7200 RPM drives, 10,61 
10,000 RPM drives, 61 
ATE/IDE hard drives, 10 
buffer/cache for, 61 
cables included with, 301 
capacity of, 10,61 
for appliance/nettop system, 266 
for budget PC, 92 
for extreme PC, 160,162 
for home server, 293, 296,303 
for mainstream PC, 122 
for media center PC, 210 
carrying with you, 305 
choosing, considerations for, 61 
consumer-grade, 62, 303 
diagnostic utilities for, 23 
disconnecting before powering 
up, 322 
enterprise-grade, 62,303 
external. See external hard drives 
failure error for, 29 
firmware for, 62 
installation utilities for, 23 
laptop drives compared to desktop 
drives, 271 
multiple, advantages of, 304 
noise level of, 16 
Parallel ATA (PATA), 10,61 
performance of, 10,61 
for appliance/nettop system, 
264-265, 266 
for budget PC, 92 
for extreme PC, 160,162 
for home server, 296 
for mainstream PC, 122 
for media center PC, 210 
recommended, 61-62 
for appliance/nettop system, 
270-272 
for budget PC, 96 
for extreme PC, 171 
for home server, 302-304 
for mainstream PC, 126 
for media center PC, 216-217 
reliability of, 303 
serial ATA (SATA), 10,61 
hardware RAID, 298 
HDCP (High-bandwidth Digital 
Content Protection), 74,215 
HDMI (High-Definition Multimedia 
Interface) connectors, 74, 215 
HDTV content, resolution for, 72 
heatsink/fan (HSF). See CPU coolers 
heatsinks, passive. See passive 
heatsinks 
High-bandwidth Digital Content 
Protection (HDCP), 74,215 
High-Definition Multimedia Interface 
(HDMI) connectors, 74, 215 
high-resolution displays, 71 
Hitachi Deskstar hard drive, 126 
Hitachi hard drives, 62 
home control, 260 
home networks, 291-292, 294-295 
home security video, 260 
home server 
backup hardware for, 305 
BIOS setup for, 326 
building instructions for, 308-326 
case for 
choosing, 295, 300-301 
preparing for build, 309-311, 
317-318 
compared to media center PC, 291 
components for, 299-308 
CPU cooler for, installing, 315 
design considerations for, 292, 
295-299 
final checklist for, 325 
front panel connections for, 
320-321 
functional requirements for, 
291-295 
hard drive docking station for, 
323-324 
hard drive fans for, 313 
hard drives for 
choosing, 293-294, 296,302-304, 
305 
installing, 311-313 
RAID for, 296-299 
I/O shield, connecting, 317 
memory for 
choosing, 302 
installing, 316 
motherboard for 
choosing, 301-302 
installing, 318-319 
populating, 313-317 
networking features for, 294-295 
operating system for, 326-328 
optical drive for 
choosing, 306 
installing, 323-324 
power cables, connecting, 321-322 
powering up, 325-326 
power supply for 
choosing, 300-301 
setting, 309 
processor for 
choosing, 295,301-302 
installing, 313-314 
UPS for, 306-307 
video adapter for, 296 
home theater personal computer 
(HTPC), 3, 205-206. See 
also media center PC 
HP PCs, components in, 2,37 
HSF (heatsink/fan). See CPU coolers 
HTPC (home theater personal 
computer), 3, 205-206. See 
also media center PC 
hybrid RAID, 298 
IBM Model "M" keyboard, 79,174 
IEEE-1394 (FireWire) ports, 58 
image management and editing 
software, 256-257 
indicator lights 
connecting, 113-114,146-148, 
192-193, 320-321 
too bright, not connecting, 229 
inline resistors 
for case fans, 15 
for CPU coolers, 13 
installation utilities for hard drive, 23 
integrated components 
audio, 76 
benefits of, 33-34 
expandability and, 8 
334 
Index 

processors, 49 
video, 9, 70-71 
Intel Active Monitor utility, 14 
Intel cases 
Intel SC5299UPNA case, 300 
Intel motherboards, 59 
Intel BOXDH55TC, 213-214 
Intel D510MO, 269 
Intel DH55TC, 123-124 
Intel DH57JG, 270 
Intel Extreme Series DX58SO, 
164-166 
Intel processors, 47-48 
Intel Atom, 51 
Intel Core, 51 
Intel Core ¡3-530, 213 
Intel Core ¡3-550,124-125 
Intel Core ¡5-661,124-125 
Intel Core ¡7,167 
Intel Core ¡7-980X, 166-167 
Intel D510MO, 268-270 
Intel sockets, 53 
Intel sound adapters 
Intel High Definition Audio, 126 
Intel SSDs, 64 
Intel video adapters 
Intel HD Graphics adapter, 126 
Intel integrated video adapters, 72 
Internet, precautions before 
connecting to, 22 
"invisible" components, 3-4 
I/O ports. See communications ports 
I/O shields, 144,178,222-223 
J 
JBOD (Just a Bunch of Drives), 299, 
304 
JEDEC memory standards, 168 
Jepson, Brian (editor), xix 
addressable RAM in Mac OS X, 125 
Apple, competition from built PCs, 
xiv 
home theater systems, Mac Mini 
for, 3 
reliability of JBOD arrays, 299 
Just a Bunch of Drives (JBOD), 299, 
304 
K 
K3b + LAME software, 247-249 
keyboards 
choosing, considerations for, 77-79 
classic IBM Model "M" keyboard, 
79,174 
ergonomic style, 78 
PS/2 interface for, 78 
recommended, 79 
for budget PC, 97 
for extreme PC, 174 
for mainstream PC, 128 
for media center PC, 219 
straight style, 78 
USB interface for, 78 
wireless, 78-79 
Kingston memory modules, 59,60 
Kino software, 258-259 
Knoppix Live Linux CD, 23 
L 
LED backlighting, 75 
LED indicators. See indicator lights 
Lexar Echo SE Backup Drive, 68 
LGA 1156 sockets, 53 
Lian Li cases, 40 
Linux, 327 
for media center PC, 245-247 
newbie-friendly distributions of, 4 
reasons to use, 4 
remote management tools, 306 
Linux Mint, 4 
LiteOn optical drives, 67 
LiteOn DS-8A4S Slim Internal DVD 
Burner, 272 
Logitech keyboards and mice, 79,80 
Logitech Cordless Desktop S520, 
128 
Logitech Deluxe 250 Desktop, 97 
Logitech speakers, 77 
Logitech LS11,97 
Logitech X-540, 219-220,220 
Logitech Z523 2.1,128 
Logitech Z-523 40 W 2.1,174 
Logitech Z-2300 2.1,129 
Logitech Z-5500,219-220 
M 
Mac Mini system, 3,263 
Mac OS 
addressable RAM with, 125 
USB flash drives backing up, 68 
magnetized tools, 21 
mainstream PC 
backup hardware for, 127-128 
building instructions for, 130-156 
cables for, connecting, 152-155 
case for 
choosing, 122-123 
preparing for build, 131-133 
components for, 122-130 
CPU cooler for 
choosing, 125 
installing, 139-144 
design considerations for, 119, 
120-122 
display for, 129-130 
final checklist for, 156 
front panel connections for, 
146-148 
functional requirements for, 120 
hard drive for 
choosing, 122,126 
installing, 135-139,149-152 
I/O ports, connecting, 146-147 
keyboard for, 128 
memory for 
choosing, 125 
installing, 139-144 
motherboard for 
choosing, 123-124 
installing, 144-148 
populating, 139-144 
mouse for, 128 
optical drive for 
choosing, 127 
installing, 135-139 
powering up, 156 
power supply for 
choosing, 122-123 
connecting to motherboard, 146 
installing, 133-135 
processor for 
choosing, 121,124-125 
installing, 139-144 
sound adapter for, 126 
Index 
335 

mainstream PC (continued) 
speakers for, 128-129 
time required to assemble, 157 
video adapter for, 121-122,126 
manufactured PCs 
comparing to PCs you build 
yourself, 3, 99 
components in 
intentionally nonstandard, 5 
quality of, 2,3-4,99,119 
selection of, 2 
costs of, 2 
mass-market PCs. See manufactured 
PCs 
mat underneath PC, 15 
M-AUDIO audio adapters, 76 
M-AUDIO speakers, 77 
M-AUDIO Studiophile AV 30 2.0 
speaker system, 128 
media center PC 
audio CDs, ripping, 247-249 
backup hardware for, 209,217, 
218-219 
building instructions for, 220-244 
camcorder capture for, 258-259 
camcorder video editing for, 
259-260 
case fans, connecting, 242-244 
case for 
choosing, 209,211-213 
preparing for build, 221-224 
compared to home server, 291 
components for, 210-220 
cooling, 209 
cost of, 209 
CPU cooler for, 226-227 
design considerations for, 205-206, 
209-210 
display for, 207, 211 
DVDs, ripping, 251-254 
entertainment center for, 
requirements for, 209 
expansion cards for, installing, 
240-242 
final checklist of, 244 
FireWire support for, 258 
front panel connections for, 
228-229, 242 
functional requirements for, 
205-208 
hard drives for 
choosing, 207,210,216-217 
installing, 237-240 
home control for, 260 
image management and editing 
for, 256-257 
keyboard for, 208,219 
memory for 
choosing, 214 
installing, 227-228 
motherboard for 
choosing, 213-214 
installing, 228-234 
populating, 224-228 
routing drive and power cables 
to, 236-237 
mouse for, 208, 219 
music management software for, 
249-251 
operating system for, 245-246 
optical drive for 
choosing, 207, 217 
installing, 234-236 
powering up, 244 
power supply for 
choosing, 211-213 
connecting to motherboard, 
233-234 
processor for 
choosing, 210, 213 
installing, 224-225 
SATA data cables, connecting, 
232-233 
security video for, 260 
software for, installing, 245-260 
speakers for, 219-220 
tuner card and PVR software for, 
261 
USB ports, connecting, 230 
video adapter for 
choosing, 207,210,215 
installing, 240-242 
video playback for, 254-255 
weather station for, 261 
wireless networking adapter for, 
215-216 
memory modules 
choosing, considerations for, 59-60 
cost of, 60 
dual-channel compared to triple-
channel, 165 
JEDEC memory standards, 168 
performance of, for extreme PC, 
160 
recommended, 60 
for appliance/nettop system, 270 
for budget PC, 95-96 
for extreme PC, 167-168 
for home server, 302 
for mainstream PC, 125 
for media center PC, 214 
SPD (Serial Presence Detect) ROM, 
168 
troubleshooting, 27 
XMP (extreme Memory Profile), 
168 
memory slots, 55-56 
MEMTEST86 utility, 23 
Mersenne Prime client, 14 
mice 
alternatives to, 80 
buttons on, 80 
choosing, considerations for, 79-80 
cord length, 80 
cordless, 80 
recommended, 80 
for budget PC, 97 
for extreme PC, 174 
for mainstream PC, 128 
for media center PC, 219 
size of, 79 
wheel mice, 79 
microATX motherboards, 58 
microATX PC, 16 
microfiber dust cloth, 22 
microphones, built-in to display, 75 
Microsoft keyboards and mice, 79,80 
Microsoft Basic White Value Pack 
2.0, 97 
Microsoft SideWinder, 174 
Microsoft SideWinder X6,174 
Microsoft Wired Desktop 400,97 
Microsoft Wireless Desktop 3000, 
219 
Microsoft Wireless Media Desktop 
3000,128 
Microsoft Windows. See Windows 
Mini-ITX motherboards, 58 
336 
Index 

Mini-ITX PCs, 16-17 
recommended, 267-268 
SSD drives for, 271 
mirroring (RAID 1), 296 
MLC (multi-level cell) memory, 64 
MLC (multi-level cell) SSD drive, 170 
modular power cables, 45 
Molex power connector, 44 
monitors. See displays 
Morse, Ron (contributor), xviii-xix 
classic IBM Model "M" keyboard, 
79,174 
converter cables, 4-pin Molex to 
6-pin PC le, 201 
cost of SSDs, 64 
CPU coolers, connecting to 
motherboard, 142 
degradation of optical drives, 66 
eSATA interface for removable 
storage, 244 
first time PC builders, advice for, 20 
protecting case from scratches by 
motherboard, 228 
SSDs for Windows 64-bit version, 
63 
motherboards 
BIOS compatibility, 54 
cables included with, 301 
choosing, considerations for, 52-58 
communications ports on, 57-58 
compatibility with other 
components, 1 
configuration errors with, 25,29 
cost of, 49-51 
CPU socket for, 52-54 
documentation for, 58 
expandability of, 8 
expansion slots of, 56-57 
form factor of, 55 
installing, alignment problems 
with, 232 
memory slots of, 55-56 
passive heatsinkfor, 16 
processor compatibility with, 54 
recommended, 59 
forappliance/nettop system, 
268-270 
for budget PC,94-95 
for extreme PC, 164-166 
for home server, 301-302 
for mainstream PC, 123-124 
for media center PC, 213-214 
standoffs for. See standoffs 
temperature sensors in, 14 
VRM compatibility, 54 
movies. See DVDs; TV programs, 
recording 
multi-level cell (MLC) memory, 64 
multi-level cell (MLC) SSD drive, 170 
Mushkin memory modules, 59 
music CDs, ripping, 247-249 
music management software, 
249-251 
Mythbuntu Linux, 246 
N 
NAS (network-attached storage) 
package, 327-328 
NEC displays, 76 
needle-nose pliers, 21 
nettop system. See appliance/nettop 
system 
network-attached storage (NAS) 
package, 327-328 
networking, for home server, 
291-292,294-295 
NewEgg, online vendor, 85-86 
NexentaStor package, 327-328 
noise level 
case affecting, 12 
case fans affecting, 15 
CPU cooler affecting, 13-14, 52 
dBs (deciBels) measurement for, 12 
of hard drives, 16 
mat underneath PC reducing, 15 
motherboard passive heatsink 
reducing, 16 
power supply affecting, 12-13 
priority of, 8 
for appliance/nettop system, 265 
for budget PC, 90, 91 
for extreme PC, 161 
for appliance/nettop system, 265 
for home server, 295 
for mainstream PC, 120,121 
for media center PC, 209-210 
processor affecting, 11 
of small PCs, 17 
sources of noise, 11 
video adapter passive heatsink 
reducing, 16 
nut driver, 21 
NVIDIA integrated video adapters, 72 
NVIDIA GeForce 8200,94, 96 
NVIDIA Scalable Link Interface (SLI), 
169 
Nylon cable ties, 22 
o 
OEM packaging, 82 
OEM Windows license, 4 
operating system. See also Linux; 
Mac OS X; Windows 
distribution discs for, 22 
for media center PC, 245-246 
Missing Operating System error, 30 
optical discs, 67 
optical drives 
ATAPI compared to SATA, 306 
Blu-ray writers, 65 
choosing, considerations for, 64-66 
external, 66 
failure to boot from, 30-31 
recommended, 66-67 
for appliance/nettop system, 272 
for budget PC, 97 
for extreme PC, 173 
for mainstream PC, 127 
for media center PC, 217 
retail-boxed comapred to OEM 
version, 217 
USB portable optical drive, 306 
OptiQuest monitors, 35 
P 
Parallel ATA (PATA) hard drives, 10,61 
passive heatsinks 
motherboard using, 16 
power supplies using, 13 
processors using, 13 
video adapter using, 16 
PATA (Parallel ATA) hard drives, 10,61 
PCIe power connector, 43 
PCI Express (PCIe) slots, 56 
PCI slots, 56 
Index 
337 

PC Power & Cooling power supplies, 
47 
peak power rating, 219 
performance 
balanced design affecting, 10 
benchmarks for, 33 
brand names related to, 34-35 
of hard drive, 10,61 
priority of 
for appliance/nettop system, 266 
for budget PC, 90,91-92 
for extreme PC, 160,161-162 
for home server, 295-296 
for mainstream PC, 120 
for media center PC, 210 
of processor, 9 
of video, 9 
peripheral power connectors, 43-44 
personal/digital video recorder (PVR/ 
DVR), 205-206. See also media 
center PC 
PFC (power factor correction), 46-47 
Phillips screwdrivers, 21 
photo management and editing 
software, 256-257 
Pioneer optical drives, 67 
Pioneer BDR-205BKS Blu-ray disc 
burner, 173 
place-shifting DVDs, 252 
Plextor optical drives, 66-67 
pliers, 21 
Pournelle, Jerry (columnist) 
experiences building a PC, 3 
Falcon Electric UPS, earthquake 
experience with, 306-307 
foreword by, ix-xii 
power factor correction (PFC), 46-47 
powering up 
checks to perform before, 19 
disconnecting hard drives before, 
322 
high-pitched noise during, 31 
minimal configuration for, 20 
not working, 26-27 
two-tone siren sound after, 31 
working only briefly, 28,117 
power supplies 
80 PLUS initiative for, 13 
adequacy of, 28 
autosensing, 134,180,309 
brand name significance for, 35 
bundled with cases, 39 
choosing, considerations for, 41-47 
compatibility with receptacle, 100 
efficiency of, 13,45-46 
expandability supported by, 8 
form factor of, 41 
input voltage switch, 180,221 
main power connector for, 42 
manufacturer of, 44-45 
modular power cables for, 45 
noise from, minimizing, 12-13 
not opening, 1 
PCIe power connector for, 43 
peripheral power connectors for, 
43-44 
power factor correction (PFC) for, 
46-47 
recommended, 47 
for appliance/nettop system, 
267-268 
for budget PC, 92 
for extreme PC, 163-164 
for home server, 300-301 
for mainstream PC, 122-123 
for media center PC, 211 -213 
supplemental power connector for, 
42-43 
troubleshooting, 26 
wattage rating for, 41-42 
pre-built PCs. See manufactured PCs 
price 
of cases, 38 
of components 
shipping and taxes affecting, 81 
spending too much on, 10 
volume affecting, 2 
ESP (estimated selling price), 81 
of manufactured PCs, 2 
of memory modules, 60 
of motherboa rds, 49-51 
price comparison sites, 82 
priority of, 6 
for appliance/nettop system, 264, 
265 
for budget PC, 91 
for extreme PC, 160 
for home server, 295 
for mainstream PC, 120 
for media center PC, 209 
of processors, 9,34,49-50 
quality related to, 34 
SRP (suggested retail price), 81 
of SSDs, 63,64 
"sweet spot"for, 34 
taxes on component purchases, 81 
of USB flash drives, 68 
of video adapters, 9 
problems. See troubleshooting 
processors (CPUs) 
bundled with CPU cooler, 51 
choosing, considerations for, 47-51 
cooling. See CPU coolers 
cost of, 34,49-50 
embedded, 49 
motherboard compatibility with, 
54 
performance of 
for appliance/nettop system, 
264-265, 266 
for budget PC, 91 
comparisons of, 93-94 
for extreme PC, 160,161 
for home server, 295 
for mainstream PC, 121 
measuring, 93 
priority of, 9 
power consumption of, noise and, 
11,13-14 
recommended, 51 
for appliance/nettop system, 
268-270 
for budget PC, 93-94 
for extreme PC, 166-167 
for home server, 301-302 
for mainstream PC, 124-125 
for media center PC, 213 
temperature of, monitoring, 14 
troubleshooting, 27 
product recommendations. 
See recommended products 
product reviews, 36 
PVR/DVR (personal/digital video 
recorder), 205-206. See 
also media center PC 
338 
Index 

Q 
quality of components, 7,34-35. See 
also reliability 
cases, 38 
in manufactured PCs, 2,3-4,99,119 
quiet PC 
case fan for, 15 
case for, 12,122 
CPU cooler for, 13-14 
designing, 11-16 
hard drive for, 16 
mat for, 15 
motherboard for, 16 
power supply for, 12-13 
processor for, 11 
video adapter for, 16 
R 
RAID (Redundant Array of 
Inexpensive Disks) 
compared to JBC)D,304 
enterprise-grade drives for, 62 
hardware RAID, 298 
for home server, 293-294, 296-299 
hybrid RAID, 298 
RAID 0, 297-298 
RAID 0+1, 298 
RAID 1,296, 298 
RAID 1+0,298 
RAID 3, 297 
RAID 5, 297, 299 
RAID 6, 296 
RAID 10, 298,299 
software RAID, 298 
stacked RAID, 298 
receipts for components, saving, 5 
recommended products 
audio adapters, 76 
backup hardware 
for extreme PC, 171-173 
for mainstream PC, 127-128 
for media center PC, 218-219 
burn-in utilities, 24 
cases, 40-41 
forappliance/nettop system, 
267-268 
for budget PC, 92 
for extreme PC, 163-164 
for home server, 300-301 
for mainstream PC, 122-123 
for media center PC, 211 -213 
for quiet PC, 122 
CPU coolers, 52 
forappliance/nettop system, 
268-270 
quiet, 14 
diagnostic utilities, 23 
displays, 76 
for budget PC,97-98 
for extreme PC, 175 
for mainstream PC, 129-130 
for media center PC, 211 
external hard drives, 69 
floppy disk drives (FDDs), 61 
hard drive docking stations, 70 
hard drives, 61-62 
forappliance/nettop system, 
270-272 
for budget PC, 96 
for extreme PC, 171 
for home server, 302-304 
for mainstream PC, 126 
for media center PC, 216-217 
quiet, 16 
home theater systems, 3 
inline resistors, 13 
keyboards, 79 
for budget PC, 97 
for extreme PC, 174 
for mainstream PC, 128 
for media center PC, 219 
memory diagnostic utilities, 23 
memory modules, 60 
for appliance/nettop system, 270 
for extreme PC, 167-168 
for budget PC,95-96 
for home server, 302 
for mainstream PC, 125 
for media center PC, 214 
mice, 80 
for extreme PC, 174 
for budget PC, 97 
for mainstream PC, 128 
for media center PC, 219 
motherboards, 59 
forappliance/nettop system, 
268-270 
for budget PC, 94-95 
for extreme PC, 164-166 
for home server, 301-302 
for mainstream PC, 123-124 
for media center PC, 213-214 
operating systems, 4 
optical discs, 67 
optical drives, 66-67 
for appliance/nettop system, 272 
for budget PC, 97 
for extreme PC, 173 
for mainstream PC, 127 
for media center PC, 217 
power supplies, 47 
for appliance/nettop system, 
267-268 
for budget PC, 92 
for extreme PC, 163-164 
for home server, 300-301 
for mainstream PC, 122-123 
for media center PC, 211-213 
quiet, 13 
processors, 7,51 
for appliance/nettop system, 
268-270 
for budget PC, 93-94 
for extreme PC, 166-167 
for home server, 301-302 
for mainstream PC, 124-125 
for media center PC, 213 
product review websites, 36 
removable hard drive bays, 70 
sound adapters 
for extreme PC, 170 
for mainstream PC, 126 
speakers, 77 
for budget PC, 97 
for extreme PC, 174 
for mainstream PC, 128-129 
for media center PC, 219-220 
SSDs (solid state drives), 64,170 
standalone video adapters, 72 
thermal compound, 107 
video adapters, 72 
for appliance/nettop system, 270 
for budget PC, 94-95,96 
for extreme PC, 168-169 
for mainstream PC, 126 
for media center PC, 215 
Index 
339 

recommended products (continued) 
Windows licenses, 4 
wireless networking adapters, 
215-216 
Redundant Array of Inexpensive 
Disks. See RAID 
reliability, 7. See also quality of 
components 
for appliance/nettop system, 264, 
265 
for extreme PC, 160-161 
for budget PC, 90,91 
for home server, 292, 295 
for mainstream PC, 120,121 
for media center PC, 209 
removable hard drive bays, 69-70 
rent-rip-and-return (RRR), 251 
resistors. See inline resistors 
resolution, display, 72 
retail-boxed form of components, 82 
Rhythmbox Music Player software, 
249-251 
RMS (root mean square) power 
rating, 219 
RRR (rent-rip-and-return), 251 
s 
safety (for computer) 
checks to perform before 
powering, 19 
data safety, 293-294 
extra standoffs, removing, 276 
food and beverages, removing 
from build area, 20 
handling components, 1,18 
power supply compatibility with 
receptacle, 100 
safety (for you), 1 
sales taxes, 81 
Samsung displays, 76 
Samsung 2494SW, 129-130 
Samsung EX2220X, 129-130 
Samsung P2050, 98 
Samsung hard drives, 62 
Samsung SpinPoint, 217 
Samsung Spinpoint F3,126 
Samsung optical drives, 67 
Sapphire video adapters, 72 
SATA 6Gb/s motherboard, 165 
SATA optical drives, 306 
SATA power connector, 44 
SATA (Serial ATA) hard drives, 10,61 
Scalable Link Interface (SLI), 169 
scientific calculations, system for. 
See extreme PC 
screens. See displays 
screwdrivers, 21,110 
Scythe CPU coolers, 52 
Seagate hard drives, 61 
Seagate 3 TB FreeAgent GoFlex 
Desk, 218-219 
Seagate 7200.11, firmware 
problem with, 126 
Seagate Barracuda 7200.12,96,126 
Seagate Barracuda XT 
ST32000641 AS 2TB, 171, 
216-217, 302-304 
Seagate Free Agent external drives, 
69 
Seagate Momentus 5400 
ST9640320AS, 270 
Seagate ST903203N3A1AS 
Momentus, 272 
Seasonic power supplies, 47 
Seasonic SS-500ET, 123 
security video, 260 
Serial ATA (SATA) hard drives, 10,61 
Serial Presence Detect (SPD) ROM, 168 
SETI@home client, 14 
Sharp LC-42SB48UT HDTV display, 211 
shipping 
checking for problems from, 24 
confirming products and time 
period for, 84-85 
large items, cost of, 81,92 
shock hazards, preventing, 1,18-19 
short circuits, 26, 27 
Silent PC Review website, 16 
Silverstone cases, 41 
Silverstone Sugo SG05-B case, 268 
single-level cell (SLC) memory, 64 
single-level cell (SLC) SSD drive, 170 
size of PC. See cases, size of; small PCs 
SLC (single-level cell) memory, 64 
SLC (single-level cell) SSD drive, 170 
SLI (Scalable Link Interface), 169 
small PCs 
compromises for, 7-8 
designing, 16-18 
expandability of, limited, 17 
microATX PC standard for, 16 
Mini-ITX PC standard for, 16-17 
noise level of, 17 
performance of, 17 
Socket AM2+/AM3 motherboards, 58 
Socket AM2 sockets, 54 
Socket AM2+ sockets, 54 
Socket AM3 motherboards, 58 
Socket AM3 sockets, 54 
Socket B sockets, 53 
Socket H sockets, 53 
Socket LGA 775 sockets, 53 
Socket LGA 1156 motherboards, 58 
Socket LGA 1366 motherboards, 58 
Socket LGA 1366 sockets, 53 
Socket T sockets, 53 
software 
application discs, 22 
application service packs and 
updates, 22 
burn-in utilities, 24 
checklist of software needed, 22-24 
component driver CDs, 22 
component driver updates, 18 
component supporting 
applications, 23 
diagnostic utilities, 23 
hard drive installation and 
diagnostic utilities, 23 
for media center PC, installing, 
245-260 
memory diagnostic utilities, 23 
motherboards, monitoring, 14 
operating system distribution 
discs, 22 
operating system service packs 
and updates, 22 
service packs, downloading, 22 
updates, downloading, 22 
software RAID, 298 
solid state drives. See SSDs 
Sony Optiarc AD-7260S-0B DVD 
burner, 173 
sound (audio) adapters, 76 
for extreme PC, 170 
for mainstream PC, 126 
Sound Blaster X-Fi Titanium sound 
adapter, 170 
SPD (Serial Presence Detect) ROM, 168 
340 
Index 

speakers 
built-in to display, 75 
choosing, considerations for, 76-77 
recommended, 77 
for budget PC, 97 
for extreme PC, 174 
for mainstream PC, 128-129 
for media center PC, 219-220 
satellite speaker designations, 77 
wattage ratings, 77 
Spousal Unit Approval (SUA) 
criterion, 211 
SRP (suggested retail price), 81 
SSDs (solid state drives), 10. See 
also hard drives 
capacity of, 63 
cell type of, 64 
choosing, considerations for, 62-64 
cost of, 63,64 
durability of, 271 
life of, 62-63 
memory speed of, 64 
for mini systems, 271 
performance of, 271 
recommended, 64,170 
wiping clean, 271 
stacked RAID, 298 
standalone video adapters. See video 
cards 
standoffs 
difficulty aligning, 231-232 
installing, 105-106,145,178-179 
removing extras, 276 
static shock, preventing, 18-19 
striping (RAID 0), 297-298 
SUA (Spousal Unit Approval) 
criterion, 211 
suggested retail price (SRP), 81 
Super Micro CSE-733i-645 case, 300 
supplemental power connectors, 
42-43 
SYBA hard drives 
SYBA SD-ENC50020,218-219 
SYBA SD-ENC50020 docking 
station, 70,127 
SYBA SD-ENC50020 Docking 
Station, 305 
SYBA SD-ENC50020 eSATA Dual 
SATA Docking Station, 171-173 
T 
Taiyo-Yuden discs, 67 
taxes on component purchases, 81 
television programs, recording, 206 
text readability affected by 
resolution, 72 
thermal compound, 27,52,107 
Thermalright coolers, 14 
Thermaltake cases, 41 
Thermaltake Element Q 
VL52021N2U case, 268 
ThermalTake Element Tease, 92 
Thermaltake RSI H SD100 case, 268 
Thermaltake CPU coolers, 52 
Thompson, Barbara Fritchman 
(author), xvii, 343 
Thompson, Robert Bruce (author), 
xvii, 343 
3D graphics adapters, 71, 72, 
168-169 
Tom's Hardware website, 36, 72,169 
tools, 21-22 
touchpads, 80 
trackballs, 80 
tray packaging, 82 
troubleshooting, 24-32 
booting failure, 29,30-31 
cable problems, 25 
components incompatible, 25 
components not working, 25 
configuration errors for 
motherboard, 25 
display not working, 27 
DMI Pool Error message, 29 
hard drive failure error, 29 
Missing Operating System error, 30 
No Boot Device error, 30 
powering up causing high-pitched 
noise, 31 
power not working, 26-27 
power working only briefly, 28 
short circuits, 26,27 
two-tone siren sound after 
powering up, 31 
TurnKey Linux package, 327 
TV programs, recording, 206,261 
u 
Ubuntu Linux, 4, 245-247 
Ubuntu Server, 327, 328 
UEFI (Unified Extensible Firmware 
Interface) BIOS, 304 
Unicomp IBM Model"M"keyboard, 79 
Unified Extensible Firmware 
Interface (UEFI) BIOS, 304 
upgrade Windows license, 4 
upgrading your PC, 5 
UPS, for home server, 306-307 
USB 2.0 ports, 57 
USB 3.0 ports, 57,166 
USB flash drives, 68 
USB portable optical drive, 306 
use taxes, 81 
V 
vendors, 80-81,85-86 
Verbatim discs, 67 
VGA connector, 74 
video adapter fans, 201 
video adapters. See also displays 
3D graphics adapters, 71, 72 
choosing, considerations for, 70-71 
cost of, 9 
display resolution, supporting, 71 
dual displays, supporting, 71 
integrated, 9 
matching to displays, 98 
passive heatsinkfor, 16 
performance of 
for appliance/nettop system, 266 
for budget PC, 92 
for extreme PC, 161-162 
for mainstream PC, 121-122 
for media center PC, 210 
priority of, 9 
recommended, 72 
for appliance/nettop system, 270 
for budget PC, 94-95,96 
for extreme PC, 168-169 
for mainstream PC, 126 
for media center PC, 215 
troubleshooting, 26,27 
video cards (standalone video 
adapters), 9,70,72 
space needed for, 135 
Index 
341 

video cards (continued) 
supplemental power for, 201 
troubleshooting, 28 
video production, PC for. 
See extreme PC 
videos. See also optical drives 
camcorder capture software, 
258-259 
camcorder video editing software, 
259-260 
playing, 207 
video playback software, 254-255 
ViewSonic displays, 34-35, 76 
ViewSonic VX2033wm, 98 
ViewSonic VX2250wm-LED, 
129-130 
ViewSonic VX2433wm, 129-130 
virtual private network (VPN), 291 
"visible" components, 3-4 
VisionTek video adapters, 72 
VLC Media Player software, 254-255 
Voltage Regulator Module (VRM), 54 
VPN (virtual private network), 291 
VRM (Voltage Regulator Module), 54 
w 
warranties for components, 5,84-85 
wattage rating for power supply, 
41-42 
weather station, 261 
webcams, built-in to display, 75 
Western Digital hard drives, 61 
Western Digital Caviar Black, 126, 
171,217 
Western Digital My Book external 
drives, 69 
wheel mice, 79 
white box packaging, 82 
WHS (Windows Home Server), 326 
Windows 
64-bit version, SSDs for, 63 
crashing, reasons for, 7 
desktop Windows, 326-327 
licenses for, 4 
Linux as alternative to, 4 
for media center PC, 245 
USB flash drives backing up, 68 
version 7, all examples verified on, 
xv 
Windows Home Server (WHS), 326 
Windows Remote Desktop, 306 
wireless keyboards, 78-79 
wireless networking adapters, 
215-216 
WQXGA resolution, 175 
WUXGA resolution, 175 
X 
X I 0 home control, 260 
XFX video adapters, 72 
XMP (extreme Memory Profile), 168 
z 
Zalman CPU coolers, 14,52 
342 
Index 

