
Build Your Own Electric Bicycle

TAB Green Guru Guides
Do-It-Yourself Home Energy Audits: 140 Simple Solutions to Lower Energy
Costs, Increase Your Home’s Efficiency, and Save the Environment by David S.
Findley
Renewable Energies for Your Home: Real-World Solutions for Green
Conversions by Russel Gehrke
Build Your Own Plug-In Hybrid Electric Vehicle by Seth Leitman
Build Your Own Electric Bicycle by Matthew Slinn
Build Your Own Electric Motorcycle by Carl Vogel

Build Your Own Electric Bicycle
Matthew Slinn

Copyright © 2010 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. All rights reserved.
Except as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this
publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored
in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the
publisher.
ISBN: 978-0-07-160622-6
MHID: 0-07-160622-X
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: ISBN: 978-
0-07-160621-9, MHID: 0-07-160621-1.
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a
trademark symbol after every occurrence of a trademarked name, we use names in an
editorial fashion only, and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no intention of
infringement of the trademark. Where such designations appear in this book, they have
been printed with initial caps.
McGraw-Hill eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as
premiums and sales promotions, or for use in corporate training programs. To contact
a representative please e-mail us at bulksales@mcgraw-hill.com.
Information contained in this work has been obtained by The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc. (“McGraw-Hill”) from sources believed to be reliable. However,
neither McGraw-Hill nor its authors guarantee the accuracy or completeness of any
information published herein, and neither McGraw-Hill nor its authors shall be
responsible for any errors, omissions, or damages arising out of use of this
information. This work is published with the understanding that McGraw-Hill and its
authors are supplying information but are not attempting to render engineering or other
professional services. If such services are required, the assistance of an appropriate
professional should be sought.
TERMS OF USE
This is a copyrighted work and The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. (“McGraw-
Hill”) and its licensors reserve all rights in and to the work. Use of this work is
subject to these terms. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the
right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not decompile, disassemble,
reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works based upon, transmit,
distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the work or any part of it without
McGraw-Hill’s prior consent. You may use the work for your own noncommercial
and personal use; any other use of the work is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the

work may be terminated if you fail to comply with these terms.
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL AND ITS LICENSORS
MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR WARRANTIES AS TO THE ACCURACY,
ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM
USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMATION THAT CAN BE
ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND
EXPRESSLY 
DISCLAIM ANY 
WARRANTY, 
EXPRESS 
OR 
IMPLIED,
INCLUDING 
BUT 
NOT 
LIMITED 
TO 
IMPLIED 
WARRANTIES 
OF
MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-
Hill and its licensors do not warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in the
work will meet your requirements or that its operation will be uninterrupted or error
free. Neither McGraw-Hill nor its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for
any inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless of cause, in the work or for any damages
resulting there from. McGraw-Hill has no responsibility for the content of any
information accessed through the work. Under no circumstances shall McGraw-Hill
and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive,
consequential or similar damages that result from the use of or inability to use the
work, even if any of them has been advised of the possibility of such damages. This
limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or cause whatsoever whether such claim
or cause arises in contract, tort or otherwise.

This book is dedicated to my girlfriend Heather, who I love.

About the Author
Matthew Slinn is an experienced research scientist and process engineer and has
worked on several alternative energy transport applications. During his EngD at the
University of Birmingham (U.K.), he worked on the biodiesel process and was
sponsored by and worked at Green Biodiesel and BHR Biofuels. During this time he
bought his first electric bicycle and quickly recognized the great possibilities for this
new form of transport. The new skills he developed while fixing and upgrading this
bike won him new jobs in the field of fuel cells and batteries. He worked on the
prototype microcab fuel-cell vehicle and at Oxis Energy developing their lithium
sulfur batteries. This book is the product of many years of accumulated knowledge.

Contents
Preface
Acknowledgments
1 Introduction
1.1 What Are Electric Bicycles?
1.2 Why Electric Bicycles?
1.2.1 Freedom and Convenience
1.2.2 Safer Than Regular Bicycles
1.2.3 The Benefits of an Electric Bicycle
1.2.4 Cost Savings
1.2.5 Time Savings
1.2.6 Saving the Environment
1.2.7 The Future of Transport
1.3 Safety with Electric Bicycles
1.3.1 Electrical Safety
1.3.2 Battery Chemical Safety
1.3.3 Road Safety
1.4 Legality of Electric Bicycles
2 Your First Electric Bicycle
2.1 Commercial Electric Bicycles
2.1.1 Buying an Electric Bicycle: The Motor
2.1.2 Buying an Electric Bicycle: The Battery
2.1.3 Buying an Electric Bicycle: The Bicycle
2.1.4 Resources for Buying an Electric Bicycle
3 Build Your Own Electric Bicycle
3.1 Why Build Your Own Electric Bicycle?
3.1.1 Quality and Unique Design
3.1.2 Increased Performance
3.1.3 Reduced Cost

3.2 What Do You Want from Your Electric Bicycle?
3.2.1 Having Realistic Goals and Expectations
3.3 Types of Electric Bicycles You Can Build
3.3.1 The Long-Range Commuter Electric Bicycle
3.3.2 The Folding Commuter Electric Bicycle
3.3.3 High-Power Electric Bicycle
3.3.4 High Power and Long Range
3.3.5 Motored Bicycles
3.4 How to Build Your Own Electric Bicycle from a Hub Motor Kit
3.4.1 Build Your Own Electric Bicycle: Kit Resources
3.4.2 Electric Bicycle Builders Gallery
3.4.3 What Determines Power and Speed?
3.4.4 What Determines Capacity and Range?
3.4.5 Weight Distribution in Electric Bicycles
3.4.6 Brakes on Electric Bicycles
3.4.7 Step-by-Step Guide to Soldering
3.4.8 Mounting and Securing Things to the Electric Bicycle
3.4.9 Choosing a Bicycle Frame
3.4.10 Positioning Your Components on the Frame
3.4.11 Battery Storage and Positioning
3.4.12 Making a Main Triangle Battery Bag
3.4.13 Making a Theft-Proof Battery Holder
3.4.14 Making a Rear-Rack Battery Holder
3.4.15 Tips on Wheel-Building Hub Motors
3.4.16 How to Do Electrical Connections and Wiring
3.4.17 Choosing Quality Connectors
3.4.18 Choosing Quality Switches and Relays
3.4.19 Making Wires Tidy: Junction Boxes
4 Electric Bicycle Components
4.1 Motors
4.1.1 How Motors Work

4.1.2 What Speed Will It Do?
4.1.3 Reviews of Different Hub Motors
4.1.4 Interfacing Motors with Controllers
4.1.5 Reliability of Motors
4.1.6 Motor Types: Hub Motors
4.1.7 Motor Types: Chain-Drive and Friction-Drive Motors
4.2 Controllers
4.2.1 Finding the Right Wiring Configuration for a New Motor-
Controller Combination
4.2.2 Inside a Controller
4.3 Batteries
4.3.1 Battery Theory
4.3.2 Pack Building and Series/Parallel Effects
4.3.3 Battery Safeguards
4.3.4 Commercially Available Batteries for Electric Bicycles
4.3.5 Future Power Sources: Fuel Cells and Flow Batteries
4.3.6 Reviews of Batteries
4.3.7 Resources for Buying Electric Bicycle Batteries
4.4 Chargers and Battery Charging
4.4.1 Charge-Termination Methods
4.4.2 Inside a Battery Charger
5 How to Maintain and Repair Electric Bicycles
5.1 Equipment for Maintaining Electric Bicycles
5.1.1 How to Use a Multimeter
5.1.2 Power Meters
5.1.3 Panel Meters
5.1.4 Clamp Meters
5.1.5 Bicycle Speedometers
5.1.6 Thermistors and Thermocouples
5.1.7 Data Loggers
5.2 Diagnosis: Finding the Problem
5.2.1 How to Check Connections and Connectors

5.2.2 How to Check the Battery
5.2.3 How to Check the Motor
5.2.4 How to Check the Throttle
5.2.5 How to Check the Controller
5.3 Maintaining Electric Bicycle Components
5.3.1 Maintenance of a Battery Charger
5.3.2 Hub Motor Maintenance Checklist
5.3.3 Battery Maintenance Checklist
5.3.4 Controller Maintenance Checklist
5.3.5 Bicycle Maintenance
5.4 Repairing Electric Bicycle Components
5.4.1 How to Repair a Controller with Broken FETs
5.4.2 Repairing a Controller with Broken Gate Drive Transistor
5.4.3 How to Repair a Controller with Blown Capacitors
5.4.4 Opening Up a Brushless, Nongeared Hub Motor
5.4.5 Reassembly of the Brushless, Nongeared Hub Motor
5.4.6 Opening Up a Brushed Hub Motor
5.4.7 Opening Up a Brushless, Geared Hub Motor
5.4.8 Replacing Hall Sensors in a Brushless, Nongeared Hub Motor
5.4.9 Replacing the Bearings in a Hub Motor
5.4.10 Repairing a Battery with Dead Cells
5.4.11 Fixing Broken Balance Wires in a Pack That Has a BMS
5.4.12 Repairing a Battery Charger
5.4.13 Wiring Up a New Battery Pack or Charger
6 Projects for Electric Bicycles
6.1 Performance Modifications
6.1.1 How to Build a Battery Pack
6.1.2 Bypassing a Brushed Motor Controller
6.1.3 Removing Pedal-Assist Mode
6.1.4 Overclocking/Upgrading a Brushed Electric Bicycle
6.1.5 Overclocking/Upgrading a Brushless Electric Bicycle

6.1.6 Increasing the Power Limit by Soldering the Shunt Resistor
6.1.7 Variable-Current-Limit Modification
6.1.8 Modification of a Battery Charger
6.1.9 Do-It-Yourself (DIY) Battery Chargers
6.1.10 Racing Electric Bicycles
6.1.11 Extending Range: Hybrid Electric Bicycles
6.1.12 Improving Aerodynamics on an Electric Bicycle
6.2 Safety Modifications
6.2.1 Regenerative Braking and Plug Braking
6.2.2 Torque Arms and Disc Brake Mounts
6.2.3 Preventing Sparking When Plugging In the Controller
6.2.4 High-Powered Lights
6.2.5 Powerful Horns
6.2.6 Bicycle Mirrors and Turn Indicators
6.2.7 Heated Handlebars
6.3 Other Modifications
6.3.1 Projects for Used Electric Bicycle Batteries
6.3.2 Renewable-Energy-Powered Electric Bicycles
Glossary of Terms
References
Index

Preface
Most people start off with electric bicycles by buying a commercially built one.
This is good because it gets you riding straightaway. After you get over the initial
novelty of the seemingly magical silent propulsion, you begin to think, “Why can’t it
go faster?” This is where this book comes in. It covers buying the best commercial
electric bicycle for you, upgrading it for more power and speed, building your own
more-powerful electric bicycle, learning new skills and how things work, repairing
your electric bicycle when it breaks down, and adding modifications to improve it.
The content is ordered to make it easy for the novice to jump in and get started and
then learn by doing. Few tools are needed, and the skills, such as soldering, are easy
to learn. This book will bring you to the forefront of electric bicycle technology and
inspire you to take on new electric bicycle projects. Once you have read this book,
you will want to keep it handy as a manual to guide you through any electric bicycle
problems that you encounter or projects that you wish to undertake. Unlike cars, a
separate user manual for each make and model of vehicle will not be needed. This
book covers all makes of electric bicycles because the technology is simple and the
same.
Matthew Slinn

Acknowledgments
I would like to thank the moderators of, and everyone who has contributed to, the
Endless-Sphere Technology Forum (www.endless-sphere.com). Without them, this
book would not be possible. Forums like this are an open source of ideas, where
science and engineering happen at lightening speed. This wealth of knowledge and
these new discoveries are a benefit to us all.

CHAPTER 1
Introduction
This book is a practical guide to electric bicycles aimed at the novice and
intermediate riders of electric bicycles who are interested in learning more and getting
the most out of their bicycles. It will be a fun and “hands on” approach that will cover
buying, building, riding, upgrading, modifying, and maintaining your electric bicycle.
Electric bicycles are far simpler than cars, essentially consisting of three main
components (i.e., battery, controller, and motor) and so are much more user
serviceable with a little know-how. Whether you use your electric bicycle for
everyday commuting, shopping, racing, or just to show off and impress your friends,
this book will help you to succeed.
1.1 What Are Electric Bicycles?
Electric bicycles are bicycles that have an electric motor and batteries that power
the bicycle and assist with pedaling. An electric bicycle is a hybrid of electric and
pedal power. Electric bicycles are not motor bikes. They are usually limited by law to
a specific power so that they still qualify as bicycles and are exempt from registration
fees, insurance, needing a driving license, and the department of safety regulations.
The specifications that electric bicycles must meet to be exempt from motor vehicle
registration vary from country to country and state to state. In Europe, the current limit
is 250 W maximum continuous power and 40 kg/88 lb maximum weight with no limit
on peak power. In the United States, the limits vary from state to state, with some
states allowing 750 W and some not allowing electric bicycles at all. In the West,
electric bicycles are new technology, and most people don’t know anything about
them. In the Far East, however, electric bicycles are big business. In China, electric
bicycles outnumber cars by four to one.
You may find that your electric bicycle draws a lot of attention. When parked, you
will see people stare and try and figure out what all the strange-looking bits are for. If
you are seen with an electric bicycle, you might get asked lots of questions by
inquisitive people. The most common question people ask is: “Does pedaling charge
the battery?” The answer is no. You use up the battery when riding and charge it from
the socket when you get home. You can pedal to go faster, but the idea of having an
electric bicycle is to pedal less. If the battery were to be charged by pedaling, then
you would have to do just as much pedaling as a regular bicycle. This question
probably comes from confusion with hybrid cars, where the engine charges the battery.
Some of the most frequently asked questions are answered in Table 1.1.

TABLE 1.1 Top 10 Most Frequently Asked Questions about Electric Bicycles
Most electric bicycles don’t require you to pedal, and some custom electric
bicycles don’t even have pedals at all. Some electric bicycles have a governor-type
mechanism that requires the rider to pedal before power is given. These are called
pedelecs. On some of the cheaper commercial electric bicycles, you need to pedal a
little because the batteries are so weak. On the more powerful electric bicycles, most
people choose to pedal slightly because it’s a fun “hands on” activity to do. Pedals are
like instant feedback, telling you how fast you are going. Accelerating so fast that you
no longer need your lower gears is a wonderful feeling. Then, on some electric
bicycles, there is the really scary feeling of going so fast that pedaling makes no
difference; you can’t physically keep up with the motor, even in your highest gear.
This feedback tells you that you need to slow down! Pedaling also can be useful if you
get caught out and run out of juice or if you have eaten too much over Christmas and

decide that you want to lose a few pounds. With electric bicycles, you can decide how
much exercise you want to do!
1.2 Why Electric Bicycles?
1.2.1 Freedom and Convenience
An electric bicycle will take you door to door without breaking a sweat. It has the
speed advantages of a motorbicycle and the freedom of a bicycle combined. An
electric bicycle can be parked anywhere, is cheap to run, and is fast and fun. An
electric bicycle is much more practical than a regular bicycle because you can carry
more stuff and it’s safer. Some die-hard cyclists will frown on your electric bicycle,
dismissing it by saying that it is too heavy or that it’s not environmentally friendly.
These people are misguided, old fashioned, and wrong. Carbon dioxide (CO2)
emissions for electric power production are lower than for human power (Lemire-
Elmore, 2004). Weight is also irrelevant when it is what powers the vehicle. Not
everyone can be a muscle-bound, sweaty pedal pusher, and not everyone wants to be.
Even the most purist cyclist will agree that there’s no way you can carry a week’s
worth of shopping on a normal push-bicycle and still cycle at a sensible speed (Figure
1.1). Having the convenience of an electric bicycle even might allow you to totally
replace your car use, meaning that you could save thousands on insurance, fuel, and
taxes and save the planet, too.
FIGURE 1.1 A week’s worth of shopping can be carried easily on an electric

bicycle in either a backpack or pannier bags. The motor will power the bicycle
without you having to sweat. Now there is no need to have a car just for shopping.
1.2.2 Safer Than Regular Bicycles
With an electric bicycle, you have a big power source for safety features such as
powerful lights and horns that you just don’t have on regular bicycles. Because you’re
not exhausted from pedaling all the time, you can sit back, relax, and get on with the
important things—such as anticipating traffic movements and avoiding hazards. You
also can keep up with traffic instead of having it whiz by you at the side of the road.
This makes cycling feel much safer, although there are no statistic on whether it
actually is safer. Keeping up with traffic means that fewer cars have to overtake you,
and this protects you from rear-end collisions. Keeping up with traffic also means that
drivers have a longer time in which to notice you when approaching you from behind.
This, in combination with lights that are 20 times more powerful, should make electric
bicycles much easier to spot than regular bicycles. Collisions owing to people pulling
out in front of you may be worsened compared with regular bicycles, but to some
extent you have control over what’s in front of you and can anticipate with braking.
Electric bicycles are a lot slower than motorcycles, so accidents will be easier to
walk away from. With an electric bicycle, you feel more equal to other road users, and
you don’t feel like a second-class road user, as you do when riding a regular bicycle.
This may give riders of electric bicycles a more polite, relaxed attitude toward other
road users. Riders of electric bicycles will be more likely to stop at red lights and
pedestrian crossings and slow down around hazards. This is so because electric
bicycles have a battery pack that will boost riders back up to speed, and they know
they don’t have to sweat it out.
Road safety in general is improved if people switch to lightweight electric bicycles
instead of cars. In collisions with pedestrians or other cyclists, bicycles will do much
less damage than cars. Car drivers feel too protected inside their cars and take more
risks as a result. Bicycle riders will be more cautious, and there will be fewer
accidents as a result. On a bicycle, it’s difficult to get distracted by a mobile phone,
cigarette, or applying your makeup. The increased visibility that bicycle riders have
also makes for safer roads than in our car-dominated society.
The first time a person rides an electric bicycle, he or she is left smiling ear to ear
by a phenomenon that has been called the electric vehicle grin—a result of the feeling
of movement without any effort or noise. For many of us, the grin does not go away as
long as our batteries are good and our bicycle doesn’t let us down.
1.2.3 The Benefits of an Electric Bicycle
There are many people who could benefit from owning an electric bicycle. The cost

of car ownership is now prohibitively high for many people, especially the young,
who get hammered by the cost of insurance. Using an electric bicycle instead of a car
to get around can save you thousands of dollars a year and is often a much faster mode
of transport in congested cities. With a bicycle, you can filter through traffic to the
front of the line, and you can take shortcuts where cars are prohibited. Speed cameras
are causing record numbers of people to lose their licenses, and without a license, an
electric bicycle is the fastest thing you can drive. Parking problems, traffic jams, and
road congestion are making many urban car journeys unfeasible. Years ago, a car
brought a feeling of freedom. Now motorists are easy targets for speed traps and
parking meter attendants. Buses are often unreliable, can be expensive, and are
universally disliked. Cycling is a good option in cities, but many people don’t like to
sweat all the time. Electric bicycling is the answer!
1.2.4 Cost Savings
The biggest cost saving of having an electric bicycle is that you don’t need a car,
which saves you the cost of gas, insurance, maintenance, taxes, depreciation, and
parking fees and tickets. To replace car use completely, we need a solution for long-
distance travel. That solution is to use a bicycle in combination with a train. The
bicycle and train are an amazing combination that will take you long distances quicker
and cheaper than any car (Figure 1.2). The electric bicycle makes this transport choice
even better. We can compare the cost of the electric bicycle–train combination versus
private car ownership. Every situation is different, but I would think that it’s difficult
to find a case where the electric bicycle–train combination is not as cost-effective as
private car ownership. Table 1.2 shows my annual cost estimation for my 40-mile
daily commuter journey, 24 weekend trips per year, and taxis for going out at
weekends.

FIGURE 1.2 Joined-up transportation. The bicycle and train are an amazing
combination that will take you long distances quicker and cheaper than any car. The
electric bicycle makes this transport choice even better.
For the scenario in the table, the capital cost of buying the new electric bicycle is at
least half as much as buying a second-hand car, and on top of that, you would save
£2,300/$3,450 a year on operating costs. If you live and work in a city, then the
savings would be even better for the electric bicycle because the fixed costs of car
ownership (insurance, tax, maintenance, and depreciation) would begin to dwarf the
variable distance costs (fuel or train fares). Living and working in the same city means
that you can use your electric bicycle more and cut out most of the train fares.
Season’s ticket train fares seem to be priced very close to the equivalent fuel costs for
the same journey done by car. Savings could be increased further if you were to use
the bicycle instead of taxis to go out in the evenings where it is impossible to park in
the city. However, since this might not be practical if you have to wear a nice suit or
dress, I have assumed that riders of electric bicycles and car drivers spend the same
amount on taxis annually. The cost of insurance also could vary considerably. For
example, for a 17-year-old male driver, the cost of third-party car insurance is
currently 
£4,500/$6,750 
irrespective 
of 
which 
car 
he 
might 
drive
(www.confused.com, 2009). One of the only reasons one might “need” a car is to
impress members of the opposite sex. I suspect that many people still have car
ownership as one of their “standards” for potential suitors!

TABLE 1.2 Cost Comparison Between Car Ownership and Electric Bicycle
Ownership for My 40-Mile Daily Commute, 24 Weekend Trips per Year, and Taxis
on Weekends
An electric bicycle will use about 20 Wh/mile, and electricity costs about 11 pence
(16 cents)/kWh. Therefore, the energy cost for an electric bicycle is about 0.2 pence
(0.3 cents)/mile, which is so low that it’s almost insignificant compared with other
costs. Battery replacement is the main cost for electric bicycles because batteries are
really a consumable item. Most good batteries sold for electric bicycles are rated for
1,000 discharge cycles and cost around 50 pence (75 cents)/Wh capacity. Therefore,
we can calculate that the operating cost of battery replacement is around 1 pence (1.5
cents)/mile (if you look after your battery). In Britain, fuel costs about £1.06/liter or
$6/gallon, which is mostly tax, and the average car in Britain does about 8 miles/liter
(Mackay, 2009). Therefore, car fuel costs about 13 pence (20 cents)/mile, which is
over 60 times the energy cost of an electric bicycle. When you include the operating
cost of battery replacement, the electric bicycle is still 13 times cheaper to run than a
car. A small gas scooter will get around 27 miles/liter or 100 miles/gallon, which
works out to be around 4 pence (6 cents)/mile. This is four times the operating cost of
an electric bicycle. Since oil is a scarce resource that is fast running out, we can

expect the price of fuel to continue to increase in the future, so the savings of electric
bicycles can only improve.
1.2.5 Time Savings
Car journeys are often slow owing to traffic congestion. In cities, an electric
bicycle usually will be faster because it can slip to the head of traffic lines. When
traveling longer distances, trains (or planes) are faster and more direct and, in
conjunction with your electric bicycle, could result in a considerable time savings. In
addition, on the train, you are free to do other things than concentrate on driving. Much
of this book was written while I was on a train. If you value your free time, then 60
free minutes on a train per day at £20/$30 per hour is worth £5,000/$7,500 each year.
One could do a similar calculation for time saved by riding an electric bicycle rather
than a regular bicycle.
1.2.6 Saving the Environment
The world is running out of oil, and with it, the price of all forms of energy will get
much more expensive. This will make cars, electric or otherwise, prohibitively
expensive for most people. In the future, it’s thought that global warming will be a
serious threat to human progress and prosperity. Global warming is caused by carbon
emissions, which are brought about, among other things, by the burning of fossil fuels
—our main source of energy. The electric bicycle often can replace the use of a car
and do the job much more efficiently. A liter/gallon of gas contains about 10 kWh of
energy; therefore, the average car in Britain/United States uses about 1,250 Wh/mile,
or 60 times as much energy as an electric bicycle. This means that an electric bicycle
can go at least 60 times farther than a car on the same amount of energy.
There are some inefficiencies in the production and distribution of electricity.
Production of electricity is about 30 to 45 percent efficient. However, even with these
numbers, there is still a massive reduction in emissions and energy use when an
electric bicycle is chosen over a car. Mackay (2009) addresses the math behind
energy use and energy policy. He calculated a 100 times reduction in energy use (at
the point of delivery) for a bicycle compared with a car. Therefore, the amount of
energy that an electric bicycle uses is insignificant compared with the energy use of a
car and so low that it easily could be generated by a renewable energy source such as
solar power, whereas it would not be practical to power a car with renewable energy
—the cost and land area required to do so would be beyond the means of most people.
First reactions to electric bicycles can be quite interesting. People generally don’t
like change, and some of them initially argue that electric bicycles are “just wrong.”
Such a negative reaction may come from car drivers who feel guilty about their
pollution when faced with a new alternative or from cyclists who think they are

morally superior for all the hard work they do. These people are in the minority, and
fortunately, most people are just very interested and even may end up buying an
electric bicycle of their own. Some of the negative reactions derive from people’s
assumptions about what is environmentally friendly and what’s not.
Many people assume that putting a battery and motor on a bicycle will only increase
its energy use, but this is not true. In an electric bicycle, the motor replaces human
power, which is achieved at the cost of eating more food. Lemire-Elmore (2004)
calculated the total life-cycle energy use of an electric bicycle with different battery
technologies and compared the results with energy consumption by a pedal cyclist.
Taking into account factors such as emissions from production, delivery, and
replacement of batteries, he concluded that there was up to five times fewer emissions
from electric bicycles than from human-powered bicycles where the rider has an
average Western diet. This is not surprising when you consider all the energy use and
emissions from the food chain, including farming, transport, manufacture, refrigeration,
cooking, and the 25% efficiency of the human body for converting food into energy. If
you have a 5-minute shower (3 kW) after a sweaty pedaling session, then this will use
more energy than cycling 12 miles on an electric bicycle. Human power is not as green
as people assume. The electric bicycle is probably the most efficient practical mode
of transport in the world.
1.2.7 The Future of Transport
Cars may become slightly more efficient in the future. They may have new types of
engines, batteries, or even fuel cells, but a car can never be as efficient as a bicycle.
The reason lies in the concepts of drag and weight. Cars are designed big and heavy
with the capacity to carry 4 to 5 people, but most cars are opperated with only a single
occupant. This “misuse” of the vehicle is what causes the inefficiency. If an efficient
car is opperated at 100% occupancy then the energy (per person, per mile) starts to
aproach that of an electric bicycle. The large frontal area of a car and its weight mean
that it will always require a large amount of energy to move. This energy demand does
not change if you change the technology powering the car without also changing its
weight and/or aerodynamics. The only way to improve a singly occupied car’s fuel
consumption significantly is to make it lightweight and torpedo shaped, in effect
making it more like a motorbike. Car manufacturers know this and have made many
fuel-efficient concept cars, but these cars never get built because of worry about
consumer acceptance of “weird looking” cars. As the cost of fuel becomes more of an
issue, aerodynamic cars will gain in popularity. Having said this, the gas engine is
fairly inefficient, and there are small gains to be made by changing engine technology.
Don’t believe the hype about hydrogen fuel cell cars or electric cars saving the
world. Hydrogen and electricity are just energy carriers and not energy sources like

oil, coal, solar, or wind energy. Hydrogen and electricity have to be made from our
limited energy sources. When all the energy comes from fossil fuels, then these
advanced vehicles are often just as costly and polluting as regular vehicles. Several
scientific studies show that future cars with fuel cell power-trains will produce about
the same emissions as gasoline vehicles today (van Mierlo, Maggettoa, and Latairea,
2006). This is so because all the inefficiencies of the energy conversion stages
involved in making, storing, and using hydrogen add up to the same inefficiency as
using gasoline in an engine. Battery electric cars fare a bit better and have the
potential to roughly halve the greenhouse gas emissions of regular cars (van Mierlo,
Maggettoa and Latairea, 2006). Hybrid cars are also good because the regenerative
braking re-aptures wasted energy. Plug-in hybrids are a good compromise because
they add the range of a gas engine to the efficiency of electric drive. The efficiency of
electric vehicles is linked to the power station efficiency. This may improve in the
future if we go renewables or nuclear, but it also could get worse as oil runs out and
nations start switching to coal for their power.
1.3 Safety with Electric Bicycles
Warning: Working on electric bicycles can be dangerous! There are many possible
hazards, including battery fires and explosions, electrocution, crushing, tripping, and
falling. Assess the risks before working on your electric bicycle, and wear the
appropriate safety and personal protective equipment (PPE), for example, goggles,
gloves, protective shoes, and thick clothing.
1.3.1 Electrical Safety
Do not touch live battery terminals. Anything over 48 V is considered a high-
voltage source and could result in a lethal electric shock. However, it’s difficult to get
an electric shock accidentally from an electric bicycle battery because dry, intact skin
is a good insulator. Main circuit box voltages are higher and much more dangerous,
however, and shouldn’t be messed with. Do not work on anything that is connected to
the main circuit box; always disconnect it first! Do not perform maintenance on the
battery or the bicycle while it is being charged. Do not connect the charger to the main
circuit in the rain or when you or your bicycle is wet. Do not charge your bicycle in
the rain. A fuse will not protect you from an electric shock; only a correctly installed
circuit breaker will. Everything should be grounded correctly for the circuit breaker to
work. I cannot be held responsible for any accident, injury, or damage to property
caused by your work following the instructions in this book.
1.3.2 Battery Chemical Safety
Be very careful when working on batteries. The batteries on electric bicycles
contain a lot of energy and can be very dangerous. Some batteries are unstable and

prone to fire if mistreated. On rare occasions, some batteries may contain
manufacturing defects that cause them to combust spontaneously for no reason. Poor
quality control during manufacture is usually to blame for these faults, and has been the
cause of several battery recalls in laptops and other consumer gadgets. Lithium
polymer (Lipo), lithium colbalt (LiCo) and lithium-ion batteries have unstable
chemistries and will catch fire or explode if overcharged, short-circuited, or
physically damaged. If you don’t believe me, watch the videos on youtube.com! If you
are new to electronics or electric bicycles, you are advised not to use these batteries.
In fact, most people avoid using these batteries altogether owing to the potential risk
of fire. Treat these batteries with extreme care. Only charge the battery outside your
house in a nonflammable location in case you have a charger malfunction that results
in a battery explosion. Other battery chemistries generally are safer, and some have
built-in safeguards that prevent dangerous failure. The fire risk of batteries is one of
the main things holding back electric cars. Large electric vehicle (EV) battery packs
often contain hundreds of cells, which increases the chance of failure. The high
temperatures caused by some cell failures can cause other neighboring cells to fail,
which, in theory, could cause a chain reaction that would destroy the EV.
The chemicals in batteries are often toxic. If you overcharge a battery and it vents
electrolyte, avoid breathing the fumes. If there is a battery fire, do not breathe the toxic
fumes. Get away as fast as possible, and call the fire department if necessary.
Disconnect any smoking battery from the charger if it is plugged in, but only if safe to
do so. If the battery is smoking, put it outside if it is safe to do so. If the battery is in a
safe location outside, then just let it burn. If the battery is on fire inside, then extinguish
the fire with a fire blanket and a CO2 extinguisher, but only if it is safe to do so. It may
not be possible to extinguish the fire because of the chemicals involved. Do not use
water fire extinguishers because lithium reacts with water. Wear protective equipment
when extinguishing a battery fire in case the battery explodes or bits are blown around
by the fire extinguisher. The highest risk is when you are working on an open battery.
When working on batteries, avoid using metal tools whenever possible; work on a
clean, empty, non-conductive surface, and don’t wear jewelry. If a cell is broken or
damaged, do not attempt to fix it. It is impossible anyway because individual cells are
not made to be user serviceable, and building them is a very intricate and complicated
process. Having said all this, batteries, if they are looked after, are usually very safe.
Dangerous battery incidents are rare.
1.3.3 Road Safety
When riding an electric bicycle, always wear a helmet; this is the law in some
states and countries. In addition, it is advisable to wear thick protective motorcycle
gloves, strong shoes, thick trousers (denim jeans are okay), and a jacket. Electric

bicycles are not as fast as motorcycles so the protective equipment doesn’t have to be
as cumbersome. However, you are not invincible, and if you fall off, it will hurt, and
you may sustain an injury. Your hands are usually the first thing to touch the concrete
in an accident, so thick motorcycle gloves are very helpful, and many cyclists wear
them. Make sure that your brakes are good enough to stop you in two car lengths at 20
mph. If the road is wet, watch out for downhill sections where braking is needed for a
turn into a side road. You will skid dangerously if you try to brake too quickly.
Always obey the traffic and vehicle laws in your country. Follow the highway code
as it applies to cyclists. Follow any special electric bicycle laws in your country.
Don’t speed or show off. Ride safely, and share the road with other users. It’s a good
idea to take a motorcycle driving test or cycling proficiency test. If you are new to
cycling, then some training will greatly enhance your confidence and keep you safe.
Most accidents happen to inexperienced cyclists. Use lights on your bicycle at night;
this is the law in many countries. Consider wearing bright florescent material on your
jacket, bicycle, or your rucksack. Cycle a meter/yard or so from the curb. This will
make you more visible to motorists, and they will not try to squeeze past dangerously.
This also will protect you from getting “doored” by people getting out of parked cars.
Take the appropriate lane at junctions, and behave like a car. If you are timid at
junctions, other drivers will not understand your intention. Many accidents happen
with large vehicles such as trucks or buses. These vehicles have large blind spots and
large turning circles. Don’t try to slide past these vehicles, especially on the inside, at
traffic lights because they will not see you and could squash you against railings,
parked cars, etc. Don’t cycle on the sidewalk because it is more dangerous than
cycling on the road. Car drivers will not look for vehicles there, and you are likely to
get hit while crossing a driveway when a car is turning in.
1.4 Legality of Electric Bicycles
In Europe, the legal power limit on electric bicycles is not very clear. The law
says, “Maximum continuous rated power output of the motor shall not exceed 250 W.”
This leaves a massive loophole because there is no limit on peak power. As long as
your motor eventually overheats at 250 W continuous power, then one would assume it
is okay to have a 2-kW motor. You could complete a short journey pulling a peak
power of 2 kW through a 250-W continuous motor, and it would get very hot. Then,
when you reach your destination, you just let it cool down, and you still would be
within the letter of the law. The law does not specify how power is tested. The
efficiency of electric motors varies depending on speed, where they are less efficient
at low speeds. The speed at which the measurement is to be taken is not specified.
Therefore, one could claim that because the motor overheats at 250 W continuous
power when the bicycle is doing only 1 mph, pulling a bus, for example, then this

satisfies the criteria. The law specifies output power, which is very difficult to
measure. To measure maximum continuous rated power output, you would need a
dedicated laboratory equipped with a rolling road. The measurement would be a
destructive test on all motors that obeyed the law because if they were rated below
250 W maximum continuous power, then you would destroy them by putting 250 W
continuously through them. The only practical part of the European or UK law is the
weight limit. It’s easy to do roadside testing of bicycle weight with scales.
Peak power of 250 W is such a small amount of power that it does not allow riders
to climb even moderate hills. In the United States, federal law states that electric
bicycles can have a “motor not exceeding 750 W power or 20 mph.” This is a much
better law because it states the peak power, which is more easily measurable, and the
top speed, which also is measurable. Peak power of 750 W is a reasonable amount of
power that will propel a cyclist up most hills. Peak power of 750 W is close to what
an athlete cyclist or a horse would be able to generate, which also falls outside motor
vehicle codes. A speed of 20 mph is reasonable because it is similar to what an
athlete cyclist would be able to do.
“The electric motor must not be able to propel the machine when it is traveling at
more than 15 mph.” This part of European law also has caused some confusion
because it requires special speed-sensing circuitry that most electric bicycles from
China don’t have. As a result, some manufacturers just sell electric bicycles that have
low-power motors that can’t exceed 15 mph on flat ground. These bicycles are
completely useless at climbing hills. Some manufacturers sell bicycles that have an
off-road switch that delimits the bicycle to faster speeds. Cyclists are allowed to
pedal faster than 15 mph so it’s not possible to prove failure to comply with this law
using a speed camera. If the rider pretends to pedal, then it’s impossible for a
bystander to tell if the power is provided by the rider or the motor.
Under European Union (EU) law, only power-assisted bicycles meeting the pedelec
classification are considered to be pedal cycles. The law stipulates that “the motor
must be activated by the rider’s pedaling effort, and the power must cut out completely
whenever the rider stops pedaling.” To comply with this law, a pedal-assist system
(PAS) can be implemented in two different ways: cutting off power when the rider
stops pedaling or trying to provide power proportional to pedaling effort. PAS is
basically a special controller that decides when it wants to supply the power to the
motor based on your pedaling. The idea is that it senses your pedaling and braking and
supplies power to the motor accordingly, making the bicycle feel like a normal bicycle
that is just a little bit faster. The reason it is bad in practice is because it depends on
software to interpret your movements and takes control away from the rider.
Sometimes the software is bad, and there is a delay between sensing and providing

power. This delay can cause the motor to provide full power when you actually want
to stop or leave you struggling when the traffic light turns green! It’s very difficult to
sense pedaling effort because that would require a torque sensor, which is expensive
and impractical. Most pedicels have only a pedal speed sensor and try to interpret the
rider’s power demand from his or her pedaling speed. This is completely useless
because if the rider stops when going up a hill, the PAS cuts out power and makes it
very difficult for the rider to get started again. PAS makes an electric bicycle feel
uncontrolled, unreliable, and dangerous. The PAS system is very counterintuitive for
people who are used to bicycles or motor bikes. The politicians who passed this law
probably have never used an electric bicycle.
The EU electric bicycle laws create a gray area that blurs the boundaries between
low-powered mopeds and bicycles. With the current EU laws, scientific testing would
be needed to prove that someone is illegally riding a moped without insurance and not
simply riding a bicycle. Police forces don’t do forensic tests unless someone is
actually hurt or killed. Therefore, as long as riders of electric bicycles stay close to
the spirit of the law by riding like cyclists, there are unlikely to be any legal troubles,
even with 2-kW motors. If riders of electric bicycles are caught overtaking cars with
motor bike–like power, then the classification of the electric bicycle might be called
into question. For most riders, reaching motor bike–like power is unlikely considering
the state of the technology. Police and lawmakers probably were waiting for lots of
accidents to happen, such as when there was a crackdown on gopeds and gas scooters.
Since most riders of electric bicycles are law-abiding citizens just trying to commute
to work, there has been no spate of accidents, and EU lawmakers are currently looking
at ways to increase the power limit on electric bicycles and clarify the law.

CHAPTER 2
Your First Electric Bicycle
2.1 Commercial Electric Bicycles
There are many different electric bicycle retailers and distributors. Most retailers
sell direct on eBay, and in addition, there is a thriving secondhand market on eBay as
well. A commercial electric bicycle is a good way to introduce yourself to the world
of electric bicycles (Figure 2.1). It will get you all the components at a good price,
and of course, the bicycle comes ready assembled. This is a good starting point from
which you can learn to upgrade and improve your electric bicycle experience.
If you’re interested in buying a new electric bicycle, you can get something fairly
good in the price range of £300 to £600 or $450 to $900. For a topof-the range
electric motorbike, you can pay any thing up to £5,000/$7,500. The battery is the most
expensive part on an electric bicycle. As a guide, good batteries sell on eBay for
around 2 Wh/£ or 1.3 Wh/$. Motors usually cost around £100 to £200/$150 to $300
depending on power, and controllers can cost £50 to £150/$750 to $2,250 depending
on power. Aim to buy a bicycle for a price equal to its components’ prices.
Secondhand electric bicycles can be found on eBay for as little as £200/$300,
although they may need some work. It’s best to have a bit of experience first before
buying secondhand because you won’t know what good/bad points to look out for.
When buying on eBay, always check the seller’s feedback. If it’s a new electric
bicycle, make sure that the seller has lots of positive feedback for selling electric
bicycles. Positive feedback for selling cheap stuff such as women’s clothing doesn’t
count. Watch a few auctions first to see what the going price is. If there is a retailer
near you, go there and try some of the electric bicycles. If you are buying from an
Internet retailer, you might want to test the seller’s after-sales service by phoning the
company and inquiring about buying a second battery or some spare parts. If the
people are too busy to deal with you, then buy elsewhere.

FIGURE 2.1 A typical commercial electric bicycle.
2.1.1 Buying an Electric Bicycle: The Motor
The two main motor formats on retail electric bicycles are hub motors and chain-
drive motors. It’s probably best to choose the hub motor, which is used in most
electric bicycles, because the motor can be swapped easily to another frame. This will
make maintenance easier. You can upgrade any bicycle with a new hub motor. It just
requires swapping the wheels (see Section 3.1). Chain-driven electric bicycles should
not be ruled out because the frame will have a convenient mounting point for chain-
drive motors that offers more upgrading possibilities for the expert electric bicycle
rider. It’s not an easy task to upgrade a chain-drive motor because you have to equally
tension both the pedal and the motor chains. There are limited things to adjust, and the
“sweet spot” can be difficult to find.
Two types of motors are available: brushed and brushless. These are explained in
detail in Section 4.1.1. Brushed motors are more reliable, simpler, and cheaper, but
brushless motors are usually more efficient. There are fewer things that can go wrong
with a brushed motor, and they are easier to upgrade or overclock. Commercially
available electric bicycles mostly use brushless motors because the increased
efficiency makes the small battery last longer. However, models with brushed motors
are also available.

Try to get the highest powered motor available because most of the commercially
available electric bicycles are quite weak. A difference of just 50 W between two
motors is noticeable, especially when climbing hills. Usually, the faster motors are
larger in size to accommodate heat dissipation. Some of the old Powabykes are quite
good for this reason. I would avoid small geared hub motors because some, such as
the Tongsin and the Tarn, have a bad track record for malfunctions.
Legal maximum power requirements vary among countries, and manufacturers tend
to meet these requirements just by changing the voltage of the battery to make the
bicycle faster or slower. This is quite a blunt approach because it means that motors in
lower-power bicycles are the same as those in higher-power bicycles but are
underclocked to meet legal requirements. In such situations, a simple overclocking can
be achieved by adding more batteries in series. See Section 6.1.5 for a detailed “how
to” about overclocking. Some of the better electric bicycles use higher power motors
but incorporate speed sensors to limit speed to legal requirements. This is good
because these bicycles have much better hill-climbing ability.
2.1.2 Buying an Electric Bicycle: The Battery
When comparing batteries, it is the overall capacity that is important and not
necessarily the volts or amps. Battery capacity is measured in watthours of energy,
where watthours = volts × ampere-hours. The retailer might not state the capacity, so
you may have to do this calculation for yourself.
The battery is often the most expensive part of the package, and a good battery can
make the difference between a good and a “rubbish” bicycle. Try to go for an electric
bicycle with at least a 200-Wh battery pack. Don’t believe any retailer’s range
specification. These are usually ridiculously exaggerated to be three or four times
more than actually will be achieved. There are no standard tests on electric bicycles
yet, and because range varies depending on how much you contribute by pedaling,
retailers basically can claim whatever they want. As a guide, 20 Wh will be needed
per mile with no pedaling. Therefore, a bicycle with a 24-V, 7-Ah battery will have a
range of 8 miles when new without pedaling. As the battery gets older, this range will
decrease. Keep this in mind when buying secondhand, and ask to ride the bicycle
before you buy it. More powerful, faster motors will require slightly more watthours
per mile.
It may be a good idea to buy a couple of spare battery packs with your electric
bicycle to increase the range or for future upgrades. You don’t want to have to pedal
home on an empty battery. Bicycles with a lithium or nickel battery (e.g., NiMh, NiCd)
are much better than lead-acid batteries (SLA). In fact, it is advisable to avoid lead-
acid batteries altogether. SLA batteries weigh twice as much as NiMh batteries and

three times as much as lithium batteries. SLA batteries also have less usable capacity
than lithium or NiMh batteries because of something called the Peukert effect. To take
account of the Peukert effect for electric bicycle use, you need to divide the rated
capacity of an SLA battery by half for comparison to other batteries. Lead batteries
also have half the lifetime of nickel or lithium batteries. Because of these poor
qualities, SLA batteries are several times cheaper than other batteries. With lead acid
batteries you need a 1 kg/2.2 lb of battery per mile traveled. If a retailer’s
advertisement does not state what battery is on the electric bicycle, then it is probably
a lead battery. If you need a folding bicycle for trains, then definitely choose a bicycle
with a lithium battery because it will weigh less.
2.1.3 Buying an Electric Bicycle: The Bicycle
There are two styles of electric bicycles: those that look like bicycles and those that
look like scooters. It is advisable to avoid models that look like scooters to avoid
being pulled over by the police for not having a registration plate on what looks like a
motorcycle. You then will have to explain that your bike is actually a bicycle in
disguise, which is a waste of police time and your time. Not only this, but motorists
will expect you to be going a lot faster, which could result in confusion and get you
beeped at or even involved in a collision. My preference is for a vehicle that is faster
than it looks, so I recommend buying an electric bicycle that looks like a traditional
bicycle. Avoid bicycles with a pedal-assist system (PAS) if you can. Only buy
electric bicycles with throttle control.
Keep in mind that most of the cheap electric bicycles will steadily fall apart on you.
Pedals, mud guards, and racks will fall off; frames will rust quickly; and controllers
will brake. With this in mind, try to buy a sturdy-looking bicycle that has standard
specification components that can be replaced easily.
The extras you should look for in an electric bicycle are a rear carrier, suspension,
disc brakes, stand, a lockable battery, and mud guards. A rear carrier is essential for
panniers to carry extra batteries or luggage. It’s difficult to fit a rear rack to a dual-
suspension bicycle. Suspension is usually a gimmick unless you plan to upgrade later
and ride around at 30 mph. The rear suspension pivots from a single point, but because
there is usually some play in the bearings, the suspended rear section can wobble
sideways. This wobble makes the bicycle unstable at fast speeds or if you place heavy
batteries in the rear rack. Mud guards are essential for commuting in all weather. A
lockable battery compartment is important because thieves will know that these
batteries are worth money. If you need to go on the train or bus with your electric
bicycle, you will need to get a folding bicycle. Folding electric bicycles also come in
handy if you need to retrieve your car after a night out. Folding electric bicycles
usually have smaller wheels and a shorter length, which makes them handle and feel

worse to ride than normal bicycles. There can be a bit of a tradeoff between folded
size and rideability.
Folding electric bicycles are also difficult to upgrade because there is no space for
additional batteries. Front or rear baskets are highly useful for serious commuting
purposes, so don’t dismiss them on looks. Disc brakes are highly desirable on an
electric bicycle because you will be going twice the speed and carrying more weight
than with a regular bicycle. Look for bicycles that have disc brakes or disc brake pegs
for a cheap upgrade later on. Disc brakes stop you a lot faster, and they require almost
no maintenance. Some electric bicycles come with lights powered by the main battery.
This is better because the lights will be brighter and will be harder for thieves and
vandals to steal.
Most electric bicycles for sale are made in China, and they vary in build quality.
The bicycles are bought and sold primarily based on price, and the quality sometimes
suffers as a result. I have seen some shockingly bad-quality electric bicycles. There is
very little quality control in some Chinese factories, and a significant percentage of the
bicycles are shipped broken. A good retailer has to work hard to check the quality of
the bicycles he or she is shipping out to his or her customers. Some retailers don’t
check their products, and it is the customer who ends up doing the quality control by
returning the product.
Electric bicycles are still an emerging market, and at the time of this writing, many
of the retailers were not short of business. I have experienced extremely busy retailers
just not wanting your business unless you want to buy their most profitable product.
After-sales service is sometimes neglected.
If you buy an electric bicycle and find a fault, you should contact the distributor and
ask for a replacement or refund, no matter how insignificant the fault may seem.
Spotting an obvious but minor fault right out the box may be a sign that the overall
build quality is poor and that other faults may soon follow. There are typical problems
with the gears, chain, pedals, and sprockets. It is often not the electric part of the
bicycle but the bicycle itself that is at fault. Even if the bicycle works, sometimes the
build quality may be inferior to a cheaper secondhand alternative. If the build quality
of a new bicycle is poor, you will find that the frame is too heavy, the handling is
poor, and you can’t ride “no hands” because the handlebars may oscillate dangerously
from side to side. This is why it’s good to try before you buy.
2.1.4 Resources for Buying an Electric Bicycle
For reviews on electric bicycles in the United States, visit the endless-sphere.com
forum. This is a mainly U.S.-based forum, but there are contributors from all over the
world. It’s an amazing forum, and you can ask anything about electric bicycles and

will receive an answer. There is an extensive knowledge base, and I have over a
thousand posts on this forum. There are many contributors building their own bicycles
there (www.endless-sphere.com/forums/).
For reviews on electric bicycles in the United Kingdom, visit the pedelecs.co.uk
forum. This is a U.K.-specific forum, so it will focus on U.K. retailers and dealers.
You can ask anything about electric bicycles there. This forum is mainly for
commercial 
electric 
bicycle 
owners, 
but 
there 
are 
a 
few 
self-builds
(www.pedelecs.co.uk/forum/).
A-to-B Magazine features folding bicycles and electric bicycles. It has an electric
bicycle buyers guide (www.atob.org.uk/Electric_Buyers%27_Guide.html).
The following is a list of European and U.K. electric bicycle retailers that you
might want to look at:
• OnBicycle, www.tebsuk.webs.com/
• Powabyke, www.powabyke.com/
• Urban Mover, www.urbanmover.com/
• Wisper, www.wisper.kellsoft.net/
• Emotive Control Systems, www.emotivecontrolsystems.co.uk/
• Cytronex, www.cytronex.com/
• 50 Cycles, www.50cycles.com/
If there is an annual electric bicycle race in your area, you could look at the
bicycles people are using and base your decision on how well they do in the race. The
Tour 
de 
Presteigne 
is 
the 
U.K.’s 
premier 
electric 
bicycle 
race
(www.tourdepresteigne.co.uk/).

CHAPTER 3
Build Your Own Electric Bicycle
3.1 Why Build Your Own Electric Bicycle?
There are several good reasons why you might want to build your own electric
bicycle. Here is a short summary of the main reasons people build their own electric
bicycles.
3.1.1 Quality and Unique Design
By building your own electric bicycle, you can decide what components to use.
This means that you can tailor the bicycle for your needs and desires. You can avoid
the cheap Chinese bicycles and electrify a really good bicycle. Often, a secondhand
bicycle will have a much better frame than the cheaper electric bicycles. If you build
your own electric bicycle, you could choose a chopper-style bicycle, a racer, or a
BMX, something you won’t find from the normal retailers.
3.1.2 Increased Performance
Commercially available bicycles have to follow strict consumer safety legislation,
so few retailers sell high-power electric bicycles. In Europe, most electric bicycles
have around 250 W of peak power and a top speed of 12 to 15 mph unassisted by
pedaling. With these bicycles, hill climbing is impossible, and headwinds will slow
you to a crawl. This is changing, and now more powerful bicycles are coming onto the
market. If you want an electric bicycle that is faster than this, you have to build your
own. If you want a practical bicycle that is a good substitute for a car, then you will
have to build your own. Another route may be to upgrade or modify a commercial
electric bicycle for more power.
3.1.3 Reduced Cost
The profit margin on electric bicycles can be significant, and some bicycles sold for
£1,000/$1,500 can be built for £300/$450, so if you are a do-it-yourselfer, there is
room to save money. If you build your own electric bicycle, you will research the
components and will know that you are getting good value compared with a
commercially available electric bicycle. Building an electric bicycle is easy and fun.
It is also a really neat project that will teach you all sorts of things about electronics,
batteries, and motors. The skills you learn may even get you a job or send you in a
new direction. With the skills that you develop, you will be able to perform
maintenance and fix the bicycle by yourself. This will save you time and money.
3.2 What Do You Want from Your Electric Bicycle?

It is important to have clear and realistic goals before you shell out your hard-
earned cash on an expensive kit. To understand your needs/requirements, you should
ask yourself the questions listed in Table 3.1.
3.2.1 Having Realistic Goals and Expectations
Some newcomers to the electric bicycle arena are filled with unrealistic
expectations of what can be achieved; they seem to want a motorcycle, not a bicycle.
Owing to the construction of a bicycle frame, there is a limit on the amount of weight
that you can put on the bicycle without adversely affecting handling. This naturally
will limit the size and weight of the motors and batteries that you can use. The limit on
extra weight you can carry on a bicycle is probably around 50 kg/100 lb. However,
you probably will find that you are limited by the space available to locate the
batteries before you exceed the weight limit. The maximum range you can expect from
an electric bicycle, fully laden with batteries, is about 100 miles (with current battery
technology). For more range than this, you would have to use a tricycle or trailer to
safely hold all the batteries. However, this will increase the cost of constructing your
electric bicycle significantly and may make it less flexible in certain situations.
Realistically, though, how long do you want to spend in the saddle? You will get
sore after about 1 hour of hard riding. Most electric bicycles are designed for a 20-
mile range. The maximum safe speed on a bicycle frame is open for debate. My top
speed on an electric bicycle has reached 50 mph. However, bicycle frames are not
really built for speeds above 30 mph because they don’t have proper suspension.
Without enhanced suspension, you will be bounced off the saddle when you hit
potholes. Most electric bicycles are designed to do 20 to 25 mph. If you have smooth
roads to ride on, then higher speeds may be acceptable, but traveling at more than 25
mph on a bicycle is very dangerous. Falling off at this speed could be deadly! Wear
motorcycle leather gloves, a full-face helmet, and a heavy, thick jacket and trousers if
you attempt to beat any land speed records. In fact, you always should wear a helmet
and motorcycle gloves on any electric bicycle.

TABLE 3.1 Decision-Making Guide for Building the Electric Bicycle You Want
3.3 Types of Electric Bicycles You Can Build
Here are some suggestions for types of electric bicycles that you can build, along
with photographs showing examples of what each bicycle might look like. For each
electric bicycle, there are some build tips and component options you might want to
choose.
3.3.1 The Long-Range Commuter Electric Bicycle
The long-range commuter electric bicycle is suitable when distances of more than
20 miles are traveled, regularly, that is, such as commuting or if it’s not possible to
recharge at work. For this bicycle, you need a large frame with lots of space for
batteries; for example, a 24-in frame with 26-in wheels is suitable. Figure 3.1 shows a
common long-range commuter electric bicycle. This geometry will provide a large

main triangle and space for a rear rack to mount panniers. You may need to fill all
available space with batteries to get the range required. High-volumetric energy-
density batteries are the best choice for this build. Choose pouch cells or primatic
cells because they stack better than cylindrical cells. A 50-mile range is not difficult
to achieve using this template.
FIGURE 3.1 The do-it-yourself (DIY) electric commuter bicycle. This bicycle has a
small brushed front hub motor and medium-capacity battery pack, along with a rear
carrier, mud guards, powerful lights, and a car horn.
In fact, a larger range could be reached with additional modifications. Mounting of
the battery packs will need special attention. Front suspension forks are useful for
comfort, but rear suspension might hinder the positioning of batteries. Reliability is
key for a long-range commuter electric bicycle, so buy special puncture-resistant tires
and slime inner tubes. Make sure that you follow the guides for good electrical wiring
and connections in Sections 3.4.16 to 3.4.19. The motor and controller size are less
important if only long range is desired and not powerful acceleration. Gear ratios
should be selected for efficiency in the 20 to 25 mph zone. A large front chain ring
should be selected to allow pedaling at this speed. At least one disc brake is essential
for stopping power when you have this much battery weight. Luggage carrying can be
a problem with all the space taken up by batteries. A rucksack and a front basket are
useful if the rest of the bicycle is full of batteries. For a commuter bicycle, powerful
lights, mud guards, and a horn are essential. Waterproofing of the wiring and yourself

will need careful attention.
If you want extreme range, say, for touring, then to further increase the battery-
carrying capability of your frame or bicycle, use either a larger frame such as a
tandem frame or a custom-welded frame, add an extracycle conversion or a trailer, or
move to a tricycle. You could even store a big battery pack in a rucksack, although for
long distances this may not be practical. With one of these modifications, you could
build a bicycle with 2 kWh of energy that would take you to 100-mile range.
Alternatively, consider using a folding electric bicycle that you can take with you part
of the way on a train or bus.
3.3.2 The Folding Commuter Electric Bicycle
If you use the train as part of your commute, then a folding commuter electric
bicycle would meet your requirements. Figures 3.2 and 3.3 show this type. For
crowded commuter trains, you will need a folding frame with either 20- or 16-in
wheel size. The smaller the wheels, the smaller is the size the bicycle will fold down
to. You can get 26-in folding bicycles, but there is nowhere to put the batteries when
the bicycle is folded up. Note that smaller wheels will reduce the ride stability of the
bicycle in traffic. In addition, the wheel base (the distance between the wheels) is
sometimes narrower on folding bicycles. This affects stability compared with bicycles
with larger wheel bases, but the smaller wheel base allows for a more compact folded
bicycle. The most popular choice for folding bicycles is a 20-in wheel size because it
seems to offer the optimal balance between folded size and rideability. The step down
to 16-in wheels doesn’t seem to reduce the folded size much because of the need to
maintain a stable wheel base (length).
If you are tall, then you can make the seating position bearable by extending the seat
to maximum and lowering the handlebars to the minimum. You can make the bicycle
more stable by swapping the handlebars over from a normal bicycle. The folding-type
handlebars do not allow you to put enough of your weight over the front wheels. Since
the space available is limited, a small number of high-power-density batteries are best
for this build. The weight of the batteries is less important than the volume, but both
should be kept to a minimum. The only space for batteries will be on the rear rack, but
most bicycles will not fold up properly if you put a pannier battery there. If you want
the bicycle to fold properly, you will need a rear-rack battery holder (see Section
3.4.14).

FIGURE 3.2 DIY folding electric bicycle. This one has a large rear hub motor
capable of power wheelies, 20-in wheels, and high-discharge-rate batteries. This
bicycle also includes front and rear suspension, dual disc brakes, powerful lights,
power meter, and speedometer.
FIGURE 3.3 Folded up and ready for the train. Sometimes the conversion to electric
can affect the folded size. Here, the large after-market forks increase the size of the
folded package.
Alternatively, you can just accept that the bicycle will not fold up completely. The
fold in the middle is the one that saves the most space because it cuts the length in half.
You may find that folding the handlebars or seat is not necessary. Consider upgrading
from a retail electric bicycle; the dedicated battery compartment in such a bicycle may

be useful. Hub motors are best because they take up the least amount of space because
they are inside the wheel, which would have been unused space otherwise.
The folding bicycle is not a stable platform for high-speed performance, so you
should select components for a maximum speed of 20 mph. High speeds are best left
for larger frames, which are more stable. With small wheels, the gearing is too low
for faster electric bicycle speeds. You will need to replace the front chain ring with
one from a racing bicycle to be able to pedal at speed. The range is less important
because you only need to ride to and from the train station. A high-torque motor might
allow you to do power wheelies in a frame such as this with the batteries all on the
rear rack. Disc brakes and suspension maybe less important if the bicycle is slower
and lighter in weight. V-brakes may be sufficient.
Never bring dangerous stuff onto a train—that is, no gas, no unsafe batteries, and no
compressed gases for fuel cells. Keep the wiring neat, or someone might confuse your
DIY electric bicycle for a bomb. Watch out for wires that cross the folding portions of
the frame, and make sure that wires are not trapped or pulled by the folding
movements. Remember to switch off the bicycle before you fold it! Don’t obstruct the
aisle of the train with your bicycle, and allow other passengers to get off first before
you unfold your bicycle. The folding mechanisms gradually loosen up, and this creates
instability while riding, so you should check the folding mechanism regularly. Also
check the suspension, headset, and battery mountings regularly for loose bolts.
3.3.3 High-Power Electric Bicycle
If you just want a really cool electric bicycle that you will enjoy riding or playing
with, then this bicycle is for you. You can choose any style of frame, including BMX,
folding, mountain bicycle, racer, beach cruiser, or even a kiddie bicycle with
stabilizers! See Figures 3.4 and 3.5 for ideas.
Bicycles with small wheel sizes are great fun for doing burnouts or power
wheelies. Rear-wheel drive is best for safety, performance, and fun. If you want to do
burnouts, put all the battery weight and your body weight away from the powered
wheel. This will mean leaning forward on a rear-wheel-drive electric bicycle. It is
acceptable to use slick tires and muddy grass to get the burnout started. If you have
skill, you can do “donuts,” where you use the front brakes and rear motor in
combination to tear up mud and carve a donut shape in the ground. If you want to do
wheelies, put the weight over the rear wheel and lean back while applying full power.
It’s possible to build two-wheel-drive electric bicycles for really challenging off-road
riding.

FIGURE 3.4 High-power racing electric bicycle. This model has a medium-capacity
8C-rated battery pack, a powerful overclocked motor, an air-cooled controller, slick
tires, and areodynamic dropped handlebars.
FIGURE 3.5 A high-power electric bicycle for stunts and power wheelies. This
model has a small number of lightweight Lipo battery packs and dual chain-drive

motors for high power.
For a high-power build, you will need to buy high-power-density batteries. Cost
can be kept down if you sacrifice range. High-rate Lipo or LiFePO4 batteries are the
best choices. Since the size of the battery pack will be small, you can fit it on any
bicycle frame you desire, and positioning won’t be a problem. Frames with a large
main triangle are best because they provide a low center of gravity and central weight
distribution. It may be possible to hide the battery pack in cycle bags for an added
stealth effect.
A high-power motor is important, and a high-power controller is even more
important. Look into overclocking to reduce the cost of the kit. At least one disc brake
is essential for breaking at high speeds—probably two is best. Get a frame with front
and rear disc brake mounts and a motor with disc brake mounts too. Torque arms on
the motor mounts are important for safety and frame longevity. You can select the
motor gear ratio to meet your requirements, low gearing for acceleration and high
gearing for high top speed.
3.3.4 High Power and Long Range
You might want this bicycle if you really want to push the limits of what’s possible
with an electric bicycle for racing. Figure 3.6 shows this design. It might be a good
idea to pass a motorcycle test or register this electric bicycle as a motor vehicle if
your country requires it. The next option is to go all out and build an electric
motorcycle that has both power and range.
FIGURE 3.6 High power and range. This design has dual disc brakes, suspension, an
air-cooled controller, and a large 2C-rated battery pack. Lights and horn are hidden in
the basket. Always wear a helmet when riding.

As you increase the range, the weight of the battery pack will increase. A large and
heavy battery pack will require better suspension and cause complications with
mounting and positioning of the batteries. Braking will become even more critical, and
disc brakes are essential front and back. With a large-capacity battery pack, the cost
per ampere-hour comes down for having high power because you can get away with
buying lower-discharge-rated 2C to 4C cells, for example, LiFePO4, Lipo, or NiMh.
The discharge rating of a battery shows you how fast you can use the stored energy and
is measured in multiples of capacity (e.g., 3C). This is explained later in Section
3.4.4.
A large rear rack, main triangle, and panniers will be important for carrying
batteries. Heat dissipation in the controller and motor will be important during
sustained hard riding, and care must be taken when overclocking to avoid damaging
components. Have the controller open to the moving air, and consider adding extra
heat sinks for added cooling if overheating is a problem.
3.3.5 Motored Bicycles
Incidentally, you can put a gas-powered motor on a bicycle. These are called
motored bicycles and are different from electric bicycles. The best motored bicycle
forum can be found at www.motoredbicycles.com/ if you’re interested. I built a
motored bicycle (Figure 3.7), but it didn’t feel as good as an electric bicycle. My 50-
cc motorized bicycle could only reach top speeds of 25 mph going downhill, which
was way less than my electric bicycle. The motorized bicycle had a two-stroke
engine, and the noise it made was tremendous compared with the actual power the
motor provided. As a result, I really didn’t get the whole effortless electric vehicle
(EV) grin feeling that I do with my electric bicycle. I felt like I was riding a lawn
mower. In addition, the whole idea of pedaling a gas engine seemed weird. I imagine I
got several strange looks. I like my bicycles to be surprising in a good way and not to
disappoint.
There is also a whole different set of laws governing the use of gas engines on
bicycles, and you could fall foul of these laws, landing you in some serious deep
water depending on where you live. I was tailed by police for a block when I was
riding my motored bicycle. They probably didn’t know what to make of it, and so
luckily I didn’t get pulled over. I only rode it about three times in total before I sold it.
A silent electric motor can be hidden, but a noisy gas engine can’t. The motorized
bicycles usually aren’t as green as they could be either. Gas consumption is usually
100 to 200 mpg, which is actually closer to cars than to electric bicycles. This is
about 300 Wh/mile or 15 times more energy than an electric bicycle. On the positive
side, a motored bicycle weighs less than a battery-powered electric bicycle and has a
much longer range. Some people have built nice-looking hybrid bicycles using a gas-

powered engine to drive the back wheel and an electric motor for the front wheel.
FIGURE 3.7 A motored bicycle kit with a two-stroke 50-cc gas engine. It felt like
riding a lawn mower.
Most of the motored bicycle kits are not free wheeled; that is, the motor is engaged
all the time. You start the motor by pedaling the bicycle up to speed and then dumping
the clutch and twisting the throttle at the same time. Once the motor warms up, you can
turn off the choke, and then you can just sit tight and motor away. There is only one
gear, which is really limiting because engines are only good at a specific speed. With
more gears, it probably could reach faster speeds. When you reach a traffic light, you
can pull the clutch in and keep the engine ticking over with the throttle. You don’t have
to bump start the motor again; it will almost pull away from the stop unaided.
3.4 How to Build Your Own Electric Bicycle from a Hub Motor Kit
Building an electric bicycle is a lot like building a computer: You buy the
components you want, and then you fit them together. The components are in kit form
and usually fit together fairly easily. Hub motors are the easiest and most common
method of motor attachment, so I will focus on hub motors. Building an electric
bicycle requires a few more skills than building a computer, though, because soldering
is often needed.
The hardest part about building an electric bicycle is making sure that all the
components are compatible with each other. When buying a kit for the first time, it is

best to buy the controller and motor from the same vendor because these are the
components that are the most complicated to match. Phone the vendor and explain that
this is your first electric bicycle kit, and make sure that the parts are compatible. This
is an opportunity to check to see if the vendor is a good company with which to do
business.
Check if the vendor has any deals or advice on batteries, etc. Keep in mind the type
of bicycle on which you are going to be using the kit, and what you are going to use
your electric bicycle for. Remember also to buy a hand throttle; hand throttles are
cheap and may get thrown in as part of the deal. Most hub motors come already built
inside a wheel. This makes it easier for you. Just make sure that you order the correct
size wheel for your bicycle. Batteries are not too difficult to match with controllers.
You just have to buy the right voltage battery for your controller and a battery with
high enough peak current to meet the controller’s peak demand.
The order of connection follows this guideline: Everything leads to the controller
(see Figures 3.9 and 3.10 later in this chapter). If you bought the controller and motor
together, then they should fit to each other easily without having to change any
connections. The connections are color coded to make it even easier. The same
applies to the hand throttle. If it came with the controller, then connection will be easy.
The battery may need the plugs changed or new ones installed if you bought it from a
different vendor. You will need to install connectors on the battery and controller that
mate. Be careful when installing the battery plugs to keep positive and negative in the
right order. If you reverse positive and negative and plug them into your controller, the
controller will blow up. To make sure that you get the polarity right, the manufacturer
usually color-codes the connectors red for positive and black for negative. The colors
will be on the wire’s insulation or the plugs. If there is any confusion over wiring,
contact the manufacturer or see Section 5.1.1 for polarity detection using a multimeter.
When you buy batteries, buy the battery charger from the same vendor, and make
sure that the batteries and charger are compatible. You also may have to wire up the
battery charger and charger plug for the batteries (see Section 5.1.1); if there is any
confusion, contact the vendor. When you plug the charger into the battery, positive
goes to positive and negative goes to negative.
The following instructions guide you step by step in building your own electric
bicycle:
• Choose the bicycle you want to convert.
• Decide if you want front- or rear-wheel drive, and buy the kit.
• Take off the old wheel.
• Prepare the new wheel for installation. Put a tire and inner tube on and inflate.

If the hub motor was not already built into the wheel, then read Section 3.4.15,
and lace it into the rim with spokes.
FIGURE 3.8 Using a car jack to increase the distance between the forks to fit a hub
motor.
• Install the new electric hub wheel. Sometimes the forks or dropouts on a
bicycle are too narrow to fit a hub motor, especially if it has gear cassettes or
disc brakes attached. Most rear dropout sizes are 125 mm/5 in, and most front
forks are 100 mm/4 in wide, but some rear hub motors are 135 mm/5.4 in and
don’t fit in standard bicycles. The solution is to use brute force and bend them. A
frame can be bent easily by around 10 mm/0.4 in. A car jack works well for
bending bicycle frames (Figure 3.8). Do it slowly in gradual steps, and measure
the distance gained between each step. Steel frames are better for this purpose
because aluminum can snap. Carbon fiber frames are vulnerable to breaking even
without a motor, so never use them. Frames with suspension can be bent slightly
too, but this will have repercussions for the suspension because the pistons will
no longer be parallel. Some suspension forks cause a fitting problem for hub
motors if they have the axle holder in the middle of the fork. This will force you
to use spacers to prevent the hub from touching the forks. The spacers will take
up too much axle thread and prevent the axle nuts getting a good grip. This will

leave the axle unsafe and the wheel too loose. All metal frames can be bent to
accommodate a hub motor. You may need to use washers as axle spacers to
position the wheel correctly inside the dropouts so that the brake calipers are in
the right place for the wheel.
• Install torque arms if you are worried about the dropouts breaking. The
dropouts might be vulnerable if you are using regenerative braking, if you are
using a front hub motor, or if you are using an aluminum frame (see Section
6.2.2).
• Secure the axle nuts. Use a 6-in-long spanner, and turn the nut as hard as you
can by hand. The threads on the nut will strip before those on the axle, so don’t
worry about damaging the axle. Hub motors usually use fine-metric-thread bolts
that can be quite difficult to find, so make sure that you have these sent with the
kit. Fine-metric-thread bolts can be found in some specialist hardware stores
(e.g., Tool Master). The axles on hub motors are very solid. If you find a nut that
almost fits, it can be forced on, and the thread on the axle will cut a new thread
into the nut, although it’s much better just to have the right bolts to begin with.
• Decide how your batteries are going to be stored on the bicycle. See Sections
3.4.12 to 3.4.14 for help. Install the batteries on the frame, and make sure that
they are secure and padded to protect against damage. Lock them to the frame to
protect against theft.
• Decide where to place your controller on the bicycle (see Section 3.4.10 for
help).
• Make all the wiring connections, as shown in Figures 3.9 and 3.10 depending
on which type of motor you have. For tips on wiring connections, see Sections
3.4.16 and 6.2.4 for tidy wiring; for tips on soldering, see Section 3.4.7. The
controller connections should all be labeled. You may not need all the
connections. There may be two connections for brake cutoff switches consisting
of three wires, a three-wire voltage display cable, a two-wire brake light, and a
two-wire charger connection cable. These are for scooter style bikes and can all
be ignored.
• Cable tie all the wiring to the frame. Make sure that the wires are splash-proof
to some extent. Water will not kill them, but it is best to be safe. The throttle
cable is the most important one to protect from water. Water in the throttle cable
can cause a loss of speed control, sending your motor into warp speed. This is
why it’s important to have an emergency cutoff switch, or at least a power wire
that you can pull out to stop the bicycle. Be careful using tape for waterproofing
the throttle wires; it can collect water and have the opposite effect to what you
intend.

• Wire up the battery plug and battery charger port (see Section 5.1.1 for help).
• Check everything over before giving it a test ride. Make sure that the brakes are
set right and can stop you quickly.
FIGURE 3.9 Brushed motor connection scheme. Some of these brushed controllers
don’t have an on/off switch; instead, they have wires that would plug into the ignition
switch on a commercially available bicycle. Just take off the connector, and install an
on/off switch there. The controller may not come with instructions so you have to
figure this out for yourself.

FIGURE 3.10 Brushless motor connection scheme. The connectors on the controller
are usually all labeled.
3.4.1 Build Your Own Electric Bicycle: Kit Resources
For advice on building electric bicycles, visit the endless-sphere.com forum. There
is a wide knowledge base there, and you should easily get an answer to all your
questions. There are many contributors building their own electric bicycles, including
a gallery of DIY electric bicycles (www.endless-sphere.com/forums/).
Electric Bicycle Kit Suppliers
• http://ebicycles.ca/
• Solar BBQ, Island Earth (Australian): www.ebicycle.biz/
• Team Hybrid: www.teamhybrid.co.uk/
• AmpedBicycles: http://ampedbicycles.com/
• www.electricrider.com
• www.Itselectric.com

• www.poweridestore.com
• www.emtb.com.au/
• www.electricscooterparts.com
• www.E-Bicyclekit.com
• www.Cycle9.com
• www.stealthelectricbicycles.com.au
3.4.2 Electric Bicycle Builders Gallery
Figures 3.11 through 3.14 show what’s possible when you build an electric bicycle
with a little skill and imagination.
FIGURE 3.11 Doctor Bass’s 2-kWh full-suspension mountain bicycle with a 100-
mile range.

FIGURE 3.12 Josh’s, aka j-vtol’s, creation with a nice looking ABS plastic battery
box, disc brakes, and crystalyte kit.

FIGURE 3.13 The e-bomber by Jim Winterle. San Antonio, Texas.

FIGURE 3.14 Bonzo’s ammo box build with headway cells capable of 40 mph.
3.4.3 What Determines Power and Speed?
Some people just buy the biggest motor and expect a high top speed, but there is a
way to calculate what speed you will get. With more power, you will travel faster, but
there are several factors that determine the amount of power that you put to the
pavement. Motors are made from coils of wire wrapped around a stator and
surrounded by magnets. The number of coils and thickness of this wire will determine
the speed and power limits of the motor. If the motor coils are too thin and you attempt
to pull too many amperes through them, then they will get hot. Eventually, the heat will
build up, and the insulation will melt or the magnets will fail. It is for this reason that
motors have power ratings. Each motor will have a continuous and peak power rating.
The peak power on most electric bicycle motors is quite high, but the heat will build
up if the continuous power is exceeded. These specifications should be available from
the manufacturer, and it is best not to exceed them.
The top speed of the motor will be determined by the number of coils of wire and
the voltage of the battery that’s used to turn it. Motors of the same power can come in
different models, where the number of coils will determine whether the motor is
designed for high torque or speed. Often a speed/volt specification is used to show
what motor speed to expect at no load from a certain voltage of battery. Figure 3.15
shows a hub motor that produces 1,000 W of peak power.

FIGURE 3.15 A cheap but reliable 250-W brushed hub motor, good for 1,000 W
peak.
The no-load speed is the top speed of the bicycle. The speed it will reach under no
load with its wheel off the ground spinning freely. When you apply a load to a motor
and make it do some work, it will use more power to maintain its speed. This means
that more amperes are used to provide torque in the motor. In a motor, more amperes
will give you more torque, and more volts will give you more speed. Both the
amperes and the volts applied to the motor determine the power. The load is created
by your weight, the weight of the bicycle, wind resistance, hills, and trying to
accelerate. Using an online calculator for the aerodynamics of bicycles, we can
calculate the power needed to fight wind resistance (Figure 3.16). This can be used as
a guide for selecting the right motor for you to reach a desired speed. As you start to
demand more power from your batteries, their voltage will drop slightly; this is called
voltage sag. When you draw gently from good batteries, the voltage sag will not be
noticeable. However, if your batteries don’t have a high enough discharge rate for the
load, then the voltage sag will slow you down.
In the simplest motors—brushed motors—the amount of amperes that the motor
draws will be proportional to the difference between the voltage applied to the motor
and the motor’s back electromotive force (EMF). The back EMF is generated from the

speed of the motor and the speed/volt specification of the motor. In short, if you are
going slowly and suddenly turn the throttle wide open, you will be drawing a lot of
amperes, but if you slowly build up speed, the voltage difference and ampere use will
be less. This is how a brushed motor controller controls the speed of the motor—by
altering the voltage supplied. For a detailed description of how brushless motors
work, see Section 4.1.1. Thus your speed could be determined by the motor, the
batteries, or the controller. For how to determine which factor is most limiting, see
Section 6.1.4 on overclocking. You have to make sure that the motor, batteries, and
controller that you buy are all rated for the power that you want and all rated for the
same power. It’s no good buying expensive heavy components for their capabilities if
you’re not going to use them fully. See Chapter 4 for more information on components.
FIGURE 3.16 Constant-speed versus power graph (estimated) for a typical mountain
bicycle–style electric bicycle on flat ground with no wind. You can use this graph to
estimate the power requirement to reach a desired speed. The graph assumes constant
speed, so in reality you would need a long road to reach this top speed. It may be
better to have more power to allow for acceleration up to the desired speed.
3.4.4 What Determines Capacity and Range?
The capacity and discharge rate of your battery pack will determine how far you
can go and how fast you can go safely without damaging your battery (Figure 3.17).
Therefore, you need to carefully and conservatively consider two things when
deciding the size of your pack. Power consumption on an electric bicycle varies
depending on how fast you go and how much you pedal. A good rule of thumb would
be 20 Wh/mile and 1 extra Wh/mile for every extra mile per hour of speed you do.

FIGURE 3.17 Lots of nickel–metal hydride (NiMh) cells. Rating at 7 Ah and 2C
peak discharge means that these batteries are good for only 14 amperes.
• Normal cyclist baseline speed is around 14 mph.
• 15 Wh/mile for slow speeds (15 to 20 mph) and normal pedaling.
• 20 to 25 Wh/mile for average speeds (20 to 25 mph) and relaxed pedaling.
• 30 Wh/mile for fast speeds (>30 mph) and no pedaling.
• At high acceleration and 30 mph, pedaling makes very little difference to the
speed.
Battery Sizing Example: Pack Capacity
Let’s assume that your commute is 5 miles, you want to be able to go 30 mph, and
you don’t want to have to charge at work. From Figure 3.18, your energy consumption
will be 35 Wh/mile. Therefore, your commute would need a battery pack size of at
least
35 Wh/mile × 10 miles = 350 Wh
Battery Sizing Example: Pack Discharge Rate
You must size your pack so that it’s big enough to cope with both peak and

continuous power demands and not just the range you need. The discharge rating of a
battery shows you how fast you can use the stored energy and is measured in multiples
of capacity (e.g, 3C). This is the multiple of the capacity of the pack, in amperes, that
you can safely draw on to make power. The units for C rate don’t make sense from a
scientific point of view, but the notation has stuck around because it’s an easy
measurement to use. Using Figure 3.16, you can see that you need 900 W to travel at
30 mph. Therefore, to travel at 30 mph, you either need a 350-Wh capacity battery
pack rated for 3C continuous discharge rate or a 900-Wh capacity battery pack rated
for 1C continuous discharge. The C rating can apply equally to amperes and ampere-
hours as it does with watts and watthours. A 2C discharge of a 10 Ah battery pack
will be 20 amperes. Batteries usually will have a continuous and peak discharge
rating, and if you stay inside these limits, then the batteries will last the number of
cycles that are claimed by the manufacturer, and you will be very happy. If you exceed
these limits, however, you will receive fewer battery cycles from your big battery
investment. The biggest mistake people make when building an electric bicycle is not
buying a powerful enough battery pack for the given discharge rate and then wrecking
it because they “ragged it” without knowing. This is why it’s so important to get a
power meter. Also, if you notice that your bicycle lights go dim when you accelerate,
then you are pulling too much from your batteries. Depth of discharge and speed of
recharge also will affect battery life.
FIGURE 3.18 Battery depletion (estimated) at different speeds for a typical mountain
bicycle–style electric bicycle on flat ground with no tail- or headwinds.

Other Things to Consider When Sizing a Battery Pack
There also will be a recommended C rate for charging a battery. Therefore, another
reason for buying a large battery pack is so you can charge at a faster rate. Maybe you
want to go out in the evening or go shopping right after your long commute back from
work. With a larger battery pack, you can put energy into your battery at a faster rate.
Batteries with low C rates like to be charged slowly, and this is relative to their size.
Having a larger battery pack generally will make your cells lasts longer.
Next, you need to take into account such things as cold winter temperatures and
pack aging, which will reduce the capacity of your batteries. To be conservative, you
should at least add an extra half capacity to cope with such situations. If you buy a
higher-capacity battery pack, then you don’t need such high-discharge-rated cells, so it
may be best value for the money to buy a 900-Wh 1C pack for the job rather than a
350-Wh 3C pack. The disadvantage will be that the 900-Wh pack will weigh more.
The main use for fast-discharge-rated packs is to save weight. Then you can safely
drive fast and for much longer, up to 26 miles at 30 mph. This kind of electric bicycle
is a seriously awesome kit that is much better than any cheap Chinese eBay bicycle,
and the only way you can currently get one is to build it yourself. However, batteries
are expensive. A good, lightweight 900-Wh battery pack currently costs about £400 to
£500/$600 to $750. Battery pack purchase is a personal decision for the owner, and it
pays to know all the facts. Think of the big battery pack as an investment. Each time
you cycle to town for a booze-up, you are saving a round-trip taxi fare. You just need
to do that 20 times, and your investment has paid off! (Disclaimer: This author does
not condone cycling under the influence of alcohol.)
3.4.5 Weight Distribution in Electric Bicycles
With heavy batteries and motors, it is not always possible to distribute the weight
evenly. Often, the best that you can do is to balance the weight between the front and
back of the bicycle. If the bicycle’s weight is out of balance, then some weird riding
characteristics can result. It’s important to be aware of these and avoid them. For
example, putting all the weight out back on an electric bicycle can result in dangerous
front-wheel skids when braking in the wet and going downhill. Front-wheel skidding
is very scary. Watch out for this problem if you have a rear hub motor and lots of
batteries in rear pannier bags. Use your rear brake to stop you, and hopefully it is a
disc brake.
If you do find yourself in a front-wheel skid, you have to release the front brake and
then reapply it once the skid has subsided in much the same way that an automatic
braking system (ABS) in a car works. Keep the bicycle going straight while you are
doing this. Front hub motors also can create front-wheel skids but only through wheel

spinning in wet conditions going uphill. Wheel spinning is not really a problem and is
easily controllable. Too much forward weight distribution can cause a different
problem—sore hands. With all the weight up front, the tires will be weighed down
and provide less bounce. This magnifies road surface bumps and gives the rider sore
hands even on bicycles with front suspension.
The ideal weight distribution in electric bicycles is low down and evenly placed
across the bicycle. It is for this reason that the Tidal Force electric bicycle has its
battery in a special front hub–mounted case, which makes the bicycle look like it has
two hub motors. This keeps the weight low and balances it out between the front and
the back. The disadvantage of hub-mounted motors and batteries is that they are not
supported by the suspension—they are unsprung weight. Unsprung weight increases
wear on the bicycle and can result in such problems as broken spokes or rim damage.
Other electric bicycle manufacturers try to spread the load out by putting the cells
inside the frame, but this has the negative side effect of difficult maintenance access.
Keeping the weight as low as possible is important for handling, especially when
jumping curbs or doing wheelies. A top-heavy bicycle will feel more unstable and
will require more effort when turning. A novice rider will weave side to side when
riding a top-heavy bicycle. Again, be careful who you let test drive your bicycle—
some people will not expect a bicycle to weigh so much and will drop it.
3.4.6 Brakes on Electric Bicycles
Brakes on fast electric bicycles get used a lot more than those on slow-moving
regular bicycles, and therefore, it is important to make sure that the brakes are strong
and reliable. They could save your life! A bicycle with good brakes also will be more
fun to ride because you will feel more in control, and you will feel safe in applying
full power of the electric motor (and skidding is fun).
Disc brakes are the best types of brakes because they are strong and maintenance-
free. An electric bicycle simply must have at least one disc brake and preferably two.
Hydraulic disc brakes are slightly better than cable disc brakes on the rear where you
have long and winding cable runs. Long bendy brake cables will have lots of
sponginess to them, which is cured by changing to hydraulics. Rim brakes can be
strong when adjusted properly, but they require lots of readjustments because of the
force involved in stopping a fast bicycle. Readjustments may be needed as often as
once a week. This can be a real pain if the brakes are hard to reach, under a pannier
bag full of batteries. Rim brake pads also will get used up really fast on a powerful
electric bicycle (as often as once every few months). In a wet environment, rim brakes
will be next to useless, and if your wheel is slightly buckled, then rim brakes will rub
and cause drag. With rim brakes, your wheel has to be exactly centered with no
sideways wobble, no vertical wobble, no egged rim, and proper dishing. If any of

these defects exist, rim braking will be weak, and you may be able to brake effectively
only on a small fraction of the total circumference of the wheel, causing inconsistent
braking force. With disc brakes, this stuff doesn’t matter, and this is much better for
people who have to lace their own hub motor because it’s very difficult to get it
exactly right.
Unfortunately, on some big rear hub motors, such as the X5, there isn’t enough space
on the axle to fit a disc brake rotor without some difficult modifications. The same is
true for chain-drive bicycles with rear-wheel sprockets; these usually take the space
where the rear disc rotor would sit. Some hub motors have a disc brake option.
Definitely choose one of these, if available, even if you don’t use the disc brake
capability right away because you may find yourself wanting the option later. With
electric bicycles, another type of brake is available—the electromagnet brake. This is
discussed in Section 6.2.1.
On any type of bicycle, usually the front brake is the most important brake because
all the weight of the bicycle is transferred to the front during braking. In fact, if the
braking force is strong enough, the back wheel may lift off the ground. For fast
braking, therefore, it is advisable to have a front disc brake and to put the hub motor
on the back. With a rear hub motor and batteries in the back, all the weight is on the
back, which keeps the back wheel on the ground and allows for more braking options
on the rear wheel. With some big rear hub motors, a disc brake may not fit, so braking
is limited to a rim brake, which is useless in wet conditions. The disadvantage of this
setup is that in wet conditions, the maximum forward stopping power can cause front-
wheel skids when going downhill. Because the rear rim brake is insufficient, the rider
uses the front brake to stop, and the lack of weight over the front wheel causes it to
skid. This is why it is important to have disc brakes on both the front and the back
when using a fast and heavy electric bicycle. It also shows the importance of slowing
down when it’s wet on the roads! The opposite setup is to have a front hub motor and
a rear disc brake. With this setup, braking in the wet during downhill travel is safer,
but stopping times in general are increased.
3.4.7 Step-by-Step Guide to Soldering
Soldering is the key skill to master when building an electric bicycle. There is no
substitute. Soldering is not difficult, but it does at times seem to require four hands
with which to hold the two wires to be soldered, the soldering iron, and the solder! If
you are not good at soldering now, by the end of building your first electric bicycle,
you will be an expert. If you have never soldered before, don’t worry—it’s easy. Go
out and buy a soldering kit, and have a go. It’s possible to learn the art of soldering in
a few hours, and once you have learned it, you will never forget—it’s just like riding a
bicycle.

Soldering Made Easy
• Start with two pieces of thin wire, a hot soldering iron, and some solder.
• Wire-strip the tips of both wires to be soldered.
• Touch the iron to solder to melt a blob of solder onto the iron. The iron is now
said to be tinned.
• Touch the wire to be soldered to the tinned soldering iron to heat it up. A thin
wire should heat up in seconds. The liquid solder on the iron is very good at heat
transfer.
• Tin the wire by touching it to solder while it is receiving heat from the iron. The
solder should flow quickly to all hot parts of the wire (three things must touch).
• Tin the other wire to be joined by repeating the two steps immediately above.
• Touch the two wires together, and heat them with the iron to melt the two tinned
coatings into each other (three things must touch).
• Hold the wires together for a few seconds, and wait for the solder to set.
Tips for Soldering Electric Bicycle Stuff
Electric bicycles use big, high-current wires that are difficult to solder because they
dissipate heat so quickly. To solder these big wires. you will need a big (high-power)
soldering iron. I recommend a 50-W iron for big wires. The best soldering irons have
a power-selection dial so that you can turn them down so as not to overheat delicate
stuff. Avoid soldering gun–style irons that are not designed for continuous use; they
break too easily.
If you are stuck with a 35-W iron, in a pinch, you can still solder high-current wires
if you follow this method:
Wire-strip the tips of both wires, and then pinch a few of the copper strands to the
side.
Because you have reduced the number of wire strands, the heat dissipation will be
less, and you should be able to solder the selected wires together.
You then will have the two wires connected by a few strands but with lots of loose
strands around the outside. You then repeat the process with the other strands until all
the strands are connected in a single connection. Or, if you’re lazy, you can just tape
the other wires together and hope that the connection is good enough with all the wires
touching.
Tips for Soldering Multiple Wires
If your soldering iron came with a holder, you can put the iron into the holder

backwards, and this will free up one of your hands for holding other things, such as
solder and tricky wires. Alternatively, you can rest the iron on the edge of a table and
with a weight on top of the handle to hold it in place while you solder.
Tips for Joining Multiple Wires
Soldering more than two wires together is difficult in the extreme because as you
solder the third wire, the first wire connection can melt and fall off. To help with
multiple-wire connections, you can use terminal blocks. Solder the wires together in
pairs so that their ends are pointing in the same direction. Then use the terminal block
to join these two soldered wires together with other wires. In this way, you can
connect four wires with one terminal block, six wires with two terminal blocks, eight
wires with three terminal blocks, etc. This technique is really good for running the
bicycle lights off the main battery because it allows you to connect a switch, front
light, rear light, battery power indicator, and other accessories very easily and neatly
(Figure 3.19). See Section 6.2.4.

FIGURE 3.19 Using terminal blocks to connect many wires is easier than soldering
them. Terminal blocks can be used for connecting sets of lights, switches, and a horn.
3.4.8 Mounting and Securing Things to the Electric Bicycle
Mounting and securing things to your electric bicycle is important. This was the
activity that I found myself spending the most time doing. The electrical parts of the
bicycle are the most reliable; it’s the mechanical parts that experience wear and are
likely to fail first. What follows are descriptions of some of the methods I have found
helpful when building electric bicycles. Table 3.2 lists the basic tools you will need
to accomplish these tasks.

TABLE 3.2 Tool Requirements for Electric Bicycle Building
Padlocks and Chains
Padlocks are good for three reasons: They are secure from theft; they are solid and
don’t break under vibrations caused by riding; and they are easy to lock and unlock. A
padlock and a chain are good for holding batteries on your electric bicycle (Figure
3.20). However, they can be a bit bulky sometimes, and too many of them make it look
to thieves like your electric bicycle is valuable. Use black duct tape over the locks
and chain for more stealth.
Drilling and Tapping
Drilling and tapping are very useful for making brackets for disc brakes or battery
holders. For adding rear disc brakes to a non–disc brake frame, I have used 10-mm-
thick aluminum tool plate, drilled and tapped to hold the brake caliper (see Section
6.2.2). For securing batteries, I have drilled and tapped angle iron onto military
surplus ammunition boxes to hold them (see Section 3.4.14 and Figure 3.20). The drill
and tap method is used when there is either no room to fit a nut on the other side, when
it has to be flush with the surface, or when the presence of a nut would make the union
less secure. This method is used commercially to secure lockable boxes to rear racks
so that a thief can’t just undo the bolts from the other side. On disc brakes, it is used
because there is no room for a nut because the disc is flush with the surface of the
bracket.

FIGURE 3.20 Battery pack held on with padlocks and tapped holes.
Cable Ties and Reusable Cable Ties
Cable ties seem to be what’s holding most DIY electric bicycles together these
days! Cable ties come in lots of sizes, colors, and quality! They are mainly good for
tying back cables, though, and will break if used to secure batteries. You can use them
to hold your controller, but it’s best to have something a little more secure against
thieves. Sharp edges on things will snap them. Cable ties are made of nylon, and they
degrade slowly over time, becoming brittle. Reusable cable ties are best used for
securing luggage-like D-locks onto the bicycle frame. The release mechanism makes
them less flexible for use and less secure. There are metal cable ties, but these aren’t
as strong as they sound, and the locking mechanism is prone to slipping.
Duct Tape
This stuff is great! I have it wrapped all over my electric bicycle. Thick, heavy tape
is great for holding lightweight, soft things together or for covering surfaces or
waterproofing. It is also good for hiding unsightly wires.
Hose Clips
The next step up from metal cable ties is hose clips. These can be opened and
wrapped round things to make strong connections. These are good for DIY torque

wrenches using 10-mm spanners.
Coil Springs
Springs are good for joining things that need a bit of elasticity. Use steel springs that
have the ends looped round. The loop is used to secure the spring to an object or to
another spring using nuts and bolts. If you wrap the spring around something that needs
to be tied and then bolt the loops together, it makes a very strong tie that also has some
elasticity. This type of setup can be used to hold batteries to racks.
Welding
If you know someone with an arc welder, then the sky’s the limit in terms of battery
mounting and frame design. An arc welder is a great tool to have if you have a steel
bicycle frame and steel ammunition boxes holding your batteries. To prevent melting
holes in stuff by accident it is helpful to clamp a third piece of metal underneath the
two pieces you are joining. This way when you melt the two metals together the piece
underneath will collect the melt and stop it from escaping and leaving a hole.
3.4.9 Choosing a Bicycle Frame
With electric motors you have plenty of power, so there is no need to worry about
making the lightest possible bicycle. Bicycle weight doesn’t really affect speed at all.
Weight may affect acceleration a bit, but the weight of the rider usually far exceeds the
weight of the bicycle, so it’s not worth worrying about. Instead, you should
concentrate on getting a frame that is solid, reliable, and built like rock. It’s going to
take a lot of punishment. A steel frame is better than an aluminum frame when you use
a powerful hub motor because the entire driving force of the motor acts on the axle
groove in the dropouts. This does not occur in a regular bicycle, and therefore, regular
bicycle frames are not really designed to cope with such force. In some aluminum
frames, the axle of the hub motor can grind away at the dropouts; some hub motors
even have been known to completely eat away the dropouts and spin inside them.
When this happens, it is bad because all the wires in the motor get wrapped around the
axle and ripped out of their mounting points. This can be difficult to repair.
Ideally, there should be no obvious visible signs that your bicycle is an electric
bicycle that is hiding £500/$750 worth of batteries and £400/$600 worth of fast motor
and controller! This is a tall order, and the best starting point is a large bicycle frame
with lots of space to put stuff. A big triangle in the frame is very useful, so avoid
frames with the lower “female” crossbar. The suspension in dual-suspension mountain
bicycles will get in the way, so it’s best to avoid these too. If you choose a frame with
20-in wheels, then you may find that the gearing of the pedals is set up for speeds of
only up to 15 mph. If you go any faster than that, you will find yourself unable to

contribute by pedaling, which will detract from your enjoyment of the ride. To help
with this, you can swap chain rings over from a racer bicycle if you have the right
tool. This will allow you to pedal up to 20 mph with the biggest 60T cog on the front
and a 12T cog on the back. The small wheels really limit pedaling at high speeds.
With 26-in wheels and the highest bicycle gearing, you can pedal up to speeds of 30
mph. Pedaling becomes a bit of a moot point at these speeds anyway because the
amount of energy you can contribute is a tiny fraction of the amount of energy that your
motor puts out to maintain the speed.
Practical Tip
Find out where all the abandoned bicycles in your city go to get recycled. This
place is likely to give you great bargains and have a wide variety of components that
you may want.
3.4.10 Positioning Your Components on the Frame
Building an electric bicycle is not too difficult, but probably the hardest thing, after
choosing your components, is positioning them on the bicycle. There are several
practical considerations to address when designing your electric bicycle, and often
you will find that decisions will be a result of compromise between these factors. The
main practical challenges to an electric bicycle are rain, heat, weight, theft, aesthetics,
reliability, and convenience. When you look at purpose-built electric bicycle frames,
there are always dedicated spaces designed to store the battery and the controller. On
a regular bicycle frame, you don’t have these purpose-built sections, so you have to
make them. Even off-the-shelf electric bicycles will have insufficient space if an
upgrade is desired. Battery storage is one of the hardest tasks the electric bicycle
builder will face. The batteries have to be firmly secured and protected from theft and
bumps, but they also may have to dissipate heat effectively and be low enough to
avoid making the bicycle top-heavy. The controller will have an even bigger heat-
dissipation problem and may need cooling airflow, but at the same time you need to
protect it from rain and theft. If you have several battery packs onboard, then you will
have a whole heap of big, thick wiring and connectors that needs to be accessible but
also needs to be covered from rain and for aesthetic reasons.
There are several places to store the controller; it is easier to place than the
batteries because of its light weight and size. Possible locations are inside the main
triangle, behind the main triangle, on the rear rack, or in a pannier bag. Most
controllers are waterproof to some extent or can be made waterproof with some
silicone sealant, duct tape, or a bag. Therefore, rain is not the biggest concern—theft
is the main threat. Some controllers cost up to £300/$450, but still, many people just
cable-tie their controllers to the frame. I have been told by police that most bicycle

thieves are junkies with a pair of pliers as their only tool. They simply crouch down
by a bicycle and cut through the cable locks one wire at a time. To an observer, they
may look like they were unlocking their bicycle. Even if passersby do spot a bicycle
thief, they usually will not want to get involved. The best theft-prevention strategy
seems to be to never leave your bicycle unattended for long periods.
As a builder of electric bicycles, you can’t completely design out theft. What you
can do is to increase the number of tools and time that a bicycle thief would need to
steal your bicycle or components. You can also dissuade a thief from trying to steal
your bicycle by hiding its true value or fitting an alarm. Since a pair of pliers is the
most common bicycle theft tool, it would be good to stay away from fixing methods
that can be defeated by pliers, such as cable ties. The best method to secure a
controller is to padlock it to the frame or rack (Figure 3.21). This requires a thief to
carry a larger, more obvious theft tool such as bolt cutters or a saw, and this is
unlikely.
FIGURE 3.21 Controller padlocked to the frame with good airflow for cooling and
duct tape for splash-proofing. Plastic tape is used to seal the seams in the case.
Another way to avoid theft is to hide the components. Put the controller in a zipped-
up bag. The zippers often can be padlocked together to prevent opening. You need to
be able to switch the controller off when the bicycle is parked. Poke a hole in the bag
to allow a finger to go through to reach the off switch so that you can switch the
controller off when it is inside the bag. Monitor the temperature of your controller
after the initial ride to be sure that heat buildup is not an issue with the bag. If you’re
going to do any racing, remember to move the controller to a more ventilated location.
It’s good to pad your controller so that it receives less of a knocking when riding.

Cable-tie some rubber matting between it and the surface to which it is locked down.
Stealth involves concealing the fact that your bicycle is electric. You may want to
do this for a variety of reasons: to look like an athletic cyclist, to conceal your
bicycle’s true value from thieves, or to avoid getting stopped by police if the laws in
your state/country prohibit electric bicycles. It’s possible to make a bicycle so stealthy
that even a top cycling dude could not tell if it was electric.
Stealth Tips
• Cover wires and shiny things that look out of the ordinary with duct tape.
• Spray paint shiny hub motors black or coat them in oil and grease so that they
don’t stand out.
• Hide wiring in a bag.
• Paint such things as the battery box and controller the same color as the bicycle
so that they look like they are original factory fittings.
• Choose motors with no noise, that is, only direct-drive hub motors, no chain
drive, and no geared motors.
• Small motors are less conspicuous than large ones, so overclock a smaller
motor rather than buying a high-power motor to get the power you desire.
• Choose a rear hub motor, and hide it behind a set of pannier bags.
• Hide things inside regular-looking cycle equipment if possible.
• Use a common frame type with which people are familiar—for example, no
recumbents, tandems, tricycles, or strange-looking folding bicycles.
• Consider hiding hub motors inside a set of wheel disc covers.
• Keep bicycle lights low power like regular bicycle lights; 20-W beams raise
suspicion.
• Don’t oil your chain; let it rust. People will hear your pedaling effort, which
will be much louder than your motor.
• Be very courteous and friendly to pedestrians you pass along your cycle route.
Say “Good morning” to them, and they will look at you and not your bicycle.
• Start pedaling and slow down when you pass people; use the motor again when
you are clear.
3.4.11 Battery Storage and Positioning
The best place to store batteries is down low in the panniers or in the frame’s main
triangle. A rear-rack carrier is essential for carrying batteries, so make sure that the
bicycle either comes with one or is able to accept one later. Steel rear racks with

strong support legs are better than the seatpost paddle kind because they can hold more
weight. Seatpost paddle racks have to be reinforced to carry batteries. I once gave my
14-stone/200-pound friend a lift on my electric bicycle’s rear carry rack. It was a
steel rack built into the bicycle. When this rack rusted to bits, I swapped it for an
aluminum rack rated for 25 kg/55 lb, and it failed inside a week under only the weight
of my 15-kg/33-lb batteries. Avoid aluminum racks; they are no good for carrying
batteries. The ratings on racks seem to be way too optimistic, and lots of people have
had problems with broken aluminum racks.
Pannier bags are good for storing luggage or batteries. With three-bag design
panniers, you can use the space in the top bag to store your wiring and controller and
the bags on either side for your batteries. This is a good design because it gives you a
low center of gravity, which really makes a difference when turning or hopping curbs.
Be sure to buy strong panniers because they will receive lots of wear from rubbing
between batteries and frame; extra padding may be needed. Few panniers are strong
enough to support 15 kg/33 lb of batteries without breaking, and frequently you will
have to provide additional support. To further secure the batteries from theft, you can
attach them to the frame’s rear dropouts.
Try to avoid putting heavy batteries on top of the rear rack because it will raise
your center of gravity, and this will make handling difficult. It also will damage the
bicycle rack if there is no padding between them. You will quickly get used to your
bicycle weighing 40 kg/88 lb, but be careful who you let test drive your electric
bicycle—most people will not expect a bicycle to weigh so much and will drop it or
fall over. Make sure to warn people about the hand throttle when you hand the bicycle
to them because some people will twist the throttle unintentionally, and the bicycle
will do a backflip.
3.4.12 Making a Main Triangle Battery Bag
A main triangle battery holder is one of the simplest DIY solutions, but it is really
suitable only for hard-cased batteries because there is no strongbox to protect
vulnerable pouch cells. Inside the main triangle is a good place to store batteries; it’s
central and has a middle center of gravity.
There are several ways to secure batteries in the triangle. The best would be to
weld a custom frame, but this is not an option for most people. Instead, you can strap
and tie the batteries to the frame. A good method is to hang the batteries from the
crossbar in a shoulder bag. The bottom of the bag can be tied to the lower frame to
stop it from waving around. The bag will need to be secured using something stronger
than just flimsy material, though. The best choice is to use plastic-coated wire metal
fence material available from your local garden center (Figure 3.22). Don’t use bare

metal chicken wire because it risks shorts in the batteries. The bag will offer a bit of
insulation, but be aware that the movements of the bicycle over bumps will cause the
heavy batteries to rub against whatever material you have used. To avoid a possible
catastrophic short circuit against the metal frame of your bicycle (Figure 3.23), you
will need to use a strong padding against abrasion. You can use thick rubber matting
material to absorb mechanical shock from the bumps, and you also can use hard
plastic PVC pipe material to insulate the frame.
FIGURE 3.22 Plastic-coated metal fence wire support bracket with rubber padding.

FIGURE 3.23 Not like this! Without rubber padding, battery insulation is eroded by
grinding against the metal frame on bumpy roads. This caused a short circuit across the
frame. Sparks melted the steel frame, and heat destroyed some of the cells. Battery
performance was significantly reduced. A fuse does not prevent this kind of incident!
This shows the importance of good battery padding, housing, and insulation.
Making the DIY Main Triangle Battery Holder
• Gather the parts you need; these include rubber matting, shoulder bag, plastic-
coated metal fence material, PVC pipe, padlocks and cable ties, plugs for charger
connection, Anderson connectors for power, fuse holders and fuses, and battery
cutoff switch.
• Gather the tools you need (see Table 3.2).
• Wire up the battery using Anderson or other main power connectors. Be sure to
put a fuse holder with a fuse on the positive power wire as close to the battery as
possible. Add a plug for charging if one is not already connected by the battery
manufacturer. Add the battery cutoff switch and place it somewhere accessible in
case you need to cut the power in an emergency. If your batteries are not already
wired up with charger port and power connection and you are unsure how to
wire them up, then consult the retailer or see the guide in Section 5.4.13 and the
multimeter polarity check tip on Section 5.1.1.

• Pad the shoulder bag with thick rubber matting material, and then put the
batteries in the shoulder bag.
• Zip up the shoulder bag so that the wires are the only thing coming out.
• Put the bag’s satchel flap over the crossbar, and fasten it so as to hang the bag
from the crossbar.
• Bend the plastic-coated metal fence material in half along its longest side to
form a rectangle. For aesthetics, you might want to spray paint the wire a
different color to match your bicycle or the bag.
• Bend the rectangle of fence material around the bag and crossbar to form the
shape of your support bracket.
• Wrap the frame with the PVC pipe where the batteries might touch it. For
aesthetics, you might want to spray paint the PVC pipe to match the frame.
• Move the support bracket up to the bag and crossbar. Stuff the support bracket
with rubber matting under where the batteries might touch the frame. This gives
more padding to protect against abrasion.
• Tension the fence material support bracket against the crossbar, and use small
padlocks or hose clips to fix it together.
• Cable-tie the bottom of the support bracket to the lower half of the main triangle
at each end of the bag to stop it from swinging.
3.4.13 Making a Theft-Proof Battery Holder
To further secure the batteries from theft, you can attach them to the frame. To do
this, you have to store your batteries in a metal case that you can padlock to the frame
(Figure 3.24). The same padlock(s) can be used to lock the case and lock it to the
frame. You also could use a chain to support it from the frame off the crossbar or rear
rack. If you have an arc welder, then you can use that instead and skip some of the
steps.

FIGURE 3.24 Battery boxes made from strong ammunition boxes. These battery
holders were designed to fit in a double pannier set and sit on either side of the rear
wheel. Remember to peel the warning stickers off the boxes and coat them in paint or
duct tape; otherwise, people might get the wrong idea. You don’t want to find that your
bicycle has been the subject of a controlled explosion by the bomb squad!
Making a Theft-Proof Battery Holder
• Gather the parts you need: these include a metal box, padlocks, a chain,
padding, plastic-coated metal fence material (optional), wiring strain-relief
grommets, panel-mount plugs for charger connection, Anderson connectors for
power, fuse holders and fuses, and a battery cutoff switch. Suitable metal cases
can be found in your local supermarket, hardware store, or army surplus store—
just go shopping and keep your eyes open. Metal cookie tins, steel breadboxes
(Figure 3.25), toolboxes, and ammunition boxes all have potential. Thick steel is
best for protection. A well-padded ammunition box is the best choice (see Figure
3.24).
• Gather the tools you need (see Table 3.2). In addition, you also will need an
electric drill and drill bits and a file.
• You can get padlocks and chain from a DIY or hardware store. The thicker the
better, but 4-mm chain works well. Cut the chain to the right length. Hopefully, it
will be hard to cut so that a thief will have a hard time. Sometimes you can just
bend the chin link back and forth with pliers until it breaks. Use the minimum
amount of chain so that it’s tight; then any thief will have a hard time trying to get

access and leverage.
FIGURE 3.25 Battery box and battery showing rubber matting used for padding. The
blue thing on top of the battery is the BMS. This is a breadbox battery holder.
• Drill holes in the metal box so that it can be padlocked shut. Obviously, don’t
drill the case while the battery is inside! The holes should be just slightly bigger
than the padlock so that it fits easily. Drill the holes, and then file the edges
smooth. Make sure that there are no sharp edges to the box that might puncture
your battery or cut into the insulation surrounding wires. Clean any metal filings
from the case before you insert the battery.
• For a professional job, you can panel mount the charger port or any other thing,
such as battery management system extension wires, an on/off switch, etc.
• Important: Pad the case with thick rubber to prevent damage to your batteries
from moving (Figure 3.26).
• Put the batteries in the metal case. Run the wires through the drilled holes, but
use grommets for strain relief and to stop the metal from wearing away at the
insulation and causing a short circuit.
• Wire up the battery using Anderson or other main power connectors. Be sure to
put a fuse holder with a fuse on the positive power wire inside the metal battery
box. Add a plug for charging if one is not already connected by the battery
manufacturer. Place the battery cutoff switch somewhere accessible in case you
need to cut the power in an emergency. If your batteries are not already wired up
with charger port and power connection and you are unsure how to wire up your
batteries, then consult the retailer or see the guide to wiring a new battery in
Section 5.4.13 and the multimeter polarity check tip in Section 5.1.1.

FIGURE 3.26 Battery snugly fitting inside a well-padded box.

FIGURE 3.27 Securely locked battery box. This is then hung from the locks using
chain over the crossbar.
• Once the battery box is ready, padlock it to the frame of the bicycle. The same
padlock(s) can be used to lock the case and lock it to the frame. If the box is
strong enough, such as an ammunition box, you can use the chain to hang it from
the crossbar or rear rack by the handles. If the box doesn’t have a strong handle
that will support its weight, you can use wire mesh to support the box from
underneath. Or you can use both chain and wire mesh, as shown in Figure 3.28.
• You can put the batteries inside a shoulder bag or a pannier bag to hide them
from view and add waterproofing.

FIGURE 3.28 Battery box padlocked to the frame with a steel chain. The box is
supported at the top by the chain and at the bottom by the wire mesh holder. The
shoulder bag is then added to hide the box.
3.4.14 Making a Rear-Rack Battery Holder
It’s harder to make a heavy battery stay on top of something than hang underneath
something. The rear-rack battery holder is useful, although on folding bicycles or dual-
suspension bicycles with a single crossbar design and no triangle to put the batteries,
there is more space on top of the rear rack for a battery than there is available on the
sides. You can’t fold a folding bicycle with big pannier batteries on the sides, and
aerodynamics is better without large side panniers. Positioning a battery above the
wheel is a more symmetrical weight distribution for a single battery than hanging it
from one side of the rack. The key to mounting a heavy battery on the rear rack is to
add suspension and dampening between the battery box and the rack so that the
mountings don’t shake themselves to pieces with the vibrations of riding (Figure 3.29).
The rack has to be strong, and the bolts need to be checked regularly to make sure they
are not vibrating themselves undone. Arc welding would be very useful for this
project, but it is possible to do it without.
Seatpost-style paddle racks tend to break under the weight of a battery. They must
be reinforced from underneath with diagonal bracing. You have to anchor the battery

to the rack at all four corners to stop it from moving around. It is possible to buy off-
the-shelf lockable rear cycle carriers for the rear rack (Figure 3.30), but they are made
of plastic and won’t last very long with batteries inside them; also, they are easily
broken into.
FIGURE 3.29 Battery box mounted to a rear rack with theft-resistant iron brackets
that are secured with padlocks and a chain to the frame and steel cables to the rack.
Suspension is provided by an inflated inner tube and rubber mat between the box and
rack.
FIGURE 3.30 A commercially available plastic rear cycle carrier is inadequate for
the task of carrying batteries. Plastic hinges can be broken easily by thieves, and the
lock can be defeated easily. The battery inside would need to be well padded for
protection or it might get damaged by shocks from the road. If the cells were
vulnerable pouch cells, then they would need to be inside a second, stronger box for

protection.
Making a Rear-Rack Battery Holder
• Select a solidly built metal box for your battery. An ammunition box is best.
• Source all the other components you will need, including 3-mm-thick angle
iron, 6-mm bolts and a tap with ISO M6 thread, 6- and 5-mm drill bits and a
drill, a padlock, some chain, an inner tube, a rubber mat, cable ties, steel brake
cable, and fine-threaded nuts and bolts.
• Drill holes for mounting the recharge socket and feed-throughs for power wires.
File the holes smooth, and use strain-relief grommets to prevent short circuit of
the battery power wires on the sharp corners of the holes.
• Obtain two angle-iron brackets, and drill 5-mm holes in them for mounting onto
the box. You must have at least two holes on each to make them secure. The holes
have to line up with 6-mm holes you will drill in the bottom of the metal box.
• Position the angle iron along the sides of the box so that the brackets run
parallel to the sides of the rear rack but slightly wider. The rack needs to sit
between the angle-iron brackets without the rack hitting them. Use the drilled
angle iron as a template for where to drill the 6-mm holes in the box to make
them line up. Pilot drill the holes first with a 5-mm drill bit.
• Tap an ISO M6 thread into the 5-mm holes you have drilled in the angle iron.
• Use the 6-mm bolts to connect the angle iron to the bottom of the metal box. The
bolts can only be tightened or loosened with access to the inside of the box where
the heads of the bolts are located. This is crucial for security. A thief cannot
unscrew the bolts from the underside because there are no nuts to loosen.
• Next, drill holes in the sides of the angle iron for locking to the rear rack. Use
an 8-mm drill bit so that you can use 6-mm padlocks. Drill holes to support all
four corners of the box.
• Next, cable-tie the rubber matting and inner tube to the middle of the rear rack
so that it stays in place when the bicycle is bouncing around on rough terrain.
• Duct tape the underside of the battery box to smooth over any sharp edges that
could puncture the inner tube.
• Place the battery on top so that it is supported by the inner tube, and secure it
from the sides using the padlocks and springs or hose clips. Use the chain to
padlock the battery to the frame as well as to the rear rack so that a thief cannot
simply steal the whole rear-rack assembly.
The commercial rear cycle carrier uses threaded brackets in a similar way, but
instead they run under the rear rack to hold it in place. This semipermanently fixes the

carrier to the rack. The metal rear-rack battery holder described here is a superior
design for electric bicycles because it provides extra suspension for the heavy battery
and allows the battery to be removed easily, if necessary, for recharging.
3.4.15 Tips on Wheel-Building Hub Motors
Sometimes you will need to build a hub motor into a new rim either to replace a
broken rim or to change wheel size. You probably could write a whole book on wheel
building, but I will offer just a few tips to get you started. These instructions may be
the wrong way to do it. I didn’t read any books on how to do this. I just gave it a try
and it worked!
My daily commuter bicycle has a custom-laced 12-kg/26-lb motor with a heavy
battery box on top of it. It has worked nicely and has broken only a few spokes, so it’s
really not that difficult to maintain. The hardest part is finding the right-sized spokes
for a given rim and hub motor combination. There are several online calculators that
can help you with this. In addition, 14G spokes are available on eBay made to any
length. It’s not really possible to cut and thread spokes yourself because it requires a
special machine, not just a simple thread-cutting die. Once you have the spokes, the
next difficult part is getting started. You can’t put spokes in some directions when the
wheel is already under tension, but it’s also difficult to do if the wheel is flopping
around owing to lack of tension. Some people use a wheel-building rig for this reason
to support the wheel and rim while you insert the spokes.
• Wheels can be built from lots of different spoke combinations, so it’s not
always necessary to buy new spokes if you have lots of different-sized spokes
already lying around. A large and small spoke set can be used in combination to
replace a spoke size somewhere between the two.
• If your spokes are a little short or a little long, then you can make up a few
millimeters/inches by changing whether the spokes are threaded from outside in
or from inside out.
• The spoke size needed will change depending on how the wheel is spoked.
With the double-cross pattern, the spokes need to be longer than with the radial
pattern.
• Remember to get the right size spokes and the right number of them. Also
remember that 26-in wheels usually have 32 spokes and 20-in wheels usually
have 36 spokes, but this can vary.
• When using powerful hub motors, a thicker gauge of spoke should be used or
the spokes all will slowly snap. Thus 10G (3.2-mm) spokes are best for this
purpose instead of the normal 14G (1.7-mm) spokes.
• Sometimes rear wheels require different-sized spokes for each side of the hub

because the wheel needs to be dished to keep the rim central on the axle if there
is a big gear cassette on one side.
• You also can dish the wheel by positioning the spoke butts all on one side. This
is useful for the rear wheel.
• Don’t be afraid to bend spokes to get them into position. They will straighten
out later when you tension them.
• With powerful hub motors it’s best to get wide steel rims and large, oversized
tires. Narrow aluminum rims won’t last.
• The normal spoke pattern used for bicycles is the triple-crossover pattern,
where each spoke crosses three other spokes on the same side of the wheel, once
at the hub and two more times. This is recommended by wheel builders for
strength, but it won’t work with big hub motors in small rims because the spokes
have to be angled too much at the rim. In this case, for example, with an X5 motor
in a 20-in rim, you must use the radial pattern.
• If you want to upgrade the spoke size on a motor, you may have to drill the
holes wider.
• It is possible to drill extra holes in a rim to change it from 32 to 36 holes, but
it’s best to use strong steel rims for this purpose.
• There are different types of nipples available with threads in different places. If
the spokes are a few millimeters/inches too short with one set of nipples, then
they might be a match with another set. Electric hub wheels seem to have
different nipples than regular wheels (Figure 3.31). They are longer with more
thread, making wheel building easier.
FIGURE 3.31 Electric bicycle wheel nipples are longer and make wheel building
easier. (Left) Regular bicycle wheel nipples. (Right) Electric bicycle wheel nipples.

How to Lace a Wheel
• Get the spokes ready. Calculate the right size spokes for the hub-rim
combination, and then buy the spokes.
• Get the rim ready. Rims can be bought with the number of holes to fit any hub
motor. Make sure that the number of holes in the rim matches the number in the
motor.
• Get the hub motor ready.
• Get a spoke key (Figure 3.32).
FIGURE 3.32 A spoke key is essential. Round ones are best.
• The best way to start lacing a wheel with a cross-pattern is to build up from a
simple radial pattern. Thread one spoke every four holes on the same side in a
radial pattern. The spokes will be too long and stick out from the rim.
• Turn the hub around inside the rim until the spoke nipples hit the rim holes and
the spokes go tight (Figure 3.33). Make sure that the nipples are all tightened to
the same extent.

FIGURE 3.33 Twist the hub in the rim until the slack is taken up.
• Next, lace a few spokes in the other direction, one every four holes. After a few
spokes in the opposite direction are threaded, the spokes will support the hub and
hold it in position inside the rim.
• Next, thread the spokes on the other side of the wheel in the same way, one
every four holes. The one-in-four method is used because there are two
directions in which the spokes go, on each side of the wheel. Thread the spokes
through from the already laced side of the wheel so that they dangle free and can
be maneuvered into position without clashing with the already laced spokes
(Figure 3.34).
• Put the wheel into the bicycle fork.
• Tighten all the spokes a bit more. Remember to dish the wheel slightly if there
is a gear cassette or a disc brake on one side.

FIGURE 3.34 Top side of the wheel is fully laced. To spoke the other side, you have
to drop the spokes through the holes from the already laced side. Otherwise, it’s not
possible to maneuver them into position because of all the other spokes already in the
way. Note how the spokes exit on the bottom of both hub flanges. This is to dish the
wheel so that the rim is central despite being offset by the disc brake mount on the
bottom.
• Tighten up all the spokes in the correct sequence to make the wheel true. The
wheel needs to be centered in the radial direction as well as true with the axle at
90 degrees to the plane of the rim. To do this, spin the wheel and look for
sections where the wheel sticks out sideways. Where the wheel angles to one
side, tighten the spokes on the other side to pull the rim over. Also look for
sections where the wheel sticks out in the radial direction. Where the wheel
sticks out of center in the radial direction, tighten the spokes on the other side to
pull the rim to the center. Don’t overtighten the spokes. Only go to finger tightness
with the spoke key.
• Make sure that the threads on the spokes aren’t extending out into where the
inner tube will be or they will cause a puncture. Cut the tips off the threads with
pliers if necessary.
• Wrap lots of thick rim tape round the rim to protect the inner tube from spoke

punctures. Install the inner tube and tire to finish the wheel. You can get special
straight inner tubes that don’t require the wheel to be removed when fixing
punctures. These are the best choice if you find removing the wheel a hard task.
• After the bicycle has been ridden for a few miles and the wheel has been worn
in, re-tighten the spokes.
3.4.16 How to Do Electrical Connections and Wiring
If you don’t do your electric bicycle wiring right, you will find yourself stuck at the
side of a road somewhere pushing a 60-kg/130-lb lump and wondering what went
wrong. It’s important to build reliability into an electric bicycle from the beginning.
Electric bicycles can be very reliable, but those built by amateurs will break down.
Wiring problems are common faults on an electric bicycle. They are not usually
serious or costly, but they are annoying. There are three potential failures to avoid
with your wiring, and they are heat buildup, loose connections, and short circuits. The
rest of this section is devoted to examining these problems in further detail.
Amperes generate heat. The more amperes you have, the thicker your current-
carrying wires need to be. The resistance of a wire goes up as its area goes down.
Therefore, everything that is in the path of your current needs to be a specific minimum
thickness. The classic mistake is the paired-wire short circuit. This is where a pair of
wires carrying current to and from a battery are too thin, and the excessive current
generates heat when squeezing through the thin-wire pinch point. The heat buildup
melts the wire’s insulation, and the wires make contact, causing a short circuit across
the battery. If you have other batteries in series, then the symptom of this failure will
be a sudden drop in power, or the power may cut out altogether. To avoid this
problem, you must make sure that every current-carrying wire that goes into your
bicycle is fit for purpose. The practical tips below can help as a guide. The problem
usually will happen only when you are pulling lots of amperes for long periods. Thus,
when you are racing to get somewhere important is when it will strike! Heat
dissipation also will factor into the problem. If the wires are packed into a bag, then
any warming will build up and might cascade into a full-scale melting. This is similar
to how a fuse works. However, it is not just wires that need to be thick; it is
everything in the current’s main path. Therefore, switches, relays, fuses, fuse holders,
and connectors all need to be rated to cope with the amperes you demand if they are in
the main current path.
I once entered an electric bicycle race with my commuter electric bicycle without
any time to upgrade for the race. As a result, I had to stop three times to replace
melted components: three fuses, three relays, and a controller overtemperature
shutdown (I didn’t win). If you are ever in any doubt about the thickness or ampere
rating of a wire or component, you can always try the touch test. Just wire it up, ride

for a bit, and then see if it gets warm to the touch. If it gets warm, then replace it with
something thicker.
You can measure the power dissipation in your wires with a multimeter. Set it to
millivolts, and touch the probes at either end of a main power wire with only wire
between the probes. Go for a short ride and check. This will tell you the voltage drop
across the wire. It should be only a few millivolts. Multiply this voltage by the
amperes from your power meter, and the result is the power dissipated as heat in the
section of wire between your two probes. Hopefully, the number will be below 100
mV, which at 30 A would produce wiring heating of only 3 W. You have to decide
what wiring losses are acceptable to you. As a guide, a 25-W soldering iron gets very
hot, so keeping your wiring below this is desirable.
Loose connections are bad because they can cause sparks, power loss, and short
circuits. A loose connection results when you haven’t done your connections properly
and something has come loose. This can be the result of solder aging, rusting, poor
soldering technique, vibration, movement, or a bad cable-crimping technique (Figures
3.35 and 3.36). If a main current connection is intermittent, you will find that your
electric bicycle will work only if it is tilted in a certain direction, and you will
experience lack of power. An intermittent connection will cause sparking at the
connection, and this could damage the component. If a plug has come loose or
something is blocking contacts in a switch, then the plug might fuse together or the
switch might weld shut. A loose connection that’s flapping around also might
inadvertently make a connection with something else that it shouldn’t do. This could
cause a short circuit and fry a component or something else unexpectedly. A short
circuit results when positive and negative terminals are allowed to touch with no load
or resistance in between. When this happens on an electric bicycle battery, only the
cell’s internal resistance and the resistance of the wire will limit the current. Things
will get very hot and start to melt metal, although hopefully the system will have a fuse
that melts first.

FIGURE 3.35 Sloppy electric bicycle wiring causes loose connections and short
circuits. Here you can see too many wires not tied down and bare metal not insulated.
FIGURE 3.36 Here you can see tidy wiring all tied down with a good junction box.

The controller is padlocked to the rack, with rubber padding under the controller to
protect it from bumps.
Practical Tips
Table 3.3 shows what wire sizes are recommended for different current flows. The
current shown in the table is the maximum continuous current and is intended as a
guide for wiring a house. Current demand on an electric bicycle fluctuates, and there
are usually periods of inactivity or low speed where the wires can cool down.
Therefore, electric bicycles can use slightly smaller wire sizes if desired.
For 20-A controllers, its best to use at least 2.5-mm-diameter wire, and for 40-A
controllers, use at least 3.5-mm-diameter wire.
TABLE 3.3 Wire Size Guide for Copper Wires
Fuses are very important on your electric bicycle, and they will save your batteries
from sudden death if there is a wiring fault that causes a short circuit. Always have a
fuse on every battery on the bicycle. Fuses should be positioned inside the battery case
so that if the insulation on the power wires were to fail by being caught on the sharp-
edged battery box, then the fuse would be in the path of the short-circuit current. Make
the edges of the wiring outlet holes smooth and free of burrs. Don’t be tempted to put
the fuse holders in accessible locations; they should be inside the battery box. If lots of
fuses blow, then you have a problem—either a short circuit that you were unaware of
or you are pulling too many amperes. Fuses are not a good indication of current flow
because they often don’t blow until the current exceeds twice their rating. Whether a
fuse blows or not is very time-dependent. Blowing fuses is not an accurate way of

estimating the effects of current flow on batteries. Use strain-relief grommets on the
holes where the power wires exit the battery box. If the box is made of metal, these
holes can have sharp edges that will cut the insulation on the wires and cause a short
circuit. Hot glue can be used to provide some instant strain-relief grommets if the wire
is already in place and you don’t want to remove it.
It can be annoying having to half disassemble your electric bicycle to change a main
power fuse each time the wires from your lights get wrapped around the handlebars
and short circuit. The best thing to prevent unnecessary blowing of main power fuses
is to install lower-value fuses on all accessory power lines. Usually it’s best to put a
5-A fuse on the accessories line that goes to the handlebars. The best fuse holders to
use are waterproof in-line blade fuse holders; these will hold standard automotive
fuses up to 30 A. It’s a pain when a main power fuse blows because it often melts the
fuse holder along with it and requires a rewiring job on the batteries. Melted fuse
holders can be confusing to diagnose, especially if you have battery management
system (BMS) cutouts to rule out first, so always examine or replace a fuse holder
after a main power fuse blows.
To neaten up your handlebars and hide some of those unsightly wires, you can buy a
single 20-core cable and feed all your handlebar wiring down that. The 20-core wire
can replace the separate wires needed for power to the lights, rear lights, throttle,
power meter, and horn. All you need is a terminal block for a breakout box at each end
(see Section 6.2.4).
3.4.17 Choosing Quality Connectors
Most electrical connections on your bicycle will be soldered. Ensure that your
soldering technique is good by reading the guide in Section 3.4.7 and practicing.
Where such things as chargers, battery packs, and controllers might need to be plugged
and unplugged, you will want to use connectors. There are a variety of different
connectors you could use on an electric bicycle. You must make sure that you make the
connection properly and that the connector is rated for the amperes and volts that will
be used. The voltage rating on things such as connectors and switches relates to the
insulation and shows how high the voltage can go before problems such as arcing
occur. Usually, the rated voltage of standard insulation will be much higher than the
typical voltages used on electric bicycles. Even just electrical tape will work fine for
electric bicycles.
The current rating is usually much more important than the voltage rating. The
voltage rating on switches usually just means that you will have a reduced lifetime for
the switch if you surpass the rating. This might not be important if it’s a cheap switch
in a nonessential area. Figures 3.37 through 3.40 show examples of plugs and

connectors that are useful on electric bicycles. In addition to voltage and current
rating, there is reliability and build quality to consider. Many of the connectors used
on cheap Chinese electric bicycle controllers and motors are awful and will break
with continual use. Sometimes the first thing you do with a new kit is upgrade the
connectors to something more reliable. Some wiring connection problems can be very
difficult to diagnose because the symptoms might be similar to those of more serious
problems. If one pin in a Hall sensor plug breaks, you may spend a long time trying to
determine if the problem is in the controller or the motor, and you might cause further
damage by attempting to “fix” things that aren’t broken. In addition, some connector
problems can cause a knock-on effect that can damage other components.
FIGURE 3.37 Anderson power poles. My connector of choice.

FIGURE 3.38 Deans connectors.

FIGURE 3.39 Multipole Anderson connectors.
FIGURE 3.40 A Euro connector or “kettle lead.”
Practical Tips
Anderson power poles (see Figure 3.37) are the electric bicycle builder’s
connector of choice because they can handle lots of amperes and are compact.
Anderson power poles come in lots of sizes, but the 30- and 45-A, 7.9-mm-wide sizes
are the ones of interest to us. The connectors are assembled by crimping them or
soldering the pin onto a wire and then pushing this through the back of the housing. A
very small screwdriver is helpful to poke the pin into the housing. It is good practice
to seal the back of the housing with hot glue or epoxy to make the connection last
longer and seal any bare wire. The power poles are unisex in that there are no male or
female ones; they all can connect with each other.
Anderson housings come in lots of different colors, so remember to always select
red for positive and black for negative wires. This way you can avoid an accidental
short circuit. The power poles have dovetail slots along their edges, so they can stack
together to form multipole plugs. This also will help prevent accidental short circuits
because you can create plugs that will fit together in only one orientation. Anderson
power poles are available on eBay. Anderson also makes multipole connectors for
this purpose (see Figure 3.39).

Deans connectors are popular with remote control (RC) hobbyists. They are
multipole connectors with orientation-specific male and female connectors (see Figure
3.38). Other connector types are also available. In a pinch, Euro connectors or “kettle
leads” can be used (see Figure 3.40). They are available commercially but are bulky,
difficult to mate, and support only limited amperes.
Another good practice is to label all your wires. After you’ve had a few pints or
it’s dark, it can be difficult to tell the difference between identical-looking connectors
in a spaghetti-like mess of wiring. A label maker can be invaluable for labeling all
your connectors.
3.4.18 Choosing Quality Switches and Relays
Conducting high currents is a demanding task for a contactor, and switching high
voltages can cause powerful sparks. A switch can be used to control an electric
bicycle. The switches on an electric bicycle need to be higher quality and much bigger
than other switches if they are in the path of the main current. Often there are special
requirements for switches, such as switching between multiple poles or multiswitches.
These specifications are abbreviated on switches and relays to double pole (DP) and
double throw (DT) (Figure 3.41). For example, a double-pole switch can be used to
switch a connection between two separate circuits. A double-pole, double-throw
(DPDT) switch might be used to switch both positive and negative terminals from a
battery between separate charge and discharge circuits.
Relays (Figure 3.42) are big switches that can be activated by remote by a smaller
switch. This allows for high-current or high-voltage circuits to be controlled by small,
compact controls from a distance. Relays are useful in electric bicycles because you
don’t want to have thick high-current wires running to your handlebars and back. You
always need to have at least one high-power switch on an electric bicycle for an
emergency cutoff switch in the event that your controller goes haywire and locks up
with the throttle wide open.
Other applications for switches are battery-switching arrays, and relays can be used
for special applications such as electric brakes. For electric bicycle applications,
normal switches of above 15 A will do (see Figure 3.41). For racing or high-
performance electric bicycles, however, these switches could be melted by the high
current. For this purpose, you can gang multiple poles together on DPDT switches. For
switching higher voltages, you need special vacuum contactors (Figure 3.43) to stop
arcing across the contacts because of oxidization of the air. These are more expensive.
For this reason, on high-powered electric bicycles, it’s best to minimize the number of
switches used. Controllers often have a special electronic switch built in, so there may
be no need for any main current switches.

FIGURE 3.41 A 16-A double-throw rocker switch. Use both sides together for 30 A.
FIGURE 3.42 A 20-A automotive relay.
FIGURE 3.43 A Kilovac contactor 500-A, 320-V dc vacuum relay.
Practical Tips
A high-amperage emergency cutout switch doesn’t have to be an expensive and

bulky contactor. You can just attach a pull cord to the back of one of your main power
wire plugs. If there is a problem, pull the cord, and the main power connection is
severed. You obviously have to anchor the other side of the connector so that the force
pulls the plug out of the socket.
If a switch is required to switch live circuits on/off, then the voltage specification
will need to be higher.
3.4.19 Making Wires Tidy: Junction Boxes
The typical home-made electric bicycle will have lots of wires carrying current
from different battery locations and sending it to the controller, lights, horns, etc. It is
essential to do a good electrical job with the wiring because otherwise your electric
bicycle will be unreliable and cause much misery. You have to use switches or plugs
on your battery network for many reasons. You may want to disconnect batteries if
there is a problem, or you may want to switch batteries between series or parallel
configurations for performance or recharging. For these reasons, you have to use either
a switch box or a junction box. The advantage of the switch box is that it’s faster to
use and can be made user friendly. The advantage of a junction box is that it’s easier
and more flexible.
Figure 3.44 shows a series/parallel battery-switching circuit. I used this circuit for
charging a high-capacity NiMh battery in series and then switched to parallel for
discharge. This was necessary because NiMh cells cannot be charged safely in
parallel and because in series the voltage is too high for the controller.
FIGURE 3.44 Plan for a series/parallel battery switching circuit. For charging in
series and discharging in parallel.
It is important to mount switches inside a box to protect them from movement during
riding. Junction boxes (Figures 3.45 and 3.46) or plug boxes are easier because they
are basically just a load of plugs connected together. It still pays to get it right, though,
to ensure a reliable ride. There are several professional junction boxes that you can

use. The circular plastic junction boxes are good for up to 4 +Ve/−Ve plug pairs. For
more junctions than this, you need a strip of terminal block. For electric bicycles, use
either the 20- or 30-A blocks. The plugs can be left outside the case or can be brought
inside for more secure connections.
FIGURE 3.45 Inside a junction box: electric bicycle wiring using a terminal block in
a case.
Once you have your switch or junction box, it is important to tie it down to stop it
from moving around and to stop plugs coming loose or switches being switched. You
can put all your unsightly wiring in a dedicated pannier bag or box. Don’t put anything
loose in the wiring bag/box. It’s important to keep leads short so that they don’t catch
on things and pull out (Figure 3.47).

FIGURE 3.46 A junction box designed to connect two batteries in parallel, several
accessories, a controller, and a power meter.

FIGURE 3.47 Electric bicycle wiring using a junction box.

CHAPTER 4
Electric Bicycle Components
4.1 Motors
4.1.1 How Motors Work
Motors are made from coils of wire wrapped round a stator (iron core) which is
free to rotate and surrounded by magnets (Figure 4.1). Motors are very similar to
electromagnets; they use the same attraction and repulsion forces. The trick with a
motor is to switch the direction of the forces to keep the motor moving after its initial
revolution. There are two main types of motors used in electric bicycles, and these are
brushed and brushless. Sometimes brushed motors are called direct-current (dc)
motors and brushless motors are called alternating-current (ac) motors. The
difference between these motors lies in how their power is switched to keep them
spinning. In a brushed dc motor, the switching is done mechanically by brushes that
sweep the sides of the hub and swap the polarity of the power as the motor spins
round. In brushless ac motors, the switching is done electronically by the controller,
and the motor position is sensed using electromagnetic sensors called Hall sensors to
obtain the position of the motor. The main difference from a performance perspective
is potentially slightly higher efficiency with the brushless motor (5 to 10 percent more
efficient). It is for this reason that you will find that most of the electric bicycles on the
market have brushless motors so that they can go farther on a small battery. The
mechanical switching in brushed motors causes sparks as the brushes make contact.
This gradually causes erosion of the brush contacts. Brushless motors can be built for
higher power requirements because they don’t have the problem of spark erosion.
The power in a brushless motor is controlled by pulse-width modulation (PWM),
which is a scheme in which the controller selects how long to switch the power on
during each phase. If full power is selected on the hand throttle, then during each phase
the power is switched on all the time. If partial throttle is selected, the power to the
phase is switched on for only a short time.

FIGURE 4.1 Inside a Crystalyte X5 brushless motor. The stator and windings are in
the middle, fixed to the axle, which is fixed to the bicycle and doesn’t move. The
wheel with the magnets attached revolves around the outside. The side coverplates of
the motor contain sealed bearings that support and hold the two parts in position while
allowing them to rotate.
4.1.2 What Speed Will It Do?
The speed and power limits of a motor will be determined by several things,
including the number of coils, the thickness of wire, and how quickly the heat can
escape from the motor. When you apply full power to a motor with its wheel off the
ground using a battery and controller, the motor will achieve a top “no-load” speed.
The top speed of the motor under real conditions usually will be around 20 percent
less than this no-lead speed. No-load speed is proportional to voltage. You can
calculate the speed per volt of the motor and scale it up to find the top speed at any
voltage. The voltage is limited, though, by the specification of the controller.
However, the actual speed in real-world situations will be determined by the power
of the system and the load.
The Balance of Load versus Motor Power Is What Determines Real Speed
Calculation of real-world maximum speed under real-world load is complicated,

and you may wish to skip it and just look at the simplified speed versus power graph
in Figure 3.16 to size your motor. Motor efficiency increases with speed to the point
where at its top speed it will be most efficient. However, the power the motor
provides reaches a peak and then drops off as the speed approaches maximum speed.
At slow speeds, the motor is very inefficient. This is called the motor characteristics
curve (Figure 4.2). The load on an electric bicycle is mainly the energy used to fight
wind resistance and to fight gravity when going uphill. Because of wind resistance, the
force required to obtain a speed increases with the square of the speed. This is called
the load curve. When you apply a load to a motor, it will use more power to maintain
its speed or will lose speed if the power is not increased. You need to know both the
load curve and the motor characteristics to calculate the speed that will be reached.
FIGURE 4.2 Motor performance characteristics for an X5303 hub motor at 48 V in
an electric bicycle with 26-in wheels and a 50-A controller at full throttle. The motor
efficiently increases with speed to the point where at its top speed it will be most
efficient. However, the power the motor provides reaches a peak and then drops off as
the speed approaches maximum. At slow speeds, the motor is very inefficient.
(Source: Motor simulator at www.ebikes.ca.)
You can do either a force balance or a power balance to work out the speed. Where
the graphs of power versus speed for the load and the motor cross, this is the speed
that will be achieved. That is, where Figure 3.16 and Figure 4.2 cross, that is the
speed that will be obtained under those conditions when steady state is reached
(Figure 4.3). This is much more complicated than we need to make motor/battery

purchasing decisions, and as soon as the grade or wind speed changes, the load curve
will change, and a different speed will be reached. In practice, it will take a while to
reach this steady-state speed. Therefore, motors should be sized slightly higher to
allow for the increased power required by acceleration up to the desired speed.
The motor simulator at www.Ebikes.ca and the speed-power calculator at
www.kreuzotter.de can do the work for you. Use the speed-power calculator to
calculate the power required to reach your desired speed, and then choose the motor
with at least that power. Play around with selecting the different motors, voltages, and
wheel sizes to see what they do to the position of the efficiency peak and the power
peak. It’s best to operate the motor at a speed between the efficiency peak and the
power peak.
FIGURE 4.3 Determining maximum speed under real-world load. The balance of
motor power versus load reveals the real maximum speed. The intersection of the
power curve (thick gray line) and the load curve (dotted line) occurs at 36 mph, which
will 
be 
the 
real-world 
maximum 
speed. 
(Source: www.Ebikes.ca 
and
www.kreuzotter.de.)
Heat Dissipation in Motors
The maximum current that a motor can pass before it melts is determined by the heat
transfer versus the resistive heating in the windings. The resistive heating is
determined by the current and resistance of the windings. The motor heats up when the
resistive heating power is more than the cooling power from heat dissipation. This is

another power balance, and the result determines the temperature at which the motor
will run at a certain current. If you know the melting point of the motor components,
then you can use this balance to work out the maximum continuous current and power
the motor can take. However, working out the heat transfer in a hub motor is much too
complicated, and at present, there are no easy online simulators to do the work for
you. Therefore, it is sufficient to know that you can increase the power of the motor if
you also increase the cooling. The power normally is not limited by the motor anyway,
but by the batteries (see Section 6.1.4 for overclocking and upgrading information).
4.1.3 Reviews of Different Hub Motors
Here are some short reviews of the different motors that are available. There are
lots of other motors available, and the best place to get reviews is on the Endless-
Sphere Forum at www.endless-sphere.com. Included here are the most common names
on the market, but there are no-name and knock-off motors as well.
Crystalyte Motors (X5, 400 Series, and BD)
Crystalyte motors are the oldest and some say they are still the best. Their power
ratings are very conservatively rated for the power that you can put through them. The
X5 is rated at 750 W continuous, but in reality, this motor can pump out 5 kW peak if
desired. The 400 Series motors are rated at 500 W, but these can withstand 2.5 kW
peak. Crystalyte brushed motors also can be overclocked way beyond their continuous
ratings. Crystalyte motors are well built and don’t break down. If you look inside them
(see Section 5.4.4), there is nothing to go wrong; it is a very elegant design. The main
disadvantage of the X5 is that it weighs a lot—12 kg/26.4 lb. The 400 Series motors
weigh less and are easily sufficient for 99 percent of electric biking. The other
disadvantage of the X5 is that it’s difficult, but not impossible, to fit a disc brake on an
electric bicycle with this motor. The axle spacing is too close and requires either very
rare or custom-made parts. You can buy these motors and the Puma from Team Hybrid
in the United Kingdom, ebikes.ca in Canada, or Island Earth in Australia.
BMC (Puma)
The Puma motor weighs less and pulls more than the Crystalyte X5 but is not as
reliable. The key to this is that it is geared to allow the motor to run at optimal speed
while the bicycle runs at regular bicycle speeds. To achieve this, it has nylon gears
that will fail eventually. The nylon gears can be replaced by steel gears, which are
more reliable but heavier. The BMC comes in two versions, the V1 (Puma), which is
400 W, and the V2, which is 600 W. These are ridiculously low factory ratings given
what the motors actually can pull. Both motors weigh about the same—4 kg/8.5 lb.
The motor can accommodate a disc brake and a six-speed gear cassette and still fit
into most bicycles.

Tongxin
The Tongxin motor (Figure 4.4) is a small, lightweight, high-torque hub motor for
riders who want a little assist with their bicycles on hills. The power is 180 to 250 W,
and the weight is only 2.3 kg/5 lb. The motor is internally geared at a 12:1 ratio for
climbing hills. Unfortunately, as of 2009, the motors have a high failure rate. Many
people have experienced problems, and it appears that there are design flaws. The
metal internal gears break, lots of controllers don’t work with it, the motor is complex
and difficult to repair, and it has a split-axle design that means that bumps cause it to
skip. 
(Source: www.endless-sphere.com/forums/viewtopic.php?f=2&t=340&p=
147452&hilit=tongxin#p147452.)
FIGURE 4.4 A Tongxin hub motor being used in a novel way.
9 Continents
The 9 Continents motor (Figure 4.5) is an internally geared hub motor. It has a
larger diameter but is narrower than the Crystalyte 400 Series. It has higher torque and
higher peak efficiency than the 400 Series but weighs 20 percent less. It is a good
example of a middle- to low-price motor that’s still fast enough. Currently, these
motors are available with two winding types, a high-rpm Model 2806 for bicycles
with 20-in wheels and a slightly slower Model 2807 for bicycles with 26-in wheels.
For faster speeds, the 2806 motor can be laced into a larger wheel. The motors are
500 W continuous and 1.5 kW peak.

FIGURE 4.5 A 9 Continents motor.
Golden Motors
Golden Motors produces 1,000-, 500-, and 200-w motors (Figure 4.6). The direct-
drive motors seem to be solidly built. However, a number of people have encountered
problems with the Golden Motors Company, as noted on the “Manufacturers to
Avoid” 
page 
at www.endless-sphere.com/forums/viewtopic.php?
f=3&t=236&start=60.
Bafang
The Bafang motor (Figure 4.7) is a capable, high-torque motor that weighs only 3
kg/6.6 lb. It can come with disc brake mount on the front or back. The gears are plastic
and can melt if it’s used for serious power, but metal gears are available, so it is
advisable to upgrade to these. The SWXH is the censored, cable-through axle, disc
mount version. The Bafang is capable of 1,500 W of peak power.

FIGURE 4.6 A Golden motor.
FIGURE 4.7 A Bafang motor.

4.1.4 Interfacing Motors with Controllers
Brushless and brushed motor controllers are not interchangeable, but you sometimes
can swap controllers between different brands of motors if they are the same type.
Most hub motors look the same, and usually, the only way you can determine the type
of motor is by looking at how many wires it has coming out of it. With a brushed
motor, you have only two wires, positive and negative, that can be swapped round for
reverse movement.
With a brushless motor, you will have up to eight wires (Figure 4.8). The additional
wires in the brushless motor are for the Hall sensor (positive, negative, and three
sense wires) and because you have three coils not just one, so three thick power wires
instead of two. The motor has three coils instead of one to even out the forces
involved and increase efficiency. The Hall sensors in the motor are powered by a
small voltage and switch their sensor output between high and low depending on
whether they are over a magnet or not. The controller then picks up this positional
information and the signal coming from the hand throttle to determine what power to
give to the motor’s three power wires (also known as phase wires). The power and
sensor wires are linked through the controller and so must be connected to the
controller in a specific combination.
FIGURE 4.8 The inner workings of the Crystalyte X5 motor showing Hall sensors,
stator, and windings. Each Hall sensor has three pins: positive (red), negative (black),
and sense (blue, green, or yellow). The motor has eight wires coming out: three sense
wires from the three Hall sensors, positive and negative for the Hall sensors, and three
power wires.
Usually, if you buy a motor and controller together, the wires will be labeled or

color-coded in an obvious way to make connection easy, but if you mix and match
different brands of motor and controller, then you may need to contact the manufacturer
or do some research on the Internet to find out the color-coding. You can use trial and
error to find the correct wiring, but there are 36 combinations. Be gentle with the
throttle if you are unsure about the wire combinations. You will know if the
combination is wrong because the motor won’t spin properly. It may oscillate or move
only in a specific orientation. See Section 4.2.1 for more detail on how to find correct
wiring combinations.
Some brushless motors have only three wires, with no Hall sensor wires. In this
case, a special controller is used that employs the back–electromotive force (EMF)
from the three phase wires to calculate the position of the motor. These controllers
have more advanced electronics and can be more expensive. In addition, the motor
needs to be moving for the back-EMF signals to be transmitted, so these special
controllers are called pedal-first controllers because you can’t use them from a
complete stop (you have to pedal up to about 5 mph first before power can be applied
to the motor).
4.1.5 Reliability of Motors
The reliability of the two types of motors is about the same. A brushed motor has
brushes that gradually wear down and have to be replaced, but brushless motors have
more wires and Hall sensors, which tend to break. The brushed motor is the simplest
because it requires no complex electronics. The brushed motor needs only a controller
to alter the speed, which is done by controlling the voltage. If a controller breaks on a
brushed motor, it is possible to simply rig a switch on the handlebar to control the
speed by on/off control. An emergency on/off switch is recommended anyway because
when a brushed motor controller breaks, it often breaks in the full-power position,
sending you flying with no hope of stopping!
4.1.6 Motor Types: Hub Motors
Motors can come in several styles of drive train, the way they apply power to the
wheel. The main three types are hub motors, chain-drive motors, and friction-drive
motors. Most electric bicycle motors on the market now are hub motors because of
their simplicity of use. For this reason, this book will focus on hub motors. Hub
motors are very easy to install and are very reliable. They come in front and rear hub
wheel designs and may be sold installed in a wheel already or be supplied separately,
requiring them to be laced into a wheel (see “Tips on Wheel-Building Hub Motors” in
Section 3.4.15). Hub motors come in lots of different sizes, and usually the physical
size relates to the power of the motor. Big, powerful motors usually have heavier-
gauge spokes because this is needed for carrying powerful and heavy battery packs.

If you are going to push your motor to its limits, you should consider buying
heavier-gauge spokes for it and building it into a stronger rim. You may have to do this
anyway if spokes start to break or the rim gets damaged. If you are buying a motor
from a retailer, you usually will have some choice between speed and torque variants
of the same power rating. You also will be able to choose the wheel size for the
motor. Choose carefully based on your needs. The motor geared for “fastest speed” is
not always the best. A higher-toque motor geared for everyday speeds will have
greater efficiency at lower speeds and better acceleration. Torque variants of a motor
would be good for circuit racing with lots of corners, whereas a speed variant would
be better for high-speed commuting or long, straight drag racing.
The torque versus speed efficiency tradeoff for a motor can be affected by the motor
windings, battery voltage, and wheel size and gearing. For instance, if you want to
make an electric bicycle that has so much torque that it does wheelies, then you would
want a motor with a high-torque winding laced into the smallest wheel with a high-
ampere controller. If you want to break bicycle land speed records, then a large-
diameter wheel with a high-voltage motor wound for efficiency at high speed is best.
High-power-rated motor, controller, and batteries obviously are essential in both the
preceding designs.
Most decent hub motors now have a disc brake option. It can be a difficult job to
modify a non–disc brake motor to accept a disc brake, but you will want disc brakes if
you plan to go faster than 20 mph on a regular basis. So make sure that your motor can
accommodate a disc brake.
Hub Motor Gearing and Free Wheels
Hub motors also can be geared by internal gearing (Figure 4.9). Gearing allows a
hub motor to run at higher rpms, which is more efficient for the motor, whereas the
output is geared down to allow optimal speed for the electric bicycle. Some new hub
motor designs allow the rider to change motor gearing while riding, but these don’t
exist in kit form at the moment.
Gears add complexity to the hub motor design and can be a point of failure. Some
gears are made of nylon, and these are more likely to fail than metal gears but are
quieter and lighter in weight. Some hub motors are free wheeling and some are fixed.
Free wheeling refers to what happens when the power is taken away in a coast. If the
motor has a free wheel, then it will coast longer when the throttle is released. If it has
no free wheel, then the motor will try to regenerate when the throttle is released. Some
controllers have regenerative braking capability and can be used with non-free-
wheeled motors to recover braking energy back into the batteries and extend the range
of the electric bicycle. Most controllers currently don’t have regenerative capability,
and in this case, a non-free-wheeled motor will be less efficient while coasting.

FIGURE 4.9 Inside a Puma geared hub motor.
Inside a Hub Motor
Hub motors have powerful neodymium-iron-boron magnets around the inside of the
hub wheel, so be careful when taking them apart. These magnets attract and stick to the
stator axle part of the wheel. This force is very strong, and the attraction is violent.
When you put the stator axle back into the magnet rim hub, you will feel the attraction
as it goes in, and then it will jump suddenly as the force of the magnets takes over.
When you put these parts together, be careful that you don’t get your fingers trapped in
the gap.
Often the spokes on a hub motor are under high tension, and this can distort the case
off the hub motor. When you take both side plates off a hub motor, sometimes the
spokes will stretch the casing of the motor so that is difficult or impossible to replace
the side plates. If this happens, the spokes must be loosened before the side plates are
screwed on, and then the spokes can be retightened. This is the case with the
Crystalyte X5 hub motor. Be careful not to let water into your motor because the
magnetic and electrical action inside can cause accelerated rusting that will damage
the insides of the motor.
From time to time, you will have to replace the bearings in your hub motor. The two
bearings in the side plates support all the weight of the bicycle and so will wear quite
fast. With daily use, you may need to change the bearings on a heavy bicycle once a
year. If you have the hub open for any reason, it is a good opportunity to do some

preventive maintenance and change the bearings. If a bearing fails while in use, you
will instantly notice bad noises coming from the motor and a noticeable loss of
smoothness. If a bearing failure occurs, stop using the bicycle because continued use
could damage the motor.
You can test if the bearings are broken by holding the bicycle by the saddle and
shaking it back and forth sideways. If the motor pivots on the axle, then the bearings
are shot. The air gap (between the magnets and stator coil) usually is very small, and
with bad bearings, the magnets could scrape against the stator, which could damage
them or the Hall sensors.
4.1.7 Motor Types: Chain-Drive and Friction-Drive Motors
Chain-drive setups (Figure 4.10) require a bit more effort to put in place than hub
motors but have several advantages. With chain-drive motors, it is possible to change
the gearing, which is not possible on many hub motors. This will increase the motor’s
efficiency. It is possible to use the main bicycle chain and allow the user to change the
gearing that the motor uses while riding. Chain-drive motors are smaller than hub
motors for the same power rating. In addition, chain-drive motors can be suspended
using the bicycle’s suspension, unlike hub motors, so this reduces the bicycle’s
unsprung weight. Because the motor is outside the wheel, it should be cheaper and
easier to replace the wheel if it is damaged. It is for this reason that most larger
electric vehicles (EVs) don’t have hub motors and many are chain-driven. However,
the mechanisms are often more mechanically complex and difficult to install initially.

FIGURE 4.10 Chain-drive setup. Several different motor mounting positions can be
used, and the chain can drive the main sprocket and an additional rear gear wheel.
Usually, chain-drive kits include some method of mounting the motor, but there are
many different types of frames, which can make connecting chain-drive motors
difficult. There is no standard motor mount, unlike hub motors, which are standard and
fit all bicycles. If you just buy the motor, then it can be quite technically challenging to
fix it to the bicycle. Often purpose-built chain-driven electric bicycles will have a
motor mount already welded to the frame, but even with this, it still can be challenging
to change the motor if an upgrade is desired. The difficulty comes from having to
correctly tension two chains at once.
Friction-drive systems (Figure 4.11) now are regarded mainly as an obsolete
technology because of problems with slippage during wet conditions, special tire
requirements, and inefficiency. Friction-drive systems have much the same problems
as rim brakes. A friction-drive system can work well in certain circumstances, though,
and it provides an easy way to gear down an electric motor for driving a bicycle. You
also can get belt-driven drive trains, but these are more common on motored bicycle
engines, where you can’t easily build the engine into a wheel hub.

FIGURE 4.11 Friction-drive system using the rim. It is also possible to use the tire
surface instead.
4.2 Controllers
With modern brushless motors, the controller is the heart and mind of the machine.
However, the controller is a complicated beast that can be treated by the user as just a
magic black box—and as long as it works, that’s often sufficient. Therefore, this
section mainly addresses controller theory that a novice electric biker might want to
skip.
Modern controllers have many functions, including controlling power, reversing,
and recovering braking energy when stopping. Some controllers can interface with
other devices such as advanced electric bicycle computers or data loggers. Often a
basic low-power controller and a faster high-power controller will be built in the
same factory and have the same chip set and circuit board. Sometimes lower-power
controllers can be modified to achieve more power just by upgrading a few key
components or using simple modifications. Often certain features are present on the
circuit board that users don’t know about. Sometimes these controllers can be
modified to increase the level of control that the user can enjoy. The aim of this
section is to make you aware of these options so that you can be more in control of
your electric bicycle’s performance, battery health, and functionality.
4.2.1 Finding the Right Wiring Configuration for a New Motor-
Controller Combination
Most of the time, brushed controllers (Figure 4.12) are interchangeable between
brushed motors, assuming that the rating specs are obeyed. Brushless controllers,

however, are usually not easily interchangeable between brushless motors because
there is no standard color code for wiring the phase wires and Hall sensor wires.
Also, the Hall sensors can be positioned in two different ways in relation to the
magnet poles. Therefore, to fit a brushless controller to a different motor, some
experimentation is needed unless you already know the combination.
1. You can use trial and error to find the correct wiring, but there are 36
combinations.
2. Fit the phase wires and Hall sensors with plugs or a terminal block so that you
can make and change connections easily.
3. Pick a combination of controller to motor phase wires and controller to motor
sensor wires. The phase wires are always of much larger thickness than the
sensor wires. Always connect thick to thick and thin to thin.
4. Connect the wires, and then gently turn the throttle.
5. You will know that the combination is wrong if the motor won’t spin properly.
It may jump, oscillate, or move in only one specific orientation.
FIGURE 4.12 Brushed motor controller. This controller is sealed with potting
compound and is difficult to disassemble if repairs are needed.
6. Keep working through the combinations until you find the right one. You can

protect the controller from damage during this trial-and-error process by putting a
light bulb in series between the battery and controller. A MR16 bulb often will
fit easily into the fuse holder.
On some motors, there may be a further complication that the position of the Hall
sensors relative to magnet poles is different from what the controller was designed
for. Some controllers have a jumper that can be used to specify what type of
configuration is used, 60 degrees or 120 degrees. The best way to connect a motor or
controller is to look on an Internet forum to see if the wiring for that motor-controller
combination is known. See “Known to Work Brushless Motor/Controller Wiring
Diagrams” on www.endless-sphere.com/forums.
The Hall sensors signal when the power pulses should be sent. Therefore, the Hall
sensors have to be positioned in a specific orientation for the controller or the timing
of the power pulse will be off. There are two types of windings: delta and wye
configurations. Some controllers have a jumper switch that allows for switching
between either type of motor winding configuration. If the wrong winding
configuration is selected, then the motor will not have any power, and the controller
may be damaged. There may be one wiring combination for forward and one wiring
combination for backward movement. Some controllers also have a reverse switch,
and the speed of the motor may be limited when in reverse mode.
4.2.2 Inside a Controller
One way to destroy a controller is to place the motor under high load when it is not
rotating and then set maximum throttle. This will cause a very high current to flow
because it is basically like shorting out the batteries. The capacitors in the controller
will receive a massive power spike and blow up. This will protect the motor, which
would be next to blow if the controller didn’t. The windings would melt under the
extreme high current owing to the lack of back-EMF because the motor is not moving.
This failure usually can be repaired simply by replacing the capacitors. If the
capacitors are too badly exploded to make out their value, then you can either search
online or guess or use the specs from Section 5.4.1. The voltage spec is likely to be at
least 1.5 times the maximum voltage of the controller, so just get the highest-value
electrolytic capacitor that will fit in the case. Pay attention to polarity when soldering
it in place (see Section 5.4.3 for help).
Most controllers have an onboard thermal cutout circuit that will protect the
controller from overheating. If the controller overheats, it will shut down and will
start again only after it has cooled down. It’s best to position the controller in a
location with airflow (not inside a bag) so that this will not happen.
All controllers also have a low-voltage cutout circuit (LVC). This is there to

protect the batteries but is a very crude form of protection. Controllers usually will
accept a range of different currents, but the LVC is a set value that will not change to
match the type of battery or voltage used. The LVC is designed to stop the controller if
the battery voltage drops below the LVC value. The LVC is specific to the voltage of
the batteries you are using. This is why some controllers have voltage stickers on them
when you can easily exceed the stated voltage. You only have LVC protection when
you use batteries of the stated voltage. This may occur if the batteries are either empty
or being discharged too fast above their C rating. The circuit is usually a comparator
type of circuit with resistors and a diode. The LVC usually can be altered by altering
the values of the resistors in the LVC.
The controller measures and limits current by measuring the voltage drop across a
current shunt resistor (Figure 4.13). Based on this measurement, there is a feedback
mechanism that will either increase or reduce the pulse-width modulation (PWM) of
the controller based on the throttle position. On any controller circuit board, the
current shunt resistor usually will look like a few parallel bars of wire. To raise or
lower the current limit of the controller, it is possible to either add solder or cut the
shunt to alter the resistance. This tricks the controller into thinking that there is either
less or more current flowing through the circuit than is actually the case and changes
the limit accordingly. The feedback mechanism uses a potential divider circuit with a
shunt resistor. It is possible to change the values of the other resistors in the potential
divider circuit to alter the current limit. A potentiometer can be installed to have a
variable current limit. See Section 6.1.7 for variable-current-limit modifications.
FIGURE 4.13 Shunt resistor and main capacitor.
4.3 Batteries
The current rate of technological advancement in the field of batteries is truly

astounding. There are new battery breakthrough news stories about once a month, and
new products are introduced every few months. Over the last 5 years while I have
been involved in electric bicycles, I have watched electric bicycles move away from
heavy lead batteries, through nickel–metal hydride (NiMh) and nickel-cadmium
(NiCd) batteries, to advanced lithium polymer and lithium-iron-phosphate batteries.
These advances have moved electric bicycles from simple toys into genuine versatile
transport solutions. Many parallels can be drawn with the world of remote control
(RC) hobbies, where these same battery advances have made it possible for electric
RC models to beat gas- and nitro-powered RC engines in terms of shorter lap times
and higher power-to-weight ratios. Surely as battery EVs improve, so will passenger
vehicles start to follow.
4.3.1 Battery Theory
A battery is a collection of cells working together, and a cell is a discrete element
of a battery. In popular language, these terms are often used interchangeably, but not in
this book. A battery is a means to store energy by way of chemical reaction. This
reaction may be reversible, as in rechargeable batteries (secondary cells), or
irreversible, as in “throw-away batteries” (primary cells). Here we are concerned
only with secondary cells for electric bicycles—for obvious reasons!
A cell normally consists of electrodes, electrolyte, a separator material, current
collects, contact tabs, a casing, and insulation. The energy in a cell is stored by
chemicals on the electrodes. The electrolyte allows the transport of ions between
electrodes. The separator is insulation material that separates the electrodes but
allows them to be close together for conduction of ions. The insulation stops the
battery from short circuiting, and the casing keeps everything together.
When you discharge a cell, you allow a path for electrons to travel from one
electrode to the other to complete the chemical reaction. When you recharge a cell,
you reverse the flow of current and force the reaction back the other way. If you
mistreat a battery by overcharging, overdischarging, or short circuiting, other bad
chemical reactions can happen that are irreversible because of loss of chemicals or
thermal damage.
The main parameter of a battery is the energy density, which can be measured in
watthours per kilogram/pound. This is a measure of how much energy is stored inside
the battery compared with its weight. The maximum energy density of each battery
chemistry can be predicted by theoretical equations of the chemical reactions
occurring in the cell. However, the theory is based on the active materials present, and
real batteries never reach the theoretical limit because they need other auxiliary
components such as insulation and casings to support the battery, and these add

weight. Real batteries rarely reach half their maximum theoretical energy density.
Internal Resistance of a Cell
A cell is a source of power, but it also contains resistance because the chemical
reactions inside the cell can occur only so fast. This is usually limited by the transport
of ions through the electrolyte. This resistance is called a cell’s internal resistance.
Good cells have a low internal resistance. This means that you can draw current
quickly from them. Internal resistance cannot be measured by a multimeter because it
is based on the physicochemical properties of the cell. When you draw current from a
cell, its voltage will drop because it loses power to its internal resistance. This is
called voltage sag.
Voltage also can be dropped across the battery tabs. This energy goes into heating
the cell and is lost. Therefore, there is always a limit to how fast you can discharge a
cell before it either melts or does other damage to itself. With larger battery packs, the
self-heating is increased because there is a smaller surface-area-to-volume ratio,
which makes the heat dissipation worse. You can calculate a cell’s internal resistance
by using Equation (4.1). This equation also can be used to compare the quality of
different cells. Internal resistance will change as the cell gets older and as its state of
charge changes. You can test cell resistance with an ESR meter, which is designed to
measure the equivalent series resistance (ESR) in capacitors. Some ESR meters
require the connection of a capacitor in series to prevent automatic discharge of the
battery.
EQUATION 4.1 Calculation for cells internal resistance.
Difference Between Capacitors and Batteries
A battery can be optimized for either high capacity or high discharge rate. A high-
capacity battery will have large electrodes or thick layers of coating on its current
collectors, whereas a high-discharge battery will have electrodes with high surface
area. Capacitors called supercapacitors can be used as another source of power for
EVs. The difference between capacitors and batteries is that capacitors store their
power only along the surface of their electrodes, whereas batteries store their power
in the bulk chemicals contained within the battery. Because a capacitor does not store
energy in its bulk, the surface area can be maximized for high power discharge rates.
Capacitors are not limited by transport of ions through the electrolyte, so they have a
much lower internal resistance. However, because a capacitor does not store power in
its bulk, this means that it has only limited energy storage capacity compared with

batteries.
Cell Voltage Effects
A cell’s voltage is determined by the electrode reactions that it supports and can be
predicted for any electrode pair by theoretical equations. The voltage of a cell is
normally between 0 and 4 V. The voltage goes up when the cell is being charged and
down when it is being discharged. You can use the resting voltage or open-circuit
voltage as a measure of how much charge is left in the battery. This can be difficult,
however, because a good battery will have a flat discharge curve (voltage-versus-
state-of-charge graph). Each cell chemistry has a nominal voltage, a fully charged
voltage, and an “empty” voltage. It is important never to discharge any cell past its
empty voltage because it will damage the cell. Never let any cell reach 0 V. It is
important never to charge a cell past its fully charged voltage because this also will
damage the cell. The nominal voltage is the cell’s working voltage. During discharge
at the cell’s specified discharge rate, the cell will be around this nominal voltage. If
the discharge is faster than the cell’s specified discharge rate, the voltage will sag to a
lower voltage. If the discharge is slower than the cell’s specified discharge rate, the
voltage will be higher, closer to the cell’s fully charged voltage. There is no hard and
fast limit between damagingly fast discharge and the normal discharge rate. The
difference is more of a tradeoff between cell life expectancy and discharge rate. This
is why cells sometimes have three specified discharge rates: a peak rate, a normal
rate, and a battery management system (BMS) cutoff discharge rate.
In addition to energy density and discharge rate, there are several other factors that
can affect batteries that are specific issues related to their chemistry. Charge/discharge
profile, charge/discharge endpoint determination, overcharging/overdischarging
failure mechanisms and protection mechanisms, and series/parallel behaviors are all
related specifically to the battery chemistry and need to be looked at individually.
Often, high-tech battery chargers and BMSs are needed to manage the charging and/or
discharging of a battery to prevent it from going outside its safe operating limits.
4.3.2 Pack Building and Series/Parallel Effects
Large battery packs are often made of combinations of series- and/or parallel-
connected cells. When cells are connected in series, the current that passes through
each cell is always the same. When cells are connected in parallel, the voltage across
them is always the same. The ideal battery pack would just consist of one cell.
Multiple-cell battery packs usually need to be balanced, and more cells increase the
likelihood of having a bad cell. However, one cell does not have a high enough
voltage for an EV, so several cells need to be connected in series to increase the
voltage; otherwise, the current requirements would be too high. Therefore, the ideal

EV battery would consist of several very large cells connected in series to reach the
desired voltage. Often we have to connect cells in parallel to increase pack capacity.
Cells are manufactured in discrete capacities, and larger-capacity cells may not be
available. The parallel connections can be made before or after the series
connections. That is, the battery back can consist of parallel-connected cell groups that
are then series connected, or it can consist of series-connected strings that are then
parallel connected with other battery packs. There are advantages and disadvantages
to both.
Cell Balancing in Series-Connected Batteries
Series- and parallel-connected cells have different balancing characteristics. When
a battery pack is assembled, the manufacturer should test and select cells that are
closely matched in terms of capacity and internal resistance. If a battery pack is not
balanced when it is charged or discharged, then bad things will happen. A balanced
pack is one where all the cells have the same state of charge and capacity. If a series-
connected battery pack is unbalanced during charging, then some of the cells will
reach full charge before others because the same charging current runs through them
all. The cells that reach full charge first then will be overcharged if the charging
continues. If a series-connected pack is unbalanced during discharge, then some of the
cells will be completely discharged before the rest, and if discharging continues, the
empty cells will be forced to discharge further by the other cells and will become
damaged by voltage reversal. It is clear that when in series, cells always should be the
same capacity. It is often said that “a battery pack is only as good as its weakest cell.”
Parallel-Connected Cells
When cells are connected in parallel, their voltage will be the same. If two cells of
different voltages are parallel connected together, then their voltages will both change,
and the resulting voltage will be somewhere between the starting voltages of the two
cells. If the two cells were of the same type and just of different states of charge, then
the higher-charged cell will just charge the other cell until they are at roughly the same
state of charge. The charging/discharging may occur very fast, though, and this may
damage the cells depending on the difference in state of charge and the C rating of the
cells. If two different types of cells with different nominal voltages are connected in
parallel, then bad things certainly will happen. The power from the higher-voltage cell
will overcharge the lower-voltage cell, potentially causing damage. At the same time,
the load on the lower-voltage cell may overdischarge the higher-voltage cell,
potentially causing damage. There is an exception to this if diodes are used to prevent
cross-charging between the cells (Figure 4.14).
Series/Parallel Cell Failures Inside Batteries

When a battery fails, it can fail either open circuit or short circuit, or its voltage
could fall outside its normal parameters and fail to produce current. Different
series/parallel configurations will react differently to the different types of cell
failure. If a series string of cells has a single cell that fails open circuit, then this will
stop the whole string from working (Figure 4.15) until the dead cell is replaced. It
will read 0 V if a voltage meter is put across it. If a series string has a cell that fails
short circuit, then the battery will continue to work but at a reduced voltage. If this
series string is in parallel with other similar packs, then the string will get charged by
the other packs and possibly overcharged. If a series string has a cell that fails with its
voltage drop outside normal operating parameters (i.e., there is a “weak cell”), then it
should be replaced because this will reduce pack performance. Continued use of the
pack in this condition will result in the cell failing even further and possibly failing
open circuit.
FIGURE 4.14 Use diodes to protect cells of different types or different voltages
when connected in parallel. This diagram shows how to connect the diodes. These
batteries are actually the same voltage and type and thus would not need diodes.
With parallel cell groups, the effects of failure are different. A cell failing open
circuit in a parallel group will reduce the capacity of that cell group but still allow
continued operation (Figure 4.16). If this cell group is part of a larger series string of

cell groups in a battery pack, then the capacity of the whole battery pack will be
reduced to the level of the bad cell group until the cell is replaced (like a “weak cell”
in a series string). Continued use of the unbalanced pack will result in the rest of the
cells in the parallel group being damaged by overcharges and overdischarges until the
whole cell group dies. A BMS is designed to stop this failure. If a cell fails short
circuit in a parallel cell group, it will short out all the other cells in the parallel group,
which can create a lot of heat. Depending on the type of battery chemistry, the heat
from short-circuited failed cells can damage other neighboring cells. If this damage is
sufficient to cause internal short circuits in the neighboring cells, then it can cause the
pack to go into thermal runaway in a spectacular fashion, but this is rare.
FIGURE 4.15 Cell failure in a series-connected string of cells.
FIGURE 4.16 Cell failure in a parallel-connected cell group.
4.3.3 Battery Safeguards
There are lots of things you can do to protect your batteries and keep them within
their safe operating limits. I have already talked about fuses (Figure 4.17), and they
are essential in any battery pack to protect the batteries and wiring from going into
meltdown because of a short circuit. Thermal fuses (Figure 4.18) also can be used to
protect a battery pack. These are like normal fuses, but they blow when a high
temperature is reached instead of a high current. These are often seen inside nickel
batteries, which get hot during use and at the end of charging. Thermistors (Figure
4.19) are resistors that change their resistance based on temperature. You see

thermistors in NiMh battery packs because they are part of the charge-termination
method for charging them.
FIGURE 4.17 Automotive fuse holder.
FIGURE 4.18 Thermal fuse.

FIGURE 4.19 Thermistors.
Because nickel batteries don’t follow a constant-current/constant-voltage charging
pattern, they have to use a special method to detect when they are full. Nickel batteries
for electric bicycles will have a three-pin plug connecting the charger to the battery.
Two of the pins are obviously positive and negative, but the third goes to a thermistor
and then to negative. The special charger measures the resistance of the thermistor as
the battery is charged, and when the battery gets hot at the end of charge, the resistance
reduces, and the charger notices this and stops charging. Batteries can be isolated from
each other to prevent them from cross-charging by using diodes (see Figure 4.14). The
diodes will only allow charge to flow in one direction; this has the advantage that you
can use different batteries in parallel with each other that otherwise would have had
damaging effects because of their voltage differences causing cross-charging. Low-
voltage cutouts (LVCs) are a safeguard built into the controller to ensure that the
batteries are not drained completely empty. The LVC is usually a crude method,
because most controllers will accept a range of different battery voltages, but the
controller will cut out at only one voltage that is not selectable.
Battery Management System (BMS)
The BMS is the ultimate battery protection device and has many functions, much
like a little hard-wired computer. The BMS (Figure 4.20) is always attached to the
battery and forms part of the battery pack but draws very little power from the pack.
The BMS will limit the discharge rate and cut out if the rate exceeds the safe limit of
the battery. Sometimes the BMS cutout is faster than a fuse at protecting the battery
from a short circuit. The BMS monitors all the cells or cell groups in the battery pack
via balance wires to monitor the voltages of the cells. If during discharge the voltage
of a cell group drops below the safe limit, then the BMS will cut out. When charging,
the BMS will “balance” the pack by draining charge from cells that have reached the
desired voltage already, thus allowing the other cells to catch up. The BMS uses
resistors to discharge the cells during balancing, and this can create a bit of heat.

FIGURE 4.20 16 cell battery management system (BMS) for a 48V LiFePo4 battery.
4.3.4 Commercially Available Batteries for Electric Bicycles
Lead Acid (SLA, Pba)
This was the first battery chemistry available to EVs and has been around for over
100 years. These batteries are still used in EVs today but only very slow ones such as
golf carts and neighborhood EVs. A single lead-acid cell is 2 V (nominal), so lead-
acid batteries are always a multiple of this voltage (i.e., a 12-V battery is six lead-
acid cells in series). The fully charged voltage is 14.5 V for a 12-V battery, and the
empty voltage is 11 V. Lead-acid batteries come in two types: deep discharge ( Figure
4.21) for EVs and normal for starting car engines. The difference is in the way the
electrodes are made, with deep-discharge electrodes having larger plates that can hold
more capacity, whereas normal lead-acid batteries have high-surface-area plates that
can deliver at a faster rate. Flooded lead-acid batteries are also available. These
batteries have openings where you can add distilled water or acid to keep the battery
in good condition.
The main advantage of lead-acid batteries is that they have a high discharge rate,

about 9C, and they are very cheap, usually two or three times cheaper than other,
better batteries. Also, because they have been used in cars and are an established
product that has been used for a long time, 95 percent of all lead-acid batteries are
recycled.
However, they have several big disadvantages. These batteries have a very small
energy density, only 35 Wh/kg or 16 Wh/lb, which means that any lead-acid battery–
powered electric bicycle will have a very limited range and be very heavy. A lead-
acid battery–powered electric bicycle will need 1 kg/2.2 lb of battery for each mile of
range. They can only be recharged slowly, which limits their flexibility of use. They
like to be kept charged all the time to maximize their life. Too much depth of discharge
(DOD) will reduce their life. Their life cycle under electric bicycle conditions is only
usually 250 cycles (Lemire-Elmore, 2004). Such a short life cycle often makes it more
economical to buy a better battery chemistry that will work out cheaper in the long run.
Lead-acid batteries should be charged using a constant-current/constant-voltage
(CC/CV) charge profile, usually C/10 until 2.4 V per cell is reached, and then that
voltage should be maintained while the current levels off. Lead-acid batteries can be
charged in parallel and/or series with other lead-acid batteries without problems. No
BMS is required.
FIGURE 4.21 Lead-acid battery for a mobility scooter.
Lead-Acid Battery Safety
Lead-acid batteries contain 33 percent sulfuric acid as the electrolyte. The acid
should never leave the battery because such batteries are sealed. If there is a rupture
and the acid escapes, then be careful because it can burn the skin and destroy clothes.
Wash with water if you suspect that you have battery acid on your skin. A small
amount of baking soda in water can be used to neutralize the burn. Overcharging a
lead-acid battery with high voltages will generate oxygen and hydrogen gas by
electrolysis of water, possibly forming an explosive mix. This is why some
renewable-energy battery banks are ventilated.

Lead-Acid Battery Formats
There are several standard formats for cells and batteries that exist for other
applications that have been adopted by bicycle manufacturers. For old lead-acid
batteries, there are several standard sizes that were brought about by car, wheelchair,
and golf cart manufactures. Lead-acid batteries come in square bricks of different
shapes and sizes. The smaller batteries (<20 Ah) come with solder or crimping tabs,
and the larger car batteries (>20 Ah) come with screw or clamping terminals.
NiMh Batteries
Nickel–metal hydride batteries are a good all-round battery chemistry and a much
better choice than lead-acid batteries for electric bicycles. These batteries are used in
hybrid vehicles because of their fast recharge capability for regenerative braking and
because they are reliable. NiMh batteries have a higher energy density than lead-acid
batteries and can hold around 65 Wh/kg or 30 Wh/lb. This is slightly lower than most
lithium batteries, but NiMh volumetric energy density is higher than that of many
lithium batteries, so they are still a good choice for EVs.
NiMh cells can be charged at up to 1C but usually are charged more slowly for
extended life (around C/5). The discharge rate is reasonable, although it varies among
brands and is usually 1C to 5C. These batteries are roughly twice as expensive as
lead-acid batteries, usually around 2 Wh/£ or 1.33 Wh/$ at the time of this writing, but
they also last longer—300 cycles under electric bicycle conditions (Lemire-Elmore,
2004). NiMh batteries don’t need to be kept charged all the time like lead batteries.
The nominal working voltage of an NiMh cell is 1.2 V, with a full voltage of 1.4 V
and an empty voltage of 1.0 V.
Charge termination is done by measuring temperature and looking for the
temperature increase at the end of charging. Balancing is done by slowing the charge
current at the end of charging. Full cells will harmlessly dissipate the slow charge
current as heat. This function is built into NiMh chargers and is designed to work with
a thermistor located inside the pack. A simple 40°C thermostat circuit also will work
by switching the current off when the cells get hot and allowing them to cool off and
then switching on/off, maintaining the temperature until all cells are balanced. No
BMS is needed, and NiMh BMSs are not readily available. This is a shame because a
BMS helps to prolong the life of the pack by preventing some forms of misuse by the
user. The batteries are damaged by temperatures over 70°C. A temperature over
100°C will destroy them. NiMh cells and batteries cannot be fast charged in parallel
without a basic BMS. Parallel fast charging can result in severe overcharging and
failure of one of the parallel cells or batteries.
Discharge is different, however, and NiMh packs can happily be paralleled on

discharge. Diodes or switches can be used to get around the problem of charging
parallel batteries. This is highly recommended if you have parallel NiMh batteries.
Some NiMh chargers sense end of charge by measuring a voltage peak. NiMh cells
also can be “trickle charged” by a very low current when the heat caused by the small
overcharging current is insignificant.
Nickel Battery Formats
NiMh cells come in several standard sizes adapted for toy manufacturers and
hobbyists, including AA (<3 Ah), AAA (<2 Ah), C (<5 Ah), D (<12 Ah), and F (<20
Ah). These cells use a cylindrical metal can design and can come with metal tabs
welded onto them for connection to other cells. To make larger EV-sized battery
packs, these cells are welded together and then packaged with protective packaging.
The ones that are mainly of interest to electric bicycle enthusiasts are D cells (Figure
4.22), but C and F cells are also used. The disadvantage of cylindrical cells is that
they leave lots of unused space between the cells when assembled into packs. For
specialist applications such as EVs, there are “prismatic” cells, but they are often not
available commercially to the public. Prismatic cells are large (20 to 500 Ah) cells
that are rectangular in size and usually have screw terminals like car batteries. These
cells are easier to build into a large EV pack; they have a lower cell count and no void
space need be left between the cells. Prismatic cells are used in hybrid and EVs, but
electric bicycle enthusiasts have gotten hold of wrecked hybrids and made packs out
of the working cells.
NiMh and NiCd Safety
NiMh and NiCd batteries use potassium hydroxide as the electrolyte, which is
alkaline. If you severely overcharge an NiMh battery, it will boil the electrolyte, and
the battery will vent. This will ruin the battery, and the fumes are toxic. Don’t breath
the fumes. Evacuate the area, and wait for the fumes to dissipate. Turn off the charger
at the socket, and open windows to assist ventilation.

FIGURE 4.22 C cell (left) and D cell (right), both nickel–metal hydride cylindrical
cells.
NiCd Batteries
NiCd batteries are very similar to NiMh batteries, and all the preceding applies to
NiCd cells as well as NiMh cells. Even the voltage is the same, and the same battery
chargers will work with both chemistries (with some exceptions). The main
differences are that NiCd batteries have slightly less energy density (35 Wh/kg or 16
Wh/lb) but a much longer life (1,000 cycles) (Lemire-Elmore, 2004). Many people
believe that NiCd batteries have a “memory effect,” where a half-discharged cell,
once recharged, will discharge only down to the previous level of discharge. This
effect seems to be an urban legend (Buchmann, 2001). The memory effect has been
noticed only on a very specific application, a satellite, where the cells were
consistently discharged down to exactly the same level on each cycle and over time
built up a “memory.” In electric bicycle use, this would never be the case, and as long
as depth of discharge varies even slightly between rides, the memory effect will not
occur. The same parallel charging problem occurs with paralleled NiCd cells as with
paralleled NiMh cells.
Lithium Polymer (Lipo, Lion, Lithium Colbalt) Batteries
Lithium polymer batteries are the battery of choice for RC hobbyists. These
batteries have the highest energy density of any secondary cell (150 Wh/kg or 68
Wh/lb; Figure 4.23). These batteries also can reach extremely high discharge rates
(30C) and can be fairly cheap. The only disadvantage is that that they are unstable, and
if abused, they will explode in a dangerous fire-ball. Several house fires have been

caused by lithium polymer batteries, and it is advised that these batteries be recharged
outside the house in a nonflammable area. This is in case you have a charger
malfunction that causes a battery explosion.
FIGURE 4.23 Graph of volumetric energy density versus mass energy density.
Several laptop manufacturers had to recall their batteries because of spontaneous
fires caused by this type of battery. No large manufacturer has yet used them in EVs
because of this problem. Large EV packs often contain hundreds of cells, which
increases the chance of failure. The high temperatures caused by some cell failures
can cause other neighboring cells to fail, which, in theory, could cause a chain
reaction that would destroy the EV. As long as none of the cells is overcharged,
overdischarged, physically damaged, or overheated, then these batteries should be
fine, and many RC hobbyists have had many happy cycles from them.
Lipo cells have a nominal voltage of 3.7 V, a full voltage of 4.1 V, and an empty
voltage of 2.5 to 2.9 V depending on type. Expensive specialist charging and BMSs
are required, and the cells never must be allowed to exceed the full voltage of 4.1 V
per cell. Several companies are currently working on safer lithium polymer batteries
that can be used in EVs, which is now seen as the biggest untapped marketplace for
batteries. The main effort seems to be replacing the cobalt with other elements such as
manganese or phosphate.
Lithium Battery Safety

Lithium batteries can’t use water-based electrolytes because lithium reacts with
water. Therefore, the electrolytes used in lithium cells are usually solvents that are
flammable. The lithium is highly reactive and will react quickly with water to produce
toxic lithium hydroxide. Lithium also will react slowly with oxygen in the air, but the
reaction will be sped up if moisture is present in the air. Very rarely, some lithium
polymer batteries (used in laptops) have cells that contain manufacturing defects.
These defects may cause them to combust spontaneously for no reason. Poor Chinese
quality control is usually to blame for these faults. Several laptops and mobile phones
have had to be recalled for this reason. If you don’t believe me, watch the videos on
YouTube of people hammering nails through them! If you are new to EVs or electric
bicycles, then don’t use lithium polymer batteries. Many people just don’t use lithium
polymer batteries at all because of the fire risks. Lithium–iron phosphate (LiFePO4)
batteries are a much safer alternative.
The chemicals in most batteries are toxic to some extent. If there is a battery fire or
venting of electrolyte, then do not breathe the toxic fumes. Get away as fast as
possible, and call the fire department if necessary. Disconnect any smoking battery at
the main circuit if it is plugged into a charger, but do so only if safe. If the battery is
smoking, move it outside if it is safe to do so. If the battery is in a safe location
outside, then just let it smolder. If the battery is on fire inside, then extinguish the fire
with a fire blanket and a CO2 extinguisher, but only if it is safe to do so. It may not be
possible to extinguish the fire because of the chemicals involved. Do not use water
fire extinguishers. Lithium reacts with water. Wear protective equipment when
extinguishing a battery fire in case the battery explodes or bits are blown around by
the fire extinguisher.
The highest risk is when you are working on an open battery. When working on
batteries, avoid using metal tools whenever possible; work on a clean, empty,
nonconductive surface; and don’t wear jewelry. If a cell is broken or damaged, do not
attempt to fix it. It is impossible anyway because individual cells were not made to be
user serviceable, and they are very complicated.
Lithium Battery Formats
Lithium cells don’t have any standard format. Some manufacturers use the 18650
cell (Figure 4.24), which is a metal can 18 × 65 mm/0.7 × 2.6 in. This is the format
used by A123 systems. Many lithium cell manufacturers use a foil pouch for their cells
(Figure 4.25) because it is lightweight and offers a very good energy density, but the
disadvantage is that it offers little mechanical protection to the cells, and they have to
be protected inside a padded strongbox. The largest cells are prismatic cells (Figure
4.26), which use a larger plastic case to contain a single cell. These are for electric
cars and motorcycles.

FIGURE 4.24 Cylindrical metal cells of the 18650 type with tabs.
FIGURE 4.25 Foil pouch cell, lithium–iron phosphate (LiFePO4).

FIGURE 4.26 Large prismatic cell for an EV.
Lithium–Iron Phosphate (LiFePO4) Batteries
Lithium–iron phosphate batteries have recently become the battery of choice for
electric bicycles. These batteries have a high energy density (100 Wh/kg or 45 Wh/lb,
200 Wh/L or 200 Wh/qt) and can reach extremely high discharge rates (up to 30C).
Many different manufacturers exist, and their products vary considerably, especially in
terms of price and discharge rate (1C to 30C). Charge rate can be up to 1C but is
usually lower, around C/5, to ensure longer life.
LiFePO4 is accepted as a safe chemistry; it won’t explode if abused. If it does fail,
it is more likely to balloon if it is a foil pouch type of cell. LiFePO4 cells are charged
using a constant-current/constant-voltage charge profile (CC/CV). This usually means
charging at C/5 until 3.75 V per cell is reached and then maintaining this as the current
levels off. LiFePO4 cells tend to drift out of balance with other cells in the same pack
and therefore need a monitoring BMS to keep them balanced. Usually the BMS will
have other safety features, such as preventing overdischarging, short-circuit
protection, or overcurrent protection. The nominal voltage is 3.3 V per cell, the full
voltage is 3.75 V, and the empty voltage is around 3 to 2.5 V depending on
manufacturer.
Using LiFePO4 batteries will make an EV fast and desirable. The prices are now
fairly reasonable, almost the same as nickel cells per watthour. LiFePo4 batteries are
the batteries most marketed for electric bicycle applications. The longevity of
LiFePO4 packs is still undecided because many manufacturers have not been around
long enough. There is intense competition among rival manufacturers, and claims of

thousands of cycles are everywhere but as yet unproven by significant numbers of real
customers.
4.3.5 Future Power Sources: Fuel Cells and Flow Batteries
There are hundreds of different battery chemistries, many of which are only now
receiving proper research and development attention because of the current interest in
the environment, global security, and the price of fuel. The battery chemistries
examined so far are just the main commercial battery chemistries that are used today,
but there are also several less-well-known batteries used by experts for specialist
applications. Fuel cells and flow batteries can be considered to be special cases of a
battery in which the electrode plates are separate from the reaction medium, which is
delivered to the cell from a separate store. This means that the reactants can be
delivered continuously to the cell and not be limited by the size of the cell but stored
in external tanks. Recharging these cells can be achieved simply by replacing or
refueling the depleted tanks with fresh reactants. Air batteries, where one of the
electrodes is air, are a type of flow battery.
Fuel cells are also a special case of a flow battery where one reactant is oxygen
from the air that is used to react with a fuel (usually hydrogen). It is a common myth
that fuel cells run on water; this is not true. Water is the waste product, and hydrogen
is the fuel. While you can make hydrogen from water, it takes a lot of electricity to do
so and is expensive.
Electric bicycles can be run on fuel cells just as easily as they can on batteries.
New advances in fuel cells might be capitalized on by electric bicycles soon too. The
early prototype fuel cells are all tested on electric bicycle applications first because
electric bicycles are becoming a major market for manufacturers, and it’s much
cheaper to prototype with smaller vehicles than with cars. However, there are still
several major obstacles to overcome with fuel cells.
Fuel cells are less efficient overall. Fuel cells are currently only 45 percent
efficient, and hydrogen generation by electrolysis and compression is only 55 percent
efficient (Shinnar, 2003). Both these steps are necessary to make hydrogen fuel cells
work on vehicles, and the combined efficiency (25 percent) is no better than that of
today’s modern gas engines.
Fuel cells require pure gases. Pure fuels are expensive. Many fuel cells specify that
99.99 percent pure hydrogen must be used. If this purity of hydrogen is needed, then
the efficiency of vehicles running on fuel cells likely would degrade quickly when they
run on polluted city air. This would require the use of heavy cylinders of pure
compressed air, which defeats the objective of using a fuel cell.
Hydrogen is very difficult to store, much harder than electricity. A complete fuel

cell system including the hydrogen store usually will be beaten on energy density by
most lithium battery chemistries. Metal hydride stores are too heavy. Compressed
gases are too bulky.
Hydrogen is more difficult to make than electricity and more expensive.
Compressed gases are dangerous, especially hydrogen. You need a special license
to carry cylinders in vehicles. No license is needed for batteries.
There is no distribution system for hydrogen. It would be unsafe and inefficient to
convert natural gas pipelines to hydrogen pipelines (Shinnar, 2003). Currently, most
experimental hydrogen filling stations use compressed cylinders delivered by truck,
which is very carbon-intensive.
If renewable energy is stored as hydrogen instead of used as electricity, then we
would have to build double the renewable-energy generating capacity (Shinnar, 2003).
4.3.6 Reviews of Batteries
Buying a battery over the Internet is all about trust and reputation. When you hand
over the cash, do you trust the retailer not to rip you off and send you a broken battery?
The battery has to perform for a long service life before you have gotten your money’s
worth. If you know a local bicycle shop that sells good batteries at a reasonable price,
then you are lucky. Often you will be better off buying from a retailer and/or
manufacturer with a good reputation than to get a cheap battery.
Ping (eBay Duct Tape LiFePO4 Battery)
Ping is the only eBay retailer of LiFePO4 batteries that has a solid reputation (as of
2010). There are two versions of the Ping battery, V2.5 and V3. Versions 1 and 2 have
been superseded by the V2.5, but they are very similar; version 3 is a completely
different battery. The V2.5 is a high-energy-density, low-power battery capable of
only 1C continuous discharge and 2C peak. The V3 is a high-power battery. The BMS
is good and protects the cells from everything you would expect and doesn’t trip
without reason. Be careful to select the size of battery that will fit the space on your
bicycle. It’s difficult to split your battery into smaller units because of the BMS
circuitry. The batteries come without a case, with just duct tape and card to hold it
together, so you must find a case yourself (Figure 4.27). Each battery on the Web site
comes with a motor power suggestion that you should follow; otherwise, you will
overstress the battery. These batteries are sold specifically for electric bicycles and
scooters, so there is no hassle of making a battery out of cells or smaller packs. Ping
includes a charger with every pack, which seems to be of good quality. The charger,
battery, and BMS all work well together. It’s a good whole-pack solution for novices
or those who don’t want a hassle. Ping’s prices have increased now that the company

has established a reputation, but the company’s offerings are still one of the best deals
on the market.
FIGURE 4.27 A brand new Ping battery. It just needs plugs for connecting.
Zippy Flightmax Batteries (RC Lipo)
These batteries are made of Lipo cells and thus are lightweight high-power
batteries, but they are not as safe as other battery chemistries. They are designed for
RC airplanes, where power-to-weight ratio is critical. They have a very high
discharge rate, so you don’t need many to make a very fast bicycle. However, they
require a special balancing charger that is not provided. No BMS is provided, so you
have to find one yourself. The packs are very small. The largest pack size is 18 V, 4
Ah. Thus, for a decent electric bicycle, you would need about five of them. For an

electric bicycle, you have to build a larger pack out of these smaller units.
A123 Cells (LiFePO4)
There are two sizes of A123 cell, 1.1 and 2.3 Ah. The 2.3-Ah cells are best for
electric bicycles because you need fewer of them. It used to be difficult to acquire
A123 cells, and people had to recycle power tool packs to get them. Now they are
available secondhand on eBay. Some RC sites (Hobby City) also stock them new. It is
harder to build a pack from these because they are often tabless, so welding is
required. Some vendors are now offering prewelded custom packs. You have to
connect up a third-party BMS and find a suitable charger.
RC Battery Pack (NiMh)
The best deals locally on NiMh batteries are for RC hobbyists because they go
through a lot of packs by hammering them on the race track. Their packs are smaller,
and they can afford to buy new ones every few months. RC NiMh packs are usually
discharge rated at 3C or 5C. These packs are harder to build into larger packs than the
small lithium packs because you can’t charge them in parallel. Because of this, it’s
quite difficult to build a decent-sized pack without using high voltages or separating
the parallel strings for charging. You also have to buy an NiMh charger and
thermistor, but a BMS is not needed. The price per watthour of these packs is also not
that much cheaper than that of Ping packs. Table 4.1 provides a summary of
commercial battery performance and value.
TABLE 4.1 Commercial Battery Performance and Value
4.3.7 Resources for Buying Electric Bicycle Batteries
For 
up-to-date 
battery 
comparison 
tables, 
see

www.wiki.saymoo.org/index.py/EvdlGems/Batteries/LithiumIons.
For 
general 
battery 
use 
information, 
see www.batteryuniversity.com/ or
www.buchmann.ca/.
Electric Bicycle and Kit Retailers
All the electric bicycle retailers and kit distributors listed in Sections 2.1.4 and
3.4.1 will have their own electric bicycle battery suppliers. E-bikekit, eBikes.ca, and
BatterySpace are good places to obtain batteries. Here you can also get materials for
building battery packs, such as battery tabs, heat shrink, and BMSs.
• www.e-bikekit.com
• www.ebikes.ca
• www.batteryspace.com
To buy Ping batteries direct instead of from eBay, see www.pingbattery.com.
For A123 cells, Zippy Flightmax, and Turnigy Lipo packs and chargers, see
www.hobbycity.com/hobbycity/store/uh_power_Search.asp.
eBay Batteries
Lots of different electric bicycle batteries are available on eBay, including Ping,
Highpower, and Cammy_CC. Or you can buy individual cells and build your own
packs with Zippy Flightmax and A123 (used cells).
Tool Packs
Cordless power tool packs are a great source of electric bicycle batteries. They
often can be used without any modification needed.
• Bosch BAT836 fatpacks contain Konion cells.
• Dewalt lithium tool packs contain A123 cells.
• Makita power tool packs contain Sony 18650v cells.
• Milwaukee power tool packs contain LiMn cells.
4.4 Chargers and Battery Charging
One of the main problems people think of when they think of EVs is charging. The
practical reality for most people is that charging is not a problem. There are
connections to the electricity grid everywhere, and all it takes is a few seconds to plug
in. Charge times are not really an issue for most commuters because there is plenty of
time when the vehicle is not being used and it could easily be undergoing charging. Is
charge time a critical factor when buying a mobile phone? However, there are some
people who desire much shorter charge times than the usual 1 to 4 hours. Charge rate

of an electric car is limited by the plug voltage and the maximum amperage of the wall
socket, which is usually 13 A. In countries with a 240-V supply, a 20-kWh electric car
battery can be fully charged from empty in 6½ hours. With a 110-V supply, it would
take twice as long as this from a standard socket. The charge time can be reduced if a
dedicated circuit is connected to the circuit breaker by an electrician. This requires
rewiring the house. As with an electric stove, a dedicated circuit will allow currents
up to 15 A. To charge an electric car even faster would require higher voltage.
Industrial three-phase power supplies are 480 V and 25 to 30 A, and these could
charge a 20-kWh electric car in just over an hour.
However, because electric bicycles have much smaller batteries, they are not
usually limited by the power of the wall socket but by the rating of the batteries. In
theory, a 240-V, 13-A socket (3 kW) could charge your average electric bicycle
battery in 10 minutes if the battery could handle the high charge rate. In countries with
110-V supply, it would take 20 minutes, twice as long. However, most batteries can’t,
in the long term, handle charge rates of more than 1C. This is why we still have the 4-
hour charge times and 1-hour “fast charges.” Even with the many promised advances
in technology, this doesn’t look like it is going to change anytime soon. The best way
to improve charging therefore seems to be to have a bigger battery that can “mop up”
charge quicker and approach that magic number wall socket limitation of 3 kW, which
in electric bicycle terms is about 150 miles of range gained every hour. Charging at
150 mph sounds good to me!
Battery Swapping
The other benefit of electric bicycles is that you can swap the batteries a lot easier
than you can on a car. The company Project Better Place wants to see battery
swapping stations, like gas stations, but where electric cars will swap their empty
batteries for full ones in less time than it takes to fill a car with gas. There are many
problems with this idea, but it does have the advantage of alleviating the limited range
of EVs. The problem is that batteries are very expensive, and you would have to trust
that someone is not giving you a dud. Some people have proposed battery rental as a
solution, but then a company has to trust you not to break its batteries. This trust is
never going to happen with DIY electric car owners and will require large automotive
manufacturers to get onboard and standardize everything. Battery swapping is much
easier with electric bicycles and can be done easily today when using bicycles with
the same battery connections. Electric bicycles will lead the way in terms of battery
swapping and rental and develop the principles and infrastructure that will transfer to
future electric cars.
4.4.1 Charge-Termination Methods

Battery chargers can vary in sophistication in terms of how they detect the level of
charge inside the cell or battery. The important part is how the charger determines
when the battery is full and stops the charge. The first battery chargers were slow and
unsophisticated, but now that electronics have progressed and have become cheaper,
much more accurate methods of charge termination are used. There are two basic
types of charging, constant voltage and constant current. Constant-current charging is
used at the start of charging when the voltage difference between the cell and the
charger would be too high and would lead to excessive currents. Control of the charge
current in this way controls how fast the battery is charged and is necessary for fast
charging. Constant-voltage charging is used to accurately top up the battery to ensure
that no damage is caused by overcharging. Constant-voltage charging is usually slow
and occurs at the end of the charge profile, once 80 percent of the charge has been
delivered. As the battery reaches the same voltage as the charger, the rate of charge
drops to zero.
The most primitive form of battery charging is trickle charging. Trickle charging
involves a very low constant current with no endpoint determination. The user has to
judge when the batteries are full by timing the charge and then manually disconnecting
the batteries. This is a poor method of charging because it requires the user to know
about the state of charge of the battery and calculate how long is required to charge it
and then to remember when to turn off the charge. Because of these pitfalls, trickle
chargers are designed to very slowly charge the battery to prevent destructive failure
if the charger is left on too long. Most battery chemistries are damaged by continued
trickle charging past their full state of charge. The only exception to this is the NiCd
battery, which is why it is used in backup power applications such as emergency
lighting, where it can be trickle-charged to prevent self-discharge. NiMh cells also
can withstand some trickle charging. Some electric bicycle battery chargers have a
short trickle-charge phase after the main fast-charge period to try to get a bit more
capacity into the cells.
Nickel batteries have a special charge-determination method based on temperature.
Modern electric bicycle NiMh chargers use a thermistor located in the battery pack
that determines when the pack is fully charged. This determination will be be based on
either rate of temperature increase or a set temperature limit. If the battery is
discharged too quickly during a ride, the temperature of the battery will rise, and the
charger may refuse to charge the battery until it has cooled down. In theory, NiCd and
NiMh chargers are almost interchangeable. However, the trickle charge on some NiCd
chargers is too much for NiMh cells, so old NiCd chargers should not be used for
NiMh cells, but it’s okay to use NiCd cells in modern NiMh chargers.
4.4.2 Inside a Battery Charger

A battery charger is basically just a means of converting electricity from one form
into another so that it can be used to charge a battery. A battery charger is very similar
to a switched power supply, such as a laptop power supply. The difference is that a
battery charger has a method of detecting full charge and switching off. Switched
power supplies are an advance over the old big transformer power supplies because
they use fast switching to reduce the size requirements of the transformer needed in the
power supply. This advance in electronics has made the power supplies cheaper and
smaller, which has made it possible to have cheaper consumer electronics and
computers in every home.
The switched power supply works as follows: First, the main circuit alternating
current (ac) electricity is converted to direct current (dc) by a bridge rectifier; then the
dc is switch quickly on and off using a special transistor. The fast switching is much
faster than the 60-Hz frequency that main circuit transformers use. Since induction is
proportional to the rate of change of current, this fast switching allows the transformer
to be much smaller than a main circuit transformer for the same power rating. The
transformer changes the voltage to the desired voltage, and then big filter capacitors
are used to smooth out the peaks caused by the switching. The interesting thing about
switched power supplies is that they work with dc or ac power because it is all turned
into dc anyway right at the start. Therefore, you can do interesting things such as
charge your electric bicycle from a bank of solar-powered batteries using your
electric bicycle charger, for example (see Section 6.3.2).
There are other possible power supplies that can be used for charging batteries. A
buck converter is another power supply that uses switching but for a different
purpose. A buck converter has the advantage that is doesn’t contain a transformer at
all, which saves on weight and cost (hence the name). A buck converter consists of a
method of switching, usually a special transistor such as a MOSFET, coupled with a
method of smoothing, such as a capacitor. In a buck converter, the ratio of on to off in
the switching determines the voltage that will be supplied. It’s possible to change the
on/off ratio of the switching to get any voltage below the main circuit supply voltage.
It’s possible on transformer-based power supplies to have variable voltage too, and
this is usually accomplished by taps in the transformer winding.
The advantage of the buck converter is that it’s lightweight and can be carried round
on an EV as an onboard charger more easily than some other chargers. The
disadvantage of the buck converter is that it is not isolated from the main circuit power
like with a transformer-based power supply. Isolation of the power supply is key to
preventing and reducing the severity of electric shocks if they occur. Some electric car
owners have made their own “bad boy” chargers based on buck convertors because
they want to avoid the high cost of commercial electric car chargers. Electric cars are

still a niche market all over the world, and therefore, specialized equipment costs are
still quite high. Electric bicycles, by comparison, are not a niche market; millions of
units are sold annually in China and other developing countries, so the costs are much
lower and there is no need to build DIY chargers.

CHAPTER 5
How to Maintain and Repair Electric Bicycles
5.1 Equipment for Maintaining Electric Bicycles
5.1.1 How to Use a Multimeter
The multimeter is the most useful diagnostic tool for electric bicycle maintenance,
and it’s essential to learn how to use one and have some basic understanding of
electricity. A multimeter can be used to measure all the important properties of
circuits, including voltage, current, and resistance.
Some fancy multimeters can do other things too, such as measure temperature,
frequency, etc. The main dial is usually the only input that is required by the user, so
it’s really a very simple tool. The dial is used to change the range and function settings
of the meter. Each measurement is split into different ranges that the meter can detect.
For voltage, the dial will be split into millivolts (200 mV), volts (2 V), tens of volts
(20 V), and hundreds of volts (200 V). The numbers around the range-select dial (and
here in parentheses) correspond to the maximum measurable value on that setting. The
setting you use also gives you the multiple of the reading you see. In other words, a
voltage reading of 19 on the 200-mV setting will mean 19 mV; a resistance reading of
24 on the 200-MΩ setting will mean 24 MΩ.
Don’t be afraid to have a go and measure all kinds of stuff. You can’t damage the
meter by having it on the wrong range or the wrong setting, except using the wrong
probe plug-in holes. Obviously, don’t mess with high-voltage electric, though. If you
don’t know what the reading will be, select a higher setting than needed, and this will
give you a rough “ballpark reading.” Then select the appropriate lower setting to get a
more accurate reading.
Resistance, direct-current (dc) voltage, and alternating-current (ac) voltage all use
the same plug-in holes, COM for the black lead and V for the red lead. With these
plugged in, the meter has a very high resistance and will not cause any problems for
the stuff you are measuring. To measure current, however, you need to change the lead
plugs over to AMP for the red lead and keep COM for the black lead. Here, the meter
will have a very low resistance. A common mistake when measuring battery current
and voltage is to forget that you have the leads plugged for current measurement and
attempt a voltage measurement. This causes the meter to act as a short across the
battery and will vaporize the contacts on the meter and the thing with which you
complete the circuit. This can cause damage to plugs, etc.
In an ideal multimeter, the resistance would be infinitely high when on voltage
measurement in parallel with the object to be measured and zero when on current

measurement in series with the object to be measured. However, real meters do not
have infinitely high resistance, and this sometimes can cause confusion when
measuring volts dropped across very high-resistance components close to the limits of
the meter. This is so because the current may flow through the multimeter, thus altering
the circuit being measured.
Multimeter Continuity Testing
A useful function of a multimeter is continuity testing. Continuity testing is where
you use the resistance measurement function to check what’s connected to stuff. If you
have a bundle of wires coming out of a cable and you want to find the one that’s
connected to your lights, you can use the continuity test. Just put a probe on the wire
that you think ends at your lights, and then test each of the wires coming out of the
cable at the other end. This is where the crocodile lead attachment is useful. When the
meter shows zero resistance (or close to it), you have found the wire that’s connected
(Figure 5.1); a one means that the measurement is off scale or infinite resistance
(Figure 5.2). Some more expensive meters have a useful audible bleep function that
does the same thing, but you don’t need to look at the meter while checking.
Sometimes with cheap meters there is an offset reading, so it may read 0.5 V even
when the meter probes are firmly contacting each other. Take this into account when
testing. For accurate readings of low resistance, you need more specialized tools such
as an equivalent series resistance (ESR) meter.
Multimeter Polarity Detection
Another useful multimeter feature is polarity indication. This allows you to find out
which way is positive and which way is negative on unmarked batteries or chargers
and saves you from blowing stuff up by connecting things the wrong way. Make sure
that you have the red lead in the red V port and the black lead in the black COM port.
Then measure the voltage of a battery or other circuit. If you connect the leads and see
a positive voltage, then the red probe is touching positive and the black probe is
touching negative (Figure 5.3). If you see a negative reading, then the opposite is true
(Figure 5.4). If you get confused with your polarity test, then test a clearly marked
household battery for comparison. Also, swapping the probes around a few times will
help. Never connect stuff if you don’t know the correct polarity. Don’t take guesses
based on the color codes of wires because they might be from different manufacturers
and mean different things.

FIGURE 5.1 Closed circuit shows as 0 (0.4Ω is close enough).
FIGURE 5.2 Open circuit shows as 1, which means off the scale.

FIGURE 5.3 A positive reading shows that whatever the red probe is touching is
positive.
FIGURE 5.4 A negative reading shows that whatever the red probe is touching is not
positive.
You can’t measure the voltage of the meter’s power source using the same meter. It
uses the battery voltage to compare against the circuit voltage and gets confused. If you
suspect a dodgy reading on the multimeter, change the battery and try again.

You can’t usually measure currents higher than 10 A with a multimeter, which is
insufficient for electric bicycle measurements. To measure currents higher than this,
you need to use a shunt resistor. A shunt resistor or clamp meter is a known-low-
resistance element with good heat dissipation. The current is run through the shunt
resistor, and you measure the voltage drop across it. From this voltage reading, the
current is calculated, which usually is done by a panel meter to give a convenient
reading. You don’t have to buy a shunt resistor. The shunt can be anything, even a
section of wire in your power leads. All you need is to know the resistance to be able
to use Ohm’s law, the relationship between voltage, current and resistance. You can
calculate the resistance again by using Ohm’s law and measuring volts and amperes
either at a current below 10 A or by using a clamp meter or power meter to compare.
Disclaimer: Don’t stick multimeters in main circuit power sockets.
5.1.2 Power Meters
Power meters come in different forms. Battery power meters can be used onboard
an electric bicycle to report the power consumption in real time to the operator.
Socket power meters can be plugged into a socket to measure the power consumption
at the socket being used to charge the vehicle. A power meter is a more specialized
tool than a multimeter and is solely for the purpose of measuring power consumption.
Most battery power meters are marketed at remote control (RC) hobbyist sites (Figure
5.5), for example, the Watts Up Meter or Doctor Watson (both available at
www.reuk.co.uk/Watts-Up-Meter.htm).
There is now a power meter designed specifically for electric bicycle use—the
Cycle Analyst. The Cycle Analyst is best because it usually can plug straight into your
controller and use its shunt, which means that you don’t have to run heavy-gauge
power wires up and down the handlebars. The RC power meters have the shunt built
into the meter, so you have to run a power wire through the meter. Although it is
possible to hack apart the cheap meter and relocate the shunt to a more convenient
location. The Cycle Analyst also can measure the speed you are going and calculate
the electric consumption per mile. Battery power meters will show you instantaneous
watts, volts, and amperes, as well as count the watthours and ampere-hours used and
the ampere peak and voltage minimum. This information is essential for checking that
there are no problems and for finding how much battery capacity you have left.

FIGURE 5.5 A very useful and easy to use RC-style power meter.
A socket power meter will tell you volts, amperes, instantaneous power, energy
used, and power factor. Most can be set up to tell you how much money the power is
costing. Socket meters are cheap, but sometimes the units are kilowatthours, which are
too big for accurate determination of electric bicycle power use. Power meters always
should be connected between the battery and controller, not after the controller.
5.1.3 Panel Meters
Panel meters (Figure 5.6) are so called because they are designed to mount on an
instrument panel. You can get cheap panel meters to measure all sorts of different
things—volts, amperes, temperature, frequency, and count—but it’s not really possible
to get more advanced measurements such as speed, power, watthours, etc., so they are
not so good for electric bicycle meters. The main advantage of panel meters is that
they are cheap; for all other purposes, it’s best to get a power meter.
Most panel meters can measure only one property, but some are dual-function
meters with a button that toggles between functions. Some panel meters are blank
liquid-crystal display (LCD) panels, which can be configured in many ways and need
to have resistors added to make them measure the property you want. This is very
complicated and best avoided. The eBay panel meters advertised as voltmeters,
ampmeters, etc., are simple to use and already preconfigured.

FIGURE 5.6 Three panel meters. These meters are cheap, but they are not as easy to
use or as useful as RC-style power meters.
There are both LCD and light-emitting diode (LED) panel meters. The LED meters
look more low tech but can be better for reading from angles; LCD meters look a bit
more professional. You can change the measurement range of some panel meters by
soldering different resistor values on the back, but it’s best to buy a meter with the
right range in the first place. Usually panel meters have bare-bones circuitry on the
back, so they have to be mounted into some kind of box for electric bicycle use. This
makes them bulkier than battery power meters.
To measure current with a panel meter, you have to have a shunt, and the panel
meter basically measures the voltage drop across it just as described earlier for the
multimeter. Thus current panel meters will input a millivolt signal and display a
current proportional to that signal. You have to buy the right resistance shunt;
otherwise, the millivolt per current signal given to the meter will be different, and the
meter will be off by some degree.
5.1.4 Clamp Meters
A clamp meter (Figure 5.7) is another way of measuring current. Clamp meters use
Hall sensors to measure the magnetic field generated by the flow of current. You put
the wire through a hole in the meter, and the Hall sensor measures the current. You
need to put a single wire through the metering hole; you cannot put both positive and

negative wires through because the fields will cancel each other out. This causes a
problem with insulated cables because you can’t simply clamp the whole cable. You
have to expose a single wire, which defeats the point a little.
FIGURE 5.7 Two different styles of clamp meter.
A great application of clamp meters that I recommend you buy is the wireless home
energy monitor (Figure 5.8). These monitors provide a portable display of your home
energy use, which is wirelessly connected to a clamp meter that you put around your
house electricity meter box. The display lets you know instantly how much power your
house is using. You can use it to check how much power your separate appliances are
using just by switching them on and off and looking at the numbers change. Most of the
energy monitors also have a data-logging function that adds up all your energy use and
calculates how much your electricity bill will be. This is great for people who are
interested in saving costs or lowering their carbon footprint. In addition, an energy
monitor allows you to demonstrate to your housemates/girlfriend/wife/parents how
little electricity your electric bicycle really uses in comparison with such things as
your refrigerator, which uses 10 times the energy of your bicycle. The monitor has
other advantages, too, such as only one check to know that all your lights and
appliances are off before you leave the house. You can use an energy monitor to
measure dc electricity as well, but you need to buy a separate adapter.

FIGURE 5.8 Wireless home energy monitor. This monitor communicates wirelessly
with a clamp meter on the supply cable in the meter box.
5.1.5 Bicycle Speedometers
Bicycle speedometers work by counting the frequency of a signal generated by a
magnet spinning around the wheel through the path of a sensor. The dimensions of the
wheel have to be accurate; otherwise, the displayed speed will be wrong. It’s amazing
how many people don’t do this correctly, and the end result is kids telling you that they
can do 40 mph on their BMX bicycle because the speedometer is set for 26-in wheels
and they have 20-in wheels.
5.1.6 Thermistors and Thermocouples
These are two different types of temperature-measuring probes that can be useful on
electric bicycle projects. If you are pushing the limits of a motor or a battery, then you
will want to monitor its temperature, at least initially, to be sure that you are not
operating outside its safe working limits. Thermistors have been mentioned before and
are resistors that change resistance based on temperature. You can buy cheap
aquarium thermometers that contain thermistors for monitoring temperature usually up
to 70°C. You also can just use a multimeter and draw up a calibration plot of
resistance against temperature. The resistance drops as temperature increases.
Thermocouples are different in that they generate a millivolt signal depending on

temperature. Thermocouples are better because they have a much wider range of
operating temperatures, something that I hope you won’t be need for electric bicycle
use because if your motor gets that hot, it will have toasted itself! To measure
thermocouples, you need special meters that are bulky for electric bicycle use. It is
best to stick to thermistors and aquarium thermometers—they are easier.
5.1.7 Data Loggers
Data loggers (Figure 5.9) can be useful for battery testing. They give more
information than a simple power meter. Data loggers can be used to log the volts from
a battery for measurement of capacity during charge or discharge. When the battery
voltage drops away, it is empty, and if you use a constant-current load, then you can
work out the capacity of the battery. However, do not let your battery voltage drop
below the minimum safe limit because it will damage the battery. You have to monitor
the battery closely or fit a low-voltage cutoff circuit to it. You can use light bulbs for a
constant-current load. Most data loggers have at least four channels, so you can
improve the accuracy by logging current too. Just use a shunt, and measure the voltage
across that. Then do the math in Excel. Be careful, though, because most data loggers
have their channels share a common negative, which means that it’s easy to short
circuit stuff if you don’t think the connections through. A mistake could cause damage
to the computer with which you are using the data logger. Use a plug-in clamp meter
for the current measurement if you are not sure. You can, if you want, make the system
mobile by using a laptop and data logging your whole ride. This is only useful for
academics, though.

FIGURE 5.9 A USB data logger can be useful for very advanced projects.
Remember that the negative terminals are all connected together.
Data-Logger Tips
If the data logger accepts readings only in a specific low-voltage range, then you
can use a potential divider circuit to reduce the battery voltage down to the level
needed for the data-logger signal. Just put the battery voltage across two series
resistors, and connect the data logger across one of them. Done with two equal
resistors, this will halve the signal to the data logger. Use Ohm’s law (see Section
5.1.1) to work out the resistor values that are needed.
Be careful what you measure. If the data logger is connected to a computer that is
plugged into a wall socket and you measure something that’s also plugged into a wall
socket, then you sometimes can cause a ground leak that throws the circuit breakers in
the house. It’s best to use a battery-powered laptop for this purpose.
5.2 Diagnosis: Finding the Problem
Things that go wrong on electric bicycles.
The most common things to go wrong on electric bicycles are the mechanical parts.
Mechanical problems usually are obvious, and you can get those solved at your local
bicycle shop, so I won’t address those issues here. The second most likely things to go

wrong are the cheap plastic connectors and wiring used in most of the kits. After this,
the electronic parts—controllers, chargers, and battery management systems (BMSs)
—sometimes may go wrong, but always start the fault-checking process by suspecting
the wiring. Do the simple checks first before you check the complicated or expensive
things; otherwise, it’s possible to mess things up during the process of fault checking.
Usually, if a problem has presented itself before, then it will be obvious, and you will
know instantly what to do to correct it. If you don’t know from the symptoms, then
process of elimination is the only way to find a problem. Table 5.1 is a quick
reference list of symptoms that you can run through to narrow down the problem to a
few possibilities. Table 5.2 is an ordered list of detailed tests that by process of
elimination should show you exactly what’s wrong with your electric bicycle. You
will find out how to fix these problems in Chapter 6.
TABLE 5.1 Diagnosing Problems from the Symptoms: A Quick Run Through This
Table Will Narrow Down the Problem to a Few Possibilities

If your bicycle doesn’t work, go through Table 5.2 to find the problem. It is set up
with the simplest and most important tests first.
5.2.1 How to Check Connections and Connectors
The connections in some Chinese electric bicycle kits are very cheap and prone to
failure. They can look okay but be broken inside. To check the connections, it is
sometimes possible to backprobe the pins in a connector. Put your multimeter probes
in the back of each pin going through the connector and to the back of its mating pin on
the other side of the plug. Measure the continuity of the connection. You may need to
use a stinger—a piece of wire connected to the meter probes. If it is not possible to
measure continuity in this way, then it is necessary to scrape away some of the
insulation on either side of the connector to measure the continuity of the wires going
through. You should test each wire because sometimes individual pins inside
connectors can fail. Reinsulate the wires carefully when finished. Always give the
connections a thorough visual inspection; it’s usually possible to spot melted or
corroded connections.

TABLE 5.2 How to Test Each Component Using a Process of Elimination to Find
the Cause of the Problem
5.2.2 How to Check the Battery
If you check the voltage (Figure 5.10) of the battery and it is either 0 V or lower
than normal or intermittent, then this indicates that there is a battery problem. The first
thing to check is the fuse and fuse holder; hopefully, it is one of them. Check to see if
the fuse or fuse holder is melted. A melted fuse obviously will result in an open
circuit. A melted fuse holder can result in an intermittent connection or a high-
resistance connection. During use, the melted fuse holder may work initially and show
a voltage, but it can heat up and melt further causing the bicycle to cut out.

FIGURE 5.10 Checking that the battery charger voltage is okay. For a 48-V LiFePO4
battery, you want to see around 61.5 V from the charger. Ignore the negative sign; this
just means that the probes are attached the wrong way.
After ruling out the fuse, check that the charger is working. Connect a multimeter
across the charger output pins, and it should show a voltage equal to the fully charged
battery voltage. If the voltage is low, then it may not be charging the battery, and the
battery may be flat or unbalanced but otherwise okay. This may present as a decreased
range if the charger is low voltage or lack of power if the battery is flat and the
charger is completely broken. If voltage is too high, then the faulty charger may have
overcharged the battery and caused damage. If there is a BMS, it may have cut out to
protect the pack.
If the fuse and battery charger are both okay, then next check the cell voltages to see
if any cells are dead or any balance wires are disconnected. This is easy on a pack
with a BMS. Just open up the insulation on the BMS, and check the cell group voltages
from the balance wires (Figure 5.11). Measure from battery +Ve to each balance wire,
and write down all the voltages. Then subtract the previous reading from the current
reading, and the difference will be the voltage of that cell. This is the preferred
method of measuring voltages. You also can just put the multimeter probes across
neighboring balance wires, but usually they are too close together, and it’s too easy to
slip and cause a short circuit.
All the cells should be the same voltage. They should all be around 3.3 V if they are

charged LiFePO4 cells and 1.35 V if they are charged NiMh or NiCd cells. If any cell
is below 2.5 V for LiFePO4 or 0.9 V for NiMh/NiCd cells, then the cell is dead, and
that is the problem. A dead or weak cell will cause the BMS to trip. If a balance wire
is disconnected, it will show as 0 V on one of the cells. A disconnected balance wire
will trip the BMS. To reset the BMS, you have to unplug all loads from the battery. If
a cell is dead, then it will need to be replaced to stop the BMS from tripping. When
you have finished, either heat shrink the BMS back up or duct-tape it closed with card
insulation. For batteries without a BMS, you will have to break open the heat shrink
on the battery to check the cell voltages. If you cut the heat shrink carefully, it can be
duct-taped back together and look respectable.
FIGURE 5.11 Check the BMS. If your battery is a lithium battery, it should have a
BMS. All the cell voltages can be measured from the white multipin connector at the
bottom.
If all the cells show the same voltage or are within 0.2 V of each other, then next
check the BMS. Do this by repeating the same cell measurements but under load to see
the voltage sag of the cells. If a cell sags a lot when a small load is applied, then it is
weak and causing the BMS to trip. If the cell voltages are all okay and the BMS is still
cutting out anyway, then by process of elimination the fault is with the BMS. Start with
a small load (a light bulb), and then build up to a bigger load (lots of light bulbs or
higher-wattage bulbs) and see when the BMS cuts out (Figures 5.12 and 5.13).

FIGURE 5.12 The cells are all connected to the BMS via the white balance wires. If
one comes off, the BMS will cut out to protect the battery. The solder mass joins the
cells three in parallel and then in series to the next cell group.

FIGURE 5.13 Look for obvious signs of damage. Notice that the ballooned shape of
the cells distorts the pack.
5.2.3 How to Check the Motor
Check Winding
The first thing to check on the motor is the coil resistance (Figure 5.14). Use a
multimeter set to resistance measurement, and connect it across the motor phase wires.
With a brushed motor, there are only two wires to check, so connect the multimeter
there with crocodile clips. Inside the hub, the windings are switched between many
different sets as the wheel rotates. Rotate the wheel slowly to see if the resistance
changes as the brushes switch over. If the resistance is 1, an open circuit, then there is
a problem with the motor, and it should be opened for further inspection. In low-
power motors, the winding resistance is higher and should be measurable by a
multimeter. If the resistance of the coils drops during a small segment of the rotation,
then there is probably a problem in which the coils have overheated and shorted
together.
With a brushless motor, there are three wires, and you should check the resistance
between each two wires, that is, three combinations. If any coil resistance shows 1, an
open circuit, then there is a problem with the motor, and it should be opened for
further inspection. These symptoms can result if the motor has been spun inside the
dropouts that caused shearing of the wire. If the resistance is lower on one phase than

it is on the other two phases, then this also indicates a motor problem. The motor may
have overheated and melted insulation, causing a short circuit, or melted a phase,
causing an open circuit. It can be difficult to measure the coil resistance accurately on
a powerful motor because it will be very low and may be difficult to distinguish from
a short circuit when using a cheap multimeter. An ESR meter might help to better
identify motor coil problems.
FIGURE 5.14 Checking that the windings are okay.
Check Hall Sensors
If the phase wires seem to be intact, then the next thing to check is the Hall sensors
if the motor is brushless. The Hall sensors should switch between high (6 V) and low
(0 V) as the motor is spun. The Hall sensors need to be supplied with power from the
controller in order to do this, so you have to plug the controller into the battery and to
the Hall sensor cable and switch it on. You don’t need to plug the motor phase wires
in. Use the multimeter on voltage setting to measure between each of the blue, green,
and yellow Hall sensor wires and the red Hall sensor wire while spinning the motor

by hand. Voltage should switch between high (6 V) and low (0 V) as the motor is
spun. If any Hall sensor wire voltage does not switch, if it is stuck on 6 or 0 V, then
that Hall sensor may be damaged and need replacing. Check that the controller is
supplying the voltage to the Hall sensors by measuring the voltage between the black
and red Hall sensor wires. It should be around 4 to 12 V; if it is 0 V, then there is a
problem with the controller.
In a brushed motor, it’s more difficult to check the brushes. The motor has to be
disassembled and examined. If there is a problem with your brushed motor—for
example, it has lost power and is running hot—test the windings as indicated earlier,
and then follow the disassembly procedure mentioned in Section 5.4.6. Look for burn
marks caused by sparks arcing or buildup of carbon dust from the brushes on the
contactor plate. Disassemble the brushes, and check for damage. Make sure that they
slide smoothly inside their housings.
Check Hall Sensor Sequence and Timing
To check the sequence and orientation of the Hall sensors, there is another test you
can perform. This one requires building a small LED board (Figure 5.15). The idea is
to visualize the open/close of the Hall sensors with LEDs. If there is a time when all
LEDs are either on all at once or off all at once, then the motor has 60-degree Halls. If
the sequence shows only two LEDs on at any one time, then the motor has 120-degree
Halls. You can use this to set the jumper settings in the controller for what type of
motor you have. The LEDs should light up in a sequence one after the other when they
are in the correct orientation. You can use this to find the correct orientation, and this
will narrow down the 36 possibilities when trying to match a motor and controller
wiring.

FIGURE 5.15 Circuit diagram of the Hall sensor checker and the finished item on a
copper strip board.
1. Get a piece of bread board or copper strip board, three different colored
LEDs, five 1-kΩ resistors, and a 9-V battery or power adapter.
2. Next, connect the circuit as shown in Figure 5.15.
3. Cut two lines through the copper strips.
4. Position the resistors across one of the cut traces and the LEDs across the
other cut trace in series with the resistors.
5. At the positive end of the LEDs, the side without the flat part, tie all the strips
together.
6. At the negative side of the LEDs, after the resistors, add wires that lead to the
Hall sensor wires. Add crocodile clips, or whatever, to attach to the Hall sensor
wires.
7. Tie the positive end of the power supply, through two parallel 1-kΩ resistors,
to the LEDs.
8. Attach crocodile clips to the negative of the power supply so that you can hook
it to the black Hall sensor power lead.

9. Attach a lead with a crocodile clip to the positive end where all the junctions
meet. This will hook onto the positive Hall sensor lead.
5.2.4 How to Check the Throttle
There are two types of throttles used on electric bicycles, a potentiometer or a Hall
throttle. Follow this procedure to test an unknown throttle type or to check for a
damaged throttle:
1. First, use a multimeter to test the throttle. Check the resistance across all the
pins (three combinations). Check the resistance while you twist the throttle and
look for changes.
2. If there is a change in resistance when you twist the throttle, then this is a
potentiometer-based throttle. If not, then this is either a Hall throttle (likely) or a
broken throttle.
3. Next, find an old mobile phone charger or batteries, around 4 V, and wire this
up to the throttle, red throttle wire to positive and black throttle wire to negative.
Put a 100-Ω resistor in the circuit on one of the power supply leads. If you don’t
know the polarity of the phone charger, then use a multimeter to polarity check it
(see Section 5.1.1).
4. Set your multimeter to the 20-V setting, and measure between the green sense
wire and the black negative wire or red positive wire and twist the throttle while
you do this.
5. If there is a voltage change, then this is a working Hall throttle. If you don’t see
any changes on either of these tests, then the throttle is dead.
5.2.5 How to Check the Controller
The two main faults that can happen with the controller are that the field-effect
transistors (FETs) can short circuit or the capacitors can blow. To check that the
capacitors in the controller are not short circuited, connect a multimeter in resistance
mode across the controller’s positive and negative battery connections. The resistance
should be infinite or very high. To check that the capacitors have not been blown open
circuit, connect the controller to the battery while a voltage meter is connected across
the same controller battery power leads. There should be a small spark as the
capacitors charge up, and the voltage should rise quickly to the battery voltage. Then
disconnect the battery, and the voltage should drop slowly to 0 V. If the voltage drops
instantly to 0 V, then it’s likely the capacitors are blown and need replacing.
Next, test that the FETs in the controller have not been shorted. You need to test
resistance between each phase wire (motor side) and each power wire (battery side).
There are six combinations. The resistance should be high or infinite on all the

combinations (Figure 5.16). If any show a resistance lower than 1,000 Ω, then there is
a short circuit, and the controller will need some work to fix it.
5.3 Maintaining Electric Bicycle Components
5.3.1 Maintenance of a Battery Charger
When plugging in an electric bicycle battery charger, there is usually a
recommended sequence of doing things depending on the type of battery and charger,
so read the manual if you have one. The open-circuit voltage of some battery chargers
will “float” up much higher than the battery voltage if it is plugged into the main
circuit first with no load before plugging it into the battery. This is true with many of
the older car battery chargers. Then, when the battery is plugged into the charger, the
voltage difference and low resistance cause a spark to jump across the connectors and
partially melt them. The spark also can damage capacitors in the charger. It therefore
used to be advised to plug into the battery first before plugging into the main circuit.
However, most modern chargers will only float up to the end of charge voltage when
plugged into the main circuit if not connected to a battery. EV packs are much higher
voltage than car batteries, and when they are plugged into the battery first, the
capacitors in the charger fill up so quickly that they cause a spark. It therefore would
be a better option to plug an electric bicycle charger into the main circuit first before
plugging it into the battery. You usually can hear the spark when the wrong connection
is made first, so it’s best to connect whatever end first that doesn’t cause a sparking
noise. It also might say in the manual which end to connect first.

FIGURE 5.16 Checking the FETs. In this figure, the blue phase shows no sign of
short circuit to the positive supply with 10 MΩ of resistance.
Avoid taking the charger with you on your electric bicycle because it may get
damaged. If your charger is being bashed around inside a shoulder bag, components
may come loose inside the case. It’s best to have two chargers, one at the destination
and one at home.
5.3.2 Hub Motor Maintenance Checklist
Very few things are needed to maintain a hub motor because they are very reliable.
Tire Pressure
Check the tire pressure regularly. Take action if it is dropping, before you get
caught out by a flat.
Spokes
Check the spokes regularly; look out for snapped spokes or loose spoke nipples.
Tighten and replace the spokes as needed. Spokes usually snap at the hub. It is
sometimes possible to change a broken spoke without having to take off the wheel.
Just unscrew the old one, leaving the nipple held in place by the inflated inner tube.
Then thread the new spoke through the hub, and turn the nipple around and up onto the

spoke. The spoke may need to be bent slightly to get it into position.
Bearings
If you feel the wheel bearings break, then stop riding immediately; otherwise, you
might cause damage to the Hall sensors or magnets. Change the bearings when they
wear out (every 1 to 2 years) or whenever the hub motor is open for other
maintenance. See Section 5.4.4 for how to open up a hub motor and Section 5.4.9 for
how to change the bearings on a hub motor.
Rims
Check the rims for damage, buckling, and weld damage or corrosion. If you are
using rim brakes, then clean the rubber residue off the rims every few weeks.
Connectors
Check for contact corrosion caused by sparking and melting caused by high current
flow.
5.3.3 Battery Maintenance Checklist
Batteries are a consumable item and will yield a service life based on how well
they are treated.
• Always keep the battery topped up.
It is generally good for batteries to be fully charged, especially lead-acid
batteries. Topping up lithium batteries also enables the BMS to balance the
cells.
• Check that the charger is putting out the correct voltage.
Sometimes charger voltage can be too low, and this won’t activate the
BMS balancing function at the end of battery charging. For example, a 48-V
LiFePO4 battery charger should put out 61.5 V.
• Don’t leave the battery unused for more than a month.
Lithium cells don’t have a very fast self-discharge, usually around 1
percent a year. However, the BMS will drain the battery at a faster rate than
this. A number of people have left their batteries over winter while not
using their bicycles, only to come back to a nonfunctional pack in spring
because the BMS drained the pack down to 0 V. To prevent this, it’s best to
either unplug the BMS or put the pack on its charger using a 7-day timer
plug to keep it topped up for a short period once every week.
• Don’t overdischarge, short circuit, overheat, or drop your battery.
• Don’t series-connect with different capacity or state-of-charge batteries.

• Don’t parallel-connect with different voltage packs.
• Don’t put things such as bicycle locks in the same container as the battery.
Thermal Management
The batteries shouldn’t heat up much during operation; otherwise, there is something
wrong. Sometimes it can be difficult to monitor temperature by touch if the battery is
in a strong box. Monitor battery temperature on a new battery or new controller or
when any component changes on the electric bicycle. Don’t exceed 40°C in everyday
use.
Current Draw
Make sure that you do not exceed the peak or continuous current rating of the
batteries. Monitor this at least on a new build or when any component changes on the
bicycle, if not all the time.
Voltage Drop (Vmin)
It’s easier to measure battery voltage than current. The voltage should not drop far
below the nominal working voltage of the battery. Monitor this at least on a new build
or when anything changes on the bicycle, if not all the time.
Capacity
To test the battery, you might want to do a long ride to drain the battery and measure
capacity and range of the bicycle. It’s not good to 100 percent discharge the battery on
a regular basis. It’s good to do this when you first get the battery and then once every
year to check that you still have the full capacity.
Insulation and Padding
Check that the battery insulation and padding is not damaged. It can become
damaged by attrition if the battery bounces around a lot. Repair the damage, and use a
more secure battery mounting to prevent it from happening again.
Corrosion on Cells
Check for corrosion. Corrosion or a deposit around the cells usually means that
either the cells are leaking electrolyte, have vented electrolyte at some point, or are
being exposed to water.
5.3.4 Controller Maintenance Checklist
• Don’t use lots of power when moving slowly or when stationary; this will blow
the capacitors.

• Don’t ride in sand or thick mud for long periods; this will overheat the
controller.
• Make sure that the controller is not getting hot.
• Make sure that the throttle cable is protected from rain. Don’t allow insulation
tape to collect water around the throttle cables. Usually they are splash-proof to
some extent.
• Make sure that none of the wires gets worn or trapped within the bicycle frame,
suspension, or battery mounts.
5.3.5 Bicycle Maintenance
• Check brake pads once every 3 months for disc brakes and every month for rim
brakes.
• Check brake adjustment once every 3 months for disc brakes and every 2 weeks
for rim brakes.
• Check battery mounts for signs of bending or movement under the weight of the
batteries once every 3 months.
• Check headset bearings for signs of excessive play.
• Check lights every month for damage or movement.
5.4 Repairing Electric Bicycle Components
5.4.1 How to Repair a Controller with Broken FETs
Broken FETs result in a fault that usually occurs in a controller operating near its
voltage limit. This problem can be fixed, the replacement parts are not expensive, and
it saves you the cost of buying a new controller. You don’t always need to replace all
the FETs, only the ones that are shorted out. The controller usually has groups of FETs
ganged in parallel to increase the current-carrying capability (Figures 5.17 and 5.18).
This means that the FETs short circuit in groups. Usually, a controller will have
multiples of three FETs for the phases. Each phase usually will have two FETs for
switching positive and two for switching negative. A controller will either contain 6,
12, or 18 FETs depending on how powerful it is. If only one short circuit is detected
between phase wires, then you can open the controller and trace the broken group of
FETs causing the short circuit by continuity tracing the wires back from the phase wire
to the group of FETs.

FIGURE 5.17 Underneath the circuit board, where the legs of the FETs come
through. The big masses of solder are the main power rails and the motor phase rail.
FIGURE 5.18 The FETs. There are four FETs for each phase, two parallel to switch
positive and two parallel to switch negative.

There are lots of different FETs available with different current and voltage
specifications. Therefore, when you buy the replacement, you may want to go for an
upgrade at the same time because this will allow your controller to deliver more
current and be more powerful. So you may need to decide that you just want to replace
the broken FETs or upgrade all the FETs. The best-quality FETs are IR4110’s. These
can deliver 100 A and work at 100 V. Table 5.3 shows the other choice of FETs
available and their current-carrying capability. When your replacement FETs arrive,
it’s a simple matter of desoldering the old FETs and soldering in the new ones.
However, it is a complex soldering operation and requires a little skill and
coordination with a solder sucker and a powerful >40-W soldering iron. Replacing
FETs on a controller will be the same as replacing FETs on a BMS. Similar
instructions will apply. Thanks to Richard Fechter in San Francisco for working out
this repair procedure.
TABLE 5.3 FET Selection Guide
1. Open the controller.

2. Continuity trace the shorted phase back to the circuit board, and track down
which FETs have short circuited. It may be all of them or just one phase group.
3. Decide to upgrade all the FETs or just replace the broken ones.
4. Order the FETs you need.
5. Unscrew the FETs from the heat sink.
6. Remove the plastic insulating sleeves and washers that insulate the FETs from
the screws. Keep the screws and insulators safe.
7. Snip off the dead FETs at the legs, leaving behind as much leg as possible so
that you can remove them later with pliers.
8. Now you need to remove the leg left behind and clear the holes of solder to
insert the new FETs.
• Debulk the mass of solder to make it easier to remove the FET legs (Figure
5.19). Using the soldering iron, heat up the mass of solder around the stumps left
from the legs of the dead FETs. Don’t leave the iron on the board for more than 8
seconds or you might lift a track from the surface of the board, which is difficult
to replace. Suck up the solder using the solder sucker and iron.
FIGURE 5.19 This shows the gap where the dead FETs have been removed. Debulk
the mass of solder so that you can remove the dead FET legs.
• Remove the legs left from the dead FETs using tweezers and the soldering iron

or the solder sucker. Gently pull on the stump while melting the solder around it.
Don’t use force, or it will lift a track on the board. It should come out easily
when the solder is melted all the way through. Sometimes you can poke the leg
out; sometimes you can solder suck it out. Use whatever it takes to remove the leg
stumps, but don’t lift a track. Be especially careful on the third leg, the one that is
not attached to a great lump of solder. The traces here are easy to pull out. Use a
lower temperature setting if you have a temperature-controlled soldering iron.
• Clear the holes left by the dead FETs using the solder sucker. Suck from one
side of the board while heating from the other. Poking through with a wire while
heating sometimes helps, too.
9. Bend the legs on the new FETs over in the same way as the other FETs.
10. Position the new FETs in the holes in the circuit board.
11. Screw all the FETs back onto the heat sink. It’s best to screw the FETs into
the heat sink first, as a guide for soldering, because if you do it the other way
around, they might not line up with the heat sink properly.
12. Solder the new FETs into position. If you find it difficult soldering with the
heat sink in the way, then just do one leg on each new FET to hold it in place, and
then remove the heat sink and solder all the other legs properly. Be careful not to
accidentally connect neighboring traces or legs with solder.
13. Add loads of extra solder back to the main busbars to beef up the current-
carrying capability.
14. Add extra thermal paste to the FETs, and then fix them onto the heat sink for
the last time. Remember to use the insulating sleeves and washers on the screws.
15. If you removed a trace during this process, follow where it went, and solder
a jumper lead to repair it. If it was on the third leg, then it will lead to the gate
resistor. You can solder a jumper lead from the jumper resistor.
16. Measure the resistance again between all the phases and each power wire.
Make sure that there is no short circuit.
17. Check that the gate resistors are working properly (Figure 5.20). When a FET
blows, it sometimes takes out its gate resistor. Use a multimeter to resistance test
between the third pins on each set of FETs. This should read 20 Ω. Each gate
resistor is 10 Ω. The resistors blow open circuit, so if there is a problem, the
resistance will be much higher than 10 Ω. The gate resistors are shown in Figure
5.20 and are usually located close to the FETs that blew. You can continuity
check to make sure because it will be connected to the third leg of the FET. If the
gate resistor blew, then chances are that the gate drive transistor also blew, and
these are difficult to test.

FIGURE 5.20 Here, the gate resistors are visible. These may need to be replaced as
well. The gate resistors are connected to the third leg of the FETs.
18. Replace any blown resistors with new ones.
19. Check the board for stray pieces of solder that could cause short circuits.
20. If there are big deposits of solder flux around the traces, then carefully
scratch them away with a small screwdriver. Solder flux can be slightly
conductive and could cause problems.
21. When finished (Figure 5.21), put the controller back into its 11 enclosure, and
test it on the bicycle. For testing, it is best to use a current-limited supply. You
can do this by putting a light bulb in series with the battery (e.g., slot an MR16
10-W bulb into the fuse holder). If it still doesn’t work and you are sure that you
did everything right, then probably the gate driver chip has blown too.
22. If the test is successful, then put the controller back on the bicycle and clean
up. If the test was not successful, then replace the gate driver transistor as in the
next section.
5.4.2 Repairing a Controller with Broken Gate Drive Transistor
When you replace the FETs on a controller you sometimes have to replace the gate
driver transistor as well. If a gate resistor blew, then chances are that this is the case.
Replacing the gate drive transistor is a very difficult soldering job because it is
surface-mount technology. This repair will require two soldering irons, a fine-tipped
iron and a temperature-controlled iron.

FIGURE 5.21 This side view shows the capacitors and all the FETs.
1. Locate the gate driver chip. The boards are usually split into thirds for each of
the three phases, so it will be near the FETs that blew. The most common gate
driver chip is the IR2101. This is what is used on the Crystalyte V1 and V2
controllers.
2. Buy a replacement IR2101. They come in both surface-mount and chip forms.
The surface-mount form is easiest to use.
3. Remove the dead chip. Use two soldering irons at medium heat, not tinned, and
position them on the legs on either side of the surface-mount chip. Wait until the
solder melts, holding it to the board, and then move it away from the solder pads
with the irons. Move it to an uncluttered area of the board, and then retract the
soldering irons. Hopefully, the chip won’t stick to something else on the board as
the solder sets. Remove it when it is free.
4. Make sure that none of the solder pads are shorted. Clean up the solder pads
by gently melting the solder and sweeping it with the iron.
5. Solder the new chip in place.
• If you have a surface-mount chip, then position it on the solder pads, and heat
the legs individually with the iron. A piece of wire wrapped round the soldering
iron called a stinger can help with soldering the little legs of the surface-mount

chip. Be careful not to short circuit the legs; this is delicate work. Use a
magnifying glass if needed.
• If you have a through-hole chip, then you will have to fashion something like the
spider shown in Figure 5.22. Solder wires to the solder pads first and then to the
chip legs.
6. Continuity check between neighboring legs to check for short circuits.
7. Put everything back inside the case. If you did the spider technique as shown in
Figure 5.22, then you must insulate the chip with electrical tape and secure it to
the other wires inside the case to stop it from coming loose.
FIGURE 5.22 Replacement IR2101 gate driver chip. Also visible is the variable-
current mod.
5.4.3 How to Repair a Controller with Blown Capacitors
Replacing blown capacitors is easier than replacing FETs. The hardest part is
fitting the new capacitors inside the case because they can be very large. If you blow
the capacitors more than once, then you may be working too close to their voltage
limit, and it may be worth upgrading them to a higher voltage. Blown capacitors
usually are caused by very low-speed, high-power-demand conditions, so you might
consider changing the gearing of the motor if it happens again. Blowing up also can
occur because they were low-quality or aging capacitors. As capacitors age, their
equivalent series resistance (ESR) increases, they heat up, and then they explode. It’s

best to replace them with bigger capacitors with lower ESR or more capacitors. See
Figures 5.23 through 5.26.
FIGURE 5.23 Capacitors are just connected across the main negative and positive
supply rails, as shown from underneath.

FIGURE 5.24 Replacement of one capacitor—same capacity, same or higher
voltage.
FIGURE 5.25 Note the burned-out trace repaired by careful placement of a blob of
solder to join the broken ends.

FIGURE 5.26 Replacement of the other capacitor. Watch out, they can still fit back in
the case.
1. Snip off the dead capacitor, and pick off any debris from the circuit board.
2. Look to see if there are any melted traces on the board that need repairing (see
Figure 5.25).
3. If there are melted traces, then you will need to solder in a makeshift jumper
wire to replace the broken trace. The jumper(s) wire should connect the places
that are no longer connected by the broken trace. This may require some skillful
soldering, but if much of the board is destroyed, the damage may be irreparable.
4. Next, snip off the dead capacitors, leaving as much leg behind as possible.
5. Using the soldering iron, heat up the mass of solder around the stumps left from
the legs of the dead capacitors. Don’t leave the iron on the board for more than 8
seconds, or you might lift a track from the surface of the board, which is difficult
to replace.
6. Suck up the solder using the solder sucker and iron.
7. Remove the legs left from the dead capacitors using tweezers and the soldering
iron. Gently pull on the stump while melting the solder around it. Don’t use force,
or it will lift a track. It should come out easily when the solder is melted all the
way through.
8. Clear the holes left by the dead capacitors using the solder sucker. Suck from

one side of the board while heating from the other.
9. Find the best location for the capacitors in the board. Make sure that the
capacitors don’t prevent the case from sliding back on to the board (see Figure
5.26). Make sure that no traces touch the case. The capacitors can go anywhere in
the case where there is space to fit them, but it’s best to keep the wires short.
10. Put the capacitor legs through the holes, and solder them in position
11. Add loads of extra solder back to the main busbars to beef up the current-
carrying capability.
12. Glue down the capacitors to stop them from vibrating.
13. Close the case and finish.
5.4.4 Opening Up a Brushless, Nongeared Hub Motor
The brushless gearless motor is the simplest and easiest to disassemble. It has only
four main parts. The stator is the big wire-wound centerpiece in Figure 5.29. This is
fixed to the axle and is stationary. The wheel housing hub with the magnets is around
the outside of this part, and the cover plates all rotate. See Figures 5.27 through 5.29.
1. Remove both side covers from the motor. It may be slightly easier to remove
the gear cassette from the right side cover before removing the cover. You need a
gear puller to remove the gear cassette.
• Fit the gear puller, and use a wrench on it to unscrew the gear cassette.
• Gently unscrew all the bolts holding the side covers in place. Be careful not to
shear off the bolts.

FIGURE 5.27 Inside, the nongeared brushless hub motor is very simple. Here is
where the wires enter the hub. The inside (stationary part) is the stator; the outside
(rotating) part is the magnet ring.

FIGURE 5.28 The other side looks the same, but you can’t see the wires entering the
hub.
FIGURE 5.29 Here is the stator removed from the magnet ring.
• Carefully pry open the side covers evenly all along the seam with a knife or
screwdriver.
• The covers should pop out of the wheel housing as the magnet ring comes off
the ring in the side cover.
• Then there should be enough space to get your fingers behind the cover and pull
it off. Pull the cover and bearing off the axle until the side cover is free. Do this
to both side covers.
2. Next, get the stator out of the hub magnets. The stator is the middle part
attached to the axle. The magnets are very strong, so you need a lot of force to
achieve this. Be careful not to trap your fingers because the magnets can pull on
the stator very quickly. Also be careful not to fall over while you do this.
• Put the coverless hub motor on hard ground with the axle and rim touching. If
you remove only one side cover, then the open side of the motor must face up.
• Step on one side of the wheel rim while the axle contacts the ground.
• The opposite edge of the wheel will be sticking in the air. To get the stator out,
step on the other side of the wheel and use your weight to push down on both
sides of the wheel while the ground holds the stator. It should pop out as soon as

you get away from the action of the magnets.
• Take the stator away from the magnets.
5.4.5 Reassembly of the Brushless, Nongeared Hub Motor
1. Put the stator back into the hub. Be careful that you don’t get your fingers
damaged while you do this because the magnets are extremely strong. Putting the
stator back in is basically the reverse of step 2 above, taking it out.
• Put the cover-less hub wheel on the ground, and stand on opposite sides of the
rim.
• Hold the stator in the middle with the axle touching the ground.
• Slowly lift the rim into the stator while using your weight to prevent violent
movement by the magnets that may cause damage. The stator will pop back into
position between the magnets.
2. Put the side covers back on.
• Slide the side cover bearing back onto the axle.
• The stator will be off center, attracted by the magnets. Center the axle by
slotting the magnet ring over the ring in the side covers.
3. Put the bolts back into the side covers. It may be difficult to tighten the bolts
because tension in the spokes can stretch the magnet ring out of alignment with the
cover plate bolt holes. You may have to loosen all the spokes in order to match
up the holes in the cover plate with the holes in the magnet ring. You need a
spoke wrench to loosen the spokes.
4. Fasten the bolts. Be careful not to shear off the bolts when tightening them.
5. Then retension the spokes.
5.4.6 Opening Up a Brushed Hub Motor
The brushed hub motor is a little more complicated to disassemble because the
brushes are spring-loaded. It consists of four main parts: the hub-mounted stator that
rotates, the side covers that rotate, and the magnet ring mounted on the axle with the
brushes, which is stationary. In this respect, it is opposite to the brushless motor in that
the positions of the stator and magnets are different.
Remove both side covers from the motor. It may be slightly easier to remove the
gear cassette from the right side cover before removing the cover. You need a gear
puller to remove the gear cassette.
1. Fit the gear puller, and use a wrench on it to unscrew the gear cassette.
2. Gently unscrew all the bolts holding the side covers in place. Be careful not to

shear off the bolts.
3. Carefully pry open the side covers (Figure 5.30) evenly all along the seam
with a knife or screwdriver. Be careful not to slip and damage the windings.
Sometimes the windings are protected by a plastic shield for this reason.
4. The covers should pop out of the wheel housing as the magnet ring comes off
the ring in the side cover.
5. Then there should be enough space to get your fingers behind the cover and
pull it off. Pull the cover and bearing off the axle until the side cover is free. Do
this to both side covers. Sometimes they are stiff and require extra force or
leverage. When the covers are off, it should look something like Figures 5.31
through 5.33. At this point, you can access the bearings.
FIGURE 5.30 Lever the side covers off. Be very careful not to slip and damage the
windings.
1. On the brushed motor, it is not advisable to remove the stator from the magnets
because the brushes are spring-loaded and are very tricky to get back in during
reassembly. It is also difficult to find replacement brushes. On the brushed motor,
the magnets are in the center, as shown in Figure 5.32. The magnet ring can only
be taken out of the hub on one side.
2. To remove the magnet ring, use the “step on” technique described earlier.

Make sure that you have the yellow brush-holding plate side in Figure 5.31 facing
the ground and the magnet side facing up. Step on one side of the wheel rim with
the axle touching the ground. Then step on the other side to push the inner magnet
ring and axle assembly out of the hub.
3. Reassembly is difficult and may require you to tape the brushes into the
holders while you put the magnet ring back into the stator.
FIGURE 5.31 This side shows the windings and the rear of the contractors. The
bearing is visible in the center of the cover plate. Holes have been drilled in this plate
for heat dissipation.

FIGURE 5.32 This side shows the magnets attached to the axle and the connections
to the brushes. The bearing is visible in the cover plate.

FIGURE 5.33 This view shows the inner workings. One of the two brushes is
visible. The brush skims over a disk of flat copper contacts on the other side of the
yellow board. This is what does the commutation in the brushed motor.
4. Use the “step off” method very carefully to ensure that the magnet ring doesn’t
hit the contactor plate with force because this might cause damage.
5. Take the tape off the brushes using tweezers from the other side.
6. Put the cover plates back on.
7. Screw the bolts back into the cover plates to secure them.
5.4.7 Opening Up a Brushless, Geared Hub Motor
The geared brushless motor has only one side cover, and the motor windings are
hidden inside an inner motor compartment. This motor has many gears and moving
parts and is more complicated than the nongeared types. Geared motors are not
supposed to be completely disassembled.
1. Unscrew the hub bolts.
2. Take off the side cover (Figure 5.34).
3. From the other side, hit the axle with something to push the motor unit out of
the hub (Figure 5.35).
4. Now, both bearings are accessible (Figure 5.36).

FIGURE 5.34 Undo the bolts and lever the side cover off.
FIGURE 5.35 Hit the axle from the other side with something, and the inner motor
will pop out of the hub.
5. To access the windings and Hall sensors, open the back of the motor unit.
Undo the bolts, and it should pop open (Figure 5.37).
6. Reassembly is just the reverse of this disassembly.

FIGURE 5.36 Here you can see the hub bearing and the planetary gears on the motor;
the other bearing is in the side cover.
FIGURE 5.37 When you open the other end of the inner motor, you access the Hall
sensors, windings, and magnets.
5.4.8 Replacing Hall Sensors in a Brushless, Nongeared Hub
Motor

The Hall sensors usually need replacing if you spin the motor without securing it
properly and wrap the wires around the axle. Sometimes corrosion can cause broken
Halls, but usually they are coated in silicone, so this is rare. Usually it is the wire that
breaks, and you should eliminate this possibility first before you open up the hub
motor. The Hall sensors you need are the bipolar latching type with an open collector
output, something such as SS40A, SS41, or SS466A.
1. Open up the motor as described in the preceding section.
2. Examine the Hall sensors for damage. Look for broken wires or corrosion.
Find the sensor(s) that need replacing.
3. The Hall switching test in Section 5.2.3 can be used to decide which Hall
sensors are broken. You don’t have to replace all the Hall sensors if only one is
broken. Follow the wiring color of the broken, nonswitching sense wires back to
the motor to find the broken Hall sensors.
4. Remove the broken Hall sensors any way that is possible (Figure 5.38). It is
sometimes possible to melt the hot glue holding a sensor in position and pick it
out. Other times you may have to destroy it to get it out. Clean any debris from the
notch in the stator.
FIGURE 5.38 The stator of a brushless motor showing the position of the Hall
sensors.

5. Connect the new Hall sensor. This is a delicate job, and it’s easier to solder
wires onto the sensor first and then solder those wires onto the motor leads. Each
Hall sensor should have a positive supply (red), negative supply (black), and a
sense wire.
6. Now glue the Hall sensors into the notches where the old sensors were. Don’t
get the positions of the sensors and their colors mixed up.
7. Make sure that all the wires are shielded from the inside walls of the rotating
hub. Hot glue them in place, if necessary.
8. Reassemble the hub as described in the preceding section.
5.4.9 Replacing the Bearings in a Hub Motor
The bearings wear out in about a year of use on some of the big hub motors. It is
important to know how to change them because your local bicycle shop won’t know.
The replacement bearings may be of different sizes for each side of the hub. On the X5
motor, the bearings are 6005 on the left and 6004 on the right. If you don’t know what
size bearings to use, there are three measurements you have to take before you can
order a replacements: the inside diameter, the outside diameter, and the thickness.
Make these measurements with a vernier caliper on the shaft, cover plate hole
diameter, and thickness. The bearings usually have the part number on them, but they
are sometimes destroyed too badly to read.
1. Remove the gear cassette from the hub. You need a gear puller to remove the
gear cassette. Fit the gear puller, and use a wrench on it to un-screw the gear
cassette.
2. Remove both side covers from the motor.
• Unscrew all the bolts holding the side covers in place. Be careful not to shear
off the bolts.
• Carefully pry open the side covers evenly all along the seam with a knife or
screwdriver.
• The covers should pop out of the wheel housing as the magnets pull the axle off
center.
• Then there should be enough space to get your fingers behind the cover and pull
it off. Pull the cover and bearing off the axle until the side cover is free. Do this
to both side covers.
3. The best way to get the bearings out is to press them out. If you have access to
a hand press, use it. If you don’t, then it is possible to tap the bearings out. If the
bearing is badly damaged or disintegrated, then you may need to lever and dig it
out piece by piece.

4. Hand press method:
• Position the side plate on the hand press with the bearing side facing down.
• Put something flat and disk-shaped (such as a coin) inside the axle hole resting
on the rim of the bearing.
• Press the bearing out using the hand press.
5. Tapping method:
• Position the side plate on some blocks with the bearing side facing down.
• Put something flat and disk-shaped inside the axle hole resting on the rim of the
bearing.
• Use a pipe like a chisel to tap on the disk to push the bearing out.
• Tap gently and evenly around the disk, and keep it parallel with the side cover.
6. To fit the new bearing, just reverse the procedure, tapping or pressing from the
other side. Use grease to help ease the bearing into position.
5.4.10 Repairing a Battery with Dead Cells
Nickel Battery Without a BMS
Nickel batteries tend not to have very sophisticated BMSs. They don’t need them
for normal operation. This allows a simple maintenance trick. If a single cell in an
NiMh battery breaks open circuit, then there is a very easy solution. The cell can be
short circuited, and the battery will go on working. The charger will see a reduced
voltage, but typically NiMh chargers work based on constant current and a
temperature cutoff limit that will be unaffected. Make sure that the cell is dead before
you short circuit it; otherwise, there could be smoke. If it shows 0 V at the terminals
and there is no conductivity through it, then it is broken open circuit, and it is okay to
fit a bypass wire. The bypass wire should be thick enough to carry main power
current.
Replacing a Dead Cell that Has a BMS or Constant-Voltage Charger
Usually, for one of many reasons, it is necessary to replace a dead cell. If the
battery has a BMS, if the pack is to be paralleled with another pack, or if the battery
charger is of the constant-voltage type, then it is necessary to replace a dead cell. To
replace a cell in a battery, you have to locate the dead cell, remove it, and then fix in a
replacement. The way you do this will depend on the configuration, how easy it is to
get at the cell, and how the cells are joined. If the cell is very difficult to get at, then it
may be best to solder a short across the dead cell and then fix a new cell into the end
of the pack, where it is easier to do. This would require a rearrangement of the
balance wires if the pack has a BMS (see Section 5.4.11). Replacing a dead cell in a

pack may require complete disassembly and reassembly of the pack. If this is the case,
then read Section 6.1.1. When working on batteries, avoid using metal tools whenever
possible; work on a clean, empty, nonconductive surface; and don’t wear jewelry.
Remember there is no off switch on a battery you have to work on them live.
Replacing a Dead Cell in a Pack
1. Disassemble the pack covering. Cut open the heat-shrink or duct-tape shell. Be
careful not to stab or cut any of the cells; they may only be a few millimeters
under the surface of the packaging.
2. Measure the cell voltages to locate the dead cell.
3. Cut the dead cell out at the contact tabs. Use side cutters to cut the metal tabs
joining the dead cell to its neighbors.
4. Remove the cell. Break off any hot glue used to secure the cell, and push it out.
5. Position a new cell with contact tabs.
6. Solder the contact tabs to the correct cells (see “Soldering to Batteries” in
Section 6.1.1).
7. Refit the cell insulation.
8. Re-cover the battery pack (heat shrink or duct tape).
8. Check that the pack still charges.
5.4.11 Fixing Broken Balance Wires in a Pack That Has a BMS
If a battery pack with a BMS is knocked around a lot or there was insufficient strain
relief on the balance wires, then this can result in a broken balance wire. A broken
balance wire will cause the BMS to trip and stop you dead in your tracks. To replace
the balance wire, you have to open up the pack to find the broken wire and then fix it
back in place. When working on batteries, avoid using metal tools whenever possible;
work on a clean, empty, non-conductive surface; and don’t wear jewelry.
1. Disassemble the pack covering. Cut open the heat-shrink or duct-tape shell. If
the cells are pouch cells, be ultracareful not to stab or cut any of the soft cells;
they may be a only few millimeters under the surface of the packaging.
2. Check all the cell voltages at the cell terminals.
3. Look for the broken BMS wire (Figure 5.39).
4. If several balance wires are disconnected, don’t guess where to connect them.
Find out where each wire was supposed to be connected by tracing the continuity
of the wire back to the position on the BMS. The sequence of the balance wires
in the BMS will tell you which wire needs to go to which cell terminal. They

will be ordered from positive to negative.
5. Solder the wire back in place.
FIGURE 5.39 Balance wires connecting the BMS to cell terminals.
6. If any of the balance wires look too short or under tension, as in Figure 5.39,
then extend them with extra wire of similar type.
7. While your pack is open, inspect the cell insulation and padding. Check that it
is sufficient for the wear and tear that you are putting on it.
8. Close up the pack, and reapply the heat shrink or duct tape.
5.4.12 Repairing a Battery Charger
The usual causes of battery charger failure are overheating, voltage spikes, and
rough handling by the user. It is rarely possible to repair a broken bicycle charger. If
there is an obvious blown component to swap that you can identify and replace, then
replacing this component might fix the charger. Capacitors are one of the most likely
components to blow through voltage spikes. I’ve had several bicycle chargers blow
and not been able to fix them (Figure 5.40) despite changing capacitors, resistors, and
transistors. Prevention is better than a cure, so follow the mods in the maintenance
section if you think the charger runs hot, etc. If your charger does fail, the best thing to
do is to buy a different brand of the same voltage. Make sure that you follow the

wiring guide for a new battery pack or charger in Section 5.4.13 so that you get the
connections correct. They might not be the same as the old charger. Make sure that the
charger is disconnected from the main circuit before you work on it.
FIGURE 5.40 A cheap NiMh battery charger (prone to breaking after 6 months).
5.4.13 Wiring Up a New Battery Pack or Charger
When you buy an electric bicycle package, everything is set up for you, but when
you buy a new battery or charger to work with an existing kit, then there may be some
minor but important wiring jobs for you to do. It is important not to rush these and to
know what you are doing because it is possible to wreck these lovely new toys with a
single ill-thought connection.
NiMh Pack and Charger Connections
Most NiMh packs will come with a thermistor already attached. Some battery
chargers are different, though, and use different value thermistors, so it is important to
check that the new pack will work with the charger you have. Likewise, it is important
to check that a new charger operates using the same thermistor resistance as your old
one. If you don’t check the thermistor value, then the pack might not charge, or worse,
it might not recognize when the charge has finished and overcharge your new battery.
The thermistor is usually connected in the battery across the negative and third
terminal of the plug, as shown in the circuit diagram in Figure 5.41. Using the
multimeter on voltage setting, check all the pins, and find which are positive and
negative. The thermistor is connected to negative, so it also will have a voltage.

It will appear as if there are two negative pins. The one with the lowest voltage
with respect to positive will be the true negative; the other one is connected to the
thermistor. Using resistance measurement, check the resistance between the negative
and sensor pins. It should be between 1 and 20 kΩ. Now do the same checks and
measurements on the battery pack that came with the charger. Make sure that both
packs are the same temperature, or the readings will be different. You want to make
the resistor values the same. If they are not, then you will have to open up and change
the thermistor in the new pack to match the value the charger expects. Thermistors are
rated by their highest resistance, so when you are buying a replacement thermistor
based on the resistance reading, round up the value from when the pack was coldest,
and buy a thermistor close to that resistance, or check the resistance with a meter
before you buy.
FIGURE 5.41 How to connect an NiMh pack showing the thermistor and the charger
plug.
Lithium Pack with BMS Connections
Lithium packs usually need to have a BMS to balance them and ensure that no cell
drops below a minimum voltage limit. The BMS is connected to the main negative on

the pack and then offers to the user separate controlled negative connections for
charging and discharging (Figure 5.42). The BMS can electrically switch off the
connection to these negatives if it detects that something is wrong with a cell. The
BMS also has a connection to the battery positive, from which it draws operating
power, and connection taps between each cell. Usually there is no direct connection to
battery negative for the user, but it can be useful to have one for fault finding or
emergency purposes. The main BMS connections should be clearly marked on the
circuit board by + and − symbols. The BMS wires should be clearly marked with
“discharging” and “charging” labels. The negative connections also should be
indicated on the board if the BMS comes without negative wires attached. If you buy a
large battery and need to separate it into smaller sections to fit on your electric
bicycle, then you have to be mindful of BMS connections. Some packs have series and
parallel cells, so it’s possible to separate them in two ways. You should separate the
pack the easiest way possible. If you separate a series string of cells, then the
connecting main current wire between the two halves needs to be very thick. This is
because any voltage drop in this wire will be assumed by the BMS to be a result of a
bad cell. Any Anderson connectors or fuses here could cause BMS cutoffs. Always
remember to reconnect the balance wires. If you separate the battery into two parallel
halves, then you can use Figure 6.1 as a template.
FIGURE 5.42 How to connect a lithium pack with a BMS including charger port and

balance wires.
Connecting the Battery Plug and Charger
Sometimes when you buy a new battery, it will come with the charger plug
removed, for you to connect yourself. This is done so that you can panel-mount the
plug on your battery box and thread the wires through. Sometimes the wires will be
clearly marked so that they can be connected easily. If they are not marked, then use
your multimeter on voltage setting to check the polarity of the wires and compare that
with the polarity of the charger when plugged in. The battery should be connected to
the charger positive to positive and negative to negative. Polarity detection is
explained in the tips in Section 5.1.1. If the BMS has separate negative wires for
discharge and charge, then the smaller-thickness blue wire is usually the charge wire.
The charge plug will have the negative BMS charge wire and a connection to positive.
The discharge power wires that connect to the controller will be the thick positive
wire and the thick black negative discharge wire.

CHAPTER 6
Projects for Electric Bicycles
6.1 Performance Modifications
6.1.1 How to Build a Battery Pack
It is very useful to know how to build a battery pack from spare cells for several
reasons: It allows you to tailor-make packs to perfectly fit your electric bicycle
project. You can use any cells you want, cells that may be free or cheap for whatever
reason. Figure 6.1 shows a LiFePO4 battery pack I made from used A123 cells
designed to add a boost to my main battery pack and fit in a small empty space in my
battery box. At the time of this writing, A123 cells are not available for the general
public to buy. The cells I used were taken from power tool packs that developed
faults. These are the good cells left over and thus were cheap. Both packs are based
on LiFePO4 chemistry, so I could use the same battery management system (BMS) to
protect both packs. The same pack-building method can be used for any cylindrical
cells, though.
Be very careful when working on batteries. The batteries on electric bicycles
contain a lot of energy and can be very dangerous in untrained hands. The risk is
highest when you are working on an open battery. When working on batteries, avoid
using metal tools whenever possible; work on a clean, empty, nonconductive surface,
and don’t wear jewelry. Read the safety section (Section 1.3) and follow all the
guidance. As the author of this book, I cannot be held responsible for any accident,
injury, or damage to property caused by your work following instructions provided in
this book.
The process of pack building is similar for all cell types, but there are some major
differences that will be explained here. There are several methods of stacking cells to
form a pack. The method you choose will depend on the type of cells you are using
and the size of the pack you wish to create. When using cylindrical cells, there are two
stacking methods that can be used for pack building: square stacking or triangular
stacking (Figure 6.2). The figure shows a square stack of cells, where the cells line up
in both directions and are not staggered between layers. This leaves lots of space
between the cells, which is bad for volumetric energy density but easy to insulate. In a
triangular stack configuration, the layers of cells are staggered like the bricks in a wall
to fill the space between the cells more efficiently. For the type of pack in the figure,
square stacking was chosen because the space in the battery box was very small, and
the void space was important. In larger battery packs, it’s important to stack the cells
triangularly to achieve better volumetric cell density. There is only one way to stack
flat-pouch cells. Because the cells are rectangular shaped, there is no wasted space

between the cells when you square stack them. There is no benefit to staggering the
layers of cells, so a triangular configuration is not used.
FIGURE 6.1 Adding cells to a lithium battery with a BMS so that the BMS controls
both packs. This can be used to add high-rate cells to a high-capacity pack as long as
they are the same chemistry and voltage.
The next thing to decide is how to interconnect the cells. With cylindrical cells, you
can either zigzag the cells and use straight battery tabs, or you can keep the cells lined
up the same direction and leapfrog the connecting battery tabs (Figure 6.3). Usually,
battery packs for electric bicycles use the zigzag configuration because it minimizes
the length needed for the interconnecting battery tabs, which reduces the resistance and
thus pack heating.

FIGURE 6.2 Triangular or square configuration of cells into a pack. The triangular
configuration saves space in larger battery packs.
FIGURE 6.3 Leapfrog or zigzag connection of cell tabs in a pack. The zigzag
arrangement has shorter cell connections and therefore less pack heating.
The other thing that can differ in building a battery pack is whether you join the
cells together physically before joining them electrically or vice versa. In the folowing
example, the cells were joined electrically first, through welding, and then they were
joined physically by heat shrinking. This allows the builder to add insulation between
the cells as the pack is constructed. Good pack insulation was a main priority because
the insulation on the cells was poor. Usually NiMh battery packs are built the other
way around—by joining the cells first with hot glue and then welding them together
electrically afterward. This makes the pack look neater. It’s best to use circuit board
or high-density card as insulation between the layers of cells because such materials
won’t wear out.
Choose your battery tabs wisely for the current you are going to use. Nickel,
copper, and aluminum are good low-resistance battery tabs, but steel is not. The
resistance and voltage drop across the battery tabs can be calculated for your battery
using the resistivity equation and Ohm’s law (basic law of resistance in conductors).
First, look up the resistivity of the material you are using for battery tabs on the
Internet or in Table 6.1. Use Equation 6.1, the resistivity equation, to calculate the
resistance of the tabs. Then use Ohm’s law (Equations 6.2 and 6.3) to calculate the
voltage drop and power consumed by the tabs at whatever current level you wish to
operate the pack. Aim to keep the wasted power below 10 W for a normal-sized
battery pack at the peak power you will use because more heat than this will not be
easy to dissipate and will increase the running temperature of the pack, which will
shorten its life.
EQUATION 6.1
Resistivity × Total tab length / Tab cross-sectional area = Resistance
Choose the ones with the lowest resistivity.

TABLE 6.1 Resistivity of Some Common Battery Materials
EQUATION 6.2 Ohm’s law applied to current through battery tabs
Voltage drop across tabs = Current × Resistance
EQUATION 6.3 Energy dissipation in the battery tabs
Current2 × Resistance = Power wasted heating battery tabs
Follow the instructions in Figures 6.4 through 6.21 to see how to build a battery
pack. In Figure 6.5 notice how the tab is trimmed at the end to protect the cell
insulation from abrasion and short circuit between positive and negative at the top
sides of the can, where the positive and negative tabs are closest. Also notice the
black insulating tape on the other side of the tab to protect from short circuits where
the tab exits the cell and crosses the positive-negative gap. In a factory-made pack,
this insulation would be heat-resistant. The most catastrophic failure occurs when
there is heat buildup inside the battery that melts or burns the insulation and causes all
the cells to short circuit.
To weld metal cylindrical cells together, you need to have a capacitance discharge
welder, which is a specialist tool (Figure 6.6). The capacitance discharge (CD)
welder works on the principle of a spot welder in that it doesn’t heat up the whole
cell, just the point that is to be welded. To weld with a CD welder, position the tab on
the cell terminal. Then press both the electrodes down onto the tab, but not touching
each other. Pressing on the cell in the place that you want to weld, you then depress
the foot pedal, and the weld will be made (Figure 6.7). You will see some sparks, so
wear goggles and protective clothing. You can vary the amount of contact force to
change the intensity of the weld. A light touch of one electrode will ensure that all the
power is delivered across the resistance caused by that contact and will create more
sparks as a result. A hard-pressed electrode will produce a mild weld and is best for
welding fragile things such as small balance wires. Try not to damage the cells, and
avoid welding through insulation because the insulation will melt and cause heat and
smoke. Welds should be done with welder tips always on the same battery terminal.

Never make a weld across the two cell terminals, or the high current will destroy the
cell. Now follow the directions in Figures 6.8 through 6.21 to complete your pack.
FIGURE 6.4 Start off with two cells arranged end to end like this.
FIGURE 6.5 Cut, insulate, and position the first battery tab.

FIGURE 6.6 A capacitance discharge welder is the best way to join cells together.

FIGURE 6.7 Position both electrodes on the tab, and depress the foot pedal. Never
weld through the battery or it will explode! The weld electrodes always should be on
the same battery terminal.

FIGURE 6.8 Do lots of welds to hold the tab on securely, but don’t damage the cell
with too much power.
FIGURE 6.9 The two cells are now securely joined both physically and electrically.

FIGURE 6.10 Weld the balance wire on too. This will require a lower setting and
the right amount of tip pressure.
FIGURE 6.11 If the cell will be in the middle of the pack, then bend the tab and heat-
shrink the cells to insulate them.

FIGURE 6.12 Good insulation is the most important thing in a battery pack. These
two cells now become one with no exposed middle junction.

FIGURE 6.13 To make the ends of your battery pack, it is just like joining two cells.
Remember to put a balance wire at every cell junction.

FIGURE 6.14 Insulate the join. This time duct tape and cardboard are used.

FIGURE 6.15 The battery pack is built up with lots of units in this way. Cardboard is
used to separate the vertical columns of cells. Be careful of short circuits; insulate
everything.

FIGURE 6.16 Here, a thin copper strip has been welded onto the terminal to make a
good place on which to solder.

FIGURE 6.17 The almost-finished battery pack—16 cells in series, a 48-V pack.
Insulate the pack as you build. Use battery heat shrink to insulate the junctions of
straight cell joined in the middle of the pack, and use duct tape and cardboard to
insulate the cell junctions at the edges of the pack. Use cardboard or circuit board to
insulate between cell layers. When the pack is completed, heat-shrink the whole pack.

FIGURE 6.18 With larger packs, keeping things straight can be a problem.
FIGURE 6.19 To connect the discharge wires, you have to either weld something that
you can solder onto or solder directly onto the cell terminals.
FIGURE 6.20 Here is the finish boost battery wedged in alongside the main pack
using all available space in the battery box. The balance wires connect the two packs,

and everything is controlled by the original BMS from the capacity pack. The BMS
shunt can be beefed up with solder if the cutout is too low for the new battery.
FIGURE 6.21 The battery box with the lid shut. This was made from an Army
surplus ammunition case.
When you heat-shrink the pack, the balance wires all will exit from the same place,
and it will be impossible to know where they go just by looking at them. To determine
the order in which to connect the wires onto the BMS, a multimeter should be used.
Measure the voltage from each wire to the positive terminal, and use the voltage to tell
where in the pack each wire is connected. In this way, there should be no unexpected
sparks when connecting the balance wires.
Pouch-Cell Battery Packs
Pouch cells may be soldered into a pack if they have long contact tabs. If the contact
tab is too short, care must be taken not to melt the insulation around the tab where it
enters the pouch; otherwise, there could be a short circuit. It’s not possible to solder
cells if the solder tabs have broken off. Use a high-power soldering iron and lead
solder. Pouch-cell tabs are connected in the factory using ultrasonic welding, which
requires a very specialized tool. If the tabs are cut short or broken, then there is very
little you can do to repair the cell.

Figure 6.22 shows the insides of a pouch-cell pack. The numbered junctions are
where the cell tabs are soldered together. In this case, the battery is 16 series, 3
parallel, so at each junction there are six tabs soldered together from different cells.
The tabs of the cells are threaded through slots in small pieces of circuit board and
then soldered together with a big blob of solder. The black foam you can see is
padding between the cells. The cells actually look like the ones in Figure 6.22. To get
the cells out, you usually have to cut the contact tabs because there are several cell
tabs going through the same circuit board. It is possible to remove the cells without
cutting the tabs if you can melt all the solder all the way through and pull the circuit
board off all the cells at once. You have to solder suck and then cut up the circuit
board joining the cell tabs, and bend it out of the way, to seperate the tabs. This is a
difficult job and its easy to brake off cell tabs if you bend them when coated in solder.
Usually you only want to unsolder cells from a pack if they are dead, so this is not a
common problem. When building a pack out of pouch cells, group the cells into
parallel cell groups first, and solder them together. Then assemble these in series to
build up the pack. If you have fresh cells and fresh circuit board. The result should
look like the pack in Figure 6.22. If you are reconfiguring and old pack then it wont
look as pretty. Be very careful not to get the polarity wrong. If you do, you will be
reminded by a spark and some smoke. Include balancing wires for the BMS. When the
pack is complete, protect it with more layers of card, duct tape, or heat shrink and then
padding, and put it in a strongbox for impact protection.
FIGURE 6.22 Pack made of pouch cells with tabs soldered together. The numbered

junctions are where the cell tabs are soldered together. In this case, the battery is 16
series, 3 parallel, so at each junction there are six tabs soldered together from
different cells. The black foam is padding between the cells. The cells actually look
like the one in Figure 6.22.
Soldering to Batteries
It is possible to solder onto metal cylindrical cells, but it is bad for the cells. This
is so because it exposes the cells to high temperatures. Soldering onto metal
cylindrical cells may be necessary if you have a dead cell in the middle of a pack or if
the tab welding was of poor quality and has come undone. The problem is that the
cylindrical cell conducts the heat away too quickly from the soldering iron, and the
temperature doesn’t go high enough to melt the solder. To solder onto batteries, a
powerful soldering iron must be used along with good leaded solder that melts at a
lower temperature than lead-free solder. This allows the soldering to be done quickly,
which minimizes the damage to the cells.
If you are going to solder a battery pack, it is best to buy cells with solder tabs
already welded to the cell, which makes the soldering easy. Soldering to batteries
without solder tabs is the most difficult soldering job that you might attempt when
building an electric bicycle.
Once the cells have solder tabs on them, soldering the tabs together to make a
battery pack is easy. Follow the pack-building advice in Section 6.1.1, especially with
regard to insulation and wire thickness. The battery tabs can be a point of failure in the
pack if they are not connected in a secure way. Therefore, the sides of the battery
where the battery tabs are connected need to be padded to protect against impacts,
especially if the welding or soldering is poor.
Battery Pack by Compression
Another way to build a battery pack is to use spring-loaded contacts to temporarily
join the cells as in such commercial devices as cameras and radios. To scale this up
for an electric bicycle, you can slide fat, high-capacity D cells down a 1.5-in-diameter
PVC pipe. The cell connections are done using spring contacts sandwiched between
the cells. To make the end pipe connections, you can use stoppers with a spring-
loaded connection joined to an exiting wire that connects to other packs. The stoppers
then can be duct-taped to the pipe, or you can use plumbing fittings to cap the pipe off.
Make sure that the springs are thick enough to cope with the expected current and are
made out of a low-resistivity material such as copper, nickel, or aluminum. This is
quite a low-tech approach to battery packs.
6.1.2 Bypassing a Brushed Motor Controller

The simplest form of motor control is just a battery, a switch, and a brushed motor
(Figure 6.23). Electric vehicles (EVs) like this have been around for hundreds of
years. This form of control still has its uses in the age of microchips and cheap
electronics. If your controller fails, and you need to rig something fast that will get you
from point A to point B, there is nothing easier than just a switch. Some cheap electric
bicycle motors are weak enough that you don’t really need partial throttle anyway. The
disadvantage is that you have to run thick power wires up to the handlebars and back.
This is a crude form of cruise control. Using this form of control, you have to
remember to switch it off when you want to brake because otherwise you might not be
able to stop. If you want to go half speed then you have to cycle the switch on-off
repeatedly. The switch will get spark eroded fast, so use the biggest switch you can
buy, rated for the highest voltage and current you can find. Both sides of a double-
pole, double-throw (DPDT) switch can be ganged together to double the current rating
for this purpose. Use two switches in series to prevent losing control of the bicycle if
the switch welds itself shut.
FIGURE 6.23 Switch-controlled brushed motor. This is the simplest form of motor
control.
This simple control backup can be wired into the normal brushed controller with
minimal extra wiring, as shown in Figure 6.24. On a brushed controller, one of the
battery wires is always through-connected to one of the motor wires. Use a multimeter
to continuity check and find which wire is through-connected to which motor wire. On
my brushed controller, the red battery wire was through-connected to the yellow motor
wire, but check on yours because it may be different. In this case, the controller can be
bypassed with a handlebar-mounted switch connecting battery negative to the blue
motor wire. This modification is also good for getting rid of unwanted pedal-assist
mode.
6.1.3 Removing Pedal-Assist Mode

Pedal-assist (PAS) mode is a pain in the butt. PAS mode leaves you stranded on
hills and makes the bicycle feel uncontrolled. Most PAS mechanisms use a simple
tachometer sensor to measure how fast you are pedaling, similar to the way a bicycle
speedometer works. The sensor sends data to the controller, which also takes control
inputs from brake-mounted electric stop switches and usually the hand throttle as well.
It is sometimes possible to hack this sensor so that it thinks you are pedaling all the
time or that you are pedaling faster than you actually are. This will turn the bicycle
into throttle control only, which most people prefer.
FIGURE 6.24 Bypass switch for brushed controller setup. This is a backup for the
event of a controller failure.
If you have a brushed motor (where only two wires exit the hub), then it is possible
to bypass the controller completely and control the motor using a switch. This could
be instead of or as well as the controller and is a great way to bypass the PAS control
(see Figure 6.23). Another way is to buy a new controller without PAS. This is easy
and cheap with a brushed motor, and it’s always good to have a spare controller
because the cheap ones can be prone to failure. See the guide in Section 4.2.1 for
wiring controllers. Sometimes there is an easy get-around on PAS-equipped bicycles

whereby the tachometer can only tell if the pedals are rotating and not the direction of
rotation. On these bicycles, you can free-wheel the pedals backwards, and this is
enough to activate the PAS mode. Sometimes you can disable PAS mode just by
unplugging the tachometer or crank sensor from the controller. The tachometer sensor
is usually accessible just below the pedal crankshaft. On some bicycles, the crankshaft
is enlarged, and the tachometer is inside it. This is a poor design because it makes it
harder to access the tachometer and also makes the crankshaft components more
specialized and difficult to replace when you hit the pedal on a trail rock and bend the
crankshaft.
Removing PAS Mode on Crank Rotation Sensor–Equipped Bicycles
The following instructions apply to the Schwinn I-Zip and other electric bicycles
equipped with the crank rotation sensor. The sensor is connected to the motor
controller with a three-wire plug that has a “black box” with a variable resistor on it.
The three-wire plug’s functions are:
• Black: Module power (+5 V)
• Red: Signal wire (+5 V)
• Blue: Signal wire (ground)
All that needs to be done is to permanently short the red and blue wires, and a
signal will be generated indicating that the crank is rotating. The controllers used on
this bicycle do not transmit information about crank speed—only that it is rotating.
Then the bicycle can be used without the Pedelec. The bicycle will not function
without the Pedelec module installed, however.
6.1.4 Overclocking/Upgrading a Brushed Electric Bicycle
So you have a 200-W Chinese electric bicycle, and it goes 15 mph. You are happy
with it, but you feel that you could keep up with traffic better if it could go a little
faster. Before you go and splurge on an all-new electric bicycle kit, you should have a
go at overclocking the one you have to see if you can get any more speed out of it
cheaply. There is always a risk of causing damage when pushing the performance
envelope, but if the old bicycle kit gets broken in the process, who cares? You were
going to buy a more expensive electric bicycle kit anyway! Disclaimer: Don’t blame
me if you follow these instructions and your stuff breaks. You do these experiments at
your own risk.
To overclock an electric bicycle, you have to know what is limiting its power.
Finding this out will involve a bit of testing and a process of elimination. There are
several things that can limit power. These are listed below in order of probability for
a commercial bicycle:

• Battery power limiting
• Controller current limiting
• Controller speed limiting
• Motor thermal tolerance limiting
• Motor rpms limiting
The subsections that follow are a guide to how to overclock any brushed electric
bicycle. The next section is a guide to overclocking brushless motor bicycles, but
many of the tests apply to both. The tests are ordered with the easiest first and must be
done in order for the process of elimination to be successful.
Controller Speed Limiting
The first thing to check is the controller because this is the cheapest thing to replace.
Despite European Union (EU) regulations and laws, most electric bicycles have no
speed-sensing circuitry, and the controller does not limit speed. You can prove this by
lifting the back wheel off the ground and doing a no-load test with a speedometer. You
will find that the speed shoots up to higher than 17 mph. If the speed is limited to 15
mph, then the controller is limiting the speed. If so, great! Just buy a £20/$30
controller on eBay, and you can increase your bicycle’s speed.
Controller Current Limiting
To overclock an electric bicycle, you should buy a power meter (see Section 5.1.2)
so that you can quantify what kind of power you have/want; otherwise, it’s just a
guessing game. With the power meter, you can determine whether the controller is
limiting your power by wiring the battery straight to the motor via a handlebar switch
(circuit shown in Figure 6.24) and comparing this power with that available when
using the controller as wired normally. This test can only be done on a brushed motor,
the ones with two wires that exit the motor. This controller bypass test probably will
show no power difference, though, because the controller is not normally used to limit
power on cheap commercial electric bicycles. If there is a difference, then great! Just
buy a £20/$30 controller on eBay, and you will increase your power by whatever the
difference was. In fact, it’s probably a good idea to buy the high-powered eBay
controller anyway because as you increase the power of the battery, you may find that
the controller starts to become a limiting factor, or it might not take the higher voltage.
There is usually no governor or bottleneck holding back a commercial electric
bicycle because all its components are rated for around the same low-power output,
about 200 W. The manufacturers do this to save on component costs. Having said this,
the motor is not an expensive component, and most of them are rated fairly
conservatively. The rated power for a motor may just be a number that was chosen to

allow a factory to legally sell a motor in a specific market. The motor may have
potential for much more power, maybe triple the power rating. The batteries are what
usually limit the electric bicycle to a specific power rating. This is so because the
batteries are the most expensive part, and the manufacturer does not want to waste
money by exceeding their rated market specifications.
The batteries limit the power by their voltage. The voltage is also limited by the
rated current of the batteries because the voltage will sag under load when you try to
exceed the rated current. You can estimate the speed limit of your battery using the
graph in Section 3.4.3 (Figure 3.16) if you know the volts and rated current. You
probably will find this is close to the speed you can achieve under the conditions
mentioned on the graph.
Motor rpms Limiting
Once you have eliminated the possibility of the controller limiting your speed, you
need to find out the battery voltage. There are two ways that battery voltage can limit
your speed—either by hitting the maximum rpm limit for the motor (when going
downhill) or by hitting a power limit versus wind resistance. A no-load test will tell
you the maximum motor speed. Lift the wheel off the ground, and with a speedometer,
measure the maximum speed. If this speed is close to the normal top speed of the
bicycle, then the system is hitting the limits of the motor rpms for that battery voltage.
This can be solved either by changing the gearing by relacing the motor into a larger
wheel or by increasing the battery voltage. The no-load speed can be divided by the
battery voltage to give a speed-per-volt specification for that motor. You then can use
this to predict the outcome of increasing the wheel size or battery voltage. When you
overcome the motor rpm limit, then speed next will be limited by the battery power
limit versus wind resistance.
Battery Voltage Limiting
If the no-load test speed was significantly higher than the normal top speed of the
bicycle, then the bicycle’s speed is limited by power versus wind resistance. This is
probably the most common limiting factor for electric bicycles, and it means that you
have to increase either battery voltage or battery peak current or both if you want to
increase the speed. If the bicycle operates on a low-voltage battery (e.g., 24 V) and is
still quite fast, then this means that there is lots of room for improvement simply by
changing to higher-voltage batteries. The highest commercial electric bicycle voltage
is usually 36 V, and the highest voltage you can increase it to is about 72 V. After that,
it becomes impossible to find compatible controllers.
Doubling the voltage of the batteries will roughly double the power if the rated
current output is the same. To increase the voltage, you just add more batteries of the

same type and capacity in series. This is good news for 24-V, 250-W motors because
you can double the battery voltage to 48 V, which will double the power, and
controllers are still readily available for this voltage.
Battery Current Limiting
With the power meter, see how much peak power you are putting through the hub
motor during riding. Put the power meter on the handlebars where you can see it, and
look to see if the voltage is sagging a lot when you accelerate. If you notice the voltage
sag a great deal, then there is lots of potential for a power increase by buying more
powerful batteries. Say that the voltage sags by 30 percent when accelerating hard.
This means that if you buy higher-amperage batteries, you can gain up to 30 percent
more power. Rated battery current is a product of discharge rate and rated capacity;
for example, 3C × 10 Ah = 30 A. By increasing the battery capacity, which will
increase the bicycle’s range, you also can increase the bicycle’s power. You can
increase the rated battery current just by adding more batteries of the same type and
voltage in parallel.
So you can increase the battery power in two ways—by increasing either or both
voltage or rated current output. Say, for example, that your 24-V, 7-Ah, 1C NiMh
battery (29 V fully charged) sags by 20 percent down to 24 V when accelerating under
maximum load at 200 W. This means that if you buy a high-current 48-V battery, you
could increase your power to 480 W. A high-current 60-V battery would increase your
power to 600 W! And this is all with a 200-W-rated motor. With these higher voltages
and currents, you will need a better controller. Sufficiently powerful controllers are
available cheaply on eBay. To summarize:
200 W × 48 V/24 V = 400 W (this is the power increase from a voltage increase)
400 W × 1.2 = 480 W (this is the power increase from a current increase that
eliminates the 20 percent voltage sag)
Motor Thermal Tolerance Limiting
If you find after this that the motor gets hot (highly likely), then giving it more
ventilation not only will stop it from melting but also will increase its power some
more by reducing resistance in the windings and allowing more current to flow. To
test this, you can touch the side of the motor after a ride and see how hot it is. If it’s no
hotter than the rest of the bicycle, then it can handle a bit more power. If you notice the
motor getting hot, you also may notice a drop in power on the power meter as the
windings heat up and prevent current flow. When overclocking the bicycle and
pushing its limits, it’s a good idea to buy an aquarium thermometer because this will
give a more accurate temperature reading than just touch alone. Insert the probe into
the hub where the wires go in. If the temperature of the outside of the motor is 40 to

50°C/104 to 122°F, then you can assume that the temperature inside is 70 to 80°C/158
to 176°F, near the melting point of some components, so don’t exceed it. You can
alleviate motor heating by drilling holes in the side covers to let the heat escape
(Figure 6.25). Take the covers off first so that you don’t drill through the motor
windings and trash the motor. The windings are the part of the motor that heats up the
most, so drill the vent holes nearest to them. With brushed hub motors, the windings
are attached to the hub, which is good for heat dissipation. If you choose to do this
modification, be careful not to weaken the side plates too much because they support
the weight of the bicycle. Avoid using a motor modified in this way in wet conditions
because it will allow water into the hub. Be careful with dust and metal debris,
especially around your work area, where iron filings will be attracted into the motor
by the magnets and could damage the bearings or cause increased friction.
Now you have reached the absolute limit to which you can take this 200W motor.
This thermal limit may be around three to five times the continuous rating depending
on heat dissipation. If you still want more power after all this, then you will have to
buy another motor. The drawback of pushing a motor to its limits in this way is that
there will be a significant efficiency penalty. You may find that your range could be 10
to 20 percent longer with a larger motor. Figure 6.26 presents a flowchart summary.
FIGURE 6.25 Holes added to a small brushed motor to let the heat out and allow it
to operate at higher power without melting.

6.1.5 Overclocking/Upgrading a Brushless Electric Bicycle
Overclocking a brushless electric bicycle is harder because brushless controllers
are made specifically for brushless motors, and upgrading them can be difficult (see
Section 4.2.1). It’s not possible to bypass the controller like it is with a brushed motor
to check for controller current limiting. However, we can still test for controller speed
limiting, motor rpm limiting, battery voltage limiting, battery current limiting, and
motor thermal tolerance limiting using the same processes as in the preceding section.
Make sure that you have read the preceding section on brushed motors because most of
the tests apply equally to brushless motors, too. This will tell you what is currently
limiting the power of your electric bicycle, which probably will be the battery power
again. The problem is that if you increase the battery voltage, the controller may not
withstand the higher voltage and may blow up.
FIGURE 6.26 A flowchart showing how to find what’s limiting an electric bicycle’s
power and what to do to increase the speed and power.
Test for Controller Current Limiting on a Brushless Motor

First, do the tests to eliminate the possibility of controller speed limiting or motor
rpm limiting. Then, if under full load there is no significant voltage drop and the motor
does not get hot, the controller is probably limiting the current. If the peak current is
always the same no matter what state of charge the batteries are in, then you can be
fairly certain that the displayed current on the power meter is the current limit of the
controller.
If the controller is not potted in resin, then it may be possible to lift the ampere limit
on it by soldering a shunt (see Section 6.1.6). If you solder a shunt, you also might
want to install a variable-current-limit pot for more control (see Section 6.1.7). You
can use a power meter in conjunction with a variable-current module to accurately set
the current limit to whatever you think the controller and motor can withstand. Be sure
to check that the field-effect transistors (FETs) can handle this current by checking
their specifications. Make sure that you have adequate cooling on the controller, and
monitor the heat buildup in the controller. If heat is a problem, you can attach heat
sinks from an old computer or computer power supply.
If you notice a large voltage sag when under load, then you can safely increase the
power by increasing the rated current of the battery (see the example under “Battery
Current Limiting” in the preceding section). You can increase the rated current of the
battery just by adding more batteries of the same type and voltage in parallel, this also
will increase the bicycle’s range, or by swapping for a higher-amperage battery.
Increasing the Voltage
If the controller is not potted in resin, then it’s possible to open it and look at the
voltage ratings of the capacitors to get a good idea of how much of a voltage increase
the controller can take. The upper voltage limit of the controller is usually around 75
percent of the capacitor value. You also can determine the model number of the FETs
and find their specifications, which will tell you about the voltage of the controller.
The number on the FETs will be something like IRFB4110, and you can look this up in
the Table 6.1 or on the Internet to find the voltage rating. The upper voltage of the
controller will be something like 75 percent of the voltage limit of the FETs. If the
controller is potted in resin, you can usually soften it up with paint stripper over a few
days, and then scrape it off with a knife. Be careful and use the proper PPE (personal
protective equipment). If you find that the controller has high-voltage-rated FETs and
capacitors, then great! You probably can increase the voltage and receive a power
boost proportional to the voltage increase. If the FETs are not rated for high voltage,
then you have two options: You can either upgrade the components of the controller or
you can buy a more powerful controller and try to make it work with your motor.
Alternatively, at this stage, if you are working with a cheap Chinese electric bicycle
setup, you may want to consider just selling the bicycle and starting fresh with a new

high-power electric bicycle kit.
Upgrading Controller Components
Once you find your speed restricted by voltage, either by motor rpms or by battery
power, you will want to increase the voltage. However, with a brushless motor, you
may be limited by how far you can safely increase the voltage without causing damage
to the controller. In this situation, you could consider moding (modifying) the
controller to increase the voltage limits of the components. This is usually attempted
only by those “crazy people” who really want to stretch the limits of electric bicycle
technology. These people already have the expensive high-power motor and
controller, but they want to make them even faster—at any cost! This will involve
swapping the FETs for higher-voltage ones and/or upgrading the capacitors. The how-
to guides for these changes are shown in Section 5.4.1 for FETs and Section 5.4.3 for
capacitors. The upgrade procedure is the same as repairing the controller from a
blowout. Doing these modifications may allow you to increase the voltage the
controller can take, but there is no guarantee that it will not blow up.
Heat Dissipation in Brushless Hub Motors
The problem with heat dissipation in brushless hub motors is that the windings are
in the middle, and there is an air gap between the windings and the outside of the
motor. Air is a good insulator and causes a problem for heat conduction. You can drill
holes in the side covers of the motor, as mentioned earlier. This is even more effective
for cooling brushless motors than it is for cooling brushed motors. The other option
with direct-drive hub motors is to fill them with oil. Filling the motor with oil will
increase the conductivity and allow the heat to conduct out through the outer surface of
the motor, which should increase heat dissipation dramatically and cool the motor.
You don’t have to completely fill the motor with oil. Just a quarter full will be enough
because centripetal force will make the oil flow to the right places.
6.1.6 Increasing the Power Limit by Soldering the Shunt Resistor
This is a simple modification that tricks the controller into thinking that the current
is lower than it actually is so that you can get more power from it. Adding extra solder
to the shunt reduces its resistance and thus lowers the voltage drop that the controller
measures. However, this is a crude modification that could damage the controller if
too much current is forced through its components. This modification can be made a
bit more refined if a parallel wire is used, and a switch is added that can activate the
parallel wire, or one could shortcut half the shunt length with a wire and an on/off
switch. Similarly, you can reduce the current limit by cutting some of the wires in the
shunt or filing them to reduce their thickness.

1. Locate the shunt resistor. It will look something like the four thick wires
standing out from the board shown in Figure 6.27. There may be more or fewer
wires on different controllers, but they always stick out from the board and
should be easy to spot.
2. Simply heat up the shunt with a soldering iron, and add solder to beef up the
thickness. The current limit generally is proportional to the cross-sectional area
of the shunt.
6.1.7 Variable-Current-Limit Modification
All controllers can have their current limit changed with alterations to the shunt.
This is a very crude way of doing it because the resistance of the shunt is very low,
and it has lots of current flowing through it, so there are not many things that we can do
to it. Most controllers can be modified to change their current limit by changing other
resistor values as well. The controller always compares the voltage drop over the
shunt to the voltage drop across another resistor. If we locate this resistor, we can
change its value, using a variable resistor, and this will give us a knob that we can
twist during a ride to make the bicycle go faster or slower.
FIGURE 6.27 The shunt resistor can be found easily on all controllers. It looks the
same—like thick parallel wires. On the V1 Crystalyte controller, there are four wires;
on the V2 Crystalyte, there are two wires.
Variable-Current Crystalyte V1 Controller Modification
This modification can be used to vary the current limit in the downward direction.

This modification is specific to the Crystalyte V1 controller but should work on any
controller using the KA3525 comparator for current limiting. This modification works
well with the shunt soldering modification that alters the current limit in the upward
direction. With these two modifications, you can set whatever current limit you feel
like. The shunt modification will increase the upper limit for better top speed, and then
you can dial it down for everyday use by using this modification. Thanks to super
electrical engineer Richard Fechter from San Francisco for discovering this
modification.
1. Locate the KA3525 comparator chip on the controller circuit board. Find legs
1 and 16 on the chip. Leg 1 is marked on the chip with a dot; leg 16 is opposite
leg 1, as seen in Figure 6.28.
2. Locate the battery negative on the controller, as shown by the ground in Figure
6.28.
3. Solder wires onto pins 1 and 16 and the battery negative.
4. Get a 150-kΩ resistor, a 51-kΩ resistor, and a 10-kΩ potentiometer.
5. Wire the circuit as shown in Figure 6.29, it should look something like what is
shown in Figure 6.30. Pin 1 on the KA3525 chip goes to the middle pin on the
potentiometer, the one that can change resistance relative to the other two legs.
Alternatively, you could use a switch and a fixed resistor to provide a boost
switch if you want a solution that is easier to operate during a ride. This could be
used to switch between a legal power limit for road use and a higher power limit
for off-road use.
6. Locate a hole in the case of the controller. In Figure 6.31, for the V1 Crystalyte
controller, the hole for the reverse switch was used because the reverse function
is never used. Alternatively, you would need to drill another hole in the case.
Remember that there needs to be room behind the hole for the potentiometer when
the circuit board is back inside the case. Don’t drill the case with the circuit
board inside because you could break it.
7. Put everything back together, and mount the variable resistor. Secure it in
place with its lock nut.

FIGURE 6.28 Where to tap the lead for a variable current limit for the Crystalyte V1
controller.

FIGURE 6.29 Variable-current-limit modification on a Crystalyte V1 controller or
others with the KA3525 chip.
FIGURE 6.30 This shows the KA3525 chip with pins 1 and 16 taped for the
variable-current-limit modification. The 10-kΩ potentiometer is shown in the

foreground.
FIGURE 6.31 This is how the potentiometer is fitted into the case where the reverse
button was located.
Crystalyte V2 Controller
On the V2 controller, the comparator is controlled by a different chip. Resistor R4
is compared with the shunt. By changing the value of R4, you can alter the current limit
of the controller.
1. Locate resistor R4 (Figure 6.32).
2. Unsolder R4.
3. Replace R4 with a variable resistor. R4’s original value was 1.2 kΩ. To
increase the current limit, you can increase the value of R4. To decrease the
current limit, you can decrease the value of R4. Putting a 1-kΩ variable resistor
in series with a 500-Ω resistor at R4 would allow you to adjust the limit
downward. Putting a 1-kΩ variable resistor in series with a 1.2-kΩ resistor at
R4 would allow you to adjust the limit upward. Putting a 5-kΩ variable resistor
in series with a 200-Ω resistor at R4 would allow you to adjust the limit up and
down. Be careful how far you twist the throttle with a 5-kΩ potentiometer,
though, because it could allow the controller to be taken outside its safe working
limit.

4. Run long wires from the variable resistor to the solder pads at R4.
5. Drill a hole in the case to mount the variable resistor. Remember that there
needs to be room behind the hole for the potentiometer when the circuit board is
back inside the case. Don’t drill the case with the circuit board inside because
you could break it.
6. Put everything back together, and mount the variable resistor. Secure it in
place with its lock nut.
FIGURE 6.32 Position of R4 on the Crystalyte V2 controller. Install a 1-kΩ
potentiometer here to add variable current limiting.
Shenzhen E-Crazyman Controller
To make the current limit adjustable, it appears that changing the value of R8 should
do the trick.
1. Locate R8 on the board (Figure 6.33), and remove it. Attach a pair of small
wires to the spot where it used to be. Note: The position for C7 above it is
parallel to R8, so the wires can go across both spots.
2. Bring the other end of this pair of wires out to a 50-kΩ potentiometer that has a
15-kΩ fixed resistor in series with it. The original value of R8 was 18 kΩ, so
you really should use an 18-kΩ fixed resistor to keep the same maximum. A 15-
kΩ resistor is a more common value and will give you a slight increase in
maximum current. The value of the potentiometer will determine the adjustment
range. If you used a 20-kΩ potentiometer instead, it would allow the adjustment
to go down to about half the maximum. A 50-kΩ potentiometer should take it way

down.
FIGURE 6.33 Variable current limit for the Shenzhen E-Crazyman controller.
6.1.8 Modification of a Battery Charger
It is possible to prevent sparks during charger connection by fitting an in-rush
thermistor. An in-rush thermistor is a component that slows down the fast in-rush of
current when a device is switched on by heating up and quickly increasing its
resistance. Normal current is allowed to flow because the thermistor cools down
when the capacitor voltage has built up and the current slows to a normal level. A
thermistor can be fitted either into the charger wires of the battery or on the power
input side. Choose whichever side causes the sparking problem. Make sure that the
thermistor is rated for the application. This will improve the life expectancy of some
of the poor-quality battery chargers.
Improving cooling is another modification that will increase the longevity of a
charger. Monitor the temperature of the charger, and if it feels hot on the outside, then
it is likely to be even hotter inside. Amazingly, some chargers are built in sealed
boxes with no airflow, and they get very hot. You can cool a charger down by taking it
apart and cutting holes for passive cooling or mounting a fan. The power for the fan(s)
can be taken from the battery side if several fans are series-connected to match the

battery voltage.
6.1.9 Do-It-Yourself (DIY) Battery Chargers
Building a DIY battery charger is possible if you know what you are doing, but it is
not recommended because of the risk of death by electric shock. Commercial electric
bicycle chargers are very cheap and recently have improved in quality, so it is not
necessary to build DIY chargers any more. However, a few years ago, some brands of
charger were very unreliable and seemed to break every 6 months, so it was worth
experimenting then. It’s also possible to build faster, more powerful battery chargers
than those typically available commercially. Typical electric bicycle battery voltages
are generally safe. It’s difficult to get a shock from 72 V because dry, intact skin is a
good insulator. Main circuit voltages are much more dangerous. Do not work on
anything that is connected to the main circuit; always disconnect it first! Attempt to
build a DIY battery charger only if you know what you are doing with electrical stuff.
Always use a circuit breaker and an earth connection. A fuse will not prevent you
from getting an electric shock. I cannot be held responsible for any accident or injury
caused by your work.
How to Build Your Own Battery Charger
A battery charger can be made from a normal power supply if the voltage is right
for the battery. The voltage of the charger should be exactly that of the constant-
voltage part of the charge curve. There also should be a method of limiting the current
for the constant-current part of the charge curve so as not to exceed the current limits
of the battery or power supply. One method to limit current is to use resistance such as
a light bulb. This can be very inefficient, dissipating lots of energy as heat, and it does
no favors for the green image of electric bicycling. The efficiency will depend greatly
on the voltage wasted across the light bulb and its ratio to the useful energy used
charging the battery.
In fact, the simplest battery charger is simply a diode and a light bulb in series with
your battery from the main circuit supply. However, this is very dangerous because it
has no isolation transformer. In popular electronics, anything like this is called a
widow maker because it gives all terminals of the battery a live connection to main
circuit voltage, which will electrocute anyone who touches it. Do not do this! It’s also
very wasteful—something like 90 percent of the energy is wasted as heat.
To make a good battery charger, you should use a power supply that is around 20 V
higher than your battery voltage, and then use a light bulb to slow the current to make it
comfortable for your battery. The 20-V difference gives the battery room in which to
charge up. As the battery’s state of charge increases, its voltage will increase and take
up more of this room. As this occurs, the bulb will grow dimmer. Higher-voltage

batteries will need more room to grow because they have more cells. A 48-V NiMh
battery can be anywhere from 38 to 60 V depending on state of charge. If the battery is
heavily discharged, it may put too much voltage across the bulb and cause it to blow.
If you find this to be the case, use two bulbs in series.
The power supply can be either a main circuit transformer or a switched power
supply, but it needs to be able to handle the amperes at which you want to charge.
Main circuit transformers will need a bridge rectifier to change the power over to
direct current (dc). For limiting the current, low-voltage MR16 bulbs work well. They
are just right to dissipate about 15 V and limit current to a few amperes depending on
the power of the bulb. A 10-W bulb will slow current to 1 ampere, a 20-W bulb to 2
amperes, and a 50-W bulb to 5 amperes. To make it safer, you should attach a trip-
switch circuit breaker to the plug to prevent electrocution if anything goes wrong.
Making the DIY Battery Charger
1. Chosoe a power supply with a voltage just above that of your fully charged
battery. For a 48-V battery, you would want a 60-V supply; for a 36-V battery,
you would want a 48-V supply; for a 24-V battery, you would want a 30-V
supply; and for a 72-V battery, you would want a 110-V supply. You can use a
switched power supply or, if you have a 72-V battery, you could use a main
circuit transformer to get 110 V. If your main circuit is already 110 V, you should
use an isolation transformer.
2. Wire up the plug if the power supply doesn’t have one.
3. If you are using a main circuit transformer, the alternating current (ac) must be
converted into dc using a bridge rectifier circuit. Bridge rectifiers can be bought
cheaply from a component supply store.
4. From the dc output, connect the light bulb of the desired power rating. If the
bulb is above 10 W, then it will need to be mounted properly because it will get
hot enough to melt plastic or burn table tops, carpet, etc.
5. Next, connect a charging plug that will fit your battery. Charging plugs can be
bought from a component supply store.
6. Decide on the charge-termination method depending on what battery chemistry
you have to charge.
7. For charging NiMh/NiCd batteries, a thermostat circuit needs to be connected
to the power output. Cheap thermistor-based thermostat circuits can be bought
from a component supply store. Set the temperature cutoff by putting the
thermistor into a warm water bath at 40°C/104°F and then changing the variable
resistor with a small screwdriver until you find the sensitive zone where you hear
the relay click on and off with minor changes of the potentiometer. Connect the

relay to control the power output from the power supply. The thermostat circuit
will need a power supply of its own because it usually works on 12 V. This
supply should be powered by the main circuit so that it is always functioning.
8. For charging most other battery chemistries, a constant-voltage termination can
be set using the adjustment potentiometer on the power supply. Find the voltage
potentiometer, and adjust it with a small screwdriver, monitoring the output with
a multimeter. The power supply should be set for exactly the voltage of the fully
charged battery and no more.
9. Assemble and mount it all inside a nice case. The ugly attempt in Figure 6.34
should not be used as an example.
FIGURE 6.34 My experiment with a DIY battery charger. The power of the light
bulb determines the charge rate. Charge termination is provided by either voltage
match of the supply to the fully charged battery or a thermostat circuit.
Balancing Cell Level Charger
Mobile phone chargers are designed to charge individual lithium cells. A good
battery charger for a lithium battery can be made from multiple phone chargers
connected to each cell group that makes up the pack. This will balance the pack by
charging the cells individually and charge each cell to the same constant voltage. The
cell chargers can be wired to a single multipin plug for ease of connection. You just
need to make sure that the battery chemistry, and therefore, the voltage, is the same as
the type for which the charger was designed. Power supply outputs can be connected
in series with each other only if they are electrically isolated. Isolated means that the
output is isolated from the main circuit. If you connect outputs from nonisolated power
supplies in series, then a short circuit of the main circuit supply occurs. This will

blow a fuse or trigger a circuit breaker, and your family/housemates will not be
pleased. To test that a power supply is isolated, you can continuity test with a
multimeter from the main circuit pins to the dc output. If there is any connection, then
the power supply is not isolated.
6.1.10 Racing Electric Bicycles
Build Tactics
Racing electric bicycles is a much heavier duty than normal commuting to work.
When racing, things such as tires and brakes become very important to your lap time.
The best thing to do is to build your bicycle specifically for the racetrack. If there are
tight turns on concrete roads, then slick tires and disc brakes are essential. If the race
is uphill, then low gearing is essential. If the race is off-road, then knobby tires are
important. If it’s a distance race, then high gearing is essential. Some races allow you
to recharge halfway through, so fast charging may be essential.
If you know the route beforehand, then you can use the speed and distance theories
mentioned in Sections 3.4.3 and 4.1.2 to design your ride specifically for the
racetrack. For example, you could optimize the battery capacity versus weight tradeoff
to only have enough energy for the race and carry no unused battery weight. You could
calculate the optimal speed that is achievable for a given weight limit. If the race is
short, then it will be decided by the best battery rating and braking/cornering. If the
race is long or there is a strict weight limit (e.g., 100 miles or 40 kg/88 lb), then
pedaling and personal fitness will be important. Reliability is always important in
racing because as you push the bicycle to its limits, faults start to show that you may
never have noticed before.
Aerodynamics are always important in racing but are very difficult to build into an
existing bicycle. The best aerodynamics tactic with electric bicycles is to use a
bicycle that allows you to stay close to the ground. Cyclists do this using recumbent
bicycles, where they are seated between the wheels, because this position is best for
pedaling. When racing high-powered electric bicycles, there is little point in pedaling,
so it’s possible to use BMX (bicycle motor cross) or folding bicycle frames and adopt
a minimoto riding position for improved aerodynamics. Racing bicycles with their
700C wheels actually have very poor aerodynamics by comparison. See the
performance aerodynamics modifications in Section 6.1.12.
Safety gear also should be a priority in a race because you are likely to take more
risks than usual, such as trying to outbrake or outcorner an opponent, and there is a
higher chance of a collision or of falling off. It is suggested that racers wear heavy
trousers (jeans or leathers), leather gloves, and elbow and knee pads, as well as the
usual helmet.

Racing Tactics
There are three ways to beat an opponent in a race: outcorner, outbrake, and outrun.
Take the racing line through a corner. Go wide to begin with, and then turn into the
bend as close as possible to the apex. Then go wide when coming out of the turn. This
will allow you to cut the corner and turn the least sharply, thus permitting you to
corner at higher speed. When cornering, you should seek to outbrake your opponent by
continuing fast and leaving braking until the last possible moment while still being
able to make the turn. When coming out of a turn, you should go back to maximum
power straightaway in order to get up to speed as fast as possible.
On a tarmac surface, slick tires will help with cornering and allow you to outcorner
your opponents. Knobby tires will buckle when leaning and will lose traction, causing
the wheel to slip and the rider to fall off. Higher tire pressures are recommended for
road racing and lower pressure for dirt-track racing. Use at least tire sidewall
pressure for road racing and 10 psi less than rated for dirt-track racing. A well-
adjusted set of front and back disc brakes will give you the best stopping power to
outbrake your opponents. Choose the largest rotors available to dissipate the heat and
provide more braking surface.
Obviously, power is the most important factor, so build the bicycle with the
maximum power that the rules will allow. Weight limits are more common because
they are enforceable, unlike power limits, which are impossible to discern. Power-to-
weight ratio is of secondary importance to absolute power. You should aim to use all
your charge in the race so that you don’t carry unnecessary weight or go slower than
you needed to. You should aim to use 80 percent of your charge and have 20 percent in
reserve so that you don’t run out and look silly. Regenerative braking is a really good
idea to have when racing electric bicycles because it probably will save 20 to 40
percent of your power depending on the amount of cornering in the course.
Regenerative braking will give you a much better energy-to-weight ratio over other
bicycles and increase your braking, allowing you to outbrake your opponents, too.
Prerace Checks
• Check that your batteries are fully charged.
• Check that your tires are inflated to the optimal value.
• Check that you have the correct tires for your racetrack.
• Check that your brake pads are not worn.
• Check that your brakes are adjusted correctly.
• Check that your fuses are rated high enough to withstand the extra current used
in racing. You don’t want to have to swap fuses during a race.

• Check that all the components in the path of the main battery current are capable
of handling the current that will be pushed through them.
• Check that the BMS doesn’t cut out inside the current limit of the controller.
You don’t want to have to unplug/replug your battery in a race or be worried
about using the full power of the controller.
• Check that everything is securely fixed to the bicycle, including batteries, quick-
release wheels, seat, etc.
• Check that the folding mechanism is tightened securely.
• Check that the controller has sufficient cooling so that it doesn’t overheat.
• Check that the batteries don’t overheat and are within (or close to) their
operating specifications. Decide beforehand how much you are going to abuse
them before the race. Remote control (RC) racers get a much shorter battery life
because of the abuse they heap on their batteries during a race.
• Check that the motor doesn’t overheat and is within (or close to) its
specifications.
• Check that you have brought all the necessary backup tools and parts in case
something goes wrong before or during the race.
6.1.11 Extending Range: Hybrid Electric Bicycles
It’s possible to overcome the range limitations of batteries if you have a gas
generator set strapped to the back of your bicycle. The advantage is that you can fill up
at any gas station on your way and continue to ride for days at a time. The
disadvantage is that the bicycle no longer feels like a bicycle when it is making loud
throbbing, revving noises. You end up riding something that is not as cool as a
motorbike or a bicycle. There are also legal implications to putting a motor on a
bicycle that probably make it illegal in most countries and states without proper tax
and registration. With current lithium batteries, we can comfortably build bicycles
with a range of 50 or even 100 miles if we really load the bicycle down with
batteries. A big enough generator basically can give the bicycle infinite range.
However, on a bicycle frame, the maximum safe riding speed is 25 to 30 mph, so a
100 mile trip is going to take more than 3 hours. Who wants to ride for 3 hours?
A much better option is to take the train and bring your bicycle with you for the
short journey at the other end. Anything containing gas would not be allowed on public
transport because of the fire risk and fumes. Gas generators are usually bulky and
heavy. A large power convertor is also needed to change the voltage into something
usable for the batteries. The space taken up by a generator and voltage convertor
probably would be equal to an extra 50 miles worth of battery capacity; therefore, it’s

usually much easier to just add another battery pack. The only application suited to a
gas range extender would be for places where there is no public transport available or
for long trips into the wilderness. Here, though, a full-on motorbike might be more
appropriate.
A different application for a low-powered generator would be remote charging.
This might be useful for camping in the wilderness, where there is no local electricity
supply. It’s perfectly okay to charge and discharge a battery at the same time.
Performing the function of power buffer between a load and a source is an easy task
for any electric bicycle battery, so only a small one is needed.
There are several ways of using a generator as a range extender. To provide the
main power to extend vehicle range or for opportunity charging without significant
range extension, power conversion is needed because generators provide main circuit
voltage, which is usually to high to directly charge an electric bicycle battery. Some
generators also provide a 12-V output for car battery charging, but this is too low to
directly charge most electric bicycle batteries, and the power output is too low as
well. One way around this voltage-conversion issue would be to use a 110-V system
and a bridge rectifier for ac-dc conversion. However, it is difficult to find commercial
electric bicycle controllers that are capable of handling this voltage. Some generators
are overrated and can only operate for a set time before they overheat.
How to Build a Gas Electric Bicycle Range Extender
1. Find a generator with a power output near to peak power demand.
2. Find a large charger or power supply for use as a voltage converter that is
equal to or just under the power rating of the generator. Don’t exceed the
generator’s power rating because it will overload the generator. The output
voltage should be right for charging the type of battery you have. The input
voltage should match the generator’s output. This setup will require bigger or
multiple chargers compared with normal charging requirements.
3. Connect the battery, charger, and controller together in parallel using a nice
junction box. Avoid using small-gauge wires designed to carry a normal battery-
charging current because they may be too small.
4. Plug in the charger(s) to the generator.
5. Fix the generator and charger to the bicycle. A rear rack or a separate trailer
are probably the only places the generator will fit. The fixture could be either
temporary or permanent.
6.1.12 Improving Aerodynamics on an Electric Bicycle
Because a bicycle is so light, the main factor that wastes energy is not stop/start

acceleration as in a car. Wind resistance is the main cause of energy loss for bicycles.
Cars have a smooth body shell that reduces drag, whereas a bicycle with a rider is a
horrible shape for moving through air. The drag coefficient of a bicycle is about twice
that of a car, and this causes bicycles to drag lots of air behind in their wake. The
aerodynamic shape of the vehicle matters more when it is traveling at high speeds.
Having a more aerodynamic shape will allow a vehicle to use less power or travel
faster on the same power.
Aerodynamics are important in car design, which is why all the green vehicles look
funny. And aerodynamics are a major factor in competitive cycling, which is why
cyclists do silly things, such as shaving their legs, wearing skintight Lycra, wearing
silly shaped helmets, and riding silly shaped bicycles. Fortunately, we electric
bicyclers have a motor for speed, so we don’t have to use these silly tactics to
increase our speed. However, if you do want to turn to the dark side, then here are a
few tips for racing.
The equation for the force of drag acting on a moving vehicle is given as Equation
6.4. This shows that the area and drag coefficient are both equally important to the
drag force on the vehicle. We can reduce either or both area and drag coefficient to
increase the speed or efficiency of our vehicles. This equation is just for illustrative
value. No one expects you to use it. The maths determining speed and power were
made simple in Section 4.1.2 and in the graph in Figure 4.3.
EQUATION 6.4 Force of drag on a vehicle. Where ρ = air density, u = velocity, Cd =
drag coefficient, A = frontal area.
Fd = ½ ρ u2Cd A
Reducing Frontal Area
Reducing frontal area is the easiest action to take because it’s easy to measure.
Here are some tips:
• Use a recumbent bicycle, where the rider sits in between the front and rear
wheels. Avoid tricycles, which have a much larger frontal area.
• Use a low-riding bicycle frame with small wheels, such as a BMX, kid’s
bicycle, or folding bicycle. Racing bicycles aren’t needed if you’re not going to
pedal. The height of the racing bicycle allows the rider to pedal.
• Reduce the saddle and handlebar height to minimum.
• Fit smaller wheels to get closer to the ground.
• Take the seatpost off, and sit on the rear rack if it is strong enough.

• Use dropdown racing handlebars, and assume a tucked riding position.
• Avoid large pannier bags that extend out sideways into the airflow.
• Avoid mounting batteries where they force your legs further out into the airflow
when pedaling.
• Try to mount the battery and controller either behind the rider on the rear rack
or in front of the rider in a basket.
• Avoid mirrors or reflectors that extend out into the airflow.
• Avoid baggy clothing such as open jackets that collect air like a sail or baggy
trousers.
Reducing Drag Coefficient
Reducing drag coefficient is difficult to quantify or visualize. The ideal
aerodynamic shape is a teardrop with the tail pointed behind and the round surface in
front. The way it works, without getting too technical, is that it allows the air that was
forced around the teardrop shape at the front to recombine more gradually at the tail.
The elongated tail of the teardrop shape allows time for the separated air to gently
recombine without getting all mixed up. If the transition at the rear of the vehicle is too
steep, then the airflow will not pass round the vehicle smoothly, and the vehicle will
drag loads of air along behind in its wake.
It’s the rear of the object that causes most of its drag; the front is less important. The
Toyota Prius and other new fuel-efficient cars use an angle of about 12 degrees from
the top of the roof to the trunk. This seems to be the magic angle, above which
turbulence occurs. Obviously, it would be impractical to have a massive long tail all
at 12 degrees until the top and sides meet up, so car designers compromise by
chopping some of the tail off. The shape doesn’t have to be perfect to still give some
benefit.
It’s possible to reduce drag by shaping individual components to be smoother and
teardrop-shaped. However, covering the whole structure with one big teardrop shape,
called a fairing, yields much better results. Some of the things that reduce frontal area
also may reduce drag coefficient as well, which would multiply the effect on drag
force. Therefore, some changes can have a big effect. For example, taking a wing
mirror off a car gives a fuel-efficiency bonus of about 7 percent. Keep in mind that not
all parts of the bicycle are traveling at the same speed. The wheels and spokes spin
around much faster and are thus subjected to different airflows. To reduce drag
coefficient, you can:
• Build a large teardrop-shaped fairing around the whole vehicle (see Figure
6.35).

• Build a teardrop-shaped tail fairing.
• Build a front fairing.
• Wear a rucksack with a teardrop tail shape.
• Buy a teardrop-shaped helmet.
• Fit wheel coverings or “aero” wheels (marginal effect).
• Use thin tires (marginal effect).
• Wear skintight Lycra (marginal effect).
• Put Cling-Film or heat shrink around rough edges such as bolts, etc. (marginal
effect).
Using all these aerodynamic tricks, it’s amazing what can be achieved. The Shell
Mileage Marathon is a competition for low-carbon vehicles to use as little energy as
possible around a racetrack with a minimum speed limit. There is an electric bicycle
class in which some of the vehicles can reach efficiencies of 1.5 Wh/mile. The world
record for a human-powered vehicle is held by Canadian cyclist Sam Whittingham.
With no motor, just pedaling on a flat road, he set the record at 81 mph using a special
low-rider recumbent bicycle with full fairing (Figure 6.35) . Figure 6.36 shows an
unusual electric bicycle designed for drag racing.
FIGURE 6.35 With good aerodynamics, even a low-power electric bicycle can get
you very high speeds. This human-powered vehicle (no motor) reached up to 81 mph
on flat ground to set the world record. The rider is Sam Whittingham with his bicycle,
the Varna Diablo.

FIGURE 6.36 Doctor Bass’s Killabicycle with front and rear fairings. This electric
bicycle was designed for drag racing.
6.2 Safety Modifications
6.2.1 Regenerative Braking and Plug Braking
Regenerative braking (regen) uses the motion of the vehicle to recharge the battery,
and as a consequence, this slows the vehicle. This is one of the main things that makes
hybrid cars more efficient. Some of the expensive electric bicycle controllers have
regenerative braking included as part of the controller, and other controllers can be
modified easily to have regen. Regen braking is simplest when it is done through the
controller, but it also can be done by bypassing the controller. Plug braking is similar
to regen braking, but the kinetic energy is wasted across a resistor instead of charging
the battery.
Regen and plug braking are useful for electric bicycles if you want extra stopping
power or if your mechanical brakes are maintenance-intensive. For safety sake, don’t
rely on any one braking system; have backups. Before you install regen or plug braking
on your ride, you must ensure that your bicycle has rock-solid dropouts that can take
the punishment. The torque leveraged on the dropouts during regen braking is colossal,
and anything other than thick steel dropouts with added torque arms is going to get
damaged. If you use regen braking on aluminum dropouts, it will cause the axle to cut
into the dropouts and spin. This will destroy your frame and your motor. If you have

this happen on a front-mounted motor, then it will break the forks, and you will go
over the handlebars. Check out Section 6.2.2 on torque arms.
Regen braking on an electric bicycle is sometimes a bit of a gimmick. You will gain
only a small percentage of the total energy with regen braking, maybe 5 to 10 percent
of the energy used in normal riding. This is so because electric bicycles use most of
their energy fighting wind resistance, not stopping and starting, and they weigh very
little. A car or a bus weighs a lot more and usually stops a lot more, so regen braking
is more important there.
Implementation in Controllers
Some electric vehicle (EV) controllers have regen braking selected all the time.
This means that as soon as you release the throttle, the car will start to slow down as
if it were a gas engine car with engine braking. The logic behind this is that the EV has
no engine braking and feels slower than a gas-powered car because the driver feels
less difference between throttle pedal on and throttle pedal off. You can only “feel”
accelerations/decelerations, not constant speeds, and the driver misinterprets this.
This perception of reduced power is not good for car sales, so manufacturers install
controller settings that mimic engine braking by using regen braking. I think this is a
bad thing because coasting makes electric cars more efficient, which should be their
main selling point. In fact, some efficient drivers of gas-powered vehicles use engine-
off coasting to save fuel at times when the engine is not needed. On a gas-powered
vehicle, it is necessary to turn the engine off while coasting to save fuel, which can be
dangerous. Leaving the engine at idle still uses lots of fuel. Some car manufacturers
have developed mild hybrid systems that automatically switch the engine off when it is
not needed to save fuel. Unnecessary regen braking is a waste of energy because of the
conversion inefficiency of transferring the energy back into the batteries. Hopefully, in
the future, mimic engine braking will be an optional feature, not a default.
Making a Plug Braking System
If your controller does not support regen, then you can use this modification to add a
plug braking switch for more stopping power. The modification can be done on either
brushed or brushless motors, but there is one extra step involved for brushless motors.
The idea is to use a relay to short out the coils of the motor across a resistor. The
severity of the braking is determined by the resistance. The most severe braking can be
achieved without a resistor. Without a resistor, the motor’s eddy currents are
dissipated across the shorted motor winding, and the wheel will almost lock up. I
don’t recommend shorting motor phases because the heat buildup in the motor coils
may melt them.
I tried this, and it seemed okay with an X503 motor, but you do it at your own risk.

The problem with this kind of regen is that the braking force is proportional to speed.
At less than 5 mph, you have almost no braking force, but at 25 mph or more, the force
is too strong. To reduce the braking force, you can add a resistor. Light bulbs make
good resistors. The lower the resistance, the more severe is the braking. With light
bulbs, the higher the power of the bulb, the higher is the braking force. The bulbs
dissipate heat well and can be used as a brake light. Don’t brake from too high a
speed, or the voltage will be too much for the bulb to cope with, and it will blow. At
different speeds, you need different resistances to have effective and safe breaking. A
heavy-duty variable resistor would work, but it would be too bulky and unsafe to
operate while riding. Possible solutions include a pic micro controller circuit, the use
of two different resistors controlled by different buttons, or saving the brake for
emergency braking situations only. The circuit diagram is shown in Figure 6.37 for
brushed motors and in Figure 6.38 for brushless motors.
FIGURE 6.37 Plug braking for a brushed motor. Two brake switches are used. One
tells the controller to switch off, and one activates the relay for plug braking. This is to
avoid accidentally shorting the motor while the throttle is engaged, which would blow
the controller.

FIGURE 6.38 Plug braking for a brushless motor. For brushless motors, there are
some changes needed for the previous design. A three-phase rectifier is needed to
include all motor windings equally in the braking effort. The same double-brake-
switch design should be used for protecting the controller.
1. Make a coil of insulated wire of about half an ohm, or use two 75-W 12-V
light bulbs in series. This will be the braking resistor, and it should be located
somewhere with good airflow for plenty of heat dissipation.
2. Wire the braking resistor up to a DPDT relay, and connect it to the two outputs
from the motor. The relay should be capable of withstanding 30 A. The
connection to the motor controller should be made using a junction box so that the
relay can be removed easily if it melts.
3. Use a brake-mounted switch to control the relay. There are purpose-build ones
sold on eBay, or you can make your own with a reed switch and a magnet taped
to the stock of your brake. The relay will need 12 V (usually) to switch, so the
brake switch should be connected in series with the 12-V source and the relay, as
shown in Figure 6.37. The 12-V source can be a dc converter (recommended), or
you could tap your battery halfway through to create a 12-V source (not
recommended).
4. To prevent the controller-popping situation of shorting the controller output

while using throttle, another brake switch is needed. The brake switches need to
be installed on the same brake so that they activate together or the controller off
activates first. This is a safeguard to protect the controller. You should never
brake while using the throttle anyway, even in normal operation, because it is bad
for the controller.
5. For brushless motors, the three motor phases cause an extra headache. A three-
phase bridge rectifier is needed to reduce them to two wires so that braking is
smooth (see Figure 6.38). The alternative is to use three braking resistors
between each of the three phases.
Problems with DIY Regen Braking
To do something useful with this braking energy instead of just wasting it across a
resistor requires a little bit more work. The voltage the motor produces during braking
varies wildly and continuously depending on speed. The voltage can be anywhere
between the full voltage of the battery, at top speed, and nothing, when stationary.
Therefore, to use the voltage to charge the battery, you need a power converter that
can step up the voltage and will accept a wide range of input voltages. You also need
to limit the current so that it doesn’t harm the battery. The regen current is what
determines the braking force, so this maximum current limit also will determine the
maximum braking force. The power requirements of the converter would be quite
large, so it might be quite bulky.
There are other regen braking modifications that use two controllers, one to control
normal vehicle speed and one to control regen braking, but this is too complicated.
The best option is to use a single controller with a regen braking function. Some regen
braking controllers have solved the problem of varying braking force by using the
throttle in conjunction with a regen switch to let the rider set the amount of regen to be
used. The vetrix electric motorcycle has a special hand throttle that you can twist in
the opposite direction for regen braking. This is the solution that should be included on
all electric bicycle controllers in the future. A good DIY solution would be to use a
boost converter with pic micro controller.
Moding the Infineon Controller for Regen
The Infineon controller supports regen braking, but it is not connected as standard.
You have to open up the controller and connect a handlebar-mounted switch across
BK and GND. When the switch is pressed, it will activate regen braking as long as the
throttle is in the off position. If you put a jumper across BK and GND, then the
controller will mimic engine braking.
6.2.2 Torque Arms and Disc Brake Mounts

If you are going to use regen braking of any kind, then you will need to use torque
arms or the bicycle frame will gradually get eaten away by the constant seesawing of
the axle in the dropouts. If the motor is a front hub motor in aluminum forks, this could
fail spectacularly and send you flying over the handlebars. What is more likely,
however, is that the axle would eat a larger hole in the dropouts, and this would cause
the axle nuts to slip, making the wheel rub against the frame. The axle also could fail
by spinning around inside the dropouts, which would damage or wreck the motor and
maybe the controller too. Torque arms also should be used on aluminum frames with
powerful hub motors in front hubs.
A torque arm works by extending the thickness of the 10-mm flat section that
supports the axle. However, it is not just the 10-mm flats of the dropouts that provide
torque support. The side tension from the axle nuts and the surface area that is under
tension also add torque support. This is why hub motors have fine threads so that you
can tighten the bolts up with loads of tension. The axle bolts never should be left with
spare thread exposed, not all the way on the axle, or you will strip the thread if you
tension the bolts with proper force. Buy a big socket wrench especially for tightening
axle nuts. A socket wrench spreads the force onto all sides of the nut, whereas an
adjustable wrench will just round the corners off the nut.
Some commercial torque arms are beginning to become available from electric
bicycle retailers, but they are still a niche product and difficult to get. The simplest
torque arm is just a 10-mm spanner across the flats of the axle (Figure 6.39). This can
be cable-tied to the frame or rear rack or arc welded in place. Another method is to
buy small off-cuts of steel and make a custom torque plate. The steel should be at least
4 mm thick if it is to withstand regenerative braking. However, this is quite difficult
for the do-it-yourselfer because steel is tough to drill and file. It is possible to send
design drawings to companies over the Internet who will CNC cut the piece for you.
An easier approach is to use thicker (10 mm) quality aluminum tool plate. This can be
drilled and tapped while in position on the bicycle. The advantage of a custom torque
plate is that it can be used to add disc brake mounts to a non–disc brake frame.

FIGURE 6.39 A 10-mm spanner as a simple torque arm. This will help with
powerful motors on aluminium dropouts, but it will not prevent dropout failure if
regen is used even on steel frames. It would need to be solidly fixed to prevent torque
movement. Welding is the best method.
I have used this technique successfully to convert several bicycles to rear disc
brakes where there were no disc brake mounts. A 10-mm aluminum torque plate, when
used with steel frame dropouts, may be enough to prevent dropout erosion caused by
regen braking. If you can arc weld, an easier method would be to just weld some
chunky metal to supplement the 10-mm axle flats.
Disc brake mounts can be welded onto frames too. To weld disc brake mounts, you
have to bolt the disc brake onto the spare mount and position it on the disc rotor. Pull
the brakes on to line up the disc brake mounts into the position to be welded. Then
tack weld them on. Finish the job properly without the disc brake in place so that the
welding doesn’t melt the brake.
Making a Custom Torque Plate
A custom torque plate can be made without any specialist machining but is time-
consuming to build this way. The torque plate is designed to go on the axle inside the
dropouts and provide more area for gripping the axle.
1. Buy a cut of aluminum 200 × 100 × 10 mm thick.
2. Line it up with the dropout, and mark where you need to cut it. Mark out where

the axle is, including the angle of the axle flats. Mark out where the cutout
sections for the chain stay and dropouts will be (Figure 6.40). If you are using
this plate to support a disc brake, then line up the disc brake caliper to see the
angle at which it needs to clamp the disc and the angle the support hole in the
plate needs to be.
3. Drill the hole for the axle and the hole for the motor wires to come out. The
hole for the axle will be a 10-mm-wide rectangle. You can make this by drilling
two holes and then filing out between them. You also will need a hole for the
wiring to emerge from the motor. The angle on the axle flats is critical, which is
why you do this first and then build everything around it. Center punch the holes
before you drill, and don’t overlap the holes or the drill will slip into the first
hole when drilling the second hole. Be patient, and don’t rush. This is much
easier and more accurate if done on a proper milling machine. File the edges
smooth so that they don’t cut the wires.
FIGURE 6.40 Lining up the torque plate and marking out the sections to be cut out for
the chain stay and dropouts. The hole in the middle is for the axle and the exiting
wires.
4. Put the axle hole over the axle, and pull the motor wires through the wiring
hole. Check that the sections marked out for the dropouts and chain stay are still
in the right place. Make any corrections necessary.
5. Cut out the sections for the dropouts and chain stay. Use a hacksaw and a drill.

Cut two parallel cuts into the plate, and then terminate these cuts with drilled
holes. To join the cuts up, sideways saw using the hacksaw, and the section will
be cut out. File the edges smooth.
6. Now you can put the torque plate on the bicycle. It should go flat against the
flat metal section of the dropout. It then will extend toward and go around the
chain stay, supporting the torque from there. Putting the motor on the bicycle with
the torque plate is usually pretty difficult, but it will fit with a bit of
encouragement. Use cobra half tubes for easy puncture repair.
7. When it is all secured in position, drill holes for the rack mount and disc brake
caliper and any other holes that you want that will add torque support or function.
For the rack mount, you can drill with a 5-mm drill and then tap with a 6-mm tap.
You don’t even have to take it off the bicycle, which is a good thing, because it is
difficult to do.
8. You might need to use washers or axle spacers for clearance between the disc
and the plate. You may need to make special C-shaped washers to slide onto the
axle from the side if there is insufficient space to install normal washers. This is
easy to do just by sawing a chunk out of a normal washer.
9. Remember to tighten the axle nuts hard. The result should look something like
Figure 6.41.

FIGURE 6.41 The finished item. This torque plate provides disc brake caliper
mounts as well as support for motor torque and a little extra support for the battery
rack.
6.2.3 Preventing Sparking When Plugging In the Controller
It’s a good idea to do this modification because it will mean that your controller and
battery plugs will last longer. It’s simple, using a precharge resistor to slowly charge
up the controller capacitors prior to plugging in (Figure 6.42).
6.2.4 High-Powered Lights
Normal bicycle lights are usually only 0.5 to 1 W, and drivers complain that they
cannot see them at night. By comparison, car head lamps are 55 W each, and there are
four of them. Bicycle lights are limited by their little batteries and the desire not to
have to charge them every day. Bicycle light technology has moved toward efficient
light-emitting diode (LED) lights and flashing lights to save energy and still be seen. In
electric bicycles, however, the batteries are often bigger than car batteries and are
charged every day, so their lights need not be limited in the same way.
FIGURE 6.42 To prevent sparking on connection, plug in the negative wire as usual
(black), and then make the positive connection with the small wire with the precharge
resistor. This will slowly charge the capacitors in the controller. Then plug in the
main positive connector, and there will be no sparks. Finally, unplug the precharge
resistor.
The best, cheapest, and most readily available high-powered lights on the market
are low-voltage halogen MR16s and MR11s. These operate on 12 V, come in different
power options, and have mirrored backplates for focusing. Commonly available
choices for MR16 are 10-, 20-, and 50-W bulbs, although 15-, 35-, 75-, and even 250-
W bulbs are available. MR16s are 45 mm in diameter, but unfortunately, they don’t

have any holding mechanism because they are designed for ceiling spot lights. The
bulbs can be overvolted to 15 V, and to meet the higher voltage of an electric bicycle,
you can string them together in series. Series-connecting bulbs are good in this
application because if one bulb is disconnected, all the bulbs in the same string will
go out. If you series-connect the front and rear lights, you will know if the rear light
has malfunctioned by looking at the front. This ensures that you will never
unknowingly be driving without a rear light.
MR16s are halogen bulbs that are bright and reasonably efficient. A 10-W bulb
front and back would be sufficient. A 48-V bicycle will need four bulbs, so 20-W
bulbs would be overkill. As a side note, if your bicycle lights go dim when you
accelerate, then your motor is putting too much stress on your batteries. Plastic pipe
fittings make good bulb housings. If you use a 72-V system and you do not want to
series-connect six bulbs, then you will have to use a dc convertor. Dc converter chips
are available and are very cheap on eBay. They are about the size of a matchbox, so
they can be positioned easily around the handlebars.
There are several other DIY bicycle lighting options available, including compact
florescent light bulbs (CFLs) and LEDs. These technologies are about four times more
efficient than halogen but about ten times more expensive for the same light output.
Both CFLs and LEDs are available in 12-V options, so they can be used with a 12-V
dc converter from an electric bicycle battery. LEDs can be series-connected to make
up the voltage to electric bicycle battery voltage just as with the halogens. LEDs are
available in an MR16 package, so they could be used in the same plastic pipe fitting
as the halogen bulbs. Main-circuit-voltage CFLs are much cheaper and sometimes free
because they are usually subsidized by government or electric companies. To operate
main-circuit-voltage CFLs, you can use a 12-V dc converter and a small autoinverter
to make main circuit voltage from the electric bicycle battery.
Building Powerful Electric Bicycle Lights
1. Go to your local hardware store and buy some 2-in elbow plastic pipe fittings.
One elbow will make two light housings.
2. Saw the elbow in half.
3. Take one of the two halves, unscrew it, sandwich the bulb in between, and then
screw it back together again. This is one light (Figure 6.43).
4. There are several ways to connect the bulbs. You can either use fittings or
solder them. Soldering them is more reliable for bicycle lighting applications.
There are also purpose-made lamp fittings available, or a 3-A terminal block
also will work with a bit of trimming. To solder into the bulbs, you need leaded
solder and a high-wattage soldering iron.

FIGURE 6.43 Bicycle lights made from MR16 bulbs and 2-in plastic pipe fittings.
5. Duct-tape the back of the light fittings to protect the lamp connections and
make the light more reliable.
6. To secure the lamp holders onto the bicycle, you can drill holes in the pipe and
either cable-tie or bolt the holder on. Good mounting points are on the rear rack
or using the reflector-holding brackets.
7. For the rear light, you need a red screen. You can use cut-up old bicycle
reflectors or any red plastic film; even red carrier bag material will work. Cut
the red material to 45 mm diameter, and place it in front of the bulb; then screw it
in place with the plastic cover nut.
8. Painting the light holders is difficult because spray paint just comes off; it’s
best just to leave them the natural color of the plastic pipe.
9. Use only 10- or 20-W bulbs in these because 50-W bulbs will melt the plastic
if left on.
10. Buy a decent-sized switch from the component supply store, and solder wires
onto it.
11. Hot glue and cable-tie the switch onto the handlebars of the bicycle in a
convenient position for use while riding.

12. Solder wires from the front lights to the switch to the rear lights and then to a
fuse holder and a plug (Figure 6.44). The plug should connect into the junction
box made earlier.
13. The fuse should be just above the ampere rating of the lights. In a short
circuit, it should blow before the main battery fuse blows.
FIGURE 6.44 Connection scheme for lights and auxiliaries with single cable to the
handlebars. Front and rear lights in series to reach 48-V battery voltage. Battery
voltage is available at the handlebars and fused for protection.
6.2.5 Powerful Horns
Have you ever been honked at by a car driver for no reason and not been able to
respond because you were on a bicycle? Frustrating, isn’t it? Well, now you can honk
back louder! Electric bicycles operate on higher voltages than cars do, so you can
have even more powerful horns than trucks. Two-tone car horns are available on
eBay. They are usually colored red/black and come in a set of two, one for each tone.
Each horn is 12 V, and you can put them in series for 24 V. However, since they are
not used continuously, it’s safe to overvolt them significantly. The same two-tone horn
set can be used on a 48-V battery fully charged at 60 V. The horns come with a bracket
for mounting, and they can be cable-tied to the frame using the holding bracket.
1. Bolt the horns together using a piece of angle iron or steel bracket from the

hardware store.
2. Cable-tie the horns onto the bicycle where you want them.
3. Solder wires connecting the horns to the battery via a switch, as shown in
Figure 6.44.
4. Hot-glue and cable-tie the switch to the handlebars in a convenient place that
is accessible while riding.
6.2.6 Bicycle Mirrors and Turn Indicators
Mirrors
Bicycle mirrors are a very personal choice, and everyone has their own favorites.
A lot depends on what sort of bicycle you are riding, what sort of helmet you have,
and how the mirrors are adjusted. None of the commercial bicycle mirrors I have seen
have been ideal. The helmet-mounted mirrors tend to vibrate and get misaligned when
you put the helmet down. The handlebar-mounted mirror’s view is usually blocked by
your arms. The best handlebar-mounted mirrors are those on long stalks because you
can see over the tops of your arms. These are designed for motorcycles but can be
fitted to bicycles. Helmet- or sunglass-mounted mirrors have the advantage of
allowing the user to move the field of view easily to see more stuff. There are some
good “how tos” on the Instructables Web site at www.instructables.com regarding
how to make a helmet-mounted mirror from an inspection mirror.
There may be an advantage to the inspection mirror approach over commercial
designs because inspection mirrors are made of stronger stuff than plastic. If you buy
the commercial design, you may end up having to modify it to fit your helmet anyway.
With any head-mounted mirror, the helmet or glasses will need to be a really good fit
to your head or it will bounce around too much. Even with a mirror installed, it is
often quicker to look back than to check a mirror, and it’s certainly safer because a
mirror can have blind spots.
Turn Indicators
None of the bicycle-mounted turn indicator boxes I have seen have been very good.
The lights are usually too weak and too close together to be seen by other drivers.
Often the lights come as a package with indicators, rear light, and stop light. The
indicator switch is a single three-position slide switch that is mounted on the left
handlebar. This is fiddly to operate because you have to move your hands from the
handlebars and counterintuitive because it uses down for left and up for right. Some of
the indicator kits have an annoying bleeping sound so that you don’t leave them on.
The brake light is activated from a clever switch mounted on the brake cable. There
are other products that fit into the handlebar ends and have mirrors and indicators

(e.g., Winkku). The best commercial indicators may be the wrist-mounted level-
sensing type (e.g., Safe-turn). These are lights that automatically flash when you move
your hand horizontally to make a turn. This is a simple system that allows drivers to
see your hand signal at night. The bulbs look quite dim, though.
You could build your own turn indicators based on the preceding high-powered
lights idea. This would allow you to custom build the indicators to your own ideals. A
flasher circuit from Radio Shack could be used to make them flash. The front and rear
bulbs could be put in the same pod using a 2-in plastic elbow as the housing or 1-in
pipe and MR11s for a more compact pod size. Switches could be mounted on both
handlebars so that you don’t have to move your hands, and they could be spring-
loaded switches to ensure that you don’t leave them on by accident. If left on by
accident, the 20-W bulbs would be obvious anyway, and drivers couldn’t miss them.
The pods could be mounted on the handlebar ends or cable-tied to the most outward
part of pannier bags.
6.2.7 Heated Handlebars
Heated handlebars will be really useful to those who ride in cooler climates. Often
in subzero temperatures your hands will freeze up and become desperately cold after
only a short time of riding. It doesn’t matter what sort of gloves you are using because
the airflow will suck the heat out of them, especially if they become wet. This can be
dangerous if you have to ride like this, so I have put this modification under safety
modifications. Heated handlebars are an easy modification because you already have
a convenient handlebar power supply from the lights and horn modifications. There
are heated gloves on the market, but they have really weak heating elements.
They run on small batteries that are depleted in 1 hour of continuous use. The
commercially available gloves are low quality, the heating elements are in the wrong
place for riding, and you can barely feel the warming effect. This handlebar
modification will give you strong heating to the inside of your gloved hands, which
will keep them toasty and warm.
1. Work out what resistance nichrome wire you will need for your battery voltage
using Ohm’s law (see Section 6.1.1, Equation 6.2) and based on needing about 5
W and 0.5 m/2 ft per grip. For example, for a 48-V battery, you will want to use
200 Ω/m or 66 Ω/ft wire; for 36 V, use 100 Ω/m or 33 Ω/ft; and for 24 V, use 50
Ω/m or 17 Ω/ft. You will need 2 to 3 m/6 to 10 ft of the wire for one set of
handlebars.
2. Wrap 1 m/3 ft of the wire around each rubber handle grip. Make sure that the
loops don’t overlap, and then tape the wire loosely in place.
3. Temporarily connect the handle grip wires together and to the battery with

crocodile clips to test the strength of the heating. If the heat is too little, then take
off some of the wire and retry. If it is too much heat, then start again with larger
pieces. Keep the wire the same length on each handle grip or the heating will be
uneven. The hand throttle will be difficult to do because it needs to move. It is
best to wrap wire only around the handle bit and not the throttle bit.
4. Once you find the right level of heating, then either duct-tape or plastic-tape
the wire in place to make your handle grip heaters.
5. Solder wires onto a switch, and then hot-glue and cable-tie the switch onto the
handlebars somewhere out of sight.
6. You can’t solder onto nichrome wire. Therefore, to permanently connect up the
handle grip heaters, you have to just twist them together with copper wire and
then solder the copper wire. The solder will adhere only to the copper wire, but
it will encapsulate the nichrome wire around which it is twisted.
7. Tape up the joins with electrical tape.
8. Connect the heaters in series and to the switch and then to the battery voltage at
the handlebars.
9. To make sure that you don’t leave the heaters on and drain the battery, you
should install an LED indicator (Figure 6.45). This is just a red LED and resistor
in series that then go in parallel with the power to the heaters. The resistor value
needed for a red LED is 3,000Ω for a 48-V battery, 2,000Ω for a 36-V battery,
and 1,200Ω for 24-V battery. The round bit of the LED should point toward the
positive.
FIGURE 6.45 Handle grip heaters with indicator LED light to prevent accidentally
draining the battery.

6.3 Other Modifications
6.3.1 Projects for Used Electric Bicycle Batteries
An average electric bicycle should use up about one battery pack every 3 or 4 years
if the pack is treated correctly. However, if the batteries are mistreated by the user,
then battery turnover will be higher. For this reason, it is best to learn and make your
mistakes on a cheaper battery chemistry or read this book and not make those newbie
errors. What do you do with all those reduced-capacity batteries? Well, thankfully,
there are many projects that use batteries, and in time, I imagine that they will develop
a resale value on eBay. I am writing this chapter now on a laptop powered exclusively
by recycled nickel cells. These cells were ruined by bad battery carriers and
experiments with DIY chargers. The nickel cells are down to half capacity, but that
still gives me 1 hour of laptop time. Other interesting uses for old batteries include
renewable-energy storage to recharge your bicycle and turning your car into a DIY
hybrid vehicle.
Laptop Battery from Recycled Electric Bicycle Nickel Cells
Laptop batteries are notorious for dying after a year of use and are expensive to
replace. Fortunately, there is a cheaper solution. You can recycle and repackage old
cells from your electric bicycle. Most laptops run on 12 to 28 V and draw a power of
about 4 A. Old electric bicycle cells with capacity reduced to 4 Ah will give 1 hour of
laptop time, or you can parallel cells to increase the run time. The drawback is that the
recycled battery will be heavier than a replacement battery. Assuming that your laptop
still works running off the wall charger, then you can build a battery pack for it.
1. Disassemble the old batteries and test the cells to find the good ones. Only use
cells with voltages that are within safe operating limits for that chemistry. For
nickel cells, this is 0.90 to 1.44 V; for LiFePO4 cells, this is 2.5 to 3.7 V.
2. Decide how many cells you will need and your charging strategy. For my
laptop, I have a 19.4-V charger, so I use just enough cells to be fully charged at
19.4 V. In this way, I know that I will not exceed the laptop voltage requirement,
but I will have the right voltage to charge the cells. 19.4 V/1.44 V = 13.47. I
rounded up to 14 cells.
3. Connect the cells to make a battery pack. Follow the battery pack building
guide in Section 6.1.1.
4. Cut the dc side plug off the charger, and use it for your battery so that you can
plug your battery into the laptop where the charger used to go. Make sure that you
polarity check the connections so that you don’t reverse the voltage.
5. Buy a mating plug to fit to the charger so that you can charge your battery.

Check that the polarities are correct.
Renewable-Energy Storage from Old Electric Bicycle Cells
Once you have a battery-powered vehicle, for maximum bragging rites, you may
feel the desire to try to use renewable energy to charge it. The problem is that a
renewable-energy supply fluctuates and only works when it’s windy or sunny. So you
can’t rely on it to be available when you want it. To get around this, you need to have
energy storage. The best energy storage is cheap batteries. Usually people use cheap
lead-acid batteries, but if you have old EV batteries for free, then this is even cheaper.
For solar panels, you will need a charge controller to keep the solar cells at peak
efficiency. For a wind turbine, you probably can get away with just a blocking diode.
The following instructions show you how to build a solar power system and a wind
energy system.
How to Build a Solar Power Energy Storage System
1. Parallel lots of cells to make a large-capacity 12-V battery out of all the old
cells you have. The fully charged voltage should be the same as that of a lead-
acid battery because that’s what charger controllers are designed for (14.4 V).
For nickel cells you would want 10 in series; for LiFePO4 cells, you would want
4 in series.
2. Buy a solar panel charge controller, and connect it to the batteries and solar
panel as shown in the instructions. The charge controller also should protect the
battery bank from overcharging.
3. Buy an inverter, and connect it to the 12-V battery.
4. Connect your bicycle charger to the inverter, and charge your bicycle as
normal through the inverter.
How to Build a Wind Power System
1. Decide on a system voltage, and parallel lots of cells to make a large-capacity
battery of that voltage: 12, 24, 36, 48, 110, and 240 V are popular choices.
Chargers and power supplies work equally well on dc and ac power. It’s best to
still use your bicycle charger to control charging of your battery. Therefore, you
can either use a lower-voltage system with an inverter to run the charger or you
can have a higher-voltage system to directly run the charger. Some bicycle
chargers may not need an inverter when operating from low voltages. It all
depends on what the charger’s cutoff voltage is. Some will take power from as
low as 40 V. Most chargers have a wide input specification, usually 90 to 130 V
for a 110-V supply and 220 to 250 V for a 240-V supply.
2. Figure out how to generate that voltage. Electric drills or old electric bicycle

motors make good wind turbines, or use solar panels.
3. Connect the generator via a nonreturn diode to the battery pack. This is done so
that the batteries don’t push power back to the turbine when it is not generating.
4. Sort out the charge-termination method so that the battery bank doesn’t get
overcharged. For nickel chemistries, you want a thermostat-operated system;
otherwise, you could use a high-voltage cutoff circuit. The charger’s cutoff
voltage will protect the battery bank from being overdis-charged by your bicycle,
or you could use a low-voltage cutoff circuit.
6.3.2 Renewable-Energy-Powered Electric Bicycles
It is impractical to expect people to power a whole car by renewable energy; the
costs involved are beyond the means of most people. An electric bicycle, however,
uses much less energy and is the perfect candidate for renewable-energy-powered
transportation that is well within the means of many people. For the environmentalists
out there, powering your electric bicycle with renewable energy is less important than
simply using the bicycle to cut down on car use. There are much more CO2 savings to
be made from not using your car than from not using fossil fuel to power your bicycle.
Many people, however, will find that the bragging rights for renewable-energy-
powered transportation are priceless! The best renewable-energy source for electric
bicycles is solar power. Solar is easier to have in residential areas because it makes
no noise and doesn’t require a tall, heavy thing that could blow over in high winds.
Wind power, though, is cheaper and will work better in rural, non-built-up areas.
Solar power could be made portable for an electric bicycle, either in an unfolding
suitcase solar panel or a very small panel permanently attached to the bicycle. Wind
turbines also could fulfill the power needs of an electric bicycle, although they are not
as portable or as reliable as solar.
Wind and Hydro
Old electric bicycle parts make great wind turbines. In fact, it’s very easy to turn an
electric bicycle into a wind turbine. If the bicycle has a regen braking–enabled
controller, then you can simply use duct tape on the spokes to create diagonal facing
“blades.” Then with the electric wheel off the ground and the bicycle side-facing into
the wind, this should be enough to generate some power. If the electric wheel is on the
front, then the handlebars can be used to pivot the turbine much like a tail fin on a
conventional wind turbine.
A similar thing could be done for hydroelectric power if you live near a fast-
flowing stream. Dip the electric wheel just so the tire is beneath the water. The flow
of water should turn the wheel, and the regen will be enough to generate power. Be
careful not to fall in the water, though, or drop the bicycle in! For a more fit-for-

purpose setup, the motors from electric bicycles make great wind turbines. Turbine
blades can be cut easily from drain pipes and mounted onto a hub motor or chain-drive
motor. Brushed motors would make dc electricity without power conversion; only a
blocking diode would be needed to prevent discharge when there is no wind.
Brushless motors would need only a three-phase bridge rectifier to convert the power
output to dc (see Section 6.2.1). Old worn-out electric bicycle batteries work great for
stationary renewable-energy applications (see Section 6.3.1). An alternative to battery
storage is to use a grid-connected system. A grid-tied system allows you to export
power back to the electricity grid when it’s not needed. A grid-tie inverter allows you
to feed power back into a standard house socket, which is very convenient but slightly
expensive at present.
Solar-Powered Bicycles and Chargers
Solar power is probably the best renewable source for electric bicycles because,
unlike wind or hydro, it can be used in normal riding. In some parts of the world, near
the equator, for example, where the sun is strong, this could be used to slightly extend
electric bicycle battery range. A wind turbine fixed to an electric bicycle could not be
used to charge the bicycle while riding (unless a tail wind is blowing you forward).
This is so because the air drag on the turbine would more than cancel out the energy
generated by it; otherwise, it would be perpetual motion, and that is not possible. One
would have to be careful of the solar panels creating drag as well, but this is not how
solar cells derive their energy, so it doesn’t have to be a problem. The best
photovoltaic (PV) cells on eBay now are priced at $2 a watt, so a 100-W(peak) solar
charger could be made for as little as £133/$200. The (output) energy density of these
solar cells is 177w/m2 or 16w/ft2, which would make a 100-W(peak) solar charger
0.6 m2/6.3 ft2 in size. The weight of this solar charger would be around 9 kg/20 lb.
This is almost feasible to install on a standard bicycle, although it would take up a lot
of room. It would be more feasible to install it on a trailer or trike.
Unfortunately, it is unrealistic to assume that the sun shines all the time and that you
can always achieve the rated power of the panels; also solar cells are only 20%
efficient. On average, in Britain, solar panels generate 22 W/m2 or 2 W/ft2. America is
closer to the equator so more solar energy can get through the atmosphere. In New
York average solar panels will generate 30w/m2 and in LA 45w/m2 (Mackay, 2009).
This is a lot less than what the panels are capable of collecting, which makes
significant range extension from onboard solar unfeasible. The only solar step-up that
would make sense would be a larger stationary but maybe portable, foldable solar
charger.
Solar Cell Technology

There are three types of solar cells: amorphous, polycrystalline, and
monochrystalline. Amorphous is the worst kind, and monocrystalline is the best. It is
possible to buy the cells separately to build your own panels at a cheaper price or buy
ready-made panels with a guarantee at a higher price. The performance of solar cells
can be increased to their rated specs if you are living in low-light areas by using
techniques such as concentrating lenses, mirrors, cooling, and sun tracking. Small
solar concentrating systems can be very powerful and burn things in seconds. Check
out www.greenpowerscience.com for more information and some truly inspiring
youTube videos.
It is important to keep the cells cool if using concentrating mirrors or lenses
because temperatures above 25°C/77°F reduce the cell’s output, and high
temperatures can damage them. Water or oil cooling therefore is important for cell
performance and longevity. Performance drops by 0.5% for each degree above
25°C/77°F (Yates, 2003).
PV cells have an open-circuit voltage of 0.5 V. They are very fragile and need to be
housed inside a sturdy box with a transparent lid for protection during operation. Solar
cells can be broken in half to create two working cells with half the power output but
the same voltage as the original cell. The positive and negative terminals are on either
side of the glass surface. Broken and misshapen cells are available on eBay, but the
price per watt is not significantly lower than that of regular cells.
There are several other solar technologies that show promise, such as concentrated
solar steam engines and concentrated solar Stirling engines. However, none of these
technologies seems to be available commercially at a competitive price. It is possible
but time-consuming to build these solar engines at home. Small amorphous solar cells
also can be made at home.

Glossary of Terms
ac Form of electricity supplied by main circuit power
BMS Battery management system
Bridge rectifier A method of converting ac electricity to dc
CC Constant current
C rate Rate of charge or discharge relative to a battery’s capacity; for example,
1C means that the capacity of the battery will be used/charged in an hour. A
battery’s current is related to its capacity by this number.
CV Constant voltage
Continuity test Checking a circuit for a through connection
dc Form of electricity supplied by batteries
Discharge rate How fast you can discharge a cell or battery without damage;
measured in multiples of the capacity of the battery, for example, C rate or 1C,
5C. A battery’s current is related to its capacity.
DPDT Double-pole, double-throw; refers to relays and switches that can switch
several things at once.
Dropouts The part of the frame that holds the wheel axle; usually refers to the
part of the frame holding the rear wheel. The front dropouts are called forks.
EV grin The feeling you get when you first ride an electric bicycle; caused by the
sensation of effortless movement and speed.
FET Field-effect transistor
LCD Liquid-crystal display
LED Light-emitting diode
LiCo Lithium-cobalt
LiFe Lithium-iron
LiFePO4 Lithium-iron-phosphate
LiPo Lithium-polymer
LiMn Lithium-manganase
LVC Low-voltage cutout; a safety feature on many controllers

NiCd Nickel-cadmium
NiMh Nickel-metal hydride
No-load speed Top speed of a motor when it is spinning freely
OCV Open-circuit voltage; the voltage of a battery when it is not being used
Open circuit When there is no circuit made and current cannot flow
Opportunity charging Charging whenever there is a socket available, for
example, on a train station platform, on a train, etc.
Overclocking Increasing the speed of some standard piece of kit past factory
settings; usually at the risk of overheating it
PbA Lead-acid battery
Plug braking Using the motor for braking; in plug braking, the energy is wasted
across a resistor and/or the coils of the motor. Similar to regen braking but
without charging the battery; can produce very powerful braking force.
Polarity The way in which the positive and negative wires are arranged
Pot Potentiometer variable resistor
PV Photovoltaic
PWM Pulse-width modulation; varying the power of a motor by changing the
time duration of the pulses during the revolution of the motor. The power and
frequency of the pulse are the same, but its duration is varied to control the
average power.
RC Remote control (cars, airplanes, etc.)
Regen Regenerative braking; generating power from waste kinetic energy when
braking. The motor is used in reverse to generate electricity and charge the
batteries using the kinetic energy of the vehicle and thus slowing it down. Related
to plug braking, which is where the energy is not used to charge the batteries but
wasted as heat.
Short circuit When a load is bypassed and the power source may cause damage
to itself
SLA Sealed lead acid
Stealth Stealth is concealing the fact that your bicycle is electric. This may be
for many reasons: So that it looks like you are an athletic cyclist, to conceal its
true value from thieves, or so that you don’t get stopped by police if the laws in

your country prohibit electric bikes.
Stinger A small piece of wire connected to a meter probe or soldering iron that
allows it to get into difficult-to-reach areas
Tap A connection between cells or batteries that can be used to monitor battery
voltage or provide a lower voltage

References
Buchmann, I. 2001. Batteries in a Portable World: A Handbook on Rechargable
Batteries for Nonengineers, 2d ed. Cadex Electronics, 22000 Fraserwood Way,
Richmond, BC, Canada V6W 1J6. Available at www.buchmann.ca/toc.asp.
www.confused.com car insurance price comparison Web site; accessed October
21, 2009. The lowest car insurance quote for a 17-year-old male driver was
£4,500/$6750. The quote was for third-party fire and theft insurance on a Citeron
AX 1.0L £1,000/$1500 car.
Green Power Science. YouTube videos involving Fresnel lens and parabolic
mirror solar concentrating systems. Available at www.greenpowerscience.com.
Accessed October 8, 2009.
Lemire-Elmore, J. 2004. The energy cost of electric and human powered
bicycles. 
Available 
at 
http://ebikes.ca/sustainability/Ebike_Energy.pdf.
Accessed September 14, 2009.
Mackay, D. J. C. 2009. Sustainable energy—without the hot air. UIT Cambridge,
Ltd., pp. 118–140. Available at www.withouthotair.com.
Shinnar, R. 2003. The hydrogen economy, fuel cells, and electric cars.
Technology in Society 25:455.
van Mierlo, J., Maggetto, G., and Lataire, Ph. 2006. Which energy source for
road transport in the future? A comparison of battery, hybrid and fuel cell
vehicles. Energy Conversion and Management 47:2748.
Yates, T. A. 2003. Solar cells in concentrating systems and their high temperature
limitations. Bachelor’s degree thesis, Department of Physics, University of
California, p. 7.

Index
A123 batteries, 118, 119
aerodynamics
car, 10
electric bicycle, 41, 214–215, 218–221
racing electric bicycles, 214–215
reducing drag coefficient, 219–220
reducing frontal area, 218–219
air batteries, 115
alarms, 54
alternating-current (ac) motors, 81, 122, 125–126
amorphous solar cells, 240
amperes, 41–42, 69, 70, 75
Anderson connectors, 60–61, 75
Anderson power poles, 74, 75–76
arc welders, 52
A-to-B Magazine, 22
automatic braking systems (ABS), 45–46
axle nuts, 35–36
axle threads, 35–36
back-electromotive force (EMF), 41–42, 90, 97
backflips, 56
Bafang motors, 87–89
balance wires, 140
baskets, 25, 27
batteries, 98–119. See also battery management system (BMS); battery packs
battery theory, 99–101
capacitors versus, 100

capacity of, 19, 149
cell voltage effects, 100–101
chargers. See chargers, battery
chemical safety, 11–12, 99
commercially available, 19–20, 106–114
compatibility with controllers, 34
C rating, 44, 45, 102
current limiting, 200
data loggers, 134–135
defined, 99
diagnosing problems with, 137, 138, 139–142
discharge rating, 43–45, 111, 112–114
energy density, 99
flow batteries, 115–116
fuel cells, 115–116
future power sources, 115–116
hiding, 52–53
high-power-density, 31
high-volumetric energy-density, 26
internal resistance, 99–100
life of, 2
lockable compartments, 21
maintenance checklist, 148–150
main triangle battery bags, 56–58
NiCd. See NiCd batteries
positioning, 56
power meters, 129
primary versus secondary, 99

projects for used, 236–238
questions regarding, 2
rear-rack battery holder, 56, 62–65
relative cost of using, 10
renewable-energy storage from, 237–238
repairing battery with dead cells, 171–172
replacing, 7–8
reviews, 116–118
safety of, 10–12, 99, 104–106, 108, 109–110, 112
securing to electric bicycle, 56–65
self-discharge, 149
series-connected, 79, 101–104
series/parallel switching circuit, 79
smoking, 11–12, 112
sources, 119
storage of, 52–53, 56
swapping, 120–121
theft prevention, 54–55, 58–62
tool packs, 119
types, 32, 43, 98, 106–114
used, projects for, 236–238
voltage limiting, 199–200
battery management system (BMS), 60, 73, 101, 106, 109, 117. See also batteries;
battery packs
diagnosing problems with, 135–136, 138, 140–141
fixing broken balance wires, 172–173
replacing dead cells, 171–172
self-discharge, 149
wiring, 175–176
battery packs. See also batteries; battery management system (BMS)

aging of, 45
battery sizing, 43–44
building, 101–104, 179–194
battery tabs, 181–182, 183, 185
capacitance discharge, 182–184
by compression, 194
insulation, 187, 188, 190
pouch-cell, 192–193
process, 179–181
soldering to batteries, 194
capacity of, 42–45, 43
discharge rate, 43–44, 111, 112–114
electric vehicle, 11
for high-power electric bicycle, 31, 32
lithium. See entries beginning with “lithium”
mounting, 26, 36, 51
NiCd. See NiCd batteries
NiMh. See NiMh batteries
pack building, 101–104
parallel-connected batteries, 79, 101–104
replacing dead cells, 172
series-connected batteries, 79, 101–104
sizing, 45
spares, 19–20
surface-to-area-to-volume ratio, 100
temperatures and, 45, 149
wiring, 174–177
bearings, 92–93
maintaining, 148, 150
replacing in hub motor, 170–171
blind spots, 12–13

BMC motors, 86, 92
Bonzo, 40
brakes. See also disc brakes
automatic braking systems, 45–46
cut-off switches, 36
maintenance checklist, 150
regenerative braking, 10, 215–216, 221–229
types and characteristics, 46–47
on wet surfaces, 12, 46–47
braking energy, 10
bridge rectifiers, 122
brushed motors, 37, 41–42
brushless motors versus, 18–19, 81–82, 89–90
bypassing controllers, 194–195, 196
check winding, 142
Crystalyte, 82, 85, 87, 89, 92, 206–209
interfacing with controllers, 89–90, 95–97
opening up, 163–166
overclocking/upgrading, 197–202
plug braking system, 223–225
reliability of, 90
brushless motors, 37
brushed motors versus, 18–19, 81–82, 89–90
check winding, 142–143
heat dissipation, 204
interfacing with controllers, 89–90
opening up
geared hub motors, 166–168
nongeared hub motors, 160–162
overclocking/upgrading, 202–204

reassembly, 163
reliability of, 90
replacing Hall sensors in nongeared hub motor, 169–170
buck converters, 122–123
building electric bicycles, 23–80
advantages, 23–24
cost savings, 24
decision-making guide, 25
goals in, 24–25
hub motor kits, 33–80
performance improvements in, 23
quality in, 23
types, 25–33
folding commuter electric bicycle, 21, 22, 25, 27–29, 62
high power and long range, 31–32
high-power electric bicycle, 29–31
long-range commuter electric bicycle, 26–27
motored bicycles, 32–33
unique design in, 23
burnouts, 25
cable ties, 36, 51, 226–227
Cammy_CC batteries, 119
capacitors
batteries versus, 100
capacitance discharge, 182–184
repairing controllers with blown, 157–160
capacity
battery, 19, 149
hub motor kit, 42–45
carbon emissions, 3, 8–9, 220, 238

car jacks, 35
C cells, 109, 110
chain-drive motors, 18, 47, 93–94
chain rings, 26–27, 53
chains, mounting, 50
chargers, battery, 2, 11, 25, 119–123
charge rate, 120
charge-termination methods, 105, 121–122
charge time, 120
compatibility issues, 34
connecting, 176–177
constant rating, 171–172
diagnosing problems with, 138
DIY, 211–214
inside, 122–123
maintaining, 138, 146–147, 173–177
modification, 210–211
repairing, 173, 174
safety issues, 11, 212
voltage, 139, 140–141, 148
wiring, 174–177
check winding, 142–143
Chinese electric bicycles, 1, 13–14, 21, 23, 45, 74, 112, 123, 136–137, 197, 204
clamp meters, 131–132
climbing hills, 25
closed circuits, 127
Cobalt batteries. See lithium polymer batteries
coil resistance, 142–143
coil springs, 52
commercial electric bicycles, 17–22

batteries, 19–20, 106–114
bicycle style, 20–21
eBay purchases, 17–18
features, 20–21
motors, 18–19
price range, 17
resources, 22
retailers, 22
reviews, 22
commuter electric bicycles
folding, 21, 22, 25, 27–29, 62
long-range, 26–27
compact fluorescent light bulbs (CFLs), 231
components. See also names of specific components
in hub motor kits, 33–34
maintaining/repairing. See maintaining/repairing electric bicycles
positioning, 53–55
theft protection, 50, 54–55, 58–62
connections, electrical
diagnosing problems with, 136–139
loose, 70
order of, 34
practical tips, 72–73
quality connectors, 73–76
short circuits, 69–70, 72–73, 76, 146, 152
sloppy versus tidy, 71
soldering, 47–49, 73–76
techniques for, 69–73
connectors, maintaining, 148
constant current, 121

constant-current charging, 121
constant-current/constant voltage battery charging, 105–106, 114
constant voltage, 121
constant-voltage charging, 121, 171–172
continuity testing, 126
controllers, 34, 36, 95–98
with blown capacitors, 157–160
with broken FETs, 150–155
with broken gate drive transistor, 155–157
bypassing brushed motor, 194–195
compatibility with batteries, 34
component upgrades, 204
current limiting, 198–199, 203
diagnosing problems with, 137, 138, 146, 150–160
high-power electric bicycle, 31
inside, 97–98
interfacing with motors, 89–90, 95–97
maintenance checklist, 150
padding, 55
regenerative braking, 222
repair procedures, 153–160
role of, 95
spark prevention for, 229, 230
speed limiting, 198
storage of, 52, 54
theft protection, 54–55
variable-current-limit modification, 205–210
wiring configuration for, 95–97
convenience, of electric bicycles, 3
corrosion, battery, 150

cost of electric bicycles, 2, 5–8
building electric bicycles, 24
capital cost, 6–7
fuel cost, 7–8
operating cost, 6–7
range for commercial electric bicycles, 17
time savings, 8
with train travel, 5–7
crank rotation system, removing pedal-assist mode, 197
C rating, 44, 45, 102
Crystalyte motors, 82, 85, 87, 89, 92, 206–209
current draw, battery, 149
current limits
battery, 200
controllers, 198–199, 203
field-effect transistors (FETs) and, 152–153, 203
variable-current-limit modification, 205–210
current rating, 73–74
cut-out switches, 78, 97
Cycle Analyst, 129–130
Cytronex, 22
data loggers, 134–135
D cells, 109, 110
dead cells, 171–172
Deans connectors, 74, 76
delta windings, 96–97
depth of discharge (DOD), 107–108
diodes, 103
direct-current (dc) motors, 37, 41–42, 81, 122, 125–126

disc brakes
advantages of, 21, 45, 46–47
for high-power electric bicycles, 32
hydraulic versus cable, 46
for long-range commuter electric bicycles, 27
regenerative braking systems, 227
discharge rating, 43–45, 111, 112–114
distance issues, 2, 5–7, 24–27, 31–32, 42–45, 216–218
DIY electric bicycles. See building electric bicycles
Doctor Bass, 38, 221
Doctor Watson Meter, 129
do-it-yourself (DIY) electric bicycles. See building electric bicycles
donuts, 29
double pole (DP) switches, 76, 77
double throw (DT) switches, 76, 77
drag coefficient, reducing, 219–220
drill and tap method, 50–51
dropouts, 52
duct tape, 51, 116, 117
eBay batteries, 118, 119
eBay bicycles, 17–18
Ebikes.ca, 84
e-bomber, 39
electric bicycles
aerodynamics, 41, 214–215, 218–221
basic styles, 20
benefits of, 5
building. See building electric bicycles
buying, 17–22

from China, 1, 13–14, 21, 23, 45, 74, 112, 123, 136–137, 197, 204
commercial, 17–22
components of. See names of specific components
cost savings, 2, 5–8, 24
described, 1–3
extent of use, 1
frequently asked questions (FAQs), 2
in future of transport, 9–10
key features, 20–21
legality of, 1, 3, 5, 13–15, 22
maintaining. See maintaining/repairing electric bicycles
motor bikes versus, 1, 3, 20
pedaling, 2, 3, 9, 14, 25, 53
performance modifications, 179–221
power of, 1
projects. See projects for electric bicycles
quality of, 21
range, 2, 24, 26–27, 31–32
reasons to use, 3–10
renewable-energy-powered, 238–240
safety with, 4–5, 10–13, 221–236
trains and, 5–7, 21, 25, 27–29
used electric bicycle battery projects, 236–238
weight issues, 2, 3, 25, 45–46, 52
electric cars, 10
electric vehicle grin (EVG), 5, 32
electrodes, 99
electrolytes, 99, 108
electromagnet brakes, 47
emergency cutout switches, 78
Emotive Control Systems, 22

endless-sphere.com, 22
Endless-Sphere Forum, 85
energy demand, 9–10
environmental issues
carbon emissions, 3, 8–9, 220, 238
electricity production costs, 8–9
energy demand, 9–10
fuel costs, 7–8
equivalent series resistance (ESR), 100, 158
ESR (equivalent series resistance), 100, 158
Euro connectors (kettle leads), 75, 76
European Union (EU)
electric bicycle retailers, 22
legality of electric bicycles, 3, 13–14, 22
speed-sensing, 198
expectations, for electric bicycles, 24–25
fairing, 219
fast charges, 120
F cells, 109
Fechter, Richard, 153–155, 206–208
field-effect transistors (FETs), 146, 147
controller current limiting, 198–199, 203
current and voltage specifications, 152–153
repair procedures, 150–157
voltage increasing, 203–204
50 Cycles, 22
50-W soldering irons, 48
fire extinguishers, 11–12
fire safety, 11–12

flasher circuits, 234
flow batteries, 115–116
folding commuter electric bicycles, 21, 22, 25, 27–29, 62
force balance, 84
frames
bending, 35
high-power electric bicycle, 31
positioning components on, 53–55
purpose-built, 53
selecting, 52–53
steel versus aluminum, 52
freedom, with electric bicycles, 3
free wheeling, 91–92
friction-drive motors, 94
frontal area, reducing, 218–219
front-wheel skidding, 45–46
fuel cells, 115–116
fuel cost, 7–8
fuse holders, 73, 138, 139
fuses, 72–73, 104, 139–140
gas engines on bicycles, 32
gate drive transistors, repair procedures, 155–157
gearing, 91–92
gear ratio, 25, 26
global warming, 3, 8–9
gloves, 12, 215
heated, 234–235
goals, for electric bicycles, 24–25

Golden Motors, 87, 88
governors, 198–199
grommets, 73
Hall sensors, 74, 81, 89, 95–97
bearings and, 148
clamp meters with, 131–132
diagnosing problems with, 137, 138, 143–145
replacing in brushless, nongeared
motor, 169–170
sequence and timing, 144–145
Hall throttles, 145–146
handlebars
heated, 234–236
wiring and, 73
hand throttles, 34, 56
headset bearings, 150
heat dissipation, 19, 85, 204
heated handlebars, 234–236
helmets, 12, 215
helmet-mounted mirrors, 233–234
Highpower batteries, 119
high-power electric bicycles
characteristics of, 29–31
with long range, 31–32
hill climbing, 25
Hobby City, 118
horns, 4, 233
hose clips, 52
hub motor kits, 33–80. See also hub motor(s)

basic instructions, 34–37
batteries/battery holders, 34, 43–45, 47, 51, 53, 56–65
brakes, 36, 46–47
brushed motors. See brushed motors
brushless motors. See brushless motors
cable ties, 36, 51
capacity of, 42–45
chains, 50
coil springs, 52
components in, 33–34. See also names of specific components
controllers, 34, 36, 52, 54, 95–98
drilling, 50–51
duct tape, 51
electrical connections and wiring, 34, 36, 69–76
frame selection, 52–53
gallery of electric bicycle builders, 38–40
hose clips, 52
junction boxes, 78–80
padlocks, 50, 54–55, 59–62
positioning components on frame, 53–55
power of, 40–42
range of, 42–45
relays, 76–78
soldering tips, 36, 47–49
speed of, 40–42
suppliers, 38
switches, 76–78
tapping, 50–51
theft protection, 54–55, 58–62
tool requirements, 50
weight distribution, 45–46
welding, 52

wheel-building, 35–36, 65–69
hub motor(s), 85–93. See also brushed motors; brushless motors; hub
motor kits
advantages of, 18
brushed. See brushed motors
brushless. See brushless motors
free wheels, 91–92
front and rear hub wheel designs, 90–91
geared, 91–92, 166–168
hiding, 55
inside, 92–93
maintenance checklist, 147–148
nongeared, 160–162, 169–170
reviews, 85–89
hybrid bicycles, 33, 108, 216–218
hybrid cars, 2, 10
hydrogen fuel cells, 10, 115–116
hydropower, electric bicycles based on, 239
Infineon controller, 225
inspection mirrors, 233–234
insulation
battery, 149
battery pack, 187, 188, 190
insurance, 7
internal resistance, 99–100
jackets, 12
jumper switches, 96–97
junction boxes, 78–80
j-vtol, 39

kettle leads, 75, 76
Kilovac contactors, 78
kits. See hub motor kits
kreuzotter.de, 84
lacing a wheel, 66–69
laptop batteries, 11, 111–112, 122, 236–237
lead-acid batteries, 20, 106–108
advantages, 107
disadvantages, 107–108
formats, 108
renewable-energy storage from, 237–238
safety, 108
legal issues
consumer safety legislation, 23
gas engines on bicycles, 32
legality of electric bikes, 1, 3, 5, 13–15, 22
maximum power requirements, 13, 19
motor vehicle departments, 1, 5
pedelecs, 3, 14, 22
traffic and vehicle laws, 12–14
LiFePO4 batteries, 11, 31, 32, 98, 112, 113–114, 116–118, 140–141
light-emitting diode (LED) panels, 131, 231
lights, 4, 55
installing high-powered, 229–232
maintaining, 150
as resistors, 223
Lion batteries. See lithium polymer batteries
Lipo batteries. See lithium polymer batteries
liquid-crystal display (LCD) panels, 130–131

lithium batteries
compared with other types, 20
wiring, 175–176
lithium cobalt (LiCo) batteries, 11
lithium-ion batteries, 11
lithium-iron-phosphate (LiFePO4) batteries, 11, 31, 32, 98, 112, 113–114, 116–
118, 140–141
lithium polymer batteries, 11, 31, 32, 98, 110–113
formats, 112–113
safety, 112
load, 41
balance of power versus, 83–84
distribution on electric bicycles, 45–46
load curve, 83
long-distance travel
long-range commuter electric bicycles, 26–27
train/electric bicycle, 5–7, 27–28
low-voltage cutout circuits (LCV), 97, 105–106
luggage carriers, 27
magnets, 40, 81, 92, 162
bearings and, 148
maintaining/repairing electric bicycles, 125–135
batteries, 137, 138, 139–142, 148–150, 171–173
battery chargers, 138, 146–147, 173–177
battery management system (BMS), 135–136
bearings, 170–171
checklist, 150
clamp meters, 131–132
component testing, 137–138

connections and connectors, 136–139
controllers, 137, 138, 146, 150–160
data loggers, 134–135
diagnosis process, 135–146
fuse holders, 138
Hall sensors, 137, 144–145, 169–170
motors, 137, 142–145, 147–148, 160–171
multimeters, 125–129
panel meters, 130–131
power leads, 137
power meters, 129–130
repairs, 150–177
speedometers, 133
symptoms list, 136
thermistors, 133–134
thermocouples, 133–134
throttle, 137, 145–146
wiring, 138, 172–173
main triangle battery holders, 56–58
memory effect, 110
mirrors, as safety issue, 233–234
mobile phone chargers, 214
monochrystalline solar cells, 240
mopeds, 14
MOSFET, 122–123
motor bikes, electric bicycles versus, 1, 3, 20
motor characteristics curve, 83
motored bicycles, 32–33
motor(s), 81–94
alternating-current (ac), 81, 122, 125–126

diagnosing problems with, 137, 142–145, 147–148, 160–171
direct-current (dc), 37, 41–42, 81, 122, 125–126
heat dissipation, 19, 85, 204
high-power electric bicycle, 31
interfacing with controllers, 89–90, 95–97
load versus power of, 83–84
operation of, 81–82
reliability of, 90
reviews of hub motors, 85–89
Bafang motors, 87–89
BMC (Puma) motors, 86, 92
Crystalyte motors, 85
Golden Motors, 87, 88
9 Continents motors, 87
Tongxin motors, 86
speed and, 82–85
types, 18–19, 90–94
brushed versus brushless, 18–19, 81–82, 89–90
chain-drive, 18, 47, 93–94
friction-drive, 94
hub motors, 18–19, 85–93
motor simulators, 84
motor vehicle registration, 1, 5
mountain bicycles, 38, 42
mounting techniques, 50–52
chains, 50
drilling, 50–51
padlocks, 50
tapping, 50–51
mud guards, 21
multimeters, 125–129, 140

in building battery packs, 192
continuity testing, 126
described, 125
polarity detection, 126–129
resistance, 125–126
throttle testing, 145–146
uses, 125
NiCd batteries, 20, 98
charging, 121
described, 110
safety, 109–110
nickel-metal hydride (NiMh) batteries. See NiMh batteries
NiMh batteries, 20, 32, 43, 78, 98, 105, 108–110, 118, 140–141
charging, 108–109, 121–122, 173, 174
discharging, 109
formats, 109
recycled, 236–237
replacing, 171
safety, 109–110
wiring, 174–175
9 Continents motors, 87
no-load speed, 41, 82–83
Ohm’s law, 129, 181, 182
OnBicycle, 22
open circuits, 127
open-circuit voltage, 100–101
overclocking, 19, 31, 42
brushed electric bicycle, 197–202
brushless electric bicycle, 202–204
padding

battery, 149
controller, 55
padlocks, 50, 54–55, 59–62
paired-wire short circuits, 69–70, 72–73, 76
panel meters, 129, 130–131
pannier bags, 56
parallel-connected batteries
cell balancing, 102
cell failures, 102–104
nature of, 101
switching circuit, 79
peak power, 13
peak power rating, 40
pedal-assist systems (PAS), 14, 20, 195–197
pedal-first controllers, 90
pedaling, 2, 3, 9, 14, 25, 53
pedal speed sensors, 14
pedelecs, 3, 14, 22
performance modifications, 179–221
aerodynamic improvements, 218–221
battery charger modification, 210–211
building a battery pack, 101–104, 179–194
bypassing brushed motor controller, 194–195, 196
DIY battery chargers, 211–214
hybrid electric bicycles, 216–218
overclocking/upgrading brushed
electric bicycle, 197–202
overclocking/upgrading brushless
electric bicycle, 202–204
racing electric bicycles, 214–216

removing pedal-assist mode, 195–197
soldering shunt resistor, 204–205
variable-current-limit modification, 205–210
Peukert effect, 20
phase wires, 89
photovoltaic (PV) cells, 239–240
pinch point, 69
Ping batteries, 116–119
plug, battery, 176–177
plug boxes, 79
plug braking, 221–225
polarity detection, 126–129, 177
polycrystalline solar cells, 240
potentiometers, 145
pouch-cell battery packs, 192–193
Powabyke, 19, 22
power
balance of load versus, 83–84
determinants of, 40–42, 82–85
high-power bicycles, 29–32
increasing power limit by soldering shunt resistor, 204–205
legal issues, 13, 19
power balance, 84
power dissipation, 70
Powerizer batteries, 118
power leads, diagnosing problems with, 137
power meters, 44
maintaining, 129–130
power wheelies, 25, 29–31

primary cells, 99
prismatic cells, 109, 112–114
Project Better Place, 120–121
projects for electric bicycles
other modifications
renewable-energy-powered electric bicycles, 238–240
used electric bicycle batteries, 236–238
performance modifications, 179–221
aerodynamics improvement, 218–221
battery charger modification, 210–211
building a battery pack, 101–104, 179–194
bypassing brushed motor
controller, 194–195, 196
DIY battery chargers, 211–214
hybrid electric bicycles, 216–218
overclocking/upgrading brushed
electric bicycle, 197–202
overclocking/upgrading brushless
electric bicycle, 202–204
racing electric bicycles, 214–216
removing pedal-assist mode, 195–197
soldering shunt resistor, 204–205
variable-current-limit modification, 205–210
safety modifications, 221–236
braking, 221–225
handlebars, 234–236
horns, 233
lights, 229–232
mirrors, 233–234
preventing sparking when plugging in controller, 229, 230
torque arms and disc brake

mounts, 225–229
turn indicators, 234
pulse-width modulation (PWM), 37, 81–82, 97–98
Puma motors, 86, 92
racing, 22, 25, 31–32, 70
aerodynamics, 214–215, 218–220
performance modifications, 214–216
build tactics, 214–215
racing tactics, 215–216
racks, 25
range
electric bicycle, 2, 24, 26–27, 31–32, 42–45
hybrid bicycle, 216–218
rear hub motors, 47
rear-rack carriers, 56, 62–65
rear-wheel drive, 25
recumbent bicycles, 214–215, 218
regenerative braking, 10, 215–216, 221–229
disc brake mounts, 227
implementation in controllers, 222
moding Infineon controller for, 225
nature of, 221–222
problems with DIY, 225
torque arms, 225–229
relays, 76–78
remote control (RC) hobbyists, 76, 98–99, 110–113, 117, 118, 130, 131
renewable-energy storage
building a solar power system, 237–238
building a wind power system, 238

electric bicycles based on, 238–240
repairing electric bicycles. See maintaining/repairing electric bicycles resistance
coil, 142–143
equivalent series (ESR), 100, 158
internal, 99–100
multimeter, 125–126
rim brakes, 46–47
rims, maintaining, 148
road safety, 4–5, 12–13
safety issues, 4–5, 10–13
battery, 11–12, 99, 104–106, 108, 109–110, 112
battery charger, 11, 212
battery pack, 179
braking
disc brake mounts, 225–229
plug, 221–225
regenerative, 10, 215–216, 221–229
electrical, 10–11
fire, 11–12
handlebars, 234–236
horns, 4, 233
lights, 4, 229–232
mirrors, 233–234
modifications, 221–236
road, 4–5, 12–13
safety gear, 12, 215
sparking prevention when plugging in controller, 229, 230
speed, 2, 4–5, 24–25
torque arms, 225–229
train travel, 29
turn indicators, 234

Schwinn I-Zip, 197
seatpost paddle racks, 56, 62–63
secondary cells, 99
separators, 99
series-connected batteries
cell balancing, 101–102
cell failures, 102–104
nature of, 101
switching circuit, 79
series-connected light bulbs, 230
Shell Mileage Marathon, 220
Shenzhen E-Crazyman controller, 210
shoes, 12
short circuits, 69–70, 72–73, 76, 146, 152
shunt resistors, 97–98, 129, 204–205
skidding, 45–46
smoking batteries, 11–12, 112
socket power meters, 129–130
solar power, 9
building a solar power system, 237–238
electric bicycles based on, 239–240
solar cell technology, 240
soldering, 47–49, 73–76
battery pack, 194
light bulb, 231–232
shunt resistor, 204–205
steps, 48
tips for electric bicycles, 36, 48–49
speed issues, 24–25, 29

determinants of speed, 40–42
motor speed, determinants, 82–85
safety, 2, 4–5, 24–25
speed-limiting controllers, 198
speedometers, 133, 199
torque versus speed efficiency, 91
speedometers, 133, 199
speed-power simulators, 84
speed/volt specifications, 40–41
spoke keys, 67
spokes, 65–69, 91, 92, 148
springs, 52
stators, 40, 81, 162, 163
steel springs, 52
sunglass-mounted mirrors, 233–234
supercapacitors, 100
surface-mount technology, 155–157
switches, 36, 76–78
cut-out, 78, 97
diagnosing problems with, 138
Tarn, 19
temperature
in battery charging, 121–122
battery packs and, 45, 149
heat dissipation, 19, 85, 204
heated handlebars, 234–236
motor thermal tolerance limiting, 200–202
thermistors, 133–134
thermocouples, 133–134

terminal blocks, 49
theft protection
battery, 54–55, 58–62
padlocks, 50, 54–55, 59–62
stealth tips, 55
thermal fuses, 104
thermistors
maintaining, 133–134
nature of, 104–105
NiMh battery packs, 174–175
thermocouples, maintaining, 133–134
35-W soldering irons, 48
throttles
diagnosing problems with, 137, 145–146
heated, 34, 56
pedal-assist systems (PAS) versus, 20
types, 145
Tidal Force electric bicycles, 46
time savings, 8
tire pressure, 148
Tongxin motors, 19, 86
torque, 41
custom torque plates, 227–229
speed versus, 91
torque arms, 36, 225–229
torque sensors, 14
total life-cycle energy use, 9
Tour de Presteigne, 22
Toyota Prius, 219

traffic laws, 12–14
trains, electric bicycles and, 5–7, 21, 25, 27–29
trickle charging, 121
trousers, 12, 215
Turnigy Lipo packs, 119
turn indicators, 234
Urban Mover, 22
vehicle laws, 12–14
voltage
battery charger, 139, 140–141, 148
battery voltage drop, 149
cell voltage effects, 100–101
constant-voltage charging, 105–106, 114, 121, 171–172
increasing FET, 203–204
low-voltage cutout circuits (LCV), 97, 105–106
in polarity detection, 126–129
voltage limiting, 199–200
voltage rating, 73
voltage sag, 99–100
Watts Up Meter, 129
weak cells, 102–104
weight
distribution on electric bicycles, 45–46
of electric bicycles, 2, 3, 25, 52
welding, 52
wet surfaces, 12, 46–47
wheel-building hub motors, 65–69, 90–91
wheelies, 25, 29–31
wheels, 35–36, 65–69

wheel spinning, 46
Whittingham, Sam, 220
widow makers, 212
windings, 96–97
wind power
building a wind power system, 238
electric bicycles based on, 239
wind turbines, 2
Winkku, 234
wireless home energy monitors, 132, 133
wiring, 34, 69–76
battery charger, 174–177
battery pack, 174–177
color-coding, 76, 90
connectors, 60–61, 73–76
controller configuration, 95–97
diagnosing problems with, 138, 172–173
fixing broken balance wires in battery packs, 172–173
joining multiple, 49
junction boxes, 78–80
labeling, 76, 90
relays, 76–78
short circuits, 69–70, 72–73, 76, 146, 152
size guide for copper wires, 72
soldering, 49
switches, 36, 76–78
Wisper, 22
wye windings, 96–97
X5 motor, 47
Zippy Flightmax batteries, 117, 118, 119


Table of Contents
Cover Page
Build Your Own Electric Bicycle
Copyright Page
Dedication
Contents
Preface
Acknowledgments
1 Introduction
1.1 What Are Electric Bicycles?
1.2 Why Electric Bicycles?
1.2.1 Freedom and Convenience
1.2.2 Safer Than Regular Bicycles
1.2.3 The Benefits of an Electric Bicycle
1.2.4 Cost Savings
1.2.5 Time Savings
1.2.6 Saving the Environment
1.2.7 The Future of Transport
1.3 Safety with Electric Bicycles
1.3.1 Electrical Safety
1.3.2 Battery Chemical Safety
1.3.3 Road Safety
1.4 Legality of Electric Bicycles
2 Your First Electric Bicycle
2.1 Commercial Electric Bicycles
2.1.1 Buying an Electric Bicycle: The Motor
2.1.2 Buying an Electric Bicycle: The Battery
2.1.3 Buying an Electric Bicycle: The Bicycle
2.1.4 Resources for Buying an Electric Bicycle
3 Build Your Own Electric Bicycle
3.1 Why Build Your Own Electric Bicycle?
3.1.1 Quality and Unique Design
3.1.2 Increased Performance
3.1.3 Reduced Cost

3.2 What Do You Want from Your Electric Bicycle?
3.2.1 Having Realistic Goals and Expectations
3.3 Types of Electric Bicycles You Can Build
3.3.1 The Long-Range Commuter Electric Bicycle
3.3.2 The Folding Commuter Electric Bicycle
3.3.3 High-Power Electric Bicycle
3.3.4 High Power and Long Range
3.3.5 Motored Bicycles
3.4 How to Build Your Own Electric Bicycle from a Hub Motor Kit
3.4.1 Build Your Own Electric Bicycle: Kit Resources
3.4.2 Electric Bicycle Builders Gallery
3.4.3 What Determines Power and Speed?
3.4.4 What Determines Capacity and Range?
3.4.5 Weight Distribution in Electric Bicycles
3.4.6 Brakes on Electric Bicycles
3.4.7 Step-by-Step Guide to Soldering
3.4.8 Mounting and Securing Things to the Electric
Bicycle
3.4.9 Choosing a Bicycle Frame
3.4.10 Positioning Your Components on the Frame
3.4.11 Battery Storage and Positioning
3.4.12 Making a Main Triangle Battery Bag
3.4.13 Making a Theft-Proof Battery Holder
3.4.14 Making a Rear-Rack Battery Holder
3.4.15 Tips on Wheel-Building Hub Motors
3.4.16 How to Do Electrical Connections and Wiring
3.4.17 Choosing Quality Connectors
3.4.18 Choosing Quality Switches and Relays
3.4.19 Making Wires Tidy: Junction Boxes
4 Electric Bicycle Components
4.1 Motors
4.1.1 How Motors Work
4.1.2 What Speed Will It Do?
4.1.3 Reviews of Different Hub Motors
4.1.4 Interfacing Motors with Controllers
4.1.5 Reliability of Motors
4.1.6 Motor Types: Hub Motors
4.1.7 Motor Types: Chain-Drive and Friction-Drive
Motors

4.2 Controllers
4.2.1 Finding the Right Wiring Configuration for a New
Motor-Controller Combination
4.2.2 Inside a Controller
4.3 Batteries
4.3.1 Battery Theory
4.3.2 Pack Building and Series/Parallel Effects
4.3.3 Battery Safeguards
4.3.4 Commercially Available Batteries for Electric
Bicycles
4.3.5 Future Power Sources: Fuel Cells and Flow
Batteries
4.3.6 Reviews of Batteries
4.3.7 Resources for Buying Electric Bicycle Batteries
4.4 Chargers and Battery Charging
4.4.1 Charge-Termination Methods
4.4.2 Inside a Battery Charger
5 How to Maintain and Repair Electric Bicycles
5.1 Equipment for Maintaining Electric Bicycles
5.1.1 How to Use a Multimeter
5.1.2 Power Meters
5.1.3 Panel Meters
5.1.4 Clamp Meters
5.1.5 Bicycle Speedometers
5.1.6 Thermistors and Thermocouples
5.1.7 Data Loggers
5.2 Diagnosis: Finding the Problem
5.2.1 How to Check Connections and Connectors
5.2.2 How to Check the Battery
5.2.3 How to Check the Motor
5.2.4 How to Check the Throttle
5.2.5 How to Check the Controller
5.3 Maintaining Electric Bicycle Components
5.3.1 Maintenance of a Battery Charger
5.3.2 Hub Motor Maintenance Checklist
5.3.3 Battery Maintenance Checklist
5.3.4 Controller Maintenance Checklist
5.3.5 Bicycle Maintenance
5.4 Repairing Electric Bicycle Components

5.4.1 How to Repair a Controller with Broken FETs
5.4.2 Repairing a Controller with Broken Gate Drive
Transistor
5.4.3 How to Repair a Controller with Blown
Capacitors
5.4.4 Opening Up a Brushless, Nongeared Hub Motor
5.4.5 Reassembly of the Brushless, Nongeared Hub
Motor
5.4.6 Opening Up a Brushed Hub Motor
5.4.7 Opening Up a Brushless, Geared Hub Motor
5.4.8 Replacing Hall Sensors in a Brushless,
Nongeared Hub Motor
5.4.9 Replacing the Bearings in a Hub Motor
5.4.10 Repairing a Battery with Dead Cells
5.4.11 Fixing Broken Balance Wires in a Pack That Has
a BMS
5.4.12 Repairing a Battery Charger
5.4.13 Wiring Up a New Battery Pack or Charger
6 Projects for Electric Bicycles
6.1 Performance Modifications
6.1.1 How to Build a Battery Pack
6.1.2 Bypassing a Brushed Motor Controller
6.1.3 Removing Pedal-Assist Mode
6.1.4 Overclocking/Upgrading a Brushed Electric
Bicycle
6.1.5 Overclocking/Upgrading a Brushless Electric
Bicycle
6.1.6 Increasing the Power Limit by Soldering the Shunt
Resistor
6.1.7 Variable-Current-Limit Modification
6.1.8 Modification of a Battery Charger
6.1.9 Do-It-Yourself (DIY) Battery Chargers
6.1.10 Racing Electric Bicycles
6.1.11 Extending Range: Hybrid Electric Bicycles
6.1.12 Improving Aerodynamics on an Electric Bicycle
6.2 Safety Modifications
6.2.1 Regenerative Braking and Plug Braking
6.2.2 Torque Arms and Disc Brake Mounts
6.2.3 Preventing Sparking When Plugging In the

Controller
6.2.4 High-Powered Lights
6.2.5 Powerful Horns
6.2.6 Bicycle Mirrors and Turn Indicators
6.2.7 Heated Handlebars
6.3 Other Modifications
6.3.1 Projects for Used Electric Bicycle Batteries
6.3.2 Renewable-Energy-Powered Electric Bicycles
Glossary of Terms
References
Index

